Lectures on Homoeopathic Materia Medica
James Tyler Kent, 1904
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Kent's Lectures — the defining American homeopathic materia medica, remedy-by-remedy lectures delivered at the Post-Graduate School of Homoeopathics. All remedy lectures are complete (Abies through Zincum); note that the source scan lacks the final leaves of the printed index, which breaks off at "Carbo veg." — the lectures themselves are entire. Calcutta: Roy Publishing House, first edition. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.458552). This 1904 first edition (Calcutta: Roy Publishing House, 1904) is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

LECTURES


ON


Homoeopathic Materia Medica


BY

JAMES TYim KENT, A. M., M. D.

I.ATE PROP'lvSSOR OF MATIlKIA MEDICA IN HERING MEDICAL COIJ-EGE, CHICA<;0^
AUTHOR OF “repertory OF THE HOMCEOPATfllC MATERIA MEDICA, “

AND “LECTVmES ON llOMCEOPA'nilC PHILOSOPHY.'*


FIRST EDITION


CALCUTTA

ROY PUBLISHING HOUSE



PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION


This course of lectures on the flomoeopathic Materia Medica was
delivered at the Post-Graduate School of 1 loinoeopaihics. Some of
tl}cm have appeared in the Journal of Homoeopathies, but for this
work they have been extensively revised. Owing to the strong appeals
of students, though against the author’s inclination, the collocpiial style
has been permitted to stand. The lectures are presented in the simple
form to explain the author's plan, of studying each reijiedy. Ihc
speech of laymen presents all sickness to the physician’s mind, hence
the Materia Medica must be reduced from technicalities to simple
speech. No two remedies arc studied exactly alike. Each has its own
requirement in order to bring before the mind what is characteristic.
Not all of the Materia Medica has been brought out, but the leading
and fully proved remedies such as have strong characteristics have
been presented for the purpose of showing how the Materia Medica
must be evolved and used. There arc other methods of studying a
remedy, but this seems to the author the most natural way of giving
to the student a lasting idea of the nature of each remedy. It may
be that it seems so because it is the oitly way the author could ever do
it. Ihe numerous repetitions of characteristic symptoms may subject
the work to criticism, but experience has shown that it is the only way
of giving the beginner a lasting grasp of the remedy.

Hahnemann’s Materia Medica Pura, Ilering’s Guiding Symptoms,
and the Encycloptcdia of Pure Materia Medica have been the works
that have given the most help in these studies.

They arc not offered as being complete digests of the various reme-
dies, but simply as the examinations of some of the most salient points.
A complete digest would be endle.ss. If some of the younger practi-
tioners and students of the Materia Medica shall meet the assistance
in this work they have been looking for, it is all that can be expected.
There is no royal road to a perfect understanding of the Materia
Medica. It is tedious and drudgery at best, but no more so than any
great science. Because of its greatness, many will fail to undertake
it even when it is for the saving of life and lessening of suffering, yet
many will not decline to offer their services to the people knowing
full well and confe.s.sing ignorance openly that the methods they offer
are inadequate, useless, and often destructive. Some profess not to
believe in this careful way of analyzing the symptomatology, but if
some easy method is offered for a pretended mastery of it they wildly
embrace it only to return to their primitive repulsive mental aversion
crying out "soiu- grapes,”



PKEFACE TO FIRST EWllON


/


The Materia McJica can be learned by careful study and by using
it. It can be understood but not ineinorized. All who would mem-
orize the Materia Mcdica must ignominiously fail. To be constantly
at hand, it must be constantly and correctly used. The continuou.s
study of the Materia Medica by the aid of a full repertory for com-
parison is the only means of continuing in a good working knowledge.
To learn the Materia Mcdica, one jnust master Hahnemann’s Organon
after which the symptomatology and the Organon go “hand in hand.”
The Organon, the symptomatology, and a full repertory must be the
constant referenre books, if careful homa'opathic prescribing is to be
attained and maintained.

All who wish to make a more' extensive examination of the reason
for the methods used in the work are referred to the chapter on vaut,
OF SY.vtPTO.vi.s in the Lectures on no-MCForAnnc i*ini.o.soi>in'.


(klober zg, lyo^.
loH A'. State St., Chicago,


JAMES TYLER KENT.


HOMCEOPATHIC


MATERIA MEDICA


ABROTANUM,

This very valuable remedy should be more frequently used. It is
indicated in such conditions as are cured by Bryonia and Rhus tox.i
but its symptoms mark out its own individual cases. Rheumatic con-
ditions with heart irritation ; epistaxis ; bloody urine ; anxiety and
trembling, when there has been a history of diarrhoea. A suddenly
checked diarrhoea will be followed by the above symptoms in a case
requiring Abrot. A suddenly suppressed rheumatism of any joint
followed by violent cardiac symptoms ; it is much like Ledum, Aurum
and Kalmia.

In marasmus of children it is a very useful remedy and not unfre-
(|uently indicated. The emaciation begins in the lower limbs and
gradually spreads upward, so that the face is the last affected ; that is
the opposite of Lycopodium, Natrum miir. and Psorinum.

It has ctired pleurisy after Bryonia, which seemed indicated, had
failed. A woman lying in bed with dyspnoea, anxiety, cold sweat and
pain in the heart was surrounded by friends to see her die. It was
learned that she had suffered tew many months with a rheumatism in
one knee, that she had used crutches to get about the house, and that
she had recently been speedily cured (?) by a strong liniment only a
few days before this attack. Abrot. restored her to health promptly.

It has caused and cured burning ulcerative pains in the stomach
with suspicious vomiting.

Metastasis is a marked feature in Abrot. The changing of one so-
called disease into another always calls attention to Abrotanum. In-
flammation of the parotid (mumps) changing to tests or mammae is
generally cured by Carbo v. or Pulsatilla, but Abrot, has cured when
these remedies have failed.

A suddenly checked diarrhoea followed by piles and acute rheuma-
tism, with bleedings, as mentioned above, is further argument in favor
of this idea.

The Abrot. patient is sensitive to cold air and cold damp weather.
He suffers much from backaches, and his symptoms are worse during
the night.

In boys it cures hydrocele. In infamy \t cutfs bleeding from die
navel.



10


ACETIC ACID


There is either diarrhoea or constipation ; with the latter he is rheu-
matic, with the former he is at his best, as when the diarrhoea slacks
up he is full of suffering. The diarrhoea is his great relief, like
Natrum sulph. and Zincum.

Sharp pains here and there, but especially in ovaries and joints.

ACETIC ACID,

This remedy is useful in complaints of pale, sickly people. Patients
who have been weak for many years, who have inherited phthisis.
Emaciation, weakness, anaemia, loss of appetite, burning* thirst and
copious pale urine are a combination calling for Acetic acid. Sensa-
tion of heat with pulsation coming and going, like orgasms ; chlorosis
in young girls ; dropsical conditions in general ; bad effects from stings
and bites, have been cured by this remedy. Vinegar is an old remedy
for bad effects from chloroform. It is useful in the haemorrhagic con-
stipation. Bleeding from various mucous membranes, nose, stomach,
rectum, lungs and from ulcers, . Sensitive to cold.

Confusion of mind ; does not know her own children ; forgets what
has recently happened ; attacks of anguish ; constantly borrows troul:)lc ;
thinks something is going to happen ; peevishness, complaining.

Fainting spells in weak, anaemic subjects ; headaches ; face pale and
waxy ; epistaxis ; one cheek pale and the other red ; diphtheria in throat
or larynx, unquenchable thir.st ; sensitive stomach : vomiting blood, and
all food taken ; ulceration of stomach ; hot, sour eructations ; frothy
vomiting ; gnawing pain ; distension of stomach, with a constant com-
motion ; burning in stomach and abdomen, ameliorated by lying on tho
stomach.

In the abdomen there is great pain, distension, flatulence or dropsy,
sore to touch; diarrhoea, thin, bloody or pure blood ; profuse bleeding
from piles ; chronic diarrhoea.

Copious watery urine. It has cured diabetes, with sugar in the
urine or without, where there is great thirst, weakness and pallor and
loss of flesh.

Weakness with seminal losses ; relaxed genitals and swollen feet.

Uterine haemorrh.ige ; copious menses, or watery menstrual flow
scanty menses with chlorosis.

Weakness of larynx ; croup ; diphtheria. It has cured many cases
of laryngeal diphtheria; hoarseness, with pale mucous membranes;
chronic dry, hacking cough in sickly, pale persons, such as have in-
herited phthisis, with oedema of extremities, diarrhoea and dyspnoea,
or night sweats ; haemorrhage from the lungs ; burning in chest and
stomach ; rattling in chest ; chronic bronchitis.



ACONITUM NAPELLUS


II


Weakness and lameness in extremities, with swelling, rheumatic oi
oedematous ; dropsy of limbs, with diarrhoea.

It is a deep-acting, constitutional remedy, and when well studicc
will be very useful. All substances abused as food become great reme
dies, such as vinegar, coffee, common salt, etc. We should look t<
them oftener than we do for the stubborn chronic cases.


ACONITUM NAPELLUS.

I 2^' A ’ . ' ^

Aconite is a short-acting remedy. Its symptoms do not last long
It is a violent poison in large doses, either destroying life or passinj
away in its effects quite soon, so that if the patient recovers, the recov
ery is not delayed. There are no chronic diseases following it. Lik
a great storm, it comes and sweeps over and passes away. By a litd
meditation we will discover what kind of sickness all this is like, an(
what kind of a patient is most likely to have that short, sudden sicl;
ness. If we think a moment from experience and homoeopathic obsei
vation, we will remember that vigorous, plethoric individuals, whei
they take cold, come down violently, whereas feeble people, sickl
people, come down and recover slowly from acute diseases, and di
not become so violently and so suddenly sick. From this, and fron
examining the sudden effet^s of Aconite, it will be easy to see tha
persons who come down with Aconite sicknesses are plethoric indi
vicluals. Strong, robust people, rugged children and infants becomi
sick, not a very slight cold, or from slight exposure, but from mon
violent exposure. From being exposed with deficient clothing ; fron
sudden, violent changes ; from prolonged exposure to the cold, north
dry wind. A vigorous person caught out with thin clothing, or re
maining out in the cold, dry air of mid-winter, with its sudden, violen
changes, comes down even before night with violent symptoms. Thii
is the class of patients, the plethoric and vigorous, who have a strong
heart, active brain, vigorous circulation, and come down suddenlj
from violent exposure, that need Aconite.

Aconite has in its nature none of the results usually following in
flammation. The storm is over so quickly that it seems mostly to con
form to the earlier condition. In these vigorous patients sudden con
gestions are likely to be thrown off by good reaction. The patient
seems to be threatened with a sudden and violent death, but recovery
is quick. So, as was ovserved by Dunham, it is a great storm and
soon over. Dunham’s discussion of this remedy in his Materia Med*
ica is very poetical and well worth reading.

Attacks come on suddenly from exposure to a dry, cold wind. In
plethoric children we have an illustration of that in the sudden con



aconitom napellus


14


gestioh of the brain with intense fever, or with convulsions. We get
illustrations of its suddenness and violence in any organ of the body,
the brain, the lungs, the liver, the blood, the kidneys. It is suited to
the complaints that come on suddenly from the very cold weather of
winter, or from the intensely hot weather of summer. It has the lung
and brain complaints of winter, and the bowel inflammations and stom-
ach disorders of summer. We know how these plethoric individuals
become suddenly overheated and become violently sick. Their sudden
attacks are frightful to look upon. All these inflammatory conditions
are attended with great excitement of the circulation, violent action
of the heart, a tremendous turmoil of the brain, a violent shock with
intense fear.

The mind symptoms that arc nearly always associated with Aconite
conditions stand out in bold relief. The patient feels the violence of
his sickness, for he is under great nervous irritation and excitement.
Fear is depicted upon his countenance, and the heart’s action is so
overwhelming the first thing he thinks of is that he must die ; this must


JHe


mean death, which he fears. It stands out upon his countenance.
says : “Doctor, there is no use ; I am going to die.” Many times he
actually predicts the moment or the hour of his death. If a clock is
in the room, he may say that when the hour hand reaches a certain,
point he will be a corpse. When we see this intetise fear, this awful
anxiety, great restlessness, the violence and the suddenness of these
attacks, we have a case, perhaps, that is dying from the poison of
Aconite, or one who needs Aconite. One who has a sickness resem-
bling the poison of Aconite needs the smallest possible dose of Aconite.
It is a very short-acting medicine, and that must be remembered.

matters what part of the body we are considering we will
lind mflammatory conditions. But regardless of the region or the
locality of the inflammation, that which I have described is the appear-
ance of the patient. Such arc the symptoms that will stand out, that
you will observe first-the appearance of the fate, the mind symptoms,
t e restlessness, the intensity. Now, there are many little mental symp-
toms that are of much less importance than this fear, this anxiety,
s^ptoms that will be masked by these marked symptoms that indicate
the patient. He has lost all affection for his friends. He does not
^ what becomes of them, he has not the slightest interest in them
It sometimes may be a state of indifference.

What I have brought out will enable one to readily see that this
b?* belong to all the remedies in the Materia Medica. In
tb-*’ only to Accomte. No matter what remedy you compare

a StlZ" i ‘tad

him which I

hhVt mtnaoned collectively wiU be found only under Aconite. Take



ACONITUM NAPELLUd I3

the mental symptoms, intensity marks every one of them. If it is a
delirium, it is an intense delirium, with excitement, with fear, with
anxiety. Patients in delirium, with excitement and fear, will weep,
as in great torment. Great excitement, fear, fear of death. You
wonder what she is weeping about. There are all sorts of moods
intermingled also with the fear of Aconite. There is moaning and
irritability, anger, throwing things away, all attended with the violence
and anxiety. These features that I described as uppermost are inter-
mingled with all the other symptoms.

^‘Screams with pain.^^ The pains are like knives, they are stinging,
cutting, stabbing. The intensity of the Aconite suffering is wonder-
ful, so that if the nerves take on neuralgic pains the pains are intense.
It is the feeling that some awful thing must be upon him or he could
not have such dreadful suffering. It says in the text, ‘‘predicts the
day of his death.’' This to a great extent is the result of the awful-
ness that seems to be overwhelming him. And this mental picture is
always present, in pneumonia, in inflammatory conditions of any part
of the body, in inflammation of the kidneys, of the liver, of the
bowels, etc.

Dizziness prevails throughout all this symptom picture. “Vertigo,
turning and whirling.'' A woman out shopping runs up suddenly
against a dog and becomes violently dizzy, she cannot even get to her
carriage. “Vertigo that comes on from fear, from sudden fear, and
the fear of the fright remains/^ There is a remnant of that fear left,
but it will lead you no more strongly towards Opium. ^‘Complaints
from fear. Inflammation of the brain from fear, dizziness from fear.'*
Even congestion of parts as a result of fear. A turmoil in the whole
sensorium. Things go round and round.

The headaches can hardly be described, they come with such vio-
lence. Tearing burning in the brain, in the scalp, attended with fear,
with fever, with anguish; headache from taking cold, from suppress-
ing catarrh in the nose. Catarrh stops suddenly in plethoric people,
from exposure, from riding in the dry, cold wind such as we have in
this northern climate in winter. “Violent headache over the eyes.
Congestion of the brain, with congestive headache, with anxiety, with
hot face.^^

The symptoms that would lead you to give Aconite for affections
of the eye are numerous. Eyes take on sudden inflammation. Con-
gestion of the eye. Blood red appearance of the eye. Sudden inflam-
mation of all the tissues ; conjunctivitis, etc., from taking cold, from
exposure to dry, cold winds.

There is a teaching that has long prevailed: give Aconite for the
first stage of an inflammation. It is not good teaching, although it is
recommended in all of our books. It does not say for what kind of a



>4


ACONITUM NAPELLUS


constitution, or how it comes about. Do not practice that way. Get
all the elements for an Aconite case, if possible, or give a better rem-
edy. ■ Another practice has prevailed, viz., giving Aconite for fever.
Aconite was the fever remedy of many of our early routinists, but it
is a bad practice.

Aconite has an inflammation of the eyes that comes on so suddenly
that one wonders how that inflammation came in so short a time.
The eyes take on great swelling without any discharge, or only very
watery mucus. The sudden inflammations that come on with thick
discharges would never be Aconite. Aconite has no results of inflam-
mation. Those conditions that are about to take on the results of
inflammation will always indicate some other remedy. You are not
to think of Aconite in fever unless the Aconite patient is present.
With the Aconite fever there will be sensitiveness to light. “Great
restlessness with fever.” Eyes staring, with pupils contracted, “vio-
lent aching and inflammation of the deep structures of the ball.” Give
Aconite only when the symptoms agree. An inflammation that is
about to run a prolonged course, to take on suppuration, or if it is
mucous membrane to take on discharge of pus, will never show you
the symptoms of Aconite. Never give Aconite in blood poisoning,
such as we find in scarlet fever, in typhoid fever, etc. We tmd noth-
ing of the violent symptoms of Aconite in s^ach conditions. The ner-
vous irritation is never present, but the opposite, the stupor, the lazi-
ness, the purple skin— whereas Aconite is bright red. Never give
Aconite for any form of zymosis, for it has no zymotic history. There
should be no thought of Aconite in the slow coming, continued fever.
Aconite has no syptoms like the slow types of continued fevers. I'he
Aconite fever is generally one short, sharp attack of fever. It is in
no way related to an intermittent fever, as it has no such symptoms.
You might find something that would deceive you in one attack of
intermittent fever, but the very fact that there was a second one would
shut out Aconite. Some remedies have periodically or waves. Aconite
has no such a condition. The most violent attack of fever will sub-
side in a night if Aconite is the remedy. If it is not it is a pity that
you naade a mistake in giving it, for it will sometimes do rnkr hipf
All things that exist in a sickness must be taken into account, not only
what the remedy does cover, but what it does not cover.

Aconite has inflammation of the eyes, with burning and sudden
swelling ; the lids swell so rapidly that they cannot be opened except
with great difficulty, and when they are forced open by seizing the
margins of the lids with a pair of forceps drops of hot water will fall
out, but no pus. This comes on rapidly from taking cold. Whenever
there are inflammations of the mucous surfaces bloody water is apt to



ACONTTUM NAPELLUS


*5


flow. Suddenly the blood vessels become engorged and ooze, the
blood vessels rupture and the capillaries ooze.

Inflammation of the ear comes on just as suddenly. 'Throbbing,
intense, cutting pains in the ear.'* The child comes home after being
out in the cold north wind, and is not sufficiently clad, and now it
screams and puts its hand to the car. The attack comes on early in
the evening, after being out in the daytime. Fever and anxiety ; child
must be carried. The suffering is intense. Noise intolerable. Music
goes through every limb, so intense is the sense of hearing. Every-
where in the body will we find that same intense condition of the
nerves. Wherever there are complaints they are intense, violent, and
the patient is always in a state of anxiety and irritability. “Stinging,
burning, rending, tearing, cutting pains in the ear.’’

Coryza if attended with violent headache, coming on in the night
after exposure and taking cold during the day, suddenly, this short-
acting, very quick-acting remedy will be indicated. The coryza that
comes on from Carlo veg. comes on several days after the exposure.
The coryza that comes on from Sulphur also develops several days
after the exposure. The Carlo veg. patient becomes overheated and
takes cold by keeping on his overcoat when he comes into your office.
In Aconite he goes out in cold air with his light clothing, and comes
down, if he is a plethoric individual, before midnight.

But especially is it often inefleated in the coryza of the rosy, chubby,
plethoric baby. Not in the sickly or pale ones. These sickly ones
will come down later; their vital activities are so reduced that their
complaints do not come on sometimes for two or three days. So that
if you take a sickly one and a vigorous one in the same family and
expose them both one will have croup tonight and need Aconite, and
the other will have it the next morning and need Hepar,

Tlie symptoms likely to occur with coryza are nosebleed, headache,
anxiety and fear. The anxious expression is one of the first things
observed in the Aconite sufferer. The Aconite pneumonia will often
show itself on the face. Look at the face ; there is great anxiety. It
shows much of the proving of Aconite. You know there is much in
the expression of the face that will enable one to read all that is going
on in the body ; it tells the story. The pleasures and sadness, and the
distress of the human family, much of which you can generalize, and
see at a glance that some great thing has happened. You have only
to guess once or twice before you hit it. Here you have the anxiety.

“One cheek red and the other pale” is in a good many remedies, but
the anxious expression, and the fear, and the heat, and the restlessness,
and the suddenness with which it comes on in a plethoric individual —
yesterday it was very dry and windy — and you will at once place this
one symptom with Aconite. But it might be one of several other



,5 aconitum napellus

remedies, were other conditions present. ‘^Neuralgic pains in the face,
like hot wires running along either side of the face/' The individual
rides in the cold, raw wind, and his face was exposed to the cold wind.
He becomes numb, then pain sets in, intense pain. He cries out and
shrieks with the knife-like cutting pains. Aconite will relieve.
^‘Crawling, creeping like ants"; Aconite has that sensation along the
course of the nerves. It has a sensation like ice water poured along
the course of the nerves. vSciatica when the sensation is felt down the
nerve like ice water. ‘^Creeping, tingling and crawling in the face,
with or without pain," There is intense heat, intense fever in the face.
The side of the face laid on will often break into a sweat, and if tht
patient turns over, that side will at once become dry, and the other
side will at once break out in a sweat.

Oh, what a comforting remedy it is for toothache. It has been so
useful in toothache that nearly every old lady nowadays knows enough
to put a drop of Aconite on a bit of cotton and put it in the old hollow
tooth. It will quite often palliate. A does of Aconite will act much
better. But the violence of the toothache ; again the same old story,
from the dry, cold winds, plethoric individuals, with hollow teeth, pain
intense, cutting, shooting pains in the teeth. Sometimes these pains
are in sound teeth and affect the whole row of teeth. Violent pains
from exposure, such as riding in the wind. The pains are relieved
and go away speedily after a dose of Aconite.

Disturbances of taste, disordered stomach. Everything tastes biticr,
except water ; and, oh, how the Aconite patient longs for water. It
seems almost impossible for him to get water enough and it agrees
%vell.

Burning is a symptom that runs all through the remedy, you will
find it descriptive of all the pains. Burning in the head, burning along
the course of nerves, burning in the spine, burning in fever, sometimes
burning as if covered with pepper.

Aconite is a very useful medicine in inflammation of the throat,
when there is burning, smarting, dryness, great redness of the tonsils,
or the fauces, the whole throat. Sometimes the soft palate is greatly
swollen. A high grade of inflammation, acute inflammation of all that
can be seen and called throat. But that alone would not indicate
Aconite. It cures that kind of case, it cures inflammation of the throat,
but every homoeopathic physician knows that forty or fifty remedies
could be selected just as well as Aconite from all that I have said. I have
only mentioned a nondescript case. No homoeopathic physician could
prescribe upon that kind of evidence. But you note the kind of throat —
every physician must ask himself the question: 'What would make
that kind of a throat an Aconite case?'' And then the question would
come up, coujd h^ not prescribe for it as wcU if be had not seen the



ACONTTUM NAPELLUS


*7


throat? The throat does not do much towards representing, ta an
intelligent physician, the patient. If it was necessary to represent to
the mind of the physician the inflamed part itself, how would he treat
the liver? He cannot see it. How would he prescribe for the stom-
ach ? He cannot see it. We are then compelled to fall back upon that
which represents to the intelligent physician the very nature of the
patient himself, and then at once we will see the reason for some of
these things. If you present and Aconite patient well before the mind
you can prescribe. It would be well to see anything that is visible.
If you could see the liver, I would say look at it. If you could sec the
heart, I would say examine it.

What is it in this throat that really represents the patient? Of
course, any soreness of the throat makes it difficult swallow. I mean
to infer that there is nothing in the soreness to represent to the physi-
cian. the Aconite patient. If that individual were a plethoric individ-
ual, if he had been riding in a cold, raw wind a good part of the day,
and he had wakened in the night with a violent burning, tearing sore
throat, and he could not swallow, and the fever came on high, and he
had thirst for cold water and he could not get enough of it, he was
in an anxious, feverish state, you have then a patient to prescribe for.
Many times will patients become intelligent enough under your obser-
vation to write just what some member of the family acts like. You
know just what the patient looks like. The black man will sometimes
give the best kind of a description, better than the Vassar girl, who
writes us : ‘‘Doctor, will y|)u please send the medicine ; I have looked
into the throat and it is rtd.''

With the stomach syrtiptoms M^hat an anxious patient we havel
The pains arc dreadful. Burning pains, tearing pains, with anxiety,
with restlessness, with fever, coming on from taking cold — not from
overeating, but from taking cold, which has settled in the stomach,
from exposure to an ice bath, or in a very hot summer from intense
heat, associated with an irritable brain in vigorous children. Vomiting
and retching, tearing, as it were, the very inside out by the awful retch-
ing. The vomiting of blood, bright red blood. This is descriptive of
the general stomach trouble. During this febrile state he craves bitter
things, wine and beer, and brandy, but they will come up as soon as
they reach the stomach. He craves pungent things, nothing tastes bit-
ter enough. ‘Tf he could only get something bitter.’’ And yet his
food tastes bitter, everything he eats tastes bitter, everything except
water.

The word in the text is a clinical word ; it says “gastric catarrhs.”
It is a very sharp, acute inflammation of the stomach. Retching, vom-
iting, of bile, vomiting of blood. Ineffectual urging to vomit, when
there is nothing in the stomach^ With it there will be amiety, restr
3



ACONTTUM NAPELLOS


l8

lessness, fear of death. The fear depicted upon the countenance makes
an awful expression.

Aconite is a useful medicine in inflammation of the liver, when it
comes suddenly. It is not very useful in repeated attacks, but in the
flrst attack. Violent inflammation of the liver, with violent tearing
pains and much burning. Then comes the restlessness, the awful
tortures of anxiety, moving constantly, fear of death, red face, glassy
eyes, great thirst. “Anxious restlessness” covers nearly all of these
things.

In the abdomen there are shooting pains, burning, stinging pains,
after exposure to cold, becoming chilled. We will soon come to think
that it does not make much difference where the disorder occurs, we
must have the Aconite patient. We also have inflammatory troubles
of all the viscera of the abdomen. It may be a violent catarrhal in-
flammation. It may be a catarrhal condition of the lower portion of
the colon, or a catarrhal condition of the rectum, when we will have
a dysentery. In dysentery, that which is found in the commode is
almost pure blood, blood and a little slime. It seems impossible for
him to leave the commode. Vomiting a little blood and passing bloody
mucus from the rectum. Always they will predict they will die to-
night, or in a few hours. They look as if they realized the sensation
of death. The whole body is in a state of anguish, but the tenesmus
and cramp, the urging to stool are simply terrible. It has a watery
diarrhoea, but that is not a very important symptom, although it is
doubly marked in Hering. But when pure blood is passed, and mucus,
with tenesmus, or when a little green mucus is passed by infants with
summer troubles, pure blood or grass-green discharges with fever com-
ing on suddenly, in bright, rosy little ones, think of Aconite. Most
of the bowel troubles come on from intense heat, in the children. The
infant takes on inflammation of the liver from the heat, and the stool
becomes white like milk, of putty consistency. The child becomes
yellow and screams with pain.

It is useful in urinary troubles, bladder and kidney troubles. In-
flammatory conditions, and with bloody urine. Scanty urine, sup-
pressed urine, or retained urine. Retention from shock. This retention
from shock makes it one of our best remedies for retention in the
new-born. The infant just born into the world has undergone a shock.
At your next visit the nurse says, “The child has not passed urine.”
The functions of that little one are not yet established, because of the
^reat shock the little one has gone throughu
^ Inflammation of the bladder, with cutting, tearing pains. Burning'
pains with burning urine. Urine is hot, dark, colored red ; red and
Clear, or bloody. Retention from cold, especially in children, with
x^aig and fesUessness. With Inflammatory conditions of the blad*



ACONtniM MAPEULUS


»9


der, either in adults or in infants, there will be all the mental states
representing the Aconite patient.

Aconite cures most violent cases of orchitis, which come on sud-
denly. Orchitis from cold, from being chilled, in plethoric men. But
in the common orchitis from suppressed gonorrhoeal discharges Aconite
is useless.

The woman is a natural Aconite patient, with her sympathetic nat-
ural sensitiveness. She usually takes on complaints from nervous
shock, from fear, and she naturally takes on complaints from causes
other than those from which men take on sickness. It is very seldom
that fear will give a man inflammation, but fear is a common cause of
inflammation of the uterus, and of the ovaries, in plethoric, vigorous,
excitable women. Fear will often cause abortion, but when Aconite
is given early enough it will check the abortion that comes from fear.
We will have the stitching, burning, tearing pains of Aconite some-
times following fear or sudden emotion. Sometimes a pregnant
woman will say, “Doctor, there is no use your planning for my con-
finement. I know I am going to die in that confinement.” If there is
any one thing that is a really strong symptom to prescribe on it is that,
A dose of Aconite, and then change the subject, she goes away, and in
a few days you ask her about that fear and she says, “Oh, never mind
that.” Many little things like that can be singled out.” But that state
of fear is a very peculiar thing, and really represents the whole nature
and being of the woman. 'She predicts the day of her death. The
reason that Aconite is so oftin the infant’s remedy is because the infant
is so often made sick front fright.

“Inflammation of the genitals in plethoric women.” Aconite is more
frequently indicated in women and children than in men. Sensitive,
vigorous, excitable women. It is indicated in men in inflammatory
conditions from becoming chilled in dry, cold air, and it is wonderful
how you can convince a patient who needs Aconite what wonderful
things there are in Homoeopathy by showing him how rapidly, with
Aconite, you can put him in a sweat and break up a sharp fever when
that is a recent and single attack.

“After tedious and difficult parturition. Violent after-pains. Shoot-
ing, tearing after-pains, with febrile conditions.” Uterine haemorrhage
with bright red blood and fear of death. It is wonderful what Aconite
will do in some cases arising from taking cold in the puerperal state,
but do not mix that up with puerperal fever. The first is a simple
form, non-septic ; perhaps the breast is involved, with soreness in the
breast, suppression of the milk and febrile conditions ; but if there is
suppression of the lochia do not give Aconite.

New-born children, with difficulty of breathing, after the use of
forceps, or from a tedious labor; the child is breathless, there is tUffi-



40


ACONTTUM NAPELLUS


cuity with the heart, and in a few hours fever comes on. Aconite is
a very simple remedy. The retention of urine in the infant is so com-
monly an Aconite condition that you will hardly ever need to use any
other medicine. The little one cannot yet talk, it cannot manifest very
much, and, to a certain extent, the practitioner is compelled to be some-
what routine in these affairs, and the routine practitioners have been
more or less successful with Aconite for the retention of the urine.
Again, it is true that in many cases, of retention of the urine in the
mother, it will disappear after a dose of Causticum,

Aconite is a great routine croup remedy, one that is misused ; but
it is indicated in all those cases of croup which come on suddenly in
plethoric children, from exposure to dry, cold wind, having been out
in the cold wind with the mother during the day. The child is put to
bed and rouses up from the first sleep, perhaps at 9 or 10 or ii o’clock,
grasps the throat, coughs violently, a croupy, choking cough, with
hoarse bark. Hardly any other remedy can correspond to that rapidity
of action, taking cold in the daytime and developing itself so suddenly.
Croup that conies on from exposure today, and does not develop until
tomorrow morning or tomorrow evening, may correspond to quite a
number of other remedies, but especially IlcpaT^ which is slower in its
pace. And it is more suitable in children somewhat run down and
subject to frequent attacks of croup. Spongia is also similar, but it
lacks many of the elements more likely to occur in run-down children,
those always taking cold. It would be a difficult matter to distinguish
between the appearance of the Aconite and the Sppngia croup so far
as the croup is concerned, because both have all the anxious appear-
ance found in croup. The Aconite croup is a violent croup, inflam-
mation of the larynx, and, at the same time, spasms of the larynx, com-
ing on with great rapidity. The Spongia croup is less inflammatory,
the inflammation grows with the spasms ; but while Spongia may rouse
up at II o’clock at night, suffocating and choking, it has not the intense
tebnlc excitement that belongs to Aconite, nor the anguish, although
It has all the dryness that is found in Aconite. Aconite conditions are
dry as a usual thing, or there is only a little watery discharge. Spongia
IS entirely dry; if there is an inflamed mucous membrane, it is dry
We have in the croup symptoms in Aconite: Larynx sensitive to
touch. Croup, waking in first sleep, after exposure to dry, cold winds.”

^ Aconite is full of disturbances of respiration, dyspnoea from contrac-
non of the smaller bronchial tubes, which we find resembles asthma.
It IS indicated in that dyspnoea that belongs to capillary bronchitis, in
that dyspnoea that belongs to cardiac excitement in plethoric persons,
from taking cold, becoming exposed or from shock. Dyspnoea from
fear, such as occurs in nervous women, excitable, easily affected
nervous, plethoric women. Breathing short, labored, anxious, quick!



ACONTTUM NAPELLUS


21


It IS an asthmatic dyspnoea and there is usually dryness of the mucous
membranes of the small bronchial tubes.

“Sits up straight and can hardly breathe/' Aconite has such a sud-
den violent cardiac irritation, pulse fluttering, weak, full and bounding ;
sits up in bed, grasps the throat, w^ants everything thrown off ; before
midnight, a hot skin, gre<it thirst, great fear — everything is associated
together.

“Anguish with dyspnoea. Sudden attacks of pain in the heart, with
dyspnoea/' All go together* “Great suffocation." From this fear
and from anxiety he breaks out in profuse sweat ; he is drenched with
sweat — and yet his is hot. When this anxiety passes off he be-
comes hot. So there is heat and sweat with this awful anxiety. Pulse
like a thread

“Better during expiration." The spasm of the larynx often comes
on during inspiration. “Worse during inspiration. Constant short,
dry cough. Difficult breathing. Breathes only with the diaphragm.
Chest troubles, such as pneumonia." Aconite produces a very rapid
inflammation of the viscera of the chest, of the pleura, of the lungs,
of the mucous membrane lining the air passages. In pneumonia we
have this dyspnoea, the suddenness with which it comes on. If it
spreads rapidly it may go into pneumonia. Inflammation runs so high
that the mucous membrane oozes blood, cherry red, — or the mucus
that comes up is white and heavily streaked with bright red blood.
You go to the bedside of btpncho-pneumonia and you will find in the
pan mucus streaked with bright red blood. Now, take the violence
with which that comes on» the restlessness and anxiety of the individ-
ual — he predicts the hour of his death — that would be the case with
the Aconite patient. In the case of pneumonia where the lung is in-
volved, it is likely to be the upper half of the left lung when Aconite
is indicated. Sometimes the whole mucous membrane, the visible
throat, the larynx, trachea, the bronchial tubes, will all ooze blood,
sometimes a mouthful of blood, so violent is the inflammation. In
these chest troubles there is much pain. Shooting, burning, tearing
pains, and the patient is compelled to lie in a somewhat elevated posi-
tion, on the back. Cannot lie upon either side, but upon the back.
Lying on the side increases the pain. The dry cold winds. Sudden
shocks, in persons of good, strong, vigorous circulation. The haemop-
tysis that is spoken of is not such as occurs in phthisis, but is involun-
tary ; the blood comes up with a slight cough. Some one might be
deceived to give it in such cases in broken down constitutions in sickly
patients ; but it is not to be administered in such cases, we have much
better remedies. The patient does not always become a pneumonia
patient, but inflammation of the small air passages may be all that is
present.



aconttum napellus


“Dry cough, vomiting and retching, intense fever, spitting of blood.
No expectoration except a little watery mucus and blood. It occurs
a good deal in this way. Dry cough, sensation of dryness of the
whole chest, sensation of dryness in the laiynx and throat. Pours
down great quantities of cold water, and once in a while after a violent
coughing spell he gets up a little blood. Sut the expectoration is gen*
erally mucus.

Pneumonia is generally attended with an expectoration looking like
iron rust, as if iron rust had been mixed in with it. Such medicines
as Bryonia and Rhus tax, and a few others have that expectoration as
a common feature, as natural to the remedies themselves, but Aconite
is the cherry red, bright red expectoration. Its haemorrhages are bright
red, and sometimes copious.

All these coughs in peumonia, in croup, and chest troubles cpme on
suddenly, and if he goes to sleep he will have spasm of the larynx, with
dryness of the larynx. He goes to sleep and the larynx becomes dry.
and he wakes up and grasps his larynx ; he thinks he is going to choke.
All these come on from cold winds. Vigorous persons get into a draft
and get a chill that will bring on Aconite symptoms.

Aconite has in all inflamed parts a sensation as if hot steam were
rushing into the parts, as if warm blood were rushing into the parts,
or ‘‘flushes of heat in the parts,'' Along nerves, a sensation of heat,
or sensation of cold.

The pulse in the highest form of the fever is full and bounding ;
strong, vigorous pulse. When the attack is first coming on and the
awful anxiety and nerve tension are present the pulse is very small,
but after the heart's action is well established, then the pulse becomes
stronger.

“Tearing pains down the spine. Painful, stiff neck. Crawling in
the spine like insects.” That is a peculiar feature, this crawling sensa-
tion ; it comes from cold, from being suddenly chilled.

“Trembling of the hands” associated with these sudden acute attacks.
“Creeping pains in the fingers” associated with these sudden acute in-
flammatory attacks. “Cold as ice. Feet cold as ice. Hot palms.”
Hot hands and cold feet are sometimes present. Rheumatic condi-
tions of the joints. Those that come on as a first attack. Not old
rheumatic and gouty attacks, but those that come on as acute rheuma-
tism, those that come on from sudden exposure to cold, from long
rides in a dry, cold wind. They also are attended with fever, with
anxious restlessness, with a critical state of mind so often described.

“Trembling, tingling, convulsions of the muscles.” But the nerves
are full of Aconite symptoms and Aconite sufferings. Aconite is a
wonderful remedy for neuritis in plethoric persons. Numbness along
the course of the nerves, from cold, from exposure. Numbness and



ACTiEA RACEM05A


23


tingling, along the course of the nerves, especially those that ruii close
to the surface. “Inflammation of the nerve sheaths. Nervous excit-
ability. Excessive restlessness.”

Svlphur has a strong relation to Aconite. It has many Aconite
symptoms. In many of the old chronic cases where Sulphur would
be used in strong, vigorous constitutions Aconite will be suitable for
a sudden attack, and Sulphur for the chronic. In sudden attacks that
Aconite conforms to, that is the whole attack, there may be left in
that constitution a tendency to return of a similar attack. Aconite has
no power over that tendency, but Sulphur has. Of course, most of
the symptoms must agree, but it will seem to you frequently where
Aconite has been suitable in the acute disease that Sulphur symptoms
will follow, and many times a very violent attack leaves a weakness
in the constitution which Aconite has no power to contend with. It
has no power to keep off recurrent attacks. It does all that it is capa-
ble of doing, and that is the end of it. But it is not so with Sulphur.

After Aconite follow well Arnica and Belladonna. Sometimes it is
true it will appear to you that Aconite is capable of coping with all
there is in the disease. But there seems to he a lingering something
that holds on, and such medicines as Arn. and Bell,, and Ip. and Bry.,
do have to come in to finish up the attack — or sometimes Sulphur.
Very commonly Silica. So we have to study the relations of medi-
cines.

If you have administered Aconite in too many doses, or given it too
strong, and your patient is fibw in recovering from the attack, or your
patient has taken Aconite hitnself unwisely, then Coffea or Nux will
often put the patient into a better condition.

ACT^A RACEMOSA (BLACK COHOSH)

This remedy has been only mcagerly proved, yet there are a few
useful points in it. From its proving we can perceive that it is sim-
ilar to diseased states in the human family, and especially in women,
namely, hysterical and rheumatic conditions. The patient is always
chilly, easily affected by cold, sensitive to cold and damp weather,
which rouses the rheumatic state and develops a state of rheumatism;
not only in the muscles and joints all over the body, but also along
the course of nerves. In the general nervous disturbance there is a
lack of will balance, or great disturbance in the voluntary system,
which is the underlying feature of hysteria, the symptoms are inter-
mingled with rheumatism. With the pains we havq soreness all over
the body. Trembling, numbness, jerking of muscles. Inability to
exercise the will over the muscles of the body, turmoil in the voluntary
system, with stiffness.


ACTiEA RACEMOSA


Tendency to take cold and thereby she takes on sensitiveness in the
glands and larger organs, such as the liver and uterus. Conaplaints in
these organs come on from cold damp weather {Dulcamara) and from
being chilled. The patient is sensitive to cold in all parts except the
head, and is aggravated from becoming cold both in parts of the body
and in general. The headaches, however, are better in the open air
and from cold, which is an exception and a particular, for the general
feature is aggravation from cold.

There is a terrible mental state that alternates with physical states.
It is an overwhelming sadness or gloominess, she is bowed down with
sorrow. Sits and mopes in great sadness, like Psorinum and Pulsa-
Ulla. This may pass off instantly, or be brought on and aggravated
from motion, from fear, from excitement, from taking cold. Very
commonly there is muscular soreness, a bruised feeling all over, with!
drawing and jerking. This will let up very suddenly and leave a
nervous, hysterical girl in a state of sadness, and she will sit and say
nothing. When questioned perhaps she will break into tears or cx*


press in various ways the overwhelming sadness. With the headache
there is marked sadness. Changeable moods. The physical and the
mental are all the time changing. Other symptoms alternate and
change. The jerking has made physicians see the resemblance to
chorea in these hysteno-rheuniatic constitutions. The rheumatisms will
change in a day into chorea, and again the choreic movements will
keep on with the soreness throughout the muscles of the body. The
jerking and soreness and numbness often keep on together.

There are certain features about the chorea that should be noted.
Jerking of the muscles when in a state of emotion or from becoming
chilled. If any part of the body is pressed upon jerking of the mus-
cles of that part will take place. One of these nervous, rheumatic,
hysterical subjects may not have choiea constantly, but as soon as she
retires at night the whole of the side lain on will commence to jerk
and prevent her from going to sleep. If she turns on the back the
muscles of the back and shoulders will jerk and prevent sleep. She
turns over on the other side, but after a little while the muscles pressed
on commence to jerk. All this time she has become so restless and
nervous that she is driven to distraction. The mind is full of all sorts
of imaginations, and the body is full of all sorts of uneasiness, because
she can find no place to rest upon. Sometimes the muscles are so
sore that they cannot be lain upon for any length of time ; sometimes
It 18 a numbness, sometimes a jerking. These things are queer, but

tliey belong to the patient, affecting not one part, but the whole
economy.


Full of fear, anguish and restlessness. Fear of death, excitement,
suspicious, Will not even take the medicine because there U some-



ACT^ RACEMOSA


as


thing wrong about it.’’ It has a mania such as occurs in nervous,
hysterical women, and it has cured puerperal mania. Puerperal mania
from taking cold during or soon after confinement. The remedy be-
longs especially to women, because its symptoms are so commonly
associated with the affections of women. Mental states following the
disappearance of rheumatism is a strong feature. The rheumatism
gets better, but the mental state becomes worse. Sometimes the rheu-
matism disappears in short order and the mind is not disturbed, but
then it is because a diarrhoea has come on, with great soreness and
aching in the bowels, or because a flow from the uterus has given
relief. There must be some relief or a disturbance will take place like
Abrotanum. Some flow must be established, and hence the menstrual
flow or diarrhoea gives relief ; otherwise the mind takes on trouble, the
patient becomes gloomy, or has a low form of mental excitement. One
of the symptoms is quite descriptive of this sadness I have referred
to : ‘^Sensation as if a black cloud had settled all over her,” while at
the same time it weighed like '‘lead upon the head.” This is entirely
figurative. It can all be expressed in the word “sadness”. We will
find “melancholy,” “gloominess,” “low spirited,” etc., running all
through out text, but the word “sadness” is just as broad as any of
them.

The headaches are rheumatic. “Sore, bruised feeling all over the
head. Bruised sensation in the occiput. Sore, bruised feeling in the
top of the head, as if the , top of the head would fly off.” “As if cold
air was blowing upon thO brain.’' Yet most of these headaches are
better by being in the cold air. “Headache brought on from catching
cold, from the weather changes, cold, damp weather.” There are
many headaches. Pressing headache. Many of the headaches are
intense, and described as if a bolt were extending down into the back
of the neck. Soreness in the back of the neck. Pain in the back of
the neck. Hysterical girls ; they have much pain in the back of the
neck. With the headache the eyeballs are very sore, “painful to turn
in any direction.” “Pain in the eyes, bruised pain in the head.”

“Soreness in the abdomen ; sore and bruised. Alternate diarrhcea
and constipation. Alternation of diarrhoea and physical complaints.”

We pass now to the female genitalia, which form a center for a
great deal of trouble in the remedy. A routine saying about Actaea
is that it makes confinement easy. That is not a legitimate saying
concerning any remedy, and such expressions encourage routine prac-
tice. It is true that when this remedy has been given to pregnant
women in accordance with its symptoms it has proved capable of mak-
ing confinement easy. But the way it has been given has been the
(routine practice of giving it in the tincture or in the 2d or 3d, until the
patient was under its influence even when it was not indicated, as it

4



26


ACTi£A RACEMOSA


was not similar to the case. But the homoeopathic physician never
practices in this way. A remedy fits a general condition when the
symptoms of that general condition are found in the remedy. Remem-
ber that it doe.s so because all the symptoms agree.

“Pain in the uterine region, darting from side to side. Bearing down
and pressing out.” These bearing down sensations, taken with all the
other states that relate to the patient in general, show that it is a very
useful remedy in prolapsus of the uterus. It has the relaxation of the


parts. Do not suppose that our remedies are not sufficient to cure
these conditions, when the symptoms agree. It is true that remedies
will cure prolapsus when the symptoms agree, and at no other time.
If it fits the patient in general, these bearing down sensations will go*
away, the patient will be made comfortable, and an examination will
finally show that the parts are in normal condition. You cannot pre-
scribe for the prolapsius ; you must prescribe for the woman. You
cannot prescribe for one symptom, because there are probably fifty
remedies that have that symptom.

Thcie .ire menstrual disorders in these hysterical rheumatic consti-
tutions. IrreguLirity of the menstrual flow. It may be copious, sup-
pressed or scanty. Severe pain all through the flow. The more the
flow the greater the pain. That is very peculiar. Generally the flow
will relieve pain, but with this remedy the pain is during the flow.
Generally the most severe .and most painful attack is at the beginning
of the flow, and with some women again just alter the flow has ccaseil,
Each woman is a law unto herself. In this remedy the sufFerines are
during the menstrual flow as a rule. The most severe mental symp-
toms, the most severe rheumatic symptoms, the most extreme jerking

flot Tu?in! m sleeplessness are during the menstrual

flow. During menses, epileptic spasms. All sorts of sufferings in the

nerves. Soreness along the course of the nerves, soreness in Ae mus-
cles or joints during the flow. Increase of mental symptoms. Cold
and chilly, must be wrapped up. “Rheumatism. DysmenorrhL ”
Soreness m the uterus and ovarian region. Lame, bruiLd feeling all

over ; painful menstruation,” and some one has named that rh^matic
dysmenorrhoea, not a bad name. rncumatic

in cv""? pregnancy. It cures all sorts of conditions

m this kind of constitution, these nervous, rheumatic

with jerking in the muscles. So markedly do her trm ff ^

with .ad, o,h., .ha. atemahon “taTh.

will commonly find that all the rest of her tm 1 1 u

and that now „a„«a ha, com. on. In all A. y.t, S'h Tn

sev... have .™p„,ad,y .t;Tan“i



ACTiEA RACEMOSA


about like Pulsatilla, But the symptoms have to be taken collectively
to get at the image of the patient. A woman will come to you with
one group of symptoms today and may come back to you with an
entirely different group in a couple of weeks. These are very trouble-
some cases to prescribe for, and you have sometimes to take the symp-
toms a dozen times and put them all together as if she had felt them
all in one day, and so make your prescription. A hysterical patient
is difficult to manage because of this changing of symptoms, and also
because she has a tendency to deceive the doctor.

"'Shivering in the first stage of labor. Hysterical manifestations
through labor.’* Pains have all ceased or are irregular, so that they
do not good. No dilatation has taken place. But when the regular
pains come on we have some important symptoms. A pain comes on
and it seems to be about to finish satisfactorily ; it has been regular and
prolonged until about two-thirds through, and all at once she screams
out and grasps her hip— the pain has left the uterus and gone to the
hip, causing a cramp in the hip, and she has to be rubbed and turned
over. This medicine will regulate the pains, and when the next pain
comes it will hold on to the end. So impressionable is this woman
during confinement that if she is subjected to any emotion — such as
having an emotional story told in the room — or if anything excitable
occurs, the pain will stop. If she has passed through the labor and
the lochia has been established, from such a cause the lochia will stop,
as if she had taken cold, ; and she will have cramps and troublesome
after-pains, the milk will be suppressed, she will feel sore and bruised
all over, and have fever. This remedy should be compared with Caulo-
phyllum, which has the following symptoms: Weakness in the repro-
ductive system of the woman. From weakness she is sterile, or she
aborts in the early months of gestation. During parturition the con-
tractions of the uterus are too feeble to expel the contents, and they are
only tormenting. Labor-like pains during menstruation with drawing
pains in the thighs and legs, and even the feet and toes. Uterine haem-
orrhage from inertia of the uterus. Relaxation of muscles and liga-
ments. Heaviness, and even prolapsus. Subinvolution. Excoriating
leucorrhoea. Menses too soon or too late. She is sensitive to cold and
wants warm clothing — quite unlike Pulsatilla, She is hysterical, like
Ignatia, She is fretful and apprehensive. She is rheumatic, like
Actaea, only the small joints are most likely to be affected. Later
she suffers from after-pains, and they are felt in the inguinal region.
Rheumatic stiffness of the back and very sensitive spine. She is sleep-
less, restless and withal very excitable. This remedy has cured chorea
at puberty when menstruation was late.

You need not be surprised that such an emotional subject has a flut-
tering, quick pulse, and irregular action of the heart, but many of the



28


^SCULUS mPPOCASTANUM


most marked hysterical features are present without any disturbances
whatever in the action of the heart. “A feeling in the region of the
heart as if the heart were sore, and as if it were enlarged.”

"Back of head and neck sore.” The head is drawn back from con-
traction of the muscles at the nape. Violent aching down the back.
Rheumatism in the back. Impossible to lie upon the back because of
the contraction of the muscles of the back. Impossible to lie upon the
side of the body because of the contraction and jerking of the mus-
cles. “Numbness of the limbs. Trembling. Soreness.”

The symptoms of the nerves are simply a reiteration of what I have
said. “Hysterical spasms. Convulsions. Trembling of the legs ;
hardly able to walk.” The numbness is such as is associated with
paralysis. Paralytic weakness.

The best effects have resulted from the 30th, 200th, loooth and still
higher potencies, and from the use of medicine in single doses.

It is similar in some of its conditions to the Blue Cohosh. Compare
it with Puls., Sepia, Natr. mur.. Lit. t., Caulophyllum and fgn.

dESCULUS HIPPOCASTANUM

A peculiar kind of plethora is found running through this remedy,
a vascular fulness which affects the extremities and the whole body,
and there are symptoms showing that the brain is similarly affected.

The conditions of *^sculus are worse during sleep, hence symptoms
are observed on waking. He wakes up with confusion of mind, looks
all around the room in confusion, bewildered, does not know tlie
people, wonders where he is and what is the meaning of the things
he sees. It is especially useful in children that rouse up in sleep fright-
ened and in confusion, like Lycopodium. The remedy produces great
sadness, irritability, loss of memory and aversion to work. There are
times when there is a sense of bodily congestion, fulness of the veins,
and then these symptoms are most marked. It is a general venous
stasis, and is sometimes worse in sleep, worse from lying, better from
Imdily exertion. The symptoms pass away after considerable exer-
tion moving about, doing something, keeping busy relieves. You will
find it useful in persons who suffer from palpitation when the pulsa-
tion extends to the extremities and the throbbing of the heart in sleep
can be heard ; an audible palpitation.

Now, as the mental symptoms arc the most important in a proving, so
are the mental symptoms in sickness the most important. Hahnemann
directs us to pay most attention to the symptoms of the mind, because
the symptoms of the mind constitute the man himself. The highest
and innermost symptoms are the most important, and these are the
mind symptoms. iEsculus has not been brought out in the finest dc-



iESCULUS HEPPOCASTANUM


29


tail, but we have the key to it. Extreme irritability is the very gen-
eral state from which ramify a great many mental symptoms. Irrita-
bility and mental depression run through a great many remedies, and
form the centre around which revolve all the mental symptoms in some
cases. The reason that these are more interior than some other symp-
toms of the mind is that these relate to the affections themselves. The
mental symptoms can be classified in a remedy. The things that relate
to the memory are not so important as the things that relate to the
intelligence, and the things that relate to the intelligence are not so
important as the things that relate to the affections or desires and
aversions. We see in a state of irritability that the patient is not irri-
table while doing the things that he desires to do ; if he wants to be
talked to, for instance, you do not discover his irritability while talk-
ing to him. You never discover he is irritable if you do the things he
wants you to do. But just as soon as you do something he does not
want, this irritability or disturbance of the will is brought on, and this
is the very innermost of the man's state. That which he wishes be-
longs to that which he wills, and the tilings that relate to what he wills
are the most important things in every proving. You may say that an
individual is sad, but he is sad because he lacks something that he
wants ; he desires something which he has not and becomes sad for it ;
sadness may go on to such an extent that the mind is in confusion.

Confusion of mind and vertigo. Make this distinction, vertigo is not
a confusion of the intelligeiice. You have only to meditate upon it
a moment and you will see that it is not. Confusion of the mind is a
disturbance of the intellect, not a disturbance of the sensorium ; you
will make a distinction between staggering when walking and a period
of disturbance of the mind, with inability to think clearly. Vertigo
is a sensation of rolling, and belongs to the sensorium. A great mis-
take has been made in some of our repertories, in that confusions of
mind are placed with vertigo under sensorium. These things must be
thought out carefully, so that we are clear in our own minds as to*,
what symptoms mean when they are given to us by patients. A patient
may state that when walking in the street he is dizzy, or that it appears
as though everything interiorly were turning around, yet he may be
perfectly able to add up a column of figures ; his mind may be clear.
If we ourselves are perfectly clear as to the meaning of these expres-
sions, we will commonly glean the meaning of the patient. It is im-
portant to record the language of the patient, yet often a patient will
say something which you can see he does not mean at all, and it then
becomes necessary to put in a parenthesis what he really means. For
instance, a patient says: 'T have such a pain in my chest,'^ with the
hand on the abdomen, or a woman when menstruating will say the
pain is in the stomach when you know it is in the uterus. Patients



30


iESCULUS HIPPOCASTANUM


must be questioned oftentimes as to their statements, or requested to
place the hand upon the painful part. In the same way, therefore,
patients talk about dizziness when they are not dizzy at all, but feel a
confusion of mind, or they speak of confusion of mind when they
mean that they stagger in the street

It is in the nature of this remedy to have flying pains all over the
body, like Pulsatilla and Kali carh.', flitting, sharp, shooting, tearing
pains, flying from one part to another ; they seem at times to be
scarcely more than skin deep. Sometimes they fly along the course
of the nerves.

This remedy is full of headache. It has also dull aching pain, when
it seems that the brain would he pressed out. But especially are these
pains felt in the back of the head, as if the head would be crushed;
hard aching pains, violent aching pains, fulness of the brain. “Dull
frontal headache, from right to left, with constrictive feeling of skin
of forehead.” Fulness of the head, with dull, heavy pains, aching in
the forehead ; pain over the right eye. “Neuralgic pains in the right
supraorbital region.” “Shooting in left parietal bone, later in right.”
Formication of the scalp. If you examine the skin you will find formi-
cation, tickling and shooting and itching all over the body, so what
there is in the scalp is only what belongs to the remedy in all parts.

.<5isculus is a wonderful eye remedy, especially when the eyes have
“haemorrhoids.” Docs that convey any idea to you ? By that I mean
particularly enlarged blood vessels. Great redness of the eyes, with
lachrymation. burning eyeballs and vascular appearance. This in-
creased determination of blood is more or less painful ; the eyeballs feel
sore and ache ; sharp, shooting pains in eyes. In almost every rubric
of .^sculus we shall find stitching and shooting : little twinges ; wander-
ing pains with fulness ; almost every kind of disturbance will intensify
the fulness. Fulness of the hands and feet, not the fulness that pits
upon pressure, that we call oedema, hut a tenseness. Medicines hav-
ing much trouble with the veins arc often disturbed by hot bathing,
weakness after a hot bath, weakness in warm weather, aversion to
heat and desire for cold. It is the state of Pulsatilla. The Pulsatilla
veins contract in cold weather, and the shrivelling up makes the
patient feel better, but the veins fill and become engorged in the warm
air and after a hot bath. A tepid bath sometimes makes a Pulsatilla
patient feel better, but a Turkish bath is generally distressing. Many
of the complaints of ACsculus are of this sort ; .^sculus often feels
better in cold air. The symptoms of .iEsculus are often brought out
by temperature, especially the little stinging pains. It is characteris-
tic of these superficial pains that they are nearly always ameliorated
by heat, while the deeper affections are oftentimes ameliorated from
cold. Now, in Pulsatilla, the stinging pains of the scalp and those



uESCtXLUS HIPPOCASTANUM


3*

over the body, here and there, are often ameliorated by the local appli-
cation of heat, while the patient himself wants to be in the cold ; in the
same way ^sculus stinging pains are better from heat, while the pa-
tient is often better from cold, although at times he is aggravated from
cold, damp weather in rheumatic and venous conditions. Again, in
Secale, we see that the little sharp pains that follow the course of the
nerves are better from heat, but the patient himself wants to be in the
cold air, or to be uncovered, except the spot of pain, which he wants
kept warm. We notice the same thing running through Camphor;
during the twinges of pain he wants the windows closed and wants hot
applications ; but as soon as the pain is over he wants the windows
up and desires to be uncovered so that he can breathe. These arc
general things, things that are to be observed in analyzing symptoms.

.^sculus then is a venous remedy, engorged and full, sometimes to
bursting. Now, there is another feature 1 want to bring out. You
will notice where congestion takes place that it is purple or blue in
color. This remedy produces inflammation of the throat, the charac-
teristic being that it is very dark. It has the tendency to produce vari-
cose veins and ulceration, and round about these we have marked
duskiness. Aisculus cures varicose leg ulcers with a purplish areola.
When we study the haemorrhoidal state we sec the tumor is purple,
looking almost as if it would slough. The remedy is not active in its
inflammatory state, it is sluggish and passive. Certain remedies pro-
duce a slight inflammation M^ith a high degree of redness, everything
is violent and rapid, but in this medicine things are slow ; the activities
are reduced, the heart is laboring and the veins arc congested.

“Eructations: sour, greasy, bitter.” “Desire to vomit.” "'Heart-
burn and gulping up of food after eating,'' It has a great disturbance
of digestion, and we can see by these symptoms that we must class it
with Phosphorus and Ferrum, As soon as the patient has swallowed
the food, or a little while after, it becomes sour and he eructates it,
until after a while he has emptied the stomach of its contents. Such
is the state of Phosphorus, Ferrum, Arsenicum, .^Esculus and a few
other medicines, .^sculus has also a state of congestion and ulcera-
tion of the stomach. “Constant distress and burning in the stomach,
inclination to vomit.” Such a state as this might be present in ulcera-
tion of the stomach.

The abdomen is full of trouble. If w'c read the symptoms of the
right hypochondriiim, of the abdomen and of the rectum, we shall see
from the study of these that there must be a marked portal stasis.
Digestion is slow, the bowels are constipated and there is protrusion
of the rectum when at stool. It has most troublesome hemorrhoids
with fullness of the right hypochondrium. The liver is full of suffer-
ing. After eating there is distress in the bowels and rectum. Stick-



3 ^


^SCULUS HIPPOCASTANUM


ing, jagging, burning pains, as if the rectum were full of sticks. Great
sullering with blind haemorrhoids. The haemorrhoidal veins are all
distended and ulcerate. The stool becomes jammed into the rectum,
against these distended veins, and then ulceration takes place with
bleeding and great suflEcring. This remedy is often supposed to be
suitable to haemorrhoids that do not bleed, but it cures bleeding piles
also. We find in the text over two pages devoted to the symptoms of
the rectum. Great soreness ; much pain ; urging to stool ; dark stool
followed by white one, showing the liver engorgement. Chronic con-
stipation.

The back is the scat of much trouble, especially low down in the
back, through the sacrum and hips ; although there is also aching all
along the back and pain in the back of the neck. It is a very common
thing for patients suffering from haemorrhoids to have pain in the
back of the neck and base of the brain, basilar headaches, and when
these haemorrhoidal patients undertake to walk tliey have pain and
aching across the sacrum into the hips. This pam through the sacrum
and into the hips^ W'hen walking, is a striking feature of ^Ssculus, so
striking that you may expect it to be present even when there are no
haemorrhoids.

Constant dull backache ; walking is almost impossible ; scarcely able
to rise or walk after sitting. You will see one suffering from the
^sculus backache, on attempting to rise from sitting, make many
painful efforts before be finally succeeds. This is found in Sulphur,
Petroleum and is also cured by Agaricus.

i^lsculus is indicated oftentimes in the troubles of women, with great
dragging pain in the pelvis. Many a time has .^sculus cured the
dragging-down pain of the pelvis with copious leucorrhoea and press^
ing pain in the hips when walking. The woman feels that the uterus
is engorged. She says that the lower part of the abdomen feels full,
both before and during menstruation. There is much suffering at this
time with pains in the hips. '‘Uterine soreness, with throbbing in the
hypogastrium.*' “Old cases of leucorrhoea, discharge of a dark yel-
low color, thick and sticky.” “Leucorrhoea, with lameness in the back
across sacroiliac articulations,^* During pregnancy there are many
complaints, with soreness and fulness and uneasy consciousness of the
uterus and pain across the back when walking.

-^sculus is full of gouty sufferings; gout in all the joints, gouty
rheumatic affections, neuralgic affections. Especially in this rheumatic
tendency found from the elbows to the hands, in the forearm and
hands. Rending, tearing pains, flying hither and thither without any
particular order, relieved by heat. Varicose veins of the thighs and
legs have been cured by ^Esculus {Fluoric acid). This vericose tend-
ency in the body we have already seen is a striking feature of .^sculus.



^THUSA CYNAPIUM


33


After the sore throat has passed away, engorged veins are left, which
-/Esculus sometimes cures. After eye troubles have been cured, vari-
cose veins remain in the eye. With rheumatic complaints there are
varicose veins. It is one of the most frequently indicated remedies
in the haemorrhoidal constitution, as it used to be called.


^THUSA CYNAPIUM

Before ALthusa was known a certain class of cases of cholera in-
fantum, and vomiting and diarrhoea in children, all resulted fatally,
because there was no remedy that looked like such serious cases.
Death is stamped on the face from the beginning, and if there are any
remedies in the book that save life this is one of them. It applies to
the cases that come on very suddenly in hot weather in infancy, with
extreme prostration. The mother does not suspect the child is sick
until she takes it from the crib ; only a few hours before it was well ;
but when cholera infantum is prevalent in hot weather, this little one
fills its stomach with milk and almost before it has had time to coagu-
late or form into curds the milk comes up partly in curds and partly
liquid, and accompanying the vomiting there is a thin, yellow green-
ish, slimy stool. The child has the appearance as if it were dying,
pale hippocratic face, there is a whitish-blue pallor around the lips, the
eyes are sunken and there hi a sunken condition around the nose. The
mother is astonished and sinds for the doctor hurriedly. The child
sinks into an exhausted sleep. It wakes up and again fills the stomach
with milk which comes up again in a few minutes, partly in curd and
partly liquid, and again there is the awful exhaustion, deathly appear-
ance and prolonged sleep. Without ^thusa, in two or three days the
undertaker gets that child. That is pretty nearly the whole story of
^thusa.

It has delirium, it has excitement, it has mental disturbances of vari-
ous kinds, but they are acute and accompany the brain troubles. A
certain class of infants come down sick in the hot weather, in the hot
nights, and they get brain trouble, and from that time the stomach
quits business, the bowels become relaxed, and everything put into the
stomach either comes up or goes right through. This occurs especially
in those infants that have been fed as the ordinary everyday mother
feeds her baby, and how is that ? Every time it cries she puts it to the
breast or feeds it. Well, now ; let us think a bit. Every doctor ought
to think a little, once in a while. Now meditate a trifle as to whether
that is a wise or foolish thing to do. It takes about two hours or two
hours and a half for the ordinary baby’s stomach to transact good
wholesome business in digesting the milk taken, and it ought to have

5



34


^TIIUSA CYNAPIUM


a rest of half an hour or so, and when we get up to three hours and
the baby cries then it is probably hungry and will be glad to take some
more and digest it. Any shorter interval of feeding than that is bad
practice. It would be just the same thing if the child should take half
a teacupful of milk and let it partly digest, and in a little while take
a little more, and then laicr add a little more. It commences to spit
up its food and it is sour, and the very first spell of hot weather that
comes brings on head trouble. Only the toughest children will stand
this bad method. I have watched these children and seen them stand
it until the summer. The doctor must put his foot down, and put it
down violently, and make them see he means it. The old woman
comes in and says: “That doctor does not know anything’’ and the
baby must be fed. Now ASthusa suits improperly fed babies. It is
at the head of the list of medicines for that condition ; that is, when
digestion has absolutely ceased from brain trouble. So far as busy
doctors have discovered the call for this remedy, it has been mostly
among babies, but adults sometimes take on an .^5^thusa state, when
digestion has absolutely ceased from brain trouble and from excite-
ment. It has cured dyspepsia from constant feeding, in those nibblers,
those hungry fellows who are always earing, always nibbling, always
taking crackers in their pockets until there comes a time w^hen the
stomach ceases to act. It also suits cases of indigestion from head
troubles, with hot head, vomiting, exhaustion, sweat and long sleep.

iEthusa has convulsions in children. Sometimes the brain trouble
docs not affect the stomach, but the child goes into convulsions, with
clammy hands, deathly countenance, and the sweat, exhaustion and
sleep. “Convulsions, great weakness and prostration, with sleepiness.
Dosing of the child after vomiting and after stool, with convulsions.”

In the .^Ilthusa patient there is much in the face and aspect to indi-
cate a remedy ; so much can be seen and comes within the observation,
and so little questioning is necessary, that a sort of snap-shot pre-
scribing can be done, but it is not to be recommended. A busy physi-
cian, one who really and truly studies his Materia Medica, and has
learned the principles, will in time do a great deal of what seems to
be snap-shot prescribing, but he really docs not do so, because he puts
together many things that outsiders would not think of. ./Ethusa then
shows itself upon the surface, whereas in many remedies there is noth-
ing seen upon the surface, lx?cause they manifest themselves in inner
or deeper sensations. Let me lay a case before you to illustrate this.
For instance, take a robust looking fellow, who declares himself fairly
well, out to lunch with you. You have noticed for some time that his
nose is all the time peeling off ; at once there is a star. He never talks
about his health. Pretty soon, while lunching, the door slams and he
jumps. That is the second point. Then he tells you how much he



AGARICUS MUSCARIUS


35


cats, how well it affects him, how good he feels after eating, and you
have noticed yourself that he cats a good deal You have not said one
word about his health to him. You have not asked him to tell you any
symptoms. Finally you shove the pitcher of milk over to him, and he
says, “Oh, I can’t drink milk ; if I take milk it gives me diarrhoea ;
I never think of taking it.” Who could not prescribe for that fellow
without taking him into the office ? Who would think of anything but
Natriim carb, for such a case ? Sometimes you can find out the whole
story by getting a stubborn patient to go and dine with you.

AGARICUS MUSCARIUS

The most striking things running, through this medicine are twitch-
ings and tremblings. Jerkings of the muscles and trembling of the
limbs ; quivering and tremors, everywhere these two features are pres-
ent in all parts of the body and limbs. The twitching of the muscles
becomes so extensive that it is a well-developed case of chorea. It has
in its nature all that is found in chorea and has cured many cases.
This is a general belonging to all parts, to all muscles. Throughout
the body there is a sensation of creeping and crawling. It is hardly
confined to the skin, it is felt as if in the flesh, a sensation as if of
ants. Itching of the skin all over which changes place from scratch-
ing. No place is exempt from this. There are strange sensations
here and there upon the skin or in parts, cold sensations, sensations of
cold needles and of hot needles ; stinging and burning where the cir-
culation is feeble, about the cars, nose, back of hands and fingers and
toes, red spots with itching and burning as if frostbitten. It is a great
remedy for chilblains. The patient is extremely nervous and sensitive
to cold. Itching, pricking, tingling, etc., come on from mental exer-
tion and are relieved from physical exertion. All the symptoms of
Agaricus arc also aggravated after sexual intercourse, especially in the
symptoms of the spinal cord. It is useful for the symptoms which
come on after coition in young, nervous married women, hysterical
fainting after coition.

The mental symptoms are such as you would expect. Great change-
ability, irritability, mental depression and complaints which come on
from overexertion of the mind and prolonged study. The brain seems
to be developed tardily. Children are late in learning to talk and walk,
thus combining the features of two remedies, Natrum muriaticum,
which has the symptom “late learning to talk,” and Calcarea carb.,
which has the symtom “late learning to walk.” It will be noticed in
Calcarea that this is due to a defect in bone weakness. In Agaricus
it is a mental defect, a slowly developing mind. Children with twitch-
ing and early fainting, nervous girls prior to puberty who have con-



36


AGARICUS MUSCARIUS


vuisions from being scolded, from excitement and shock ; late in men-
tal development. Children who cannot remember, make mistakes and
are slow in learning. Nervous patients who on going over their
manuscripts find out their mistakes in writing and spelling. The con-
dition of the mind is one in which they arc slow to grasp ideas ; wrong
words float in kaleidoscopically. When we read in the book ‘‘the
whole psychological sphere as if paralyzed,’’ wc must read between the
lines. The whole mind and sensorium seem paralyzed ; the patient is
sluggish, stupid, at times seems to be delirious ; there is confusion of
the mind so nearly like delirium that it is not unlike intoxication. A
delirium such as is produced by alcohol. He also becomes silly, says
foolish and silly things, sings and whistles at an inopportune time,
makes verses and prophesies ; or he lapses into an opposite state, be-
comes indifferent to his surroundings. One who is mild and placid
becomes self-willed, obstinate and conceited.

Difficulty in co-ordinating the movements of the muscles of the body.
Inco-ordination of brain and spinal cord. Clumsy motion of the
fingers and hands. In handling things she drops them. Fingers fly
open spasmodically while holding things. You will sometimes cure
Bridget in the kitchen with Agaricus or Apis, when the trouble is that
she is continually breaking the dishes by letting them fall. These two
remedies are opposites, Agaricus must stay near the fire, while Apis
she wants to get out of the kitchen. The awkwardness, clumsiness,
etc., are both mental and bodily. Every sort of change is rung on the
patient and the doctor. At times the patient is stupid, awkward and
clumsy, at other times quick and poetical, can run off poetry without
effort, especially at night. In the morning he is tired and sluggish and
this may last till noon. The mental symptoms are worse in the morn-
ing and are relieved towards evening. All jerkings and twitchings
subside during sleep. There is vertigo when walking in the open air.
He is always chilly. On undertaking to do something he does the
opposite. Vertigo and confusion of mind are mixed up.

It is a common feature for the headaches of this remedy to be asso-
ciated with the spinal symptoms, the quivering and jerking. Head-
aches in spinal patients. Pain as though sharp ice touched the head,
or as if from cold needles. That is general ; we find it in other parts.
Pam m the head as if from a nail. There is some bleeding in the
morning, and the blood is thick, black and will hardly drop. Coldness
in the head. In the scalp there arc all sorts of queer sensations; icy
^dness after itching or scratching. That runs all through the body,
Thtre is itching, although no eruption is visible ; can’t let it alone, and
^ter scratching there is a sensation of icy coldness in the part or as
if the wind was blowing on it. The head is in constant motion as in
chorea. Itching of the scalp, especially in the morning on rising,



AGARICUS MUSCARIUS


37


There again we have the general aggravation in the morning. There
are marked eruptions on the scalp. Eczema with crusts.

Twitching and jerking of the eyes. You will observe this about
the Agaricus eyes ; as the patient looks at you there is a pendulum-
like action of the eyes, they go back and forth all the time ; they oscil-
late, though he tries his best to fix his look on you. This stops only
during sleep ; all the motions subside during sleep. A few other medi-
cines have cured this eye symptom, Cictita, Arsenicum, Sulphur, Pulsa-
tilla, but Agaricus also produces and cures it. There is every con-
ceivable kind of deception in colors and in vision. Flickering before
the eyes ; he reads with difficulty. Objects seem to be where they are
not. Black flies before the eyes ; black motes ; secs double ; floating
flies before the eyes. Muscular weakness of the eyes. Irregularity
of the motions of the eyes ; pupils dilated ; pupils contracted. Sensa-
tion as of a mist or cobweb before the eyes. Spasmodic twitching and
jerking. The jerkings and twitchings arc the most marked symptoms,
as also the choreic movements about the eyes, and the deceptions in
colors and figures before the eyes.

Redness, burning and itching of the cars as if they had been frost-
bitten. The sensation as of chilblains, the same sensation as found
throughout ; the same itching and tingling as of the remedy in general.
Dulness of hearing. Deafness. Hearing acute. In the morning he
is dumb, sluggish, stupid, tired, but when evening comes he brightens
up, becomes warmed up, becomes excited, poetical and prophetical,
wants to sit up late at night, is brilliant, wants to play games.

Nosebleed ; profuse, foetid discharge from the nose. Agaricus will
cure the most inveterate chronic catarrhs with dryness and crusts, in
tubercular constitutions, so deep-seated is it. It has cured many cases
of incipient phthisis. It cures old coughs and catarrhs. Red nose, as
if frostbitten. It is as good as Ledum and Lachesis for the red-tipped
nose in old drunkards.

From what we have already seen we expect twitching of the muscles
of the face, and itching and redness and burning as if frostbitten, para-
lytic weakness, etc,, because these are general features, and just as we
expect we sec these things in the text. Choreic spasms. Expression
as of idiocy. Now notice this: Some patients when going on witli
their own usual vocation are pretty smart, but if you put some new
idea before them, something not in the routine of their work, they arc
perfectly idiotic. This is especially noticeable in the morning. He
can't take in anything new in the morning, but he is able to take in
new ideas and is bright in the evening, like the effect produced by tea
and coffee and alcoholic beverages. This remedy is a great antidote
to alcoholic beverages. In this remedy and in Zinctim the spine is
affected and both of these have aggravation from stimulants.



38


AGAKICUS ^n;SCARIUS


Agaricus has cured many cases of epileptiform convulsions, more
commonly the hysterio-epileptic type with frothing of the mouth,
opisthotonos, drawing of the muscles of the face. The Agaricus
patient has spells in which a little muscle of the face or a few fibres
of a muscle w’ill quiver for a few minutes and stop, and then in another
part of the face the same thing, an eyelid will quiver, and then another
set of fibres, sometimes so bad as to nearly drive him crazy. Such is
an Agaricus state as well as Nux vomica.

The teeth feel too long and arc sensitive to touch. The tongue
quivers, twitches, jerks and causes disorderly speech ; articulates vio-
lently. Tongue dry, tremulous. Learns to speak with difficulty.
Spasms of the tongue, inarticulate speech. Phagedenic ulcer on the
Iraemun of the tongue; cats it away. Soreness of the tongue. Mer-
curial aphthie in roof of mouth. Little white blisters like nursing sore
mouth. Chronic sore throat. Induration of tonsils. Burning thirst,
ravenous appetite. Gnawing in stomach as if from hunger, without
desire for food.


Hatus; distressing belching; great tympanites; rumbling; turmoil
in abdomen ; olfcnsive flatus; rumbling and gurgling in belly. Every-
thing fc=;rmcnts ; rumbling and loud rolling ; pinching colic. Horribly
foetid discharge. Tympanitic condition marked in typhoid ; low typo
of typhoid; trembling and jerking of muscles; paralytic weakness;
emaciation ; mental symptoms.

Morning diarrha-a, great deal of hot flatus [Aliic), with burning
m the rectum; soft stool, great tenesmus; urging to stool violent; in-
voluntary straining before, during and after stool. Sensation as if
rectum would burst, even after stool [Merc, and Sul). Violent, sud-
den pains ; can’t wait; distressing, bursting sensation. Before stool,
cutting and ^nchmg in abdomen ; urgent tenesmus ; painful straining
m rectum. During stool, colic and passing of flatus ; burning, sore-
ness, smarting and cutting in anus ; sweat ; pain in loins to legs, con-
tmumg after stool. After stool, headache relieved; biting in anus •
s raining tn. rectum ; cutting pain in anus ; griping in hypogastrium ;
distension m abdomen ; heaviness in abdomen and around^Lil ; pSn
in chest. Emphasize the tenesmus after siooL ^

‘-■o”s»pation and paralytic feelings of the rectum ; stool
hard, straining at stool as if life depended on it and yet no stool
Beginning paralysis of the lower limbs, with twitching oi the muscles
and burning spine In one case, after straining had ^en given u^ 2
unsuccessful would pass a stool involuntarily. This symptom Liv

wa. known ^JeTurS

as the desire for stool. Dribbling of urine. A neculiar fear,?,? “f
this remedy is that the urine feels cold on passing ; while the urine
dribbles, can count the cold drops along the urethra. “Urine passes



AGARICUS MUSCARIUS


39


slowly in a stream or in drops, has to press to promote the flow,”
“Urine watery, clear, lemon-colored, bright yellow ; dark yellow and
hot ; red, flocculent, a powdery sediment ; watery in the forenoon, in
the afternoon milky, like whey, with a red or white sediment (phos-
phate of ntagnesia) ; iridizing on surface.” Phosphates ; milky urine.
Oily surface, iridescent surface, greasy-like pellicle on urine, like pe-
troleum, Scanty urine in rheumatic, gouty, hysterical subjects. Per-
sons cold, feeble, pale, going info phthisis. Urine becomes scanty and
a headache comes on. Goes many days and is constipated, and head-
ache relieved by stool. In Fluoric acid, if he does not attend to the
desire to urinate, a headache comes on.

Transformation takes place. The milk ceases in one day, but con-
gestion of the brain or spine comes on. Metastasis, especially if milk
ceases and complaints come on.

Genital organs cold and shrunken. The comparative examination
of the symptoms of male and female sexual organs shows that the
proving has not been extensively made on the female, but in the male
there are many symptoms which have an analogous condition in the
female. In the male, symptoms are worse after coition, but just as
marked in the female. Complaints after sexual excitement, debauch,
etc., in the woman, fainting; in the man, weakness, The trembling
and twitching, or any of the Agaricus symptoms may be worse after
coition, because the sexual functions are related to the cord. Those
sufl'ering from spinal affections have distress after this act.

In the 7nalc, during coition, burning in the urethra comes from ex-
coriation or a sense of hotness of the seminal fluid while being ejected,
and hence can only be a symptom of the male. Burning in the pros-
tate during ejaculation. Violent sexual excitement before and during,
but at the time of ejaculation the orgasm is wanting, it is a passive
and plcasureless ejaculation. This occurs in men with spinal weak-
ness, nervous men who have tingling and crawling all over. It comes
in the cure of old catarrhal discharge from the urethra, chronic
gonorrhoea, gleet, after all sorts of local treatment have been used.
The penis is cold and strunken ; excessively painful retraction in testes.
In old gleety discharge where there is a continued itching tingling in
the urethra and the last drop will remain, discharging for a long time.
There are two remedies better for this than many others, Petroleum
and Agaricus.

The routine prescriber always thinks of Puls,, Sep,, etc., for bearing-
down pains in the female, but in a woman with spinal irritation, etc.,
with the dragging-down sensation as if the parts would drop into the
world, this remedy is the best. Those slender, nervous, restless women
with tingling and creeping, must have Agaricus. During menses,
headache, toothache, etc. All the general symptoms are worse during



40


AGARICUS MUSCA&ItS


the menstrual period, not to any great extent before or after. Aggra-
vation of the heart symptoms and prolapsus just at the close of the
menses.

Leucorrhoea very profuse, dark, bloody, acrid, excoriating in parts.
This remedy has been mentioned in relation to Fluoric acid. There are
many points of relation. They are like each other in the leucorrhoea
especially ; copious and acrid, so acrid that it keeps the parts raw and
irritated around the genitals and the patient can’t walk. In Fluoric
acid there is, with the nervous symptoms, headache ameliorated by
passing the urine, or headache if urination is not immediately attended
to, with copious, acrid, excoriating leucorrhoea.

Agaricus is a great remedy in chesi troubles, though seldom thought
of. It has cured what seemed to be consumption. Catarrhal condi-
tion of the chest, with night sweats and history of the nervous symp-
toms. Violent cough in isolated attacks ending in sneezing. Convul-
sive cough, with sweat towards evening, with frequent pulse, expec-
toration of pus-like mucus, worse in the mornings and when lying on
the back. Add to this the symptoms of Agaricus as described, and
Agaricus will take liold of that case. Cases of incipient phthisis. It
closely relates to the tubercular diathesis. I remember starting out
to prove Tubercidinum on an individual I suspected would be sensi-
tive to it from his history and symptoms. The first dose almost killed
him, and, considering the use that that substance is put to in diagnos-
ing the disease in cattle, it seemed to stir him up. He became ema-
ciated and looked as if he would die. I let it alone and watched and
waited patiently and the symptoms of Agaricus came up and estab-
lished the relationship between these two remedies, and confirmed
Hering’s observation of the relationship of Agaricus to the tubercular
diathesis. Agaricus cured him and fattened him up.

The remedy is full of nervous palpitation ; worse in the evening.
It cures shocks and thrills in the heart ; spasms of the heart ; internal
manifestations of its jerking symptoms. These shocks come from
sudden noise ; from eructations ; on coughing ; when lying on the left
side or back ; worse at night ; during fever ; they often extend to other
parts, as to abdomen or back or limbs. On the outer chest there is
tingling and creeping as in general.

The hack has many peculiar and general guiding symptoms. Stiff-
ness of the whole spine. Feeling as if it would break when he at-
tempts to bend. Feels as if something is so tight that it will break
when he stoops. Tightness in the muscles of the back. Tingling deep
in the spine. Violent, shooting, burning pains. Pain along the spine,
worse by stooping. Pains of all sorts in the spine. Pains go up the
back and down the back. Sensitiveness of the spine to touch, espe-
cially in the back of the neck and dorsal region between the scapulae.



AGNUS CASTUS


41


Sensitive to a hot sponge in the lumbar region in spinal irritation.
Sensation as if cold air were spreading along the back like an aura
epileptica. Sensation of ice touching the body. Cold spots. Chilli-
ness over the back, crawling, creeping and formication. Numbness of
skin over the back. The most of the pains are in the back of the
neck and the lumbosacral region. Pains in this region in connection
with coition. Pain in the lumbar region and sacral region, especially
during exertion, sitting, etc. Pain in the sacrum as if beaten, as if it
would break. Pains below the waist in women.

In the limbs in general there are twitchings ; they are numb, choreic;
burning here and there ; cold feelings in spots, paralyzed. Trembling
of limbs, hands, awkwardness of all the movements. Rheumatism and
gout of joints. Paralysis of the lower limbs. Trembling and weak-
ness of the lower limbs.

Burning itching of the hands as if frozen. In the smaller joints,
where the circulation is feeble, there are frostbite symptoms. Toes
and fingers stiff.

Bones feel as if they would break during rest, especially in the lower
limbs. Feeling as if the tibia would break. Aching in the tibia.
Growing pains in children and they must sit at the fire or the extremi-
ties will get cold. Pains in the bones. Weight in the legs. Pains
in the lower limbs ; aching ; stitching ; tearing ; better from warmth and
from motion.

Paralytic weakness in tht lower limbs soon after becoming pregnant.
This comes with every pregnancy and she must go to bed. The symp-
toms may lead to Agaricus. Weight in the legs. Legs feel heavy.
Trembling and jerking motion in the lower limbs.

AGNUS CASTUS

This wonderful remedy is often overlooked. It should come to
mind for old sufferers who are broken from sexual excesses and secret
vice. The pale sickly and sad mortals who lament over their misspent
life. It is good for both sexes. Sexual weakness ; relaxation of parts.
Perversion of all the functions.

A woman who indulged extensively in secret vice, found after mar-
riage that she had no sexual thrill, was cured by this remedy. Later
she was confined and no milk came in her mammae, again Agnus started
the belated milk at the end of three weeks.

When the milk ceases after it has started, or becomes scanty when
the above history is known, and the woman is said, this remedy will,
if not opposed, most likely cure.

It cures uterine haemorrhage, and restores suppressed menses in

6



AILANTHUS GLANDULOSA


young women with a history. The vagina is much relaxed, there is
often prolapsus, and there is a copious white-o£-egg-like leucorrhoea.

But the pitiful, woebegone young man, heart-broken over his early
life, now finds himself newly married, and impotent. He has had
gonorrhoea ; he has lived in excesses, and now suffers from relaxed
and cold genitalia, emissions, prostatic discharge at stool. His young
and beautiful wife excites no erection, though only recently he had a
clandestine success, and he has morning erections but no more.

Out of the above cause and condition come many distressing symp-
toms. Loss of memory, despair, suicidal thoughts, anxiety, fear and
peevishness. These patients suffer from headaches, photophobia and
nervous symptoms too numerous to mention. Formication of the
skin. Tearing pains of head, face and teeth. All but the simplest
food disorders the stomach, and he complains much of nausea. Ilis
muscles arc flabl)y. He is anaemic, and his glands arc enlarged, espe-
cially the spleen. He is growing increasingly flatulent. The abdominal
viscera hang down as a weight. There is a growing weakness of the
rectum and constipation, and he presses hard at stool, which often
fails and slips back, like Silica, Sank and Thuja, llie stool is large
and hard. Itching, smarting at the anus, noisy flatus of a urinous odor.
Excoriated anus. He soon takes on a hacking cough and night sweats.
The limbs arc tired and cold. He is sensitive to cold, and wants to
remain quiet. Exertion and motion intensify his complaints. He has
been to many advisers, and they have told him he has Neurasthenia.
He must have Agnus castus.

AILANTHUS GLANDULOSA

This medicine is especially suitable in the low zymotic forms of sick-
ness, such as we find in diphtheria and scarlet fever, in blood poisoning
and in symptomatic typhoids, especially those cases that are character-
ized by capillary congestion in spots, red mottled spots. Perhaps the
most striking manifestation of such a low type of sickness is malig-
nant scarlet fever. The regular rash does not come out, but in its
place red spots, roseola-like, make their appearance ; the usual uniform
spread of the eruption has failed, or has been suppressed, and there
is bleeding from the gums and nose, and dreadful tumefaction in the
throat. The countenance is purple and besotted, the eyes are congested
and there is even bleeding from the eyes. There is an appearance of
great prostration, but it is really stupefaction ; he seems stupid and
benumbed. If you look at the throat you see it is covered with little
purple patches, intermingled with an oedematous appearance similar to
that found in Baptisia. It is a low depressed type of sickness. De-



AILANTHUS GLANDULOSA


43


composition of the blood is going on rapidly. The blood that oozes is
black. The child is going into a state of stupor and it is with diffi-
culty that he can be aroused. Sometimes blisters are formed on the
ends of fingers, or here and tliere over the. body. From the mouth and
nose come foetid odors. The child is going as rapidly as possible into
a form of malignant disease. Sometimes the disease comes on as a
light febrile attack, but from taking cold and suppressing some of the
natural manifestations the case takes on a low typhoid form and
whereas you had at first only a simple remittent, the case has now
assumed a state of prostration with a very rapid heart, foctor, purple-
ness or blueness, a passive congestion with purple blotches of the skin,
causing a mottled appearance. When a disease turns so suddenly
blood poisoning is going on and a symptomatic typhoid state appears.
A remittent that turns into a sharp zymotic state in the course of
twenty-four hours, a diphtheria that takes on this form wdth stupidity
and mottled skin are examples of such a type of sickness.

The mental symptoms accompanying this state are interesting. I
read from some notes I have made. A continued dreamy state of
mind though awake. Child cries all the time. Sees little animals like
rats running around. Feels a rat or something small crawling up the
limb and over the body. There seems to be constant loss of memory,
even the things spoken of a moment ago go right out of the mind.
Constant forgetfulness. All past events are forgotten. Past events
arc forgotten or remembered .ias belonging to someone else, or as matters
read. That is in keeping with the dreamy state, it seems as though
those things that arc past appear as in a dream, as if he had dreamed
them. Cannot concentrate the mind in any mental effort ; cannot
answer questions correctly ; is as if in a semi-conscious state, and
finally he goes into complete unconsciousness. There is in the earlier
stages of this zymotic state great anxiety and restlessness, later there
is stupor and indifference to everything. Continual sighing with depres-
sion of spirits ; extremely irritable, scmi-conscious, finally unconscious-
ness, stupor, delirium and insensibility ; muttering delirium with sleep-
lessness and restlessness. This mental state is such as occurs in zymotic
sickness ; the chronic illness has not been well brought out. Dr. Wells
used this remedy in a number of cases, as it was at that time an
epidemic remedy for scarlet fever, in Brooklyn, and many patients were
saved by it. It seemed to be able to change the character of the
malignant forms of scarlet fever into a mild type.

In addition to the symptoms of the text it has been observed that
the hair falls out and flashes of light play before the eyes on closing
the lids at night. ‘Tupils widely dilated ; copious, thin, ichorous and
bloody discharge from the nose.” That is in the zymotic states in
scarlet fever, ‘‘Nostrils congested. Great prostration and a counte-



44


AILANTHUS GLANDITLOSA


nance indicating much distress. Face dark as mahogany.'^ That is in
suppressed scarlet fever. Purple, bloated and puffed, besotted face.
This remedy is one not very much used, and it is not very often indi-
cated, but it is very useful when indicated. You will not very often
sec this particular type even in malignant scarlet fever. You will often
see such a scarlet fever running to a number of other remedies, but
this remedy corresponds to one of the most malignant types, and its
commonest use will be in an epidemic in which the cases largely run
to the malignant type. There are three common types of scarlet fever.
In one season you find the cases arc mild and simple, the typical erup-
tion is present and comes on speedily without any great amount of
fever. Such cases will often run their course with good nursing, a
warm room and plenty of clothing without much medicine. The skin
is bright red, smooth and shiny. The case is not serious. In other
epidemics you will find only an isolated case of this kind, while the
majority of cases present marked trouble in the throat ; the rash is


scanty when present, and congestion of the head and spinal symptoms
come on with pain in the hack of the neck. The throat is dreadfully
swollen and inflamed, bright red and very painful. Then there is a
third type in which the throat is severely swollen, all the mucous mem-
branes are swollen, and the whole tendency is toward blood poisoning
or zymosis with enlargement of the glands, puffincss of the skin and a
great deal of ioetor ; the skin is dusky and the eruption is scanty, some-
times hardly visible from beginning to end. These cases will almost
all die if let alone; they arc very serious. The old authors call these
three forms scarlatina simplex,’' “scarlatina anginosa,” and “scarlatina
maligna.” In some epidemics you will see all three of the appear-
ances, m some families you will see two forms. One child will have
a mild type, and another will have it more severely with zymotic blisters
here and there, on the ends of the fingers, and these will be attended

.T! ulceration will take place if

e c 1 ivc ong enough ; hut these arc the deadly cases, the malig-

does not come out in the low forms
of carlet fever, the impression of the finger makes a white mark which

® 'Uarked that is, the lower the type.

circulation, and

o t when there is no rash, a passive congesSo^

or me veins. Quite a number of medicines have that, but Veratrum
W. ,„ch a va,o-™.„, p„a,y* a line S

made by pressure will remain a Ion? time In all ^



AILANIHUS GLANDULOSA


45


‘Throat much swollen, dark red, almost purple in color. Diphtheria
with extreme prostration. Throat livid, swollen ; tonsils prominent
and studded with deep ulcers.*' The throat and tonsils very often
appear as if they would pit upon pressure like a dropsical state. In
some of these zymotic cases where a reaction ought to take place a
diarrhoea sets in that is horribly offensive ; a critical diarrhoea. With
these zymotic states there is pain in the back of the neck and head no
matter what the name of the disease is.

“Breathing hurried, irregular, heavy. Burning in the palms and
soles, hunts to find a cool place to put them. Feels a rat running up
the leg. Feeling as if a snake crawled up the leg.” These mental
symptoms occurred in one of my provers. In low, adynamic forms of
disease characterized by sudden and extreme prostration, “vomiting,
pulse small and rapid purplish appearance of skin.'* “Electric thrill
from brain to extremities.” “Chill at 8 a. m. with chill, heat and
sweat ** During the chill vomiting of food and piercing pain over the
hip. Chill is preceded by malignant eruption, especially on the face
and forehead. “During chill hunger, empty feeling, intolerable pain
in back of neck, upper part of back and hip joint.” That pain in the
back of the neck is a common forerunner of low types of fever. It
generally precedes a congestive attack of great violence characterized
by fulness of the head with heat.

This miliary rash spoken of in the text, looking like measles, is when
the scarlet fever rash or th^ measles rash does not come out in its uni-
form fashion, but in patches, little circles here and there and is dark.
“Irregular, patchy, livid eruption, disappearing on pressure and return-
ing very slowly ; interspersed with small vesicles, worse on forehead,
head, neck and chest. Eruption appeared scantily for two days with
sore throat and mild fever,” This eruption is like the petechiae that
we see in typhoid forms of disease. The record of this remedy in
scarlet fever makes it worthy of further study ; it ought to be reproved
that we may have a fuller understanding of it. “Eruption plentiful,
of a bluish tint. Typhoid scarlatina.” “Eruption is slow to make its
appearance, remains livid.” “Body and limbs covered with an
irregular patchy eruption of a very livid color.” Here you see but
one type of scarlet fever. This low type of fever sometimes needs
Sulphur, or Phosphorus, or Belladonna, or Baptisia, or Lachesis,
That you may be able to distinguish one from the other and keep the
picture of each remedy clearly in mind requires a prolonged study of
the Materia Medica. It is an easy matter to compare remedies for
yourself after you have first studied each one separately. You can then
bring out many comparisons, and especially in this case at the bed-
side. If you go to the bedside with a good knowdedge of the generals
of Materia Medica you will be surprised at the number of symptom



46


ALIJUM CEPA


})icturcs which will come into your mind, called up by the signs of
the sickness. When you go to the bedside of scarlet fever you should
not call to mind the names of these medicines you may have heard
recommended for scarlet fever ; let the appearance of the patient bring
to mind .such remedies as appear like this patient, regardless of whether
they have been associated with scarlet fever or not. When you see the
rash perhaps you will say that looks like an Aconite rash but
there is such scanty zymosis in the nature of Aconite that it is no longer
thought of. Belladonna is not suitable, for in that remedy the rash
is shiny and smooth, the typical Sydenham rash. On the other hand,
you will say Pidsaiilla has a measly rash, and often associated with
a low form of fever, but not so low as the typhoid type, so Pulsatilla
goes out of your mind. You now think of the remedies that are typical
of all zymotic states : the prostration, the aggravation after sleep, general
stupor and delirium, and almost at a glance you see Lachesis,
the type of such forms of disease. Its picture comes into your mind
speedily. You see another case of scarlet fever where there is a scanty
rash, the child before you keeps on picking the skin from the lips and
nose, lies in a state of pallor and exhaustion, no rash to speak of, urine
nearly suppressed ; almost in a moment you think of Arum triph. It
is the aspect of things that will call the remedy to the mind. In another
case you have all the purple appearance I have spoken of in this remedy ;
horrible foetor, a good deal of .sore throat, and the child cannot get
water cold enough, wants a stream of water running down the throat all
the time ; you may safely trust to Phosphorus. In these low types of
sickness there is always something to tell the story if you will only
listen, study and wait long enough.

ALLIUM CEPA

Allium cepa is used principally for “colds.” There are various
phases of these “colds.” in the nose, in the throat, in the larynx, in the
bronchial tubes. The patient and all the phases of his “cold,” his
coryza, his laryngitis, his tough, all his complaints, are aggravated by
warmth, are worse in a warm room, excepting the tickling in the
larynx, which is sometimes aggravated by drawing in cold air. In
this way the cough is sometimes excited by cold air, but the patient
himself is better in cold air and sensitive to heat. Most of the symp-
toms are worse in the evening, the symptoms of coryza, the “cold,”
and the general symptoms. These are the two most striking general
features of Allium cepa.

It is not strange that the old ladies used to bind onions on the ear
for earache and around the neck for sore throats, for onion is very
frequently indicated in almost every climate for the effects of cold.



ALLIUM CEPA


47


Cold, damp, penetrating winds, in any climate, are likely to bring on
Allium cepa complaints — coryza, la grippe, inliuenza or whatever they
may be called, and usually there is a congestive headache. Rawness in
the nose, copious How of water from the eyes, which is always bland ;
copious watery discharge from the nose, which is always excoriating.
Rawness in the larynx and throat, extending down into the chest.
Rawness in the nose. In twenty-four hours it reaches the larynx.
Cough, excited by tickling in the larynx and when lying down at night
in a warm room. On going to bed in the evening Allium has its most
troublesome aggravation. 1 have heard patients describe the pain in
the larynx on coughing, saying that it felt as if someone was reaching
down with a hook at every cough. Tearing in the larynx with every
cough. Sneezing, rawness of all the mucous membranes and that
tearing cough, all symptoms worse in a warm room and in the even-
ing ; it is astonishing how quickly the onion will break up that “cold.'’

Now we will take up the particulars of the coryza. Among the
earlier symptoms will l)e the sneezing, which comes with increasing
frecjuency. A watery discharge drips from the nose constantly, burns
like lire, and excoriates the upper lip and the wings of the nose until
there are rawness and redness. Notice that the fluid from the nose is
excoriating and the fluid from the eyes bland. Bear that in mind, for
when we come to study Euphrasia we will find just the opposite. We
will hnd just such a watery discharge from the nose and such copious
lachrymation ; but the lachrymation is acrid and the discharge from
the nose bland. The na^al discharge of Cepa fairly cats the hair olf
of the upper lip. And there is so much congestion that the patient has
a sensation of fulness in the nose, with throbbing and burning, and
sometimes nosebleed. Pains through the jaws, in the face ; and these
pains extend into the head. Dull frontal headaches, occipital headaches ;
headaches very severe and the eyes cannot stand the light ; tearing,
bursting, throbbing in the head.

Now, there is another phase of this medicine. Why it begins on
the left side and goes over to the right I do not know, but it usually
does this. Stuffing up of the side ot the nose, watery, acrid discharge,
from the left side of the nose — in another twenty-four hours the right
side is invaded. “Profuse nasal discharge. Colds after damp north-
easterly winds.'* That is, after damp, cold winds, for they may come
from different directions in different localities. Fluent coryza with
headache, tears from the eyes, want of appetite, cough and trembling
in the open air. '‘Every year in August, morning coryza, with violent
sneezing, very sensitive to the odor of flowers and skin of peaches."
That is one form of hay fever cured by Allium cepa. It will wipe out
an attack of hay fever in a few days, when the symptoms agree. You
may know that the true nature of hay fever is not generally under-



48


allium cepa


stood. It is really only an explosion of chronic disease, that is, it is a
manifestation of psora, and can be eradicated only by antipsoric treat-
ment. Many a time have I seen hay fever wiped out in one season
by a short-acting remedy, only to return the next just the same, and
perhaps another remedy will be required. As soon as the hay fever
is slopped you must begin with constitutional treatment. There will
be symptoms, if you know how to hunt for them, that differ altogether
from the acute attack. When the hay fever is on these do not appear.
It is a difficult matter to find a constitutional remedy when the hay
fever is at its height, for it resembles an acute disease ; but it is a
manifestation of psora, like any other manifestation of psora, as erup-
tions. cough, etc. The nose may manifest only a certain phase of
chronic disease in one season which may, for instance, be suited to
Allium cepa. I remember one time having occasion to prescribe Allium
cepa at long distance. It was near a homteopathic pharmacy. I wired
the pharmacist to send my patient Allium cepa, and he labeled it.
Well, the patient kept the bottle and used it next season, but it did
no good. That is likely to be the case, even when the symptoms seem
to agree. In a psoric condition a short-acting remedy is insufficient ;
it may help for one day only, and the deep-acting remedy that includes
the patient as well as the hay fever and all the other symptoms will
have to be administered. The best time to treat hay fever is after the
acute attack sul)sides and until it begins again the next season. It
will then occur in a greatly modified form, different from any the patient
has ever had, and calling for a different remedy. That will be the case
if the constitutional remedy has been properly selected.

In these coryzas the inflammation soon spreads to the ears, the throat
and the larynx. The old mothers used to put onions on the baby's ear
when it had earache. That is not surprising, when we see all the
pains and aches belonging to this remedy. Jerking pains from the
throat loward the Eustachian tube. Violent earache, even to the dis-
charge of pus from the ear. Ringing in the ears. Stitches towards
the ear from the forehead. Pain like thick threads drawing from
deep within the head. Stitching, tearing pains in the ear, with whoop-
ing cough, with coryza,, with laryngitis. In the household where a
medicine case is kept Pulsatilla is the standard remedy for earache, and
it is true that only occasionally has a doctor to be sent for. Pulsatilla
has such a strong affinity for the ear that it will cure earache in almost
all sensitive children who cry pitifully. But those who are snappish,
who are never suited, who will throw away something they have asked
for and slap the nurse in the face must have Chamomilla. With Pulsa-
tilla, Chamomilla and Allium cepa you can cure the majority of ear-
aches in children.

Further, as to the eye-symptoms that accompany the Allium cepa



ALLIUM CEPA


49


colds. Remember that the discharge from the eye is bland. Although
there is burning in the eyes the rears do not excoriate as they flow
down over the cheek. Profuse, bland lachrymation. Lachrymation
in the evening in a warm room.

We all know what a flatulent vegetable the onion is. It is a won-
derful medicine for babies with colic. Cutting, rending, tearing pains
drawing the poor little thing almost double. Jt screams with the vio-
lent cutting in the lower abdomen. “Stitching pains in the abdomen."
“Colicky pains beginning in the hepatic region and spreading over the
whole abdomen, worse around the navel ; worse when sitting.” Wind
colic. Allium cepa is a w^onderful remedy in whooping cough, and
when it is indicated the child will often have indigestion, vomiting and
flatulency ; will pass offensive flatus, will be doubled up with colic.
Allium cepa also cures a ragged, sensitive condition of the anus, with
bleeding, in infants.

Acute complaints of the \oicc ; catarrhal hoarseness ; copious expec-
toration of mucus from the larynx. Violent inflammation of the la-
rynx coming on vc^y rapidly, with that cough 1 spoke of, and the tear-
ing in the larynx. Some will describe it as a sensation as if something
were being torn loose. Those who describe mc/re accurately will say
that it feels as if a hook were dragging up through the larynx with
every cough. Tickling in the larynx with hoarseness. In the whoop-
ing cough there is this satne painfulness of the larynx. The child
shakes and shudders and yoii can sec that it dreads the cough because
of^thc tearing pain in tlie larynx. Cough and difficult breathing from
inspiring cold air, yet a warm diaft will so increase the tickling that
it is sure to set the patient cougliing. So the cough is aggravated both
by cold air and a warm room. Colds sometimes travel down into the
bronchial tubes and are attended with fever and rapid pulse. If the
tickling in the larynx, the cough from inspiring the cold air, worse in
a warm room and in the evening, with tearing pain in the larynx, arc
present. Allium cepa will cure. The cough is spasmodic and resem-
t)lcs croup or whooping cough. Cepa has a record for croupy cough.
The old lady binds oinon on the throat of the child with croup, and no
doubt, out in the back w^oods, where there arc no doctors, it was far
better than Old School treatment.

Here is a fairly good description from the Guiding Symptoms:
“Hoarse, harsh, ringing, spasmodic cough, excited by constant tickling
in the larynx ; cough produces a raw% splitting pain in the larynx, so
acute and so severe as to compel the patient to crouch from suffering,
and to make every effort to suppress the cough.” “Severe, laryngeal
cough, which compels the patient to grasp the larynx ; feels as if
cough would tear it.” The child will reach up to the larynx and
clutch it. This is wholly different from the Aconite condition, when

7



ALOE


50

the child, after exposure to a dry, cold wind, wakes before midnight
with a hoarse, barking cough, and clutches the larynx. So Aconite
cannot be substituted for Allium cepa.

Another affection over which this remedy has marvellous power is
traumatic neuritis, often met with in a stump after amputation. The
pains are almost unbearable, rapidly exhausting the strength of the
patient.


ALOE

Aloe, much like /Esculus, has a peculiar engorgement of the veins,
causing stiffness and fulness throughout the body, but the greatest
disturbance is in the veins of the portal system, with great fulness in
the region of the liver, and abdominal, rectal and intestinal fulness.
This is associated with haemorrhoids. It has abdominal pains that
drive him to stool like Nux vomica, cutting, cramping pains around
the navel. Pains about the navel that shoot down towards the rectum,
cutting like knives. Dysenteric and diarrhoeic troubles. In the attacks
of diarrhoea there is gushing of thin, yellow, offensive, excoriating
faeces, which burn like lire, and the anus is sore. He holds the stool
with difficulty, docs not dare take his mind oft* the sphincter because
as soon as he does so the stool will escape. He cannot let the least
quantity of flatus escape, because with it there will be a rush of feces.
With the Aloe diarrheea the abdomen is distended with gas, causing a
feeling of fulness and tightness, and he must go often to stool. Little
ones, soon after they begin to walk, will drop all over the carpet, in-
voluntarily, little yellow drops of mucus and Iccces. The mother some-
times punishes the little ones, but they cannot help it, they cannot hold
the stool, as it is passed involuntarily. There is a lack of control of
the sphincter. This state is not always confined to diarrha^a, because
sometimes children will go around dropping, involuntarily, little, hard,
round marble-like pieces of stool. They do not even know the stool
has passed. There is relaxation about the rectum and protrusion of
the anus, with bleeding piles. Every mouthful of food hurries him to
stool ; drinking water will often hurry him to stool. Diarrhoea from
eating oysters out of season. You might be disposed to give Lyco-
podium because in the text books poisoning from oysters is laid down
under Lyc* I do not know that you would be justified in saying poison-
ing from oysters in season is Lyc., and out of season is Aloe, but there
is a tremendous poisoning effect about oysters in the hot weather and
in the breeding season that is not found at any other time. A great
many people become nauseated, bloat up, purge tremendously, vomit
everything for several days after eating oysters. Now, when that



ALOE


5^

group of symptoms is present Lycopodium will cure it and will re-
move the tendency to get sick from oysters. But if you notice those
who get sick have a cholera-likc trouble from eating oysters in the hot
season, you will find that that is where Aloe is the remedy.

This remedy is not well proved, hence I have first referred to the
things it is used for clinically. It is more nearly related to Sulphur
in its venous condition than to any other remedy. If you study to-
gether, side by side. Kali bi., Sulphur and Aloe, you will be astonished
at their wonderful relation to the stomach and bowels.

Among the few mental symptoms we notice. “She knew she would
die in a week.’’ “Life is a burden.” “Disinclined to move.” Very
little is brought out by which we can distinguish it ; only a few things
common to many remedies are given. The Aloe patient is extremely
excitable when under the influence of pain, and the pains are generally
in the abdomen. Colic-like pains, flatulent pains in the abdomen, that
drive to despair ; he becomes extremely irritable and excited in his
attacks of colic. A little symptom that is somewhat striking is, “Hates
people, repels everyone.”

The head congestion, which occurs during the bowel disturbance, is
a sort of venous stasis such as is found in the portal system. “Head-
ache across forehead.” “Headaches aggravated from heat, amelior-
ated from cold applications.” Aggravation from heat and relief from
cold runs through Aloe. He wants to be In a cool room ; feels hot
and flushed ; the skin is often hot and dry ; he wants to be uncovered at
night in bed ; burning of the extremities, hot hands and cold feet, or
cold hands and hot feet ; these alternate. The head feels hot and he
wants something cool upon it. This is from the heat of the surface,
not fever. Sensation of heat in the surface, feeling of congestion and
fullness of the surface of the body ; fullness and engorged veins all
over the body. Bleedings are common in this remedy, venous oozings
from the nose, the bowels, the bladder ; bleeding in general. The veins
become varicose and the skin is hot. Much heat in the orifices of the
body ; the eyes, mouth and throat arc hot and bum. There is a sen-
sation of dryness, burning and excoriation about the anus.

Under “Eating and Drinking” wt find “Soon after supper growling
in abdomen.” There are colicky pains in the bowels from eating and
drinking when there is no diarrhoea, even when there is a state of
constipation.

This remedy is useful for the complaints of old beer drinkers. Diar-
rhoea brought on from drinking beer. In persons who have a diar-
rhoea every time they drink beer you will most likely find that Aloe
will agree with the symptoms, but sometimes it will be Kali bu, for
these two remedies are very similar as to their stomach and bowel



5 -


ALOE


symptoms. “Belching with oppression of stomach/’ Here is another
instance of the tendency to capillary and venous engorgement, “Vom-
iting of blood’’ and blood from the bowels.

There is much pain in the hepatic region, burning and heat, etc.
Mostly in the right hypochondrium you will find distension and full-
ness. It is pre-eminently a liver medicine. Jt is not as deep in its
action as Sulphur. You will often find that Aloe will serve as a pal-
liative when it will have to be followed by Sulphur, Sulph. ac., Kali bi,
or Sepia, the medicines that follow Aloe and are complementary to it,
finishing its work. Aloe will make a good beginning in these liver
troubles when there are great fiilnes-, distension, stitching pains in the
region cf the liver and a dry, hot, burning skin, with no increase of
temperature. Aloe has some fever, hut this sensation of heat of the
skin and dryness is without fever and is such as is found in psoric
patients. The proving has not been sufficiently extensive to demon-
strate whether Aloe produces cnijition to any extent or not, but if such
could be proved this would j)lnce it among tlie anti-psorics. It is not
a deep long-acting constitutional remedy like Sulphur, and yet it is not
so short-acting as Aconite or Bclhidoiuia. Complaints come on only
with a moderate degree of rapidity. It may he associated very well
with Bryonia, Bryonia does not go so deeply into the life substance
as Sulphur.

Perhaps one of the most striking features of the abdominal state is
the fulness, distension and rumbling. It seems as if the abdomen
would burst and the rumbling is so great that it can be heard by any-
one in the room. It keeps on one continuous gurgling. The stool
gurgles out with a noisy rumbling, like water out of a bung-hole. The
text of the earlier writers speaks of it as a sputtering, for while the
stool is passing out it is accompanied by much flatus which gurgles and
sputters. The abdomen seems to be as much distended as ever even
after great cjuantities of flatus have pavssed. There is no relief. The
pain is especially felt across the abdomen, about the hips. Great dis-
tension as if the abdomen would hurst across the transverse colon, and
also in the ascending and descending colon : pain, gurgling, rumbling,
heaviness, and feeling of pressure outwards. “Twisting and griping
pain in the upper abdomen, around the navel, compelling him to sit
bent up which relieves.” “Feeling of weakness in abdomen as if diar-
rhoea would result.” The weakness is sometimes very great, so much
so that he is compelled to go to bed with the diarrhfjea, and you will
often mistake it for Podophyllum, so great is the exhaustion. Pod.
has great distension, tremendous gushing, much flatulence, great rum-
bling in the bowel and the trouble comes on at 4 o’clock in the morn-
ing. Aloe is like Sulph. again, in that it drives him out of bed in the
early morning with diarrhoea, and there are times when he puts the



ALOE


53


feet out from beneath the covers to cool them off ; the soles of the feet
burn and he uncovers them. Griping in the abdomen, feeling of weak-
ness in the abdomen. “Painfulness in whole abdomen, especially in
sides and along both sides ot navel.'’ So sensitive is the abdomen that
he can find no comfortable position. “Dull, abdominal pain as after
taking cold, morning and evening repeatedly.'’

Now here arc abdominal symptoms that relate to the condition of
the woman and not to diarrha‘a. “Feeling as if a plug was wedged in
between sympliysis pubis and os coccygis" “Labor-like pains in the
groins and loins worse when standing.” Aloe lias cured prolapsus of
the uterus of long standing when it was associated with fulness, heat
of the surface ol the liody, tendency to morning tliarrhcea, dragging
down of the uterus and sensation of a plug wedged in between the
symphysis pubis and coccyx. The outward pressure of the uterus
causes that sensation, l^ragging down as if all parts of the pelvis
would push out, A funnelling sensation in the vagina, in the pelvis.

“Urging to stool, only hot flatus passes, giving relief, but urging
soon returns.” The idea is that it compels liim to go to stool, but
when upon the commode nothing but wind passes. It is useful also
in old chronic sufferers from this trouble, those wdio suffer from con-
stipation, who go many days without a stool, but feel every little wdiilc,
or several times in the day, that they must go to stool, and then only
a little wind passes. Nalrum sulpli. will very commonly overcome that
state. “Lumpy, watery stool/’ That is a strong feature of Aloe ; hard
lumps mingled wdth a watery stool : the lumps are in the w^ater or in,
the liejuid feces ; little hard lumps looking like marbles or sheep dung.
In the constipation the stool is lumpy, like marbles. Sometimes these
little nodules remain in the rectum a long time without any urging to
stool, and finally escape unconsciouvsly, being found in the clothing.
Entire loss of sensation in the anus, an anaesthesia ; no feeling during
the passage of the stool.

Much of the Aloe trouble is dysenteric: in character, with a sharp,
inflammatory condition of the rectum and lower portion of the colon :
bloody discharges and yellow, jelly-like mucus. Sometimes the Aloe
patient will pass nothing but large cjuantities of this catarrhal, jelly-
like mucus. Don’t forget Aloe for hcTmorrhoids that form like a bunch
of grapes. “Itching and burning in anus, preventing sleep.” He is
compelled to bore with the finger into the anus ; so violent is the itch-
ing that the patient cannot let it alone ; it seems it will drive him to dis-
traction. He gets relief only from applying something cold. A com-
mon feature of Aloe is that ointments increase the burning. There is
increased burning of the skin round alx)ut the ulcers after applying an
ointment. The Sulphur patient also cannot bear any application ; it is
poisonous to him and he breaks out in eruptions.



54


ALUMEN


Wherever a mucous membrane is inflamed there is formed a deposit
of thick, jelly-like mucus. If there is an ulcerated spot or aphthous
patch or inflamed surface, thick, jelly-like cakes of mucus may be peeled
off almost as thick as leather at times. At times the lower portion of
the rectum is in this state and the patient will say that the lumpy stools
are caked in jelly. The lumpy stools in Graphites look as if embedded
in coagulated white of egg. Sometimes the Aloe patient, before having
a stool, will expel a teacupful of thick, jelly-like mucus which has occu-
pied the lower portion of the rectum. Aloe cured a case of stricture
of the rectum in which it was indicated by this symptom. The stric-
ture prevented nearly all the fecal matter from getting down to the
anus, but the rectum would fill up three or four times a day and com-
pel the patient to expel a quantity of jelly-like mucus. The feces that
could be forced through were scarcely larger than a pipe stem. It has
been said that our medicines arc not capable of curing strictures, but
they sometimes do cure strictures. If they can cure the patient it is
marvelous how nature will take up all that inflammatory tissue and the
canal become normal. This thing has been seen many times in stric-
ture of the urethra and stricture of the rectum.


ALUMEN


This medicine, like Alumina, seems to produce a peculiar kind of
paralytic weakness of the muscles in all parts of the body, a sort of
lack of tone. The extremities are weak. This weakness is felt espe-
cially in the rectum and bladder. The stool becomes impacted from
want of ability of the rectum and colon to expel their contents. The
bladder is also slowed down in its action, and it is with great difficulty
that the urine is voided. After urinating, the bladder often remains
half full. The urine is very slow to start, and when the patient stands
to urinate the urine falls down perpendicularly, as in Hepar, Fromi
this wc sec the sluggish action. The paralytic condition extends also
to the veins producing a vaso-motor paralysis.

Another peculiar condition running through the remedy is the tend-
ency to induration wherever there is an inflamed surface. All reme-
dies that have this in their nature relate more or less to cancerous af-
fections, because in cancer wc have as the most natural feature a tend-
ency to induration. Ulcers are common in Alumen, and this indura-
tion underlies the ulcer ; ulcers with indurated base. Or little scales
may appear upon the skin where the circulation is feeble, over cartilag-
inous portions for instance, and a great thick indurated mass forms.
Infiltration takes place under this crust, the crust keeps coming off, and
a lack of healing follows because of the weakness of the tissues from



ALUMEN


55


a vaso-motor paralysis. Epithelioma is scarcely more than that, and
so we have in this remedy features like epithelioma and other cancer-
ous affections. What is the scirrhus but a peculiar form of indura-
tion ? When the economy takes on a low type of life, a low form of
tissue making, and the tissues inflame and upon the slightest provoca-
tion indurate we can see that this is a kind of constitution that is pre-
disposed to deep-seated troubles, to phthisis, Bright’s disease, diabetes,
cancer, etc. We are on the border line of ultimates and something is
going to happen. This remedy leads the economy into such a state
of disorder, a low type of tissue making is found, and many of these
indurations will have cancer as an ultimate. This is a long acting
antipsoric remedy.

There is also in this medicine a tendency to induration of the neck
of the uterus and the mammary glands. Glands become slowly in-
flamed, and do not stop with ordinary congestion and hardness, but
become as hard as bullets. This induration extends to the various
glands of the body, but is especially noticeable in the tonsils. For
those who have a tendency to colds which settle in the throat, especially
singling out the tonsils and indurating these ; those who keep on taking
cold and the tonsils keep on growing and indurating, we have in Alu-
men a medicine that fits the whole process, the hardening and infiltra-
tion, and it cures these cases accorcUng to the law of similars — when
the symptoms agree. It cures young children growing up with enor-
mously enlarged and very l^ard tonsils, in whom every cold settles in
the throat. Alumen is one of the cognates of Baryta curb,, which has
ihe same tendency. In one patient there will be one kind of constitu-
tion, and, after thoroughly examining it, looks like Baryta carb. You
may have a different constitution in another patient, and, after care-
fully examining it, see that it looks like Alumen ; another you will see
is Sulphur ; another, if you look into it carefully, you find is Calcarea
carb.y and another, Calcarea iod,, and so on among those remedies
capable of bringing about the conditions described. If we can find
symptoms which picture the constitutional state we have no trouble.
When the symptoms have been well gathered the case is as good as
cured ; it is easy then to find a remedy.

This remedy is imperfect from the fact that it is only partially
proved. I do not care to dwell upon partially proved remedies, but
when they have a number of striking features that fit into everyday
life it is important to know them. The mental symptoms of this rem-
edy are very few. The remedy should be proved in the higher poten-
cies upon sensitive persons in order that the mental state may be
brought out.

Some of the symptoms of the head are very striking and valuable.
Pain on the top of the head with burning. The pain is a sensation as



56


ALUMEN


if a weight were pressing down into the skull. You will see a woman
in bed with her hand on top of the head and she will say : '^Doctor, it
burns right there like fire, and it presses as if my skull would be
crushed in, and the only relief 1 get is from pressing hard upon it and
from an ice cold cloth pressed upon it.’’ She wants the cloth changed
and made cold every few minutes. It is a queer thing that a pressing
pain is made better from pressing upon the part. This is like Cactus^
pressing pain on vertex relieved from pressure. The rubric of reme-
dies with that symptom is very small, and hence this remedy fills a
place. There are some strange, lare and peculiar symptoms for which
we have a paucity of remedies, and we have to work in other channels
and along sidetracks in getting the constitutional state of the patient.
Alumen cured the pressing pain on the vertex in one patient in whom
it alternated with ihe most uoublesomc chronic, irritable bladder.

“Vertigo: lying on his hack, with weakness in pit of stomach :
> opening eyes ; > turning on right side.” There is another feature,
however, in this remedy, the palpitation is brought on from lying on
the right side. It would strike anyone as something very singular,
because palpitation is generally worse lying on the left side. A heart
that is lluttering, enlarged or disordered is generally worse while lying-
on the left, as the heart has less room tlien, but it is strange, rare and
unique when these symptoms arc worse lying on the right side. When
this condition is present in a patient it is necessary to find a remedy
having just exactly that symptom, anti very often it will he seen that
the rest of the symptoms of the case fit into the remedy that has pro-
duced this peculiar state.

There is one more feature that you must add to these things, viz.:
slowness and sluggishness of the muscles throughout the body, a slow-
ing down of all the muscles, a sense of weakness in the arms and legs.

In the constipation there may be some urging to stool without result
or he may go several days without desire. There is no ability to ex-
pel the stool. He will strain a long time with no success, and finally
after many days the stool is passed and is an agglomeration of hard
balls, large masses of little hard balls like marbles all fastened together.
This is a very strong feature in an Alumen constitution. “Stool: less
irequent, dryer and harder; large black, hard or in small pieces like
sheep’s dung ; no relief afterwards.” After stool there is a sensation
as if the rectum were yet full. This peculiar feature comes with the
weakness or paresis of the rectum, i, c., the rectum is not strong
enough to expel all of its contents, and hence the sensation of unfin-
ished stool. In the rectum there is ulceration with bleeding from the
ulcers. The haemorrhoids ulcerate and they are very painful, so that
after every stool he has prolonged suffering, a dull aching pain in the
rectum.



ALUMEN


SI

Catarrhal conditions prevail throughout the remedy In old scrofu-
lous, psoric patients, who are subject to chronic yellow bland discharges
from the eyes, with enlarged veins ; chronic yellow discharges from
the vagina and from the urethra in the male ; chronic painless gonor-
rhoea. In addition to the catarrhal discharges there is a tendency to
ulceration, so that there are little ulcerative patches in the vagina, little
aphthous patches in the vagina and on the cervix of the uterus. When
a patient is suffering from a chronic gonorrhoea, instead of the dis-
charge becoming white as in a gleet it remains yellow, and there are
little indurations along the urethra, which the patient will call the
physician's attention to as ‘‘lumps.'' Discharge with “little bunches"
along the urethra. These are little ulcers, and beneath the ulcers are
indurations. When this state is present you have an Alumen gonor-
rhoea. In a little while the patient will have two or three strictures
unless he gets this remedy, because these little ulcers will each end in
stricture narrowing the canal. Another strange feature in the catar-
rhal states and in the ulcers is its tendency to affect the vessels. The
veins become varicose and bleed, so that there may be bleeding from
any of the inflamed or catarrhal areas and bleeding from the ulcers.

There are many neuralgic pains about tlie head of a nondescript
character. These head pains come on in the morning on awaking.
The eye symptoms are of an inflammatory or congestive character,
with tendency to ulceration. Purulent ophthalmia ; chronic sore eyes.
“Sees things double by candl^ light." “Nasal polypus left side. Lupus
or cancer on the nose, Faci pale as a corpse, lips blue. Scirrhus of
the tongue." See what a tendency it has to produce minute growths,
little indurations and infiltrations. Bleeding from the teeth ; the teeth
decay and the gums recede from the teeth ; the teeth become loose ;
scorbutic appearance of the gums. “Mouth burning, ulcerated ; grey,
dirty, spongy skin about a tooth, which is surrounded with proud flesh ;
offensive saliva." In the mouth we have the same general feature of
ulceration, with dryness of the mouth, dry tongue and throat, and great
thirst for ice cold water. “Uvula inflamed and enlarged. Predisposed
to tonsilitis." “Vomits everything he eats." After that you can put
the word “ulcer," because it especially refers to that state of congestion
where there is easy ulceration.

Under abdomen we find flatulence. The intestines do not perform
their work, they take on spasmodic action, and consequently the patient
suffers from cramps and colicky pains ; boring, rending, tearing pains.
Retraction of the abdomen and drawing in of the navel. If you will
compare Lead in its poisonous effects upon those who work in white
lead you will see quite a counterpart of this remedy, and you will not
be surprised to observe that Plumbum and this remedy antidote each
other. They do so because they arc so similar, they cannot live in the

8



ALUMEH


58

same house. Alumen is a great remedy to overcome lead colic in those
who work in lead ; it removes the susceptibility. There are many
painters who have to give up their occupation on account of this sus-
ceptibility. Alumen will often overcome this tendency and enable them
to go back to their business.

In the female we note “weight of uterus presses down collum ; granu-
lations of vagina ; leucorrhoea copious j emaciation yellow complexion j
indurations of uterus, even scirrhus ; ulcers of uterus.'" Sometimes you
get evidence of this vaginal state by the woman saying that coition
is so painful that it becomes impossible. It is not to be wondered at
that the natural act cannot be performed when so much trouble is
present.

“Voice entirely lost.’" Chronic loss of the voice from a low state of
the economy and from always taking fresh colds. Expectoration of
much yellow mucus ; scraping of the throat all the time to get rid of
a little accumulation of yellow mucus. “Dry cough in evening after
lying down.’’ “Chronic morning cough.” Cough is not a very important
thing in this remedy; it is the general state of the economy tliat is
to be looked at. The cough will not interpret tlie nature of the disease
to the physician, because when these little ulcers arc present they must
cause some kind of a cough. This patient may go into phthisis or be
affected with any of the ultimates of disease.

Alumen has been very useful in the treatment of old people who
suffer from copious, ropy, morning expectoration, catarrh of the chest,
haemoptysis and great weakness of the chest, so that it is difficult to
expel the mucus. In this it is similar to Antimonium tartaricum.

Because of its relation to Alumina further provings will undoubt-
edly develop the fact that it has many spinal symptoms. It is well
known that it has a weak spine, with coldness of the spine, a feeling
as if cold water were poured down the back. Pain in the dorsal spine
on a line with the inferior angle of the scapulae ; weakness in this region
and in the shoulders. Like Alumina it has the sensation of constric-
tion, as of a cord or band around the limbs. Feeling as if a cord were
drawn tightly around the upper arm. The clumsiness of the fingers,
as seen in dropping things, the pain in the lower limbs at night, the
lassitude and numbness, are other manifestations of spinal symptoms.
Sensation as of a cord around the leg under the knee ; soles sensitive
to pressure on walking ; feet numb and cold, although warmly covered ;
legs cold to knees. These are all further evidences of the action of the
remedy on the spinal cord. Bruised pain in all the limbs. Crawling,
tingling paralysis of all the limbs.

He is kept awake at night by a sensation as if the blood rushed
through the body. Many complaints come on during sleep. Night-
mare. He is sensitive to weather changes and very sensitive to cold.



ALUMINA


59


ALUMINA

This remedy comes in very nicely after Alutncn, which has much
Alumina in its nature and depends largely upon Alumina, which is its
base, for its way of working. It occurs to me to throw out a little
hint. When you have a good substantial proving of an oxide or a
carbonate, and the mental symptoms are well brought out, you can use
these, in a measure in a presumptive way, in prescribing another salt,
with the same base, which has a few mental symptoms in its proving.
For instance, you have a group of symptoms decidedly relating to
Alumen. The mental symptoms of Alutnen, however, have not been
brought out to any extent, but still you have the mental symptoms of
the base of Alutncn, which is the oxide, so that if the patient has the
mental symptoms of Alumina and the physical symptoms of Alumen,
you can rationally presume that Alumen will cure because of the
Aluminum in each.

We know the mental symptoms of Alumina fairly well. It espe-
cially takes hold of the intellect and so confuses the intelligence that
the patient is unable to effect a decision ; the judgment is disturbed.
He is unable to realize ; the things that he knows or has known to be
real seem to him to be unreal, and he is in doubt as to whether they
arc so or not. In the Guiding Symptoms this is not so plainly ex-
pressed, but in the Chronic Diseases we have a record of this which
is the best expression of it , that occurs anywhere. There we read :
'‘When he says anything he feels as if another person had said it, and
when he secs anything, as if another person had seen it, or as if he
could transfer himself into another and only then could see."' That is
to say, there is a confusion of mind, a confusion of ideas and thoughts.
It has cured these symptoms. The consciousness of his personal iden-
tity is confused. He is not exactly certain who he was ; it seemd as
though he were not himself. He is in a dazed condition of mind. He
makes mistakes in writing and speaking ; uses words not intended ; uses
wrong words. Confusion and obscuration of the intellect. Inability to
follow up a train of thought.

Then he enters into another state, in which he gets into a hurry..
Nothing moves fast enough ; time seems so slow ; everything is de-
layed ; nothing goes right. Besides this he has impulses. When he
sees sharp instruments or blood, impulses rise up within him and he
shudders because of these impulses. An instrument that could be used
for murder or for killing causes these impulses to arise ; impulse to
kill herself.

The Alumina patient is very sad, constantly sad. Incessantly moan-
ing, groaning, worrying, fretting and in a hurry. Wants to get away ;
wants to get away from this place, hoping that things will be better;



6o


ALUMINA


full of fears. All sorts of imaginations. A sort of general apprehen-
siveness. When he meditates upon this state of mind he thinks he
is going to lose his reason. He thinks about this frenzy and hurry
and confusion of mind, how he hardly knows his own name, and how
fretful he is, and he wonders if he is not going crazy, and finally he
really thinks he is going crazy.

Most of tlie mental symptoms come on in the morning on waking.
Sadness and weeping on waking in the morning. His moods alternate.
Sometimes his mental state is a little improved and his mood changes
into a quiet, placid state, and again he goes into fear and apprehensive-
ness. Some evil is going to take place and he is full of anxiety. Anxiety
about the future.

The next most striking feature is the way in which the remedy acts
upon the nerves that proceed from the spine. There is a state of weak-
ness of the muscles supplied by these nerves ; weakness over the whole
body. There is difficulty in swallowing, a paralytic condition of the
cesophagiis ; difficulty in raising or moving the arms ; paralysis of one
side of the body, or paralysis of the muscles of the lower extremities,
or of the bladder and rectum. The paralytic state begins as a sort of
a semi-paralysis, for a long time merely an inactivity, which grows at
length into a complete paralytic condition.

Everything is slowed down. The conductivity of the nerves is im-
paired so that a prick of a pin upon the extremities is not felt until
a second or so afterwards. All of his senses are impaired in this way
until it really means a benumbing of the consciousness and appears to
be a kind of stupefaction of his intellect, a mental sluggishness. Im-
pressions reach his mind with a marked degree of slowness.

The paralytic state runs through the remedy and is observed in vari-
ous parts in many ways. The bladder manifests it in the slowness
with which the urine passes. A woman sits a long time before the
flow starts, with inability to press, and then the stream flows slowly.
The patient will say she cannot hurry the flow of urine. The urine
is slow to start and slow to flow, and sometimes only dribbles. At
times it is retained and dribbles involuntarily. This slowness is ob-
served also in the rectum. Its tone is lost and there is inability to
perform the ordinary straining when sitting at stool, and so paretic is
the rectum that it may be full and distende^, and the quantity of feces
enormous, and yet, though the stool is soft, there is constipation. In
this remedy there is often a hard stool, but we notice that the remedy
will do the best work where there is this paretic condition of the
rectum \yith soft stool. If the mental symptoms, however, are present,
such as I have described, with large, hard and knotty or lumpy stool.
Alumina will cure. Now, so great is the straining to pass a soft stool
that you will sometimes hear a patient describe the state as follows;



ALUMINA


6l


When sitting upon the seat she must wait a long time, tliough there
is fullness and she has gone many days without stool ; she has the
consciousness that she should pass a stool and is conscious of the full-
ness in the rectum, yet she will sit a long time and finally will under-
take to help herself by pressing down violently with the abdominal
muscles, straining vigorously, yet conscious that very little effort is made
by the rectum itself. She will continue to strain, covered with copious
sweat, hanging on to the seat, if there be any place to hang on to, and
will pull and work as if in labor, and at last is able to expel a soft stool,
yet with the sensation that more stool remains.

Of course a number of other remedies have this straining to pass
a soft stool, but they have their own characteristics. Take for example
an individual who cannot keep awake ; she says that it is impossible for
her to read a line without going to sleep ; that she can sleep all the time ;
she suffers night and day from a dry mouth, and the tongue cleaves to
the roof of the mouth. Now let her describe this state of straining
and struggling to expel a soft stool, and you hardly need to
go any further before you know the remedy. If that patient in addi-
tion to what she has said tells you that she is in the habit of fainting
when standing any length of time, that she is disturbed in a close room
and has all sorts of complaints in the cold air, it is Nux moschata.
Now you see how easy it is for remedies to talk ; they tell their own
story. Suppose a woman should come to you who has been suffering
from haemorrhage, from prolonged oozing, who is pallid and weak and
is distended with flatulence, with much belching and passing of gas,
and the more she passes the wwse she feels, and she has these same
symptoms of straining a long time to pass a soft stool, tremendous
effort with inactivity of the rectum. You could do nothing but give
her China, By allowing remedies to talk and tell their own story in-
dividualization is accomplished. I have said all that to show that it
is not upon the inactivity of the rectum that you are to decide upon the
remedy. Individualization must be made through the patient. That
is a principle that should never be violated. You may have twenty
remedies all possessing a certain symptom, but if you have a few real
decided things that you can say about the patient, the manner in which
he does business, the manner in which the disease affects the entire
man, then you have something to individualize by. You have seen the
Alumina patient, the China patient and the Nux moschata patient.
The sole duty of the physician is to treat the sick, which means to study
the patient himself until an idea of the sickness is obtained.

This medicine is full of vertigo ; he quivers, reels and ''objects go
round” almost constantly. It corresponds to the vertigo of tired>out
people, old broken down patients, men worn out from old age. Ver-
tigo also that comes on when closing the eyes, as is found in spinal



62


ALUMINA


afIections> in sclerosis of posterior lateral columns. Alumina has pro-
duced affections analogous to locomotor ataxia. It produces numb-
ness of the soles of the feet, the fulgurating pains, the vertigo when
closing the eyes, and produces staggering and disturbances of co-
ordination. It is true that in an early stage of locomotor ataxia
Alumina will check the disease process by bringing into order the
internal state of the economy. With Aluminum metallicum I have
stopped fulgurating pains in old incurable cases, and improved the
reflexes wonderfully, thus showing the general improvement of the
patient.

Most of the symptoms are < on rising in the morning. In the
morning, as I have mentioned it, the urine is slower to pass than after
he has moved about and warmed up a little. His limbs are suffer in
the morning and in the morning he has to whip up his mental state.
He wakes up confused and wonders where he is. You will see that
in children especially — they wake up in the morning in a bewildered
state, such as you will find in Alumina, yEsculus, Lycopod. He has
to put his mind on things to ascertain whether they be so or not, as to
how things should look and wonders whether he is at home or in some
other place.

Inhere are many headaches with nausea and vomiting. The head-
aches come whenever he takes cold. This probably is due to the*
catarrhal state. The Alumina patient suffers almost constantly from
dryness of mucous rncmbraiies, the nose is dry, stuffed up, especially
on one side, commonly the left. Nose feels full of sticks, dry mem-
brane or crusts, old atrophic catarrh crusts in the posterior nares and
in the fossa of Rosenmullcr. Large green, offensive crusts all through
the nose. Now comes the relation to the headache. Every time he
catches cold the thick yellow discharge slacks up and gives way to a
watery discharge and he has pain in the forehead over the eyes, going
through the head, with nausea and vomiting. So when it says head-
ache from chronic catarrh that is Avhat it means. The headache !>
lying down. He has sick headaches and periodical headaches. You
will see that Alumina corresponds to a constitution that may be called
psoric — old, broken-down, feeble constitutions, scrofulous constitu-
tions, such as are inclined to tubercles and catarrhal affections.

The catarrhal tendency of this remedy is marked. Catarrhs are
found wherever mucous membranes exist. Alumina affects the skin
and mucous membrane extensively, Le,, the external and internal
skin, the surfaces of the body. The patient is always expectorating,
he blows the nose much and has discharges from the eyes. There is
much disturbance of vision belonging to this catarrhal state that may
be spoken of now. Dimness of vision, as if looking through a fog,
sometimes described as through a veil. A misty dimness of vision.



ALUMINA


63


There is also disturbance of the muscles of the eye, of the muscles
of the ball and of the ciliary muscle. Weak and changeable vision.
The paralytic weakness, such as belongs to the whole remedy, will be
found in certain muscles, or sets of muscles, so that it is with great
difficulty that glasses can be adjusted. The activity of the eye muscles
is disturbed.

The catarrhal state extends over into the back of the nose and the
posterior nares are filled up with tough mucus and crusts, and on look-
ing into the throat you will see that the soft palate and the mucous
membrane of the tonsils and pharynx and all parts that can be seen
are in a state of granulation, arc swollen, congested and inflamed.
The pharynx feels dry and there is a chronic sensitiveness and sore-
ness. When swallowing food there is stinging and sensation as if the
throat were full of little sticks, especially after a moment's rest, better
by moistening and swallowing. In the night air, after keeping still a
while, there in an accumulation of ropy mucus. This extends into
the larynx with soreness in the larynx and chest and chronic dry,
hacking cough. The .same catarrhal state proceeds down into the
oesophagus, so that it becomes sensitive and clumsy, lie swallows with
difficulty. The bolus goes down with an effort and he feels it all the
way down. There is soreness and clumsiness, paresis and difficulty
of swallowing. This paralytic weakness reminds the patient that he
must put on a little force ijn order to swallow and this swallowing is
felt while the substance goes down as if the oesophagus was sensitive.
It has a catarrhal state of the stomach, bowels and rectum so that
with the soft and difficult stool there is often an accumulation of mu-
cus. There is also a catarrhal condition in the bladder, kidneys and
urethra and an old gonorrhoea will be prolonged into a catarrhal or
glecty discharge. Sometimes it is not a gleet, but the discharge re-
mains for many months and instead of its being a light milky white,
such as is natural in most prolonged cases of gonorrhoea, it remains
yellow and is painless. So it is with the vagina. The mucous dis-
charge from the vagina is thick yellowish-white discharge, some-
times excoriating. Thus we see, in the constitution we have described,
that an extensive catarrhal state belongs to the remedy.

When we come to the skin we find that it takes on a similar state
of affairs. The patient is subject to all sorts of eruptions. The skin
withers, becomes dry and is subject to eruptions, thickening, indura-
tions, ulcerations, cracking and bleeding. The eruptions itch worse
in the warmth of the bed. The skin itches, even when there is no
eruption, when becoming warm in bed, so that he scratches until the
skin bleeds. This presents an idea as to eruptions that you will have
to consider. A patient comes to you covered with crusts, and he says:
‘‘When I get warm at night I have to scratch, and I scratch until the



64


ALUMINA


skin bleeds.” Now in Alumina it is very important to find out whether
these crusts were produced by the scratching or whether the eruption
came out as an itching eruption, for in Alumina in the beginning there
is no eruption, but he scratches until the skin is off and then come the
crusts. You must here prescribe not for the eruption, but for the
itching of the skin without eruption. Now in Mezereum, Arsenicum,
Dolichos and Alumina the skin itches and he scratches until it bleeds,
and then he gets relief. Of course after this there is an apparent
eruption because crusts form. As soon as the healing begins the itch-
ing begins, and he is only relieved when the skin is raw. With the
bleeding and moisture of the skin there is relief of the itching. Now
some of the books do not make the distinction between itching with-
out eruption and itching with eruption, and hence mostly all young
doctors get to thinking that itching of the skin must always be asso-
ciated with eruption, and make a mistake in figuring out what kind
of an eruption it is. The skin thickens and indurates and ulcerates,
and there are indurations under the ulcers. There is a very sluggish
condition of both mucous membrane and skin with a tendency to in-
duration. Thickening of the mucous membrane will be found any-
where ; after the thickening come little ulcerations, and in the course
of time indurations are formed at the base of the ulcers. The same
thing is true of the skin. Dryness and burning run through everything
and may be said of all the mucous membranes and the skin in general.

Chronic granular lids. If we turn the eyelids down we will see
that the mucous membrane is thickened. Sometimes this thickening
or hypertrophy causes a turning out of the lids like ectropion. “The
eyelashes fall out that is in keeping with the general state. The
hairs all over the body fall out. Parts become entirely denuded of
hair ; the hair of the scalp falls out extensively. All sorts of sounds in
the ears, buzzing, etc., and derangement of hearing ; purulent otorrhoea.

“Point of nose cracked’' is in keeping with the remedy. Induration
here and there so that it favors lupus and epithelioma in one who is
subject to these swellings and eruptions. Alumina and Alumen, like
Ars,, Lack., Sulph, and Conium, arc medicines that relate to these
troubles. Some of these have made brilliant cures where there is in-
filtration. Upon the skin of the face and other parts of the body there
is crawling. Itching especially when getting warm. Sensation of
tension. Peculiar sensation about the face and other parts not cov-
ered by clothing, a sensation of dried white of egg on the face, of
dried blood or cobweb on the face. If you have ever been going
through a place where there are cobwebs and a little cobweb has strung
across your face you will know what a peculiar sensation of crawling
it produces, and you cannot leave it alone until it is removed. That
sensation particularly belongs to Alumina, Borax, Bar, c. Little



ALUMINA


65


crawlings and crcepings in the skin. Itching of the face. These
symptoms are so irritating that the patient will sit and rub his face
all the time. You will think that he is nervous. He has the appear-
ance of being nervous as he sits rubbing the back of his hands. It is
well to find out whether he does this because he cannot keep his hands
still or because of the itching. Because of this itching sensation in
the face he carries the hand to the face as though to brush away
something.

Perhaps I have not said as much as should be said about the throat.
‘'Ulcers in the fauces, spongy, secreting a yellowish brown, badly smell-
ing pus.*' It may be said that the patient is often a victim of chronic
sore throat. There is this about Alumina, it has a special tendency
to localize itself upon mucous membranes. You will find in an Alu-
mina subject bleeding from all mucous membranes. He has catarrh
of the nose and red eyes, and his nose becomes stuffed up and he has
many acute colds ; very severe throat trouble. Discharges from all
of the orifices. It is not a medicine that would be selected for a cold
settling in the throat, not a remedy for acute sore throat, but it is a
deep-acting antisporic and acts for months. Its greatest usefulness is
as a remedy for taking cold. In this respect it is like SiL, Graph, and
Sulph, It effects tissue changes, and it docs this slowly, for it is a
slow-acting medicine. While the patient himself with these deep-
seated psoric affections feels better generally after the remedy, it will
be months before his symptoms go away. He may say: “I feel bet-
ter, but my symptoms all appear to be here. I can eat better and
sleep better.'" Then it would be unwise to change the remedy. You
need not expect to get immediate relief of the catarrhs and pains in
the back and other symptoms for which you gave this remedy. You
may be satisfied if you get the results after many weeks. You will
find the same thing in the paralytic weakness produced by Plumbum,
There is a new drug that is coming into use, the proving of which is
very full and rich, atid it is analogous to the symptoms of this remedy.
It is Curare, I wish we had a finer proving of it, but it is rich with
a great many things similar to Alumina and Plumbum, and especially
in the weakness of the hands and fingers of pianists. An old player
will say that after she has been playing for some time her fingers slow
down. The weakness seems to be in the extensors. Lack of ability
to life the fingers ; the lifting motion is lost. Curare to a great extent
overcomes that, causes quickness to that lifting power of the fingers.
But this remedy also runs through in general way such paretic con-
ditions ; while Curare is especially related to a paralytic condition of
the extensors more than the flexors, the paralysis in Alumina is of
both flexors and extensors.

This medicine is one of the few that have been found to be aggra-



66


ALUMINA


vated from starch, especially the starch of potatoes. Aggravation
from eating potatoes. It has indigestion, diarrhoea, great flatulence
and aggravation of the cough from eating potatoes. It has also ag-
gravation from salt, wine, vinegar, pepper and from spirituous drinks.
Alumina is a spinal remedy and aggravation from spirituous drinks
is in keeping with some other spinal remedies. You find it in Zincum,
The Zincum patient cannot drink wine, for all of his complaints are
aggravated by it. This medicine is so sensitive and so easily over-
come by a small amount of liquor that he is obliged to abandon it. He
is not only intoxicated by it, but it aggravates his complaints.

Now the digestion has practically given out in this medicine. He
is subject to catarrh of the stomach, to ulceration of the stomach, to
indigestion from the simplest food. Sour and bitter eructations.
Vomiting of food, mucus or bile. Nausea, vertigo, heartburn, much
flatulence. Vomits mucus and water. Stomach is distended with
gas. The liver is full of suffering. Both hypochondria are full of
misery, but especially the right.

When going over A lumen I called attention especially to its anti-
dotal relation to Lead, This remedy also will overcome the poisonous
effects of lead and sensitiveness to lead. Colic and paralytic weakness
in lead workers, painters and artists and in those who arc so sensitive
to lead that from using hair wash containing lead they are paralyzed.
Not many years ago the acetate of lead was commonly used by women
for leucorrhoea, but it was found that so many were sensitive to it that
it was abandoned. Alumina is the most prominent antidote to the
affections which have come about through that sensitive state.

There is so much under stool and rectum that belongs to the gen-
eral state that there is scarcely anything left to be presented except
some important particulars. As you might suppose, this remedy has
fissures ; you would naturally expect these when you consider what
kind of mucous membranes and tivssucs this patient manufactures. He
suffers greatly from constipation, he does much straining, the mucous
membrane is thickened and swollen, and hence we have a fissure.
When you sec a remedy manufacturing and producing such a state
upon the economy, growing that kind of mucous membrane that would
favour fissures, you do not have to wait until you have cured a fissure
with that remedy to find out if it will suit the case. You do not have
to resort to the repertory to see what this remedy has done in fissure.
From your general knowledge of the medicine, you will see that it
ought to cure the patient, as it produces such a condition of the mu-
cous membrane and skin as would be naturally found in one who has
a fissure. The skin indurates and ulcerates and becomes clumsy and
unhealthy and constipation is produced, and so, after studying the
remedy in that way, you arc not surprised if it cures a fissure. You



ALUMINA


67


can also think over \\diat other medicines have this state of the econ-
omy and see what other remedies you would expect to cure a fissure
with. If you look into the nature of Nitric acid, Caustiemn and Graph-
ites, you will see why they have had a wonderful record for curing
fissure. That is the way to study your Materia Medica ; see what it
does to the man himself, to his organs and tissues,

“Frequent micturition. ’ “Urine voided while straining at stool, or
cannot pass urine without mch straining.” That is a high grade symp-
tom, it is a peculiar symptom, and may be called a particular of first
grade. He must strain at stool in order to empty the contents of the
bladder. “Urine smarting, corroding” “Feeling of weakness in the
bladder and genitals.” “Swelling and discharge of light yellow pus
from urethra.” “Burning with dLscharge of urine.”

The symptoms of the male sexual organs are characterized by weak-
ness, impotency and nightly emissions ; suitable when the sexual or-
gans are worn out from abuse or over use. There Is fulness and
enlargement of the prostate gland and various disturbances of the
prostrate, with sensation of fulness in the perinaeum. Unpleasant sen-
sations and distress in the region of the prostate gland after coition.
Complaints at the time of, or after ejaculation, or after an emission.
The sexual desire is diminished and sometimes entirely lost. Paralytic
weakness or paresis of the sexual organs ; a state that is in keeping
with the whole remedy. “Discharge of prostatic fluid during difficult
stool.” “Painful erections at night.”

The female has a great deal of trouble that can be cured with this
remedy, but her troubles arc mostly catarrhal. An instance of this is
the leucorrhoea ; copious, acrid or excoriating, yellow leucorrhoea ; leu-
corrhoea so copious that it runs down the thighs, making the parts red
and inflamed. Ulceration about the os. The mucous membranes are
weak and patulous and ulcerate easily. All the parts are in a state of
weakness. There is dragging down from the relaxed condition of the
ligaments. Sensation of weight ; the pelvic viscera feel heavy. The
discharge, stringy, looking like white of egg, copious and acrid ; “trans-
parent mucus.” Leucorrhoea, corroding, profuse ; running down to
heels.” It is more noticeable in the day time, because these complaints
are generally worse w^hen walking or when standing, which is not
really an important symptom, but a common condition. After men-
struation it takes the woman nearly until the next period to get
straightened up. All her muscles are weak ; there seems to be no
tonicity about her. It is highly suitable to women drawing near the
end of menstruation, about forty years of age ; the menstrual period
prostrates, the flow is scanty, yet prostrating ; the sufferings are ter-
rible and the patient is miserable at the menstrual period. After
menses, exhausted in body and mind, is a strong feature of Alumina.



68


ALUMINA


It is a suitable remedy again when the woman has a gororrhoea which
has been prolonged by palliation. She has been made comfortable by
partly suitable remedies, but it seems that no remedy has been quite
deep enough to root out the trouble, for it keeps coming back. In a
discharge that keeps returning, better for little while on Pulsatilla^
and on this and that and the other thing, and even on Thuja, given
more especially because it is gonorrhoea than because she is a sick
woman. The patient is tired and worn out, and when you come to
look at the whole patient and you see the paretic condition, the con-
tinued return of the discharge that has been palliated by remedies,
think of this medicine in both the male and female.

The discharge is a painless one in the male. The gonorrhoeal dis-
charge has lasted a long time, going and coming, until now there is
left but a few drops and it is painless. The remedy has cured many
of these old cases. Threatening chronic catarrh. The mucous mem-
brane everywhere is in a congested state and is weak.

A pregnant woman has some trouble as well. A woman, who is
not naturally a sufferer from constipation, when pregnant becomes
constipated, with all the characterizing features of Alumina, 7. e,, the
inactivity of the rectum, no expulsive force ; she must use the abdom-
inal muscles, must strain a long time. Again, the infant has a siim
ilar kind of straining. You will see the new-born infant, or the infant
only a few months old, that will need Alumina. It is a very common
medicine for constipation in infants when you can find nothing else ;
the child will strain and strain and make every effort to press the stool
out, and upon examining the stool it is found to be soft, and should
have been expelled easily.

It has hoarseness and loss of voice and paralytic weakness of the
larynx. That is not strange ; it is only in keeping with the general
state, the broken down constitution. He has a weak voice and, if a
singer, he is capable of singing only a little while, only capable of slight
exertion. Everything is a burden. A paralytic condition of the vocal
cords, which steadily increases to loss of voice.

The most striking things we come to now are the cough and chest
troubles. There is expectoration in some of the coughs, but the cough
is usualy a constant, dry, hacking cough one of those troublesome
lingering coughs that has existed for years. It competes with Arg,
met, in its character of the dry, hacking cough, especially associated
with weakness, but Arg. met. has the cough in the day time, which is
not so in Alumina. The Alumina cough is in the morning. Here is
a symptom that about covers the Alumina cough : ‘'Cough soon after
waWng in the morning.” Every morning, a long attack of dry cough.
The cough is hard, a continued dry hacking, and she coughs until she
loses her breath and vomits, and loses the urine. This symptom com-



ALUMINA


6g


monly occurs in the woman. ‘‘Dry, hacking cough with frequent
sneezing.’’ It says in the text “from elongated uvula,” but it should
read “from sensation of elongated uvula.” It is a sensation as if
there were something tickling the throat ; a tickling as if the uvula
were hanging down a long distance, and he will tell you that his palate
must be too long. Another expression which is the same thing is
“cough from sensation as of loose skin hanging in throat.” Some-
times those who do not know about the palate will talk of something
loose in the throat, while those who know they have an uvula will gen-
erally call it the palate. But it is the same idea. Tickling in the
larynx, too. This is always quoted in singers. We would think of
Alumina when singers break down in the voice from paralysis or from
overwork of the voice. The voice lets down and becomes feeble, and,
when taking cold, there starts up a peculiar kind of tickling. Alumina
is very useful in these cases Arg, met, was the remedy used by the
earlier homoeopaths for singers and talkers with much tremhling and
letting down of the voice before the value of Alumina was known in
such conditions. Let me tell you something here about Rhus, as I may
not think of it again. Many old singers, after taking cold, have a
weakness left in the voice, which they notice on beginning to sing. On
beginning to sing the voice is weak and husky, but after using it a
little while it improves. Give Rhus to all these patients, prima don-
nas, lawyers, preachers, etc. They must warm up the voice and then
they are all right, but they s^y: “If I go back into the green room and
wait a little while, when I commence to sing again I am worse than
ever.” The voice Is better if they stay in a very hot room and keep it
in use. This fits into the general state of Rhus. There is a kind of
hoarseness that you may discover to be a little different from the para-
lytic hoarseness of Alumina and Arg. met. This hoarseness of which
I speak belongs to this same class of people ; on first beginning to use
the voice it seems that they must get rid of some mucus by clearing
the throat until the voice can get to work. The vocal cords on begin-
ning to work are covered with mucus and on getting rid of it they can
do very good work, so long as they keep at it. That is Phosphorus,
In such cases the use of the voice becomes painful. The vocal cords
are painful after motion and the larynx is painful to touch. Some-
times this is so marked that it is like stabbing with a knife on trying
to use the voice. So we must individualize hoarseness very exten-
sively. Homoeopathy is a matter of discrimination.

Soreness of the chest, which is much increased by talking. There
is weakness of the muscular power of the chest. The lungs seem weak
and the chest has a sensation of weakness in it. Jar increases the
misery of the chest.

The next most striking features will be in connection with the back



70


ALUMINA


and limbs, and I have spoken of these in general way. Burning in
the spine ; much pain in the back. Burning and stitching pains in the
back. He expresses it as follows: “Pain in the back, as if a hot iron
was thrust through lower vertebra?.’’ In myelitis this medicine does
wonderful w^ork when there is a considerable amount of spasmodic
condition of the back as well, showing that the membranes are in-
volved. Another thing that belongs to this remedy that is a well-
known state in myelitis is the hoop sensation ; sensation of bandages
here and there about the limbs and body is a common symptom. A
sensation of a tight cord around the body characteristic of the most
marked state of irritation and myelitis. Irritation of the spinal cord
with sensitive places. Burning places as if a hot iron were forced
into the spine. Pain along the cord, rending, tearing pains in the cord
with paralytic weakness, increasing paralysis and complete paralysis ;
paralysis of one side of the body.

“Pain in sole of foot on stepping, as though it were too soft and
swollen.” “Numbness of heel when stepping.” “Trembling of knees,”
this is a mere matter of the general weakness. “Limbs go to sleep
when sitting.” Whenever the limb is pressed again anything it will
go to sleep. Feeble circulation, feeble conductivity, feeble nerve ac-
tion ; everything is slowed down. Arms and legs feel heavy. “Pains
in limbs as if bones were squeezed narrower, with pressure in the
joints.” Now I will read some of the nerve symptoms which will cor-
roborate some of the things wc have gone over. “Want of bodily irri-
tability.” “Great exhaustion of strength, especially after walking in
open air.” “One-sided paralysis, especially of the extensors.” “Rheu-
matic and traumatic paralysis in gouty patients.” Gouty patients with
nodules in the joints ; old broken down constitutions with paretic ex-
haustion. “Excited condition of mind and body.” Tremblings here
and there in the body. “Slow, tottering gait as after severe illness.”
He must make .slow motions, he cannot hurry. “Involuntary motions.”

There arc all sorts of dreams and disturbances in sleep, so that the
sleep may be quite disturbed and restless. Unrefreshing sleep, wak-
ing up with palpitation of the heart. “Many dreams and frequent
awaking ; starts in affright ; muttering or crying.” “During sleep
cervical muscles drew head backward this is in cases of paralytic
weakness ; has to wake up as the muscles of the back of the neck pull
vSo. Jerks in the back of the neck during sleep.

Running through the remedy very often, there is a great lack of
animal heat, coldness, and yet the patient wants to be in the open air ;
must be well clothed and kept warm, but wants to be in the open air.
The patient takes cold continually from every change and draft.
^Sometimes the patient will go to bed as cold as a frog, and when
warm in bed is so disturbed by itching and the warmth of the bed that



AMBRA CRISEA


71


there is no comfort. These arc two extremes coming together. The
circulation is so feeble over the extremities and backs of the hands
that in cold weather the hands are constantly cold and covered with
cracks and fissures that bleed.

The skin along the shin bone is rough, ragged and itching. It has
been said that dry weather and dry, cold weather increase the com-
plaints of Alumina, and that wet weather sometimes ameliorates.

The febrile condition of this remedy is not at all marked. There
is not much chill and not much fever, but the passive, slow, sluggish,
chronic elements and chronic symptoms are the ones that prevail most
markedly. In weak, broken-down cases there are some night sweats and
sweating towards morning. Slight chill in morning. Chill with thirst.

A striking feature of the remedy is the chronic dryness of the skin.
Sweat is rare and scanty. This is not Cwspccially suitable for those
copious, exhaustive sweats. It is the very opposite of Calcarea, which
sweats copiously, but this remedy, with spinal and paralytic affections,
is tired out from exertion, very exhausted, but docs not sweat. Pile
on the covers to make him sweat if you will, but he only gets hot and
itching and does not sweat. Scanty sweat. Entire inability to sweat.
Chronic dryness of the skin with fissures. The skin becomes worn
and ragged and fissured from its dryness. Great dryness of the thick
skin over the back of the hands, and in cold weather the hands become
cold and discolored.


AMiRA GRISEA

On looking over this remedy as a whole it will appear to you that
you have been studying the characteristics of one prematurely old.
You will often see symptoms coming on in one at fifty years of age
that should appear at eighty, and after studying this remedy you will
see that the same aspect is presented, a premature old age. We recog-
nize trembling and a peculiar kind of feebleness that cannot be de-
scribed by any expression but senility ; it is not the confusion of mind
belonging to sickness, but the peculiar state we recognize in old people,
in declining life ; trembling and tottering and a dreamy state of mind
with forgetfulness. He goes on from one subject to another, asking
a question, and, without waiting for it to be answered, asking another.
And so he jumps about' from one topic to another. It can hardly be
said to be confusion, it is a dreamy state of mind, a state of senility.
This remedy is useful when such a state is found in young persons,
when the mind is not insane and yet it is weak. Especially is it indi-
cated in those persons who manifest a momentary, fleeting inquisitive-
ness, jumping from one subject to another. Often a patient asks me
one question after another, never waiting to have the first one an-



72


AMBlFlA GR1S£A


swered, a flitting, flighty talker, who does not seem to realize that I
have not answered his questions ; that patient, I say to myself, needs
Ambra grisea. That state of mind belongs to modern society women
in such great frequency that you will be astonished to note it on all
hands. A modern society belle that could not darn the heel of her
stocking to save her soul will in a few years get into just that state,
and even Ambra will not cure her. But there is a kind of nervous
sickness manifested by these symptoms that Ambra grisea will cure.
Alternation of depression of spirits with vehemence of temper is an-
other feature. That naturally belongs to old age. A period of great-
est excitability is often followed by depression, a state of indifference
to all things, to joy, to grief, to people etc., treating with indifference
things that would naturally break the heart of a well-balanced person.
He does not even wonder why he is not excited over these wonderful
things, so decided is the state of indifference. Many of the complaints
are worse in the morning. He gets up with confusion and dulness of
mind and is in a dreamy state and towards evening he takes on symp-
toms of insanity.

Ambra is one of the most frequently indicated medicines in simple,
nondescript vertigo of old men. So dizzy that they cannot go out on
the street ; so dizzy upon getting up in the morning that they must
wait a while until they can get around on their feet. It is the dizzi-
ness belonging to senility and to premature old age. Now, when this
man undertakes to meditate upon something his ideas are whisked
away. It is a sort of confusion with vanishing of ideas. He has to
make an unusual effort a few times to bring his thoughts back to-
the place before he can concentrate the mind to meditate upon some
idea. But while concentration of the mind is dilBcult, he is compelled
to sit and dwell upon the most disagreeable things that force themselves
upon him and he cannot get rid of them. It is somewhat analogous
to Natrum mur,, but the peculiar feature of the Natr, mur, is that she
delights to dwell upon past unpleasant occurrences and lies awake at
night thinking about them. Ambra grisea is forced to dwell upon
such things. Images, false faces, hideous imaginations, fancies and
visions annoy him and keep him awake. In the semi-dreamy state he
is kept holding up before his mind these grimaces. Such a state of
mind may come on from business embarrassments with vertigo, con-
gestion to the head and brain fag.

One thing running through this remedy is that the presence of other
persons aggravates the symptoms ; also the marked aggravation from
conversation, A woman, when attended by a nurse, is unable to have
a stool without sending the nurse into another room. In spite of much
straining she can do nothing unless alone. It is said in Natr, mur,
that the patient cannot urinate in the presence of other persons. The



AMBHA GRtSKA


n


urine will not start when anyone is around. That is a sort of general
feature of this remedy. ConJfusion of mind and embarrassment in the
presence of other persons. Embarrassment in company. As soon as
he goes into campany there is flushing, trembling, nervous excitement
and the thoughts vanish. With these symptoms the patient imagines
that he is going out of his mind, and finally he settles down into a
state of melancholy, sadness and despair, and does not want to live.
He loathes his life and wants to die. '‘Great sadness.*' “Melancholy,
sits for days weeping.*' Such is the mental state of this prematurely
old patient with broken down constitution. It is a picture of a wreck
and the question will arise when you find a patient that looks and acts
in this way whether you have received him in time to cure him. You
readily sec you have before you one who is going down hill and going
into insanity of one form or another. A physician sees the forenmner
of a great breakdown when he secs an Ambra grisca patient with the
nervous mental state, the quivering, trembling and excitement in one
who was once a strong, vigorous man. Some great business or do-
mestic shock has come upon this patient. It is not the aspect you see
when phthisis is coming on ; you do not see the cachectic condition, but
it is a prostration of the nervous system, a mental prostration. A man
goes through the trial of one death after another in the family and
there seems to be nothing remaining ; he cannot look at it philosophic-
ally ; he has lost his business and his friends and then he takes on
dreaminess and wonders whe&er life is worthing living. Then it is you
get the Ambra grisea aspect

Many of the complaints oomc on in the morning and many come on
after eati?ig, “Vertigo with feeling of weight on vertex ; worse after
sleep," but especially in the morning. It is not mentioned in the text,
but it is also worse after eating. “Had to lie down on account of
vertigo and feeling of weakness in stomach."

Running through the nervous symptoms we have music is intoler^^
able; music makes him tremble, aggravates his mental symptoms and
gives him pain in the back as from a hammer. A number of physical
symptoms are brought out by listening to music. The tones seem as
if they were a material substance taking hold of him.

Complaints are often one-sided; perspiration on one side of the
body or perspiration on tlie affected side. “On right side of head, a
spot where hair when touched pains as if sore." The same sensation
is in the skin, oversensitive to touch. “Scalp feels sore in the morn-
ing when awaking ; this is followed by a sensation of numbness." The
word numbness you will find running through the complaints. You
will find a peculiar kind of numbness, such as belongs to old people.
Diminished sensibility of the parts ; feeble circulation.

Again, we find under the eye symptoms, “Dulncss of viaion as if

lO



74


AKIBRA GRtSEA


from looking through a mist/’ There is dimness of vision coming on
without any condition in the eye that would justify it. It is a nervous
dimness of vision, a senile paralysis coming on. ‘Itching on eyelid
as if a sty was forming/’ Itching is felt all over the body ; itching
in all the little openings.

Among the symptoms that are not in the text and that are decided
symptoms belonging to this remedy are, ‘‘Pressing headache starting
from both temples, drawing and tearing in the head, no and fro.
Shooting through the head, lancinating, cutting pains, worse on exer-
tion, better from quiet and lying. Headache when blowing nose.
Pressing pain in the left frontal eminence and in the eye. Burning in
the right eye and in the eye-lids. Tearing in short streaks in and upon
the right eye, pressure on the left eye brow, shooting, aggravated after
eating ; lachrymation.” These are in the original provings, but not in
the text ; they have been left out. This is the case all through the
Guiding Symptoms ; important symptoms w^erc left out because it was
necessary to cut down the work.

“Hearing decreases.” Dulness of hearing without any organic af-
fection of the ear. So perverted is his ability to hear that music aggra-
vates his symptoms, that is through the nerves of hearing. “Listening
to music brings on congestion to head.” Music aggravates his cough.
Think of one commencing to cough simply because he hears music I
What a strange thing that is! Calcarca has such sensitiveness that
the stroke of the piano is painful in parts, especially in the larynx.

This remedy is full of bleeding. Copious bleeding from the nose in
the morning. There we get the morning aggravation again. We get
the idea of the feeble circulation Ijccause of the easy oozings from
mucous membranes. “Copious nose bleed early in bed.” “Dried blood
gathered in nose.” “Long continued dryness of the nose, frequent
irritation as from sneezing.” In the nose an old, dry catarrh with
atropic condition of the mucous membrane. The nose inside becomes
shiny and withered.

Dryness of the mouth without thirst. Biting pain in the throat
between the acts of swallowing. Rawness in the throat. The throat
complaints are worse in the morning. Complaints are worse after
eating and worse from warm drinks, especially from warm milk.
“After eating, cough and gagging.” There is a peculiar combination
of symptoms about the throat. Dryness and accumulation of mucus
in the throat which he tries to expel, and when making an efEort to
cough out the mucus he gags and sometimes vomits. Vomiting from
cough. Weakness at the pit of the stomach after every evacuation ;
an “all-gone” feeling in the pit of the stomach. Pressure deep in the
region of the liver ; worse in the morning ; worse after eating ; worse
after stool. Distension of the abdomen with great flatulence^ espe-



AMBRA GRtSEA


75


dally after eating. Some symptoms are worse after drinking. Some-
times these complaints come on in the middle of the night, rousing
him up with rumbling and cutting in the bowels. The abdomen is
cold ; it feels as if the whole inside of the abdomen were cold. At
other times the coldness seems to be on one side of the abdomen.

Inveterate constipation in old persons, and espedally when it is im-
possible to have anyone near at the time of stool. “Frequent inef-
fectual desire for stool ; this makes her very anxious ; at this time pres-
ence of other persons becomes unbearable.” After the normal stool
there is pressure in the abdomen or a sense of emptiness and weak-
ness in the abdomen which is better after passing flatus or eructation.

Bloody urine with red sediment in the urine. Urine when emitted
is clouded, yellowish-brown and deposits a brownish sediment. “Sour-
smelling urine.” The urine is copious. “During urination burning,
smarting, itching and titillation in the urethra and vulva.” “Sore
rawness between the thighs.” “Voluptuous itching on scrotum.”
“Violent morning erections without desire,” with numbness of the
genitals. The symptoms are most erratic, as much so as in Ignatia
and Natr. mur. Taken as a whole they can be reconciled, but taken
a few at a time they seem wonderfully inconsistent. You must get the
whole remedy in order to comprehend it.

Copious discharge of blood between the menstrual periods. “Dis-
charge of blood between periods at every little accident.” Discharge
of blood from the vagina from pressing at hard stool ; even from a
walk that is a little too lox^ or from too great exertion. “During
menses left leg becomes quite blue from distended varices, with press-
ive pain in leg.” “Lying down aggravates uterine .symptoms,” quite
an unexpected thing. Menses too early and too profuse. “Menses
appear seven days before time,” and then comes that horrible itching
of the genitals ; “soreness and itching with swelling of labia.”

Another marked feature of this remedy that you might expect with
all this nervous excitement and prostration is dyspnoea with cardiac
symptoms, difficult breathing, a sort of asthma. It comes on from any
little exertion. Asthma on attempting coition.

“Itching, scraping and soreness in larynx and trachea.” “Titilla-
tion in throat, larynx and trachea.” Everywhere there is itching, and
the itching is very often a form of crawling. “Asthma of old people
and children,” in feeble, tremulous, weakly ones. “Whistling in chest
during breathing.” “Spasmodic cough.” “Violent spasmodic cough
with frequent eructations and hoarseness** A good deal of this cough
is of nervous origin. It is a cough with excitement, with nervousness,
with trembling, which would make one of considerable experience
wonder if that patient did not have brain and spinal cord trouble.
Nervous cough, such as occurs often in spinal irritation. Cough from



76


AMMONmM CARBONICUM


constriction of the larynx followed by copious flow of white mucus.
This is a paroxysmal cough, much like whooping cough. Asthmatic
dyspnoea from any little exertion, from music, from excitement.
Cough with congestion of blood to the head. Cough from thinking
and from anxiety.

It is not very long after these symptoms show themselves before
this patient will emaciate and wither, until the skin looks like dried
beef. With all he is a tremulous and shaky patient.

He complains a great deal of tearing pressure deep in the left side
of the chest. Sensation of rawness in the chest and itching in the
chest. Titillation and itching, moving about here and there if he tries
to touch the place and scratch it.

You will not be surprised to know that this patient suffers from
palpitation of the heart upon slight exertion, from excitement, from
music, from any effort to put the mind on anything, with trembling
and quivering. And this palpitation he notices even to the extremities ;
he throbs all over. His extremities pulsate. He is conscious of his
arteries everywhere and the palpitation of his heart causes oppression
of breathing.

The limbs easily become numb ; pressed upon in the slightest man-
ner they go to sleep ; go to sleep on being crossed. Coldness, trem-
bling and stiffness of the extremities. The finger nails become brittle
and are shrivelled. The arms go to sleep when lying down. “Sore
and raw between the thighs and in hollow of knees. Heaviness of
lower limbs, paralytic weakness ; the patient is growing old ; senility
is coming on. This remedy has cured the premature trembling that
comes on in middle-aged persons. It has cured the ^'going to sleep''
and numbness and feeble circulation with loss of muscular power. It
is very suitable in children who are excitable and nervous and weak.
“In lean persons." “Old persons and childen."

AMMONIUM CARBONICUM

If we were practicing in the old-fashioned way and considered the
wonderfully volatile nature of Ammonium carb. in some of its forms
we would only look upon it as an agent to relieve fainting and simple
affections and use it in the form of hartshorn to comfort old maids
and some other women. But Ammonium carb, is a deep-acting, con-
stitutional medicine, an anti-psoric. It effects rapid blood changes, it
disturbs the whole economy and it establishes a scorbutic constitution.
Its fluids are all acrid. The saliva becomes acrid and excoriates the
lips, so that they crack in the corners and middle, and become raw
and dry and scabby. The eye-lids fester and become dry and cracked
from the excoriating fluids from the eye. The stool is acrid and ex-



AMMONIUM CARBONICUM


77


coriates. The genitals of the female become raw and sore from the
acrid menstrual discharge and leucorrhoea, and wherever there is an
ulcer upon the skin the fluids that ooze from it excoriate the parts
round about, this excoriating character belonging to all of the exud-
ing fluids and discharges.

This remedy has bleeding of black blood, often fluid blood, that will
not coagulate, flowing from the nose, the uterus, the bladder and
bowels. The blood is dark, showing that a great disturbance is taking
place in the circulation. The skin has a mottled appearance inter-
mingled with great pallor.

It produces a violent action upon the heart, in which there is audible
palpitation, and every motion aggravates the pulsation. With this is
associated great prostration. It is rather a strange coincidence that the
ancients know that Amm. carb. w^ould overcome difficult breathing from
cardiac attacks and that acjua ammoniac or hartshorn is used to-day to
a certain extent in indications similar to those mentioned. They use it
as a stimulant, but when indicated the single dose very high is enough.
The ancients knew enough, also, to use hartshorn in the low forms of
pneumonia, at the turning point in the advanced stage ; that is an old
allopathic practice, but it had a homoeopathic relation to some of the
cases. Once in a while they would cure a patient in the awful stage of
prostration with heart failure at the end of pneumonia, and because
they relieved such a one it was then established as a remedy for all
future use.

Ammonium carb, has a ♦tate analogous to blood poisoning, such as
we find in erysipelas and in tlie most malignant forms of scarlet fever,
with prostration, great dyspnoea, so that it seems as if the heart were
giving out. With this there is an unusual patchy condition of the sur-
face, due to the paralytic condition of the blood vessels, enlargement of
the glands, duskiness and puffiness of the face. Amm. carb. has been
used allopathically in just such a state for centuries and it has demon-
strated its homoeopathic relations by its efficacy.

It belongs to the simple enfeeblement, w^eak heart, emaciation.
There is quite an absence of symptoms and a lack of response to reme-
dies. The patient must lie in bed because of the palpitation and dif-
ficult breathing on motion. It is a matter of mere weakness. Such a
case furnished me much amusement for a year and a half. There
was a woman in this city who answered just such a description ; her
state was one of peculiar cardiac weakness with dyspnoea and palpita-
tion on motion. I had been treating the case, but had not fully studied
it, and as she did not progress under my management she was taken
out of my hands and taken to one of our most able neurologists, who
put her upon the “rest cure" and promised that in six weeks she would
be perfectly well. But at the end of six weeks she was worse tlian



78


AMMONIUM CARBONICUM


ever and a cardiac specialist was then brought to examine her. He
said it was true the heart was not vigorous, but there was no organic
affection and consequently the case did not belong to his branch. Then
a lung specialist was brought in, and later she was examined by all
kinds of specialists. All of her organs were fully investigated, and
it was announced that nothing was the matter with them ; but the
poor woman could not walk because of her sufferings and palpitating
heart. She had a little dry, hacking cough that did not amount to
anything, but her chest was examined and there was nothing wrong
with it. But after she had been in this continual fire for about three
months, and was steadily failing, the side of the family that were my
adherents prevailed against the others and I went to see her again.
I continued to study the case, which was extremely vague, having
nothing but those few symptoms, and finally I settled upon Ammonium
carb., and she has been on this remedy for eighteen months. She now
climbs mountains, she does everything she wants to do and is about
ready to go to housekeeping. She has grown from a case of nervous
prostration, brain fag and any other diagnosis that might have been
heaped upon her to a well woman, and under that one remedy. This
shows you how deeply this remedy acts. One dose generally acts
upon her for from six weeks to two months, steadily improving her
each time.

Exhaustion coming at every menstrual period. An attack of chol-
era, or what one might mistake for cholera, coming the first day of
the menses ; a copious diarrhoea. Sometimes it is an exhaustion with
vomiting, exhaustion as in Veratrum. with coldness, blueness, sink-
ing, dyspnoea. The kind of dyspnoea that I have been speaking of
up to this time is not an asthmatic dyspnoea ; it is a cardiac dyspnoea,
due to a weak heart ; but this remedy has also asthma, and in the asth-
ma there is this peculiarity: if the room is warm the dyspnoea increases
until suffocation seems imminent ; as if he would die for want of
breath. He is compelled to go out into the cold air for relief. While
the warm room increases the dyspnoea in asthmatic complaints the
bodily state of the patient is worse from cold. The complaints of the
body and the headaches are worse from cold.

A common thing running through this remedy is aching in the
bones. The bones ache as if they w'ould break. The teeth ache vio-
lently from every change of weather or from change of the tempera-
ture in the mouth. The jaws ache or the roots of the teeth ache. A
prominent feature is falling out of the hair, the finger nails become
yellowish, the gums settle away from the teeth and bleed, the teeth
become loose, all in keeping with the scorbutic constitution.

This remedy has hysteria, and it is not surprising that nervous
women carry a bottle of ammonia hanging to their chain. Many



AMMOKIUM CARBONICUM


79


women do this because as soon as they go into a close place they
faint and must use their hartshorn. This condition in the woman,
if in a mild degree, is not hysterical ; it belongs to the sensitive nature
of women ; but if carried to a more marked state it is hysterical. The
hysterical fainting will be averted by the use of the hartshorn. Amm.
carb. will stimulate the action of the heart and relieve.

The remedy is full of depression of spirits. She weeps much, has
fainting fits, anxiety, uneasiness and exhaustion from motion. Over-
sensitive about what she hears other people saying. G^mplaints from
listening to others talking. Complaints, both mental and physical,
are worse in the wet weather, and she is sensitive to cold, raw, wet
weather. The gouty complaints, nervous complaints, prostration, car-
diac complaints, dyspntea, headaches, etc., come on in raw weather.
A congestive headache comes on in wet weather and from weather
changes. Sensation as if the brain would ooze out through the fore-
head and eyes. “Pulsating, beating in the forehead as if it would
burst.” The headache is worse from stepping, especially the head-
aches that come at the menstrual period. Headache worse in the
morning. This medicine in such headaches, with the symptoms I have
described, shows its antidotal relation to Lachesis, because Lachesis
produces all this state of prostration. In the old text-books you
will notice this expression, “Inimical to Lachesis” This means when
Lachesis has been given in high potency and has acted curatively,
Ammonium carb. is not likely to act curatively after it, and is some-
times capable of disturbing the case, confusing it and mixing up the
symptoms. But when Loch, has been given in too low potency, and
the patient has been poisoned with the crude medicine, this remedy
then becomes an antidote, used in a high potency, because of the
similarity in its action. It will overcome many of the poisonous symp-
toms of the case. If you will examine the appearance of people who
have been bitten by snakes and then examine the pathogenesis of this
remedy you will see a great similarity between them. It is well known
that this remedy has had repeated use in snake bites. Evidently it
did not save all of them, but it must have done something for these
cases or it would not have established so great a reputation for itself.
Give it not as an antidote per se, but when indicated in blood-poisoning
and animal bites with zymosis, with a tendency to black liquid bleed-
ing, as in Elaps. Running through the snake poisons there is a tend-
ency to bleeding of black blood that will not coagulate.

It has many eye symptoms. Sparks before the eyes in connection
with headaches ; double vision ; aversion to light. “Large, black spot
floats before the eyes after sewing.” When these symptoms have
been present in such a constitutional state as I have described the
remedy has cured cataract ; it has cured the patient and finally the



8o


ammonium carbonicum


crystalline lens has cleared up. Burning of the eyes, smarting eyes,
blood-shot eyes.

It disturbs the hearing, causing hardness of hearing and discharge
of acrid fluid from the ears.

We have had scorbutic, catarrhal condition of the nose, such as
described. Discharge from the nose acrid. “Severe pain as if the
brain were forcing itself out just above nose.'* “Nose-bleed when wash-
ing face or hands in morning." It has many complaints from bath-
ing, and a prominent feature is that the skin is covered with red,
mottled spots after bathing. Bathing produces surging all over, here
and there, as well as nose-bleed. Palpitation is worse from bathing.

In the throat we have an appearance like malignant scarlet fever,
diphtheria and other zymotic state ; purple, swollen, ulcerated and
bleeding, and gangrenous, accompanied by great exhaustion, with en-
larged tonsils and glands. The glands outside of the throat and neck
are enlarged and felt as lumps. In diphtheria, when the nose is stop-
ped, the child starts from sleep gasping for breath. Here again we
observe its relation to Lachests and the ophidia, for soon after the
patient drops to sleep he wakes up suffocating. In diphtheria, in chest
troubles with great prostration, the patient is worse after sleep.

Menses too soon, “The menstrual blood is blackish, often in clots."
The leucorrhoea is acrid. “Violent tearing in abdomen and vagina.”
“Irritation of clitoris." Swelling of the genitals. Now, let me tell
you something not mentioned here, but important, and that is a sensa-
tion of soreness in the whole pelvic viscera ; at times it seems as if all
her inner parts were raw. It is a sensation of soreness ; not always
sore to touch. This sensation of deep-seated soreness is especially
felt during menstruation. All through the menstrual period soreness
and rawness. “Menses prerriature, abundant, blackish, often in clots,
preceded by griping and colic,”

The remedy is full of catarrhal symptoms and cough, with much
rattling of mucus in the chest and air passages. Oppression of breath-
ing, a catarrhal dyspnoea. Especially is this a remedy, when the
symptoms agree, in hypostatic congestion of the lungs, a filling up of
the chest with mucus which it is difficult to expel ; great rattling in the
chest and great weakness. It is a good palliative in the last stages of
consumption. A dose of Ammonium carb, when there is great cold-
ness, prostration and weakness in the chest. It is not unlike that sen-
sation of weakness in the chest which is like Stannum. He can hardly
cough out loud and because of the weakness he cannot expel the
mucus, like Ant. tart. Short asthmatic cough.

The complaints of this remedy come on especially at three o’clock
in the morning. The cough comes on at that time. Old people who
suffer from catarrh of the chest have an aggravation at three o’clock



ammonium MURUncUM


8i

in the morning with the palpitation and prostration, waking up at that
hour with cold sweat and dyspnoea. Almost pulseless ; weakness of
the heart. Face pale and cold.

'‘Great lassitude/* Defective reaction with, or at tlie close of,
severe zymotic troubles, typhoid, diphtheria, scarlet fever, erysipelas,
etc. In those complaints that should come to a crisis, if the patient
goes into a state of great exhaustion under remedies fairly well se-
lected, you have an instance w^here this medicine competes with
Arsenicum for the nervous prostration. You sec “heart failure*' spoken
of in old school literature. They say the patient got along very
nicely, but finally died of heart failure. In a great many instances if
Ammonium carb. were given in time it would save life.

“Averse to walking in open air/* ‘'Children dislike washing.** The
warmth of the bed relieves the rheumatic pains, relieves the chill. “In
a warm room the headache is better.** “From washing reappearance
of the symptoms ; nose-bleed ; blue hands ; swollen veins." “Worse
in cold air."

We come now to the appearance of the skin: “Body red as if cov-
ered with scarlatina." “Putrid flat ulcers with a pungent sensation."
“Malignant scarlatina with somnolence, starting from sleep.’* “Ery-
sipelas of old people when cerebral symptoms are developed." When-
ever treating a severe form of disease and an eruption comes to the
surface, like a carbuncle or erysipelas, and does not give relief to the
patient then there is danger, A remedy must be found soon. When
a patient is coming down with severe internal troubles it is not a very
uncommon thing for unhealthy looking boils to come out, or carbuncles
or erysipelas blotches. It is always serious when these are not
immediately followed by relief to the patient. It shows a pernicious
state that has been pent up and cannot be held any longer and this
violence is going to destroy. This is one of the remedies that you
may look for to check the progress of such states. Any remedy, of
course, which corresponds to the totality of the symptoms is the rem-
edy to administer.


AMMONIUM MURIATICUM

The patient frequently feels a boiling throughout the body as if in
the blood vessel. Sensitive to cold. Many complaints increase while
in the open air. Flushes of heat, ending in sweat. Tearing pains and
smarting prevail extensively. Burning and excoriation of mucous
membranes. Drawing or sensation of shortening of tendons. It is
a long-acting remedy. There are few reliable mental symptoms
known. Anxiety, fretfulness and antipathy to certain persons. Neu-
ralgic and rheumatic pains in the head. Tearing pains in the head.


11



d2


AMMONIUM MUBIATICUM


Stitching and tearing in the temples. Itching of the scalp and other
parts. Rash all over body like measles. It cures capsular cataract,
when the symptoms agree. Yellow spots before the eyes. Burning
of the lids and balls in twilight or dim light. Mist before the eyes in
a bright light. Burning of the cars when walking in cold air. DiflS-
cult hearing. Catarrh of right ear, throat and larynx.

Much sneezing, watery burning discharge, yet stoppage of nose.
Coryza with burning in larynx. It has been used extensively in tra-
ditional medicine for coryza. Some sore throat and inflammation of the
larynx. P'or these troubles in olden times the large chunk of sal
ammoniac was produced, a few crystals shaved off with a common
jack knife into a glass of water. All got the same thing, regardless
of symptoms. Some were cured promptly of these bad colds, with or
without fever. It is now an overlooked remedy. Its symptoms should
be carefully studied.

With many of its complaints there is much pallor of the face.
Tearing in the bones of the face. Swelling of the submaxillary and
patroid glands with stitching pains. Burning and excoriation of mouth
and lips, like Am. c. Tongue swollen. It is a very useful remedy
for nondescript sore throat ; but especially useful where there is
marked burning and much viscid mucus, pulsating in the neck and
glands of neck, great swelling, pale face, stitching in the throat, great
pain on swallowing, with or without thirst.

Eructations of food as eaten, and vomiting. Sensation of hunger
with fullness, which is a flatulent state. Empty feeling, gnawing in
the stomach and spleen. Burning, stitching, tearing pains in the ab-
domen. Distension from flatus. Much grumbling in the bowels.
Much pain in inguinal region. Pain in abdomen and back during
menses. The abdomen is fat, relaxed and heavy, and the lower limbs
are lean. Excoriation and burning of the rectum and anus during and
long after stool. Stitching, tearing pains in the perineum. Hard,
crumbling stool, most difficult to expel ; must use the abdominal mus-
cles. All the salts of ammonia, like this one, have painful haemor-
rhoids. It cures diarrhoea when the stools are like scraping^s, bloody
and watery; also green slimy stools in the morning. Diarrhoea and
vomiting during menses, like Am. c. It has cured enlarged prostate,
also enlarged uterus.

Menses too soon each month, with pain in back and abdomen. The
flow is black and clotted, much like Am. c. During menses there is often
haemorrhage from the bowels or rectum with cholera-like symptoms.

Copious uterine haemorrhage. Copious white painless leucorrhoea.
With all the abdominal and menstrual symptoms there is copious
flatus, with rumbling and colic.

These symptoms especially in pale, sickly, feeble women.



ANACARDIUM ORIENTALE


83


In 'catarrhal troubles that extend into the larynx and bronchial tubes,
with stitching, tearing, burning. Hoarseness and loss of voice, with
burning in the larynx. Constantly scraping white mucus from the
larynx. Difficult breathing when using the arms or from manual
labor. Weight on the chest in open or cold air. Dry cough from
constant tickling in the larynx. Daily recurring suffocating cough.
In weakly people going toward phthisis, with daily dry cough and
fast pulse.

Violent backache at waist line, worse at night. Coldness between
the shoulders.

Stitching, drawing, tearing in limbs. Drawing in the limbs. Ten-
sion in the muscles and tendons of the lower limbs. Tension in pos-
terior part of thighs when walking. Cold feet at night in bed. Co-
pious night sweats latter part of night. Flushes of heat and fever.

If the reader will take up the provings and study them carefully he
should be able to use this remedy in the direction pointed out, and
■most likely would sec uses not mentioned.

ANACARDIUM ORIENTALE

This remedy is full of strange notions and ideas. The mind ap-
pears to be feeble ; almost, if not complete imbecility ; seems as if in
a dream ; everything is strange ; slow to comprehend. Marked irrita-
bility ; disturbed by every tlu% ; cursing. Weak memory. Forgetful
of things in his mind but a moment ago. All his senses seem to van-
ish and he gropes around as if in a dream. Change of states ; after-
nate states, Dulncss and sluggishness of the mind prevail. He is in
a continuous controversy with himself. Irresolution marks his charac-
ter. He cannot settle between doing this and that, he hesitates and
often does nothing. He cannot decide, especially in an action of good
or evil. He hears voices commanding him to do this or that, and
seems to be between a good and an evil will. He is persuaded by his
evil will to do acts of violence and injustice, but is withheld and re-
strained by a good will. So there is a controversy between two wills,
between two impulses. When this is really analyzed by one who
knows something of the nature of man it will be seen that the man is
disturbed in his external will, but the internal will cannot be affected
by medicine. His external voluntary is continuously excited by ex-
ternal influences, but his real will, in which is his conscience, restrains
that and keeps him from carrying the impulses into effect. This can
only be observed when its action is on a really good man. He has a
controversy when his external will is aroused, but in an evil man
there is no restraint and he will not have this symptom.

Hallucinations: a demon sits on one shoulder and an angel on the



p


84 ANACAIIDIUM ORIENlALE

Other. He is disposed to malice and has an irresistible desire to curse
and swear. Laughs when he should be serious. So it is carried on
until all things in the external will are inverted. Internal anxiety,
i. e,, the internal will is in a turmoil over this external disturbance.
“Contradiction between will and reason” is an attempt to express what
the individual knew nothing about. “Feels as though he had two
wills.” That is better. It finally destroys or paralyzes the external
will, and when a man is naturally evil and is under the paralyzing
influence of Anacardium he will do acts of violence. A wicked man
is restrained, not by his conscience, but by fear of the law. Ana-
cardium paralyzes the external will and places him in a position of
imbecility, and he does acts of violence from his own natural perverted
self. It has so acted on a portion of the mind that it teaches a great
deal. I have learned much from Anac., Aurum and Argentum of the
strange action of medicines on the human mind. Psychology must
be figured out by the action of drugs on the human mind. By this
means we get at facts and can Jay aside many hypotheses.

Ideas as if nothing were real, all seems to be a dream. Fixed ideas.
He thinks he is double. This comes from a vague consciousness that
there is a difference between the external and internal will, a conscious-
ness that one will is the body and another is the mind. Dwells on
thoughts about salvation. That a stranger is by his side, is another
recognition of the two wills. That strange forms accompany him, one
to his right side and one to his left. This mental state drives him to
madness. Alternation of his moods and understanding. One moment
he sees a thing and another moment he does not understand it. One
moment she sees it is her child and another that it is not. One mo-
ment it is a delusion and next moment it is an illusion. One moment
thinks it is so and next moment has enough reason left to know that
it is not so. Delusion is an advanced stage of illusion. In the Reper-
tory we have the same remedies often in illusion and delusion, it is
a matter of grade. When the intellect is slightly affected it is an illu-
sion, and what he sees he knows is not so. He sees demons, and at
first he knows from his intelligence that a demon is not there, but later
he /wants you to drive him out. It docs not matter which, they arc
similar symptoms, and it is a matter of degree, and so, in the Reper-
tory, delusions and illusions are not given separate places.

Anac., Hyos., Siiam. and Bell are important in bringing out the
quality of the perverted human mind as to the intelligence and affec-
tions. Whenever a medicine makes a man desire to do something it
affects his will, and when it affects his intelligence it is acting on hi^
understanding. Medicines act on both.

Low-spirited, disheartened, fears he is pursued, looks for thieves,
expects enemies, fears everything and everybody. Full of internal



ANTIMONIUM CRTOUM


8S


anxiety. No peace. He is separated from the whole world, and he
despairs to do that which is required of him. Cowardly in the ex-
treme. Fears some dreadful thing will happen. Morose, sulky, sul-
len. Unsocial ; complains of weak memory. Slight causes make himi
excessively angry. A strong feature is that all moral feeling is taken
out of him. He feels cruel. Can do bodily injury without feeling.
Cruel, malicious, wicked.

Bad effects of mental excitement. Weak-minded. Consequences of
fright and mortification. Suitable in religious mania when the conflict
between the external and internal will is kept up. It is analogous to Hyos.

Many complaints are ameliorated by eating.

Sensation here and there of pressure, described as if a plug, all
through the body, in the head, eyes, in the navel and down the spine.
Objects appear too far off. Things have a strange look, sometimes
uncanny. Illusions of smell, burning timber, pigeon's dung. Chronic
dry coryza.

The whole body has been well covered by symptoms ; but it seems
that the mind represents the principal aspect, and it will seldom be
used excepting for such mind symptoms. Usually when the mental
symptoms are strong the physical are also covered by the remedy.

Full of trembling and paralytic weakness. Tetanus ; epilepsy. Sen-
sations as of a hoop or band around the body, limbs or head ; pressing
as of a plug.

The eruptions are like Rhus in many respects ; erysipelatous erup-
tions dark, dusky and of malignant types. It is an antidote to Rhus
poisoning. Eruptions all over. Yellow vesicles are common. In-
tense itching of eruptions. Warts on the palms like Natrum mur.
Skin burns much. It seems closely related in its symptoms to all the
Rhus family.


ANTIMONIUM CRUDUM

You will be surprised, when studying full provings of this sub-
stance, to notice that all the symptoms seem to centre ab out the stom-
a ch ; it does not matter rnudS wTi at TindTir cdi^ suffers from,

the stomach takes part in it. The pains disturb his stomach and bring
on nausea ; with his headache he is sick at the stomach ; with all com-
plaints his stomach is out of order, and, on the other hand, whenever
he disorders his stomach he is sick all over. C omplaints that manif est
themselves through the stomach very frequently need this medicine.

First in importance are the mental symptoms showing theT^e of
constitution likely to need this remedy. It produces a very serious
state in the mind, an absence of the desire to live. It is well known
to physicians that the case is a serious one if the patient has no desire



86


ANTTMONIUM CRXJDUM


to live ; life is a burden. When I hear a patient say : "'Oh, doctor, if
I could only die.'* I do not like such a case ; there is some deep-seated
trouble in the economy that is hard to remove. Something is threat-
ening, and when it comes it is a common thing to see the patient
actually die. “Loathing of life.” You will find this especially in a
low, lingering, continued fever, such as typhoid. This remedy has
all the prostration of typhoid, and it has the continued type of fever
as well as the intermittent and remittent. The prostration is similar
to Arsenicum, but Ars, have overwhelming fear of death, while this
medicine has loathing of life ; and so they both part company. Ars,
has overwhelming restlessness, this remedy is seldom restless. Ars.
has an intense thirst, this medicine' is thirstless. So even though both
these remedies have excessive exhaustion with continued fever, we
sec they have features dissimilar enough to make them wholly dis-
tinct. Such a typhoid will sometimes be seen in young girls about
puberty who are threatening to go into chlorosis. They have loathing
of life, but it is a hysterical loathing of life. Moments of great ex-
haustion, sudden attacks of weakness and fainting. You will com-
monly find another feature with this, not coming at the same moment,
but alternating with it, or only present at times, namely, these over-
excitable, intense, nervous, hysterical, ecstatic young girls and women
arc overcome by mellow lights such as flow through stained glass
windows or the mellow light from the moon in the evening. That is
;what is meant when it says in the text: “Sentimental mood in the
moonlight.” It is a hysterical state, a disorderly outburst of the af-
fections, such affections as can be aroused only in one who is sick,
or one who is unbalanced in the general nervous system. This kind
of patient gives us the mental state and constitution of Ant. crud., and
along with such mental states the physical conditions seems to strike
to the stomach, as it were.

We have running through this remedy a general state that you
should keep in mind, that is, a gouty or rh emnatic state, in which the
symptoms change with the changes of the weather; worse in cold,
damp weather, worse from cold bathing, better from the heat of a
hot bath, worse from taking sour wine, and worse from stimulants of
any kind. When you use the expression “worse from wine,” it is not
only important to know that the patient is worse from wine, but also
the character of complaints that are worse from wine. This patient
becomes easily intoxicated, but the physical symptoms arc more dis-
turbed than the mental ; his gouty symptoms are worse from sour
wine ; all the pains and aches of the body are worse from sour wine ;
headaches come from this cause and the gastric disturbances are great-
ly aggravated from sour wine.

This patient is worse at night, worse in damp weather, worse from'



anumonium crudxjm


87


damp cold, better from lying down quietly, better from applied heat,
but much worse from over-heating and from radiated heat, and in a
warm room. Many of the symptoms come on in the sun's rays and
from the heat of an open grate. The open fire is wholly against the
Ant. crud. patient. A child with whooping cough will cough more
after looking into the fire. Such things are queer ; they are so strange
that there is no philosophical hypothesis to explain them, no theory
that looks toward an explanation, but they are facts which we must accept.

The whole gouty nature of the case seems to change so suddenly
that you wonder where the more exterior symptoms have gone to, for
all at once in a night or a day the patient commences to vomit and you
have persistent vomiting, lasting days and weeks, until the gouty
symptoms come back into the extremities. It is wonderful how quickly
this old-fashioned metastasis will come on, this changing from one
place to another. Jhe gouj suddenl y ceases i n the ext remities and
s toma ch symptoms come ra, an^jcm m^cdl it goutjiohc.^^
if you wil l.

There are catarrhal symptoms in this remedy ; catarrh of the nose,
stomajh, rectum, etc., and an increased flow of mucus from any of
these locailtles from drinking sour wine and from taking cold. A dis-
tressing feature of the catarrh is the stuffing up of the nose at night.
As soon as he gets into an overheated room, his nose gets stuffed up.
The coryza has a tendency to become chronic, because of the low and
feeble circulation and the poor constitution. When it becomes chronic
It is worse at night and is associated .with headaches. As the catarrh
slackens up and becomes dry the headache becomes worse ; he has
neuralgia in the head, crushing pains and dreadful sickness at the
stomach with vomiting. He often has an attack of sick headache and
it will be called by the family a gastric sick headache, but the condi-
tion just mentioned comes on from taking cold, which slacks up the
thick discharge into a dryness of the nose and the inhaled air burns
the nose like fire. Sometimes these troubles pass off after an intense
vomiting spell ; sometimes they do not, but the headache may remain
for days not relieved by vomiting, or relieved only after prolonged
vomiting. There are remedies full of headache and as soon as he
vomits he feels better, but in this remedy he vomits long, and becomes
relaxed and exhausted. The headache is worse moving about, worse
at night, better from lying down, from keeping quiet, better in the
open air, worse in warm room, worse from overheating, worse from
radiated heat and light. You see now how the catarrh, the headache
and gastric symptoms all belong together. It is because the patient
is sick that you cannot take symptoms separately, you must prescribe
for the whole man.

There is another feature belonging to the mucuous membranes, and



88


ANTIMONIUM CRUDUM


an important one ; the se membranes have a tendency to th row ^cgit_a.
milky white exudatiTO or deposits and it is especially noticed up on the
tongue* Th e whole tongue is_c ovcred with a milk-white coating .
This youlSnd in all diseases ^hSe the remedy is^ndii^ted. In the
stomach disorders of children, in gastric fevers, in complaints with
fever and much vomiting, great irritation of the whole nervous sys-
tem and in irritation of the stomach in typhoids, the tongue looks
white. Upon the slightest provocation he will retch and gag. Every-
thing seems to disturb him. He has loathing of food ; the thought
and smell of food disturb him. This is like Arsenicum.

He takes a cold bath at night on going to bed and gets up in the
morning voiceless ; cannot speak a word. This has come on in an
apparently painless manner ; he does not know that it is present until
he attempts to speak in the morning. This may be present with
spasms of the larynx, clutchings of the throat. Colds sometimes go
down into the throat and into the trachea, producing a bronchitis or
pneumonia.

Dry, hacking spasmodic cough in diminishing paroxysms. I will
explain that: The first paroxysm occurs with great violence, racking
his whole frame, and lasting a longer or shorter period, to be followed
by one with less violence and another with less violence ; perhaps after
a dozen or less paroxysms of diminishing violence, he ends up with
a dry, hacking cough which is not a paroxysm. When this first cough
shakes the whole body, whether it is a bronchitis or whooping cough,
and the tongue is white, and there are more or less gastric disturb-
ances, Ant, crud. is the remedy. It wdll change the whole aspect of
the case at once. The chest remains sore, lame and bruised from the
violence of the cough.

The stomach symptoms must be particularly considered. Constant
nausea, lump in the stomad u^fceling all the time as if he had an over-
loaded stomach, as if he had eaten too much, and that is when he had
not eaten at all. The stomach feels distended although the abdomen
is flat. He feels distended and vomits the contents of the stomach ;
he vomits slime after he has emptied the stomach of its contents ; pro-
longed retching, nausea, sickening load in the stomach and it seems to
go on and on. The vomiting does nm relieve and ^herp is
j^xh austion. “

Jnflaniination and hardng^jofjthe liyeij^r any portion Qf Jlt^ Pain
ipiJbeT^ion of the gaj[ bladd^^^ pain in the region of ‘the

liver, rending, teaffhg pains in the liver. Jaundice is associated with
these symptoms at times.

In the abdomen we have a group of symptoms ; violent abdominal
pains, burning, great distension ; there appears to be an increasing
distension as if by a screw, gradually forcing down upon something



akhmoniom crudom


89


gradually increasing the tension. We find this state in the tympanitic
condition of typhoid fever, we find it in cases of flatulence, we find it
in summer diarrhoeas. It will be associa^d whh jgastric symptoms
and the white tongue, especialTy^flrsuc^ disturbance had been brougHt
^mTTiy drinking sour wine, by taking a cold bath, in one who has a
gouty constitution, where the nodules in tlie finger joints become
painless and the stomach and bowels become distended and painful.

This remedy has a nondescript diarrhoea, but also a lumpy and liejuid
diarrhoea. Diarrhooea from sour wine. It seems to take a long time
to empty the bowels. He hurries to stool and passes a little lump and
some liquid, and is soon hurried again to stool and more lumps and
liquid are passed, and this goes on in summer diarrhoeas until finally
the bowel is emptied and then there is great tenesmus. It is a diar-
rhoea ending in dysentery ; inflammation of the rectum and colon, with
sullering, much tenesmus, prolonged efforts and great exhaustion.

Troublesome haemorrhoids in old gouty constitutions. They arc
always sore and inflamed from a cold, wet day, from cold bathing and
are always worse if he is foolish enough to drink sour wine or take
sour food. The stomach, bowel, rectum and haemorrhoidal complaints
are all worse from disordering the stomach with sour wine, sour fruit
or indigestible substances from cold bathing and wet weather.

The pelvic viscera become greatly relaxed, especially in women, so
much so that there is a dragging down in the pelvis. It seems as
though the contents of the p^vis would be expelled, or would fall out.
There is prolap sus of the utjer us and a discharge resembling^ leucor-
rhoea. Disturbances of various kinds at the rnehsfnTaT period. Irrita-
l)le and painful ovaries, such as we find associated with hysterical
girls ; those who suffer from unrequited affections ; dreamers.

This medicine produces sweating ; copious, exhau stive sweat s, nigh t
sweats, such as we find in lingering diseases. Sweats from the slight-
m exertion. If he becomes slightly overheated he fairly boils with
perspiration and then takes cold.

The skin is ulcerated and has a tendency to grow war ts^ callosities,
l ^ad nails and bad hair. Hard, horny excrescences grow under the
nail and are extremely painful. FrQni_tlie ends of the fi ngers little
ijorn-like excrescences appear. The slightest pressure will produce a
callosity, or”^a sot^T plJ^^ in working men you will find an unusual
tendency to thickening o f the ski n on the soles of the fee t. They are
very sore to walk upon, becausFTKSe callous places are sensitive and
have numerous centres of little-corns. The tendency to build up and
indurate belongs to the remedy. Warts grow upon the hands. The
hair is unhealthy. Pustules form upon the skin with red areola.
Pustular eruptions have an inflamed base that is red, and sensitive.

Now, if you will study the proving and get the particulars of the


12



go ANHAIONIUM TARTARICUM

remedy, and fit them into this framework, you will understand some-
thing of Ant. crud.


ANTIMONIUM TARTARICUM

About the first thing we see in the study of an Antimonium tart,
patient is expressed in the face. The face is pale and sickly ; the nose
is drawn and shrunken ; the eyes are sunken and there are dark rings
around the eyes. The lips are pale and shrivelled. The nostrils are
dilated and flapping, and there is a dark, sooty appearance inside of
the nostrils. The face is covered with a cold sweat and is cold and
pale. The expression is that of suffering. The atmosphere of the
room is pungent, more pungent than feetid or putrid, and makes you
feel that death is in it. The family is disturbed ; they are going hither
and thither, and the nurse is in an excited and busy state, and you
enter upon this scene to make a homoeopathic prescription. It is one
of excitement and one that you cannot act rapidly in, but one in which
you must make a very quick prescription. These things wdll interfere
somewhat with your thinking at the time that you must do the best
thinking and the most rapid thinking.

Now, in what kind of cases do we find this state and appearance,
where all the features and symptoms conform to the nature of the
remedy? First, in catarrhal patients, in broken down constitutions,
in feeble children, in old people. Catarrhal conditions of the trachea
and the bronchial tubes. Our ears being open we hear coarse rattling
and bubblings in the chest. If you have ever been in the room of the
dying you have heard what is called the death rattle. It is coarse
like that. Now and then there is expectoration of a mouthful of
light-colored, whitish mucus. The condition is one in which the chest
is steadily filling up with mucus, and at first he may be able to throw
it out ; but finally he is suffocating from the filling up of mucus and
the inability of the chest and lungs to throw it out. It is a paralytic
condition of the lungs. It may occur in cases of grippe. At first it
may be a case that comes on quite rapidly, running a rapid course.
It may be a case that produces early prostration, that is, in three or
four days or a week. The first few days of the sickness will not point
to Antimonium tart. So long as the reaction is good and his strength
holds up you will not see this hippocratic countenance, sinking, and
coldness and cold sweat. You will not hear this rattling in the chest,
because these symptoms are symptoms that indicate a passive condi-
tion. Antimonium tart, has weakness and lack of reaction. Hence
we see that it is suitable in those cases that present this state, or in
such patients as are so feeble, when they are taken down, that they
at once enter upon a passive or relaxed state. In cases of bronchitis



ANTIMOMUM TARTARICUM


9^

with pneumonia, inflammation of the trachea, inflammation of the air
passages in general, the inflammation is likely to be attended with dry-
ness or a scanty flow of mucus. If this be violent in a few days it
will reach a state of relaxation and weakness. But the first state does
not indicate Antimoniura tart. Such medicines as Bryonia and Ipecac,
come in for the first period, and your impression is, when administer-
ing those medicines, that they will be sufficient for the whole case, and
they will be, except in those states wherein this weakness is present
from the beginning, or where there is lack of ability to react sufficiently
from your remedy to recover under it. Then comes in a second rem-
edy, and that is the time when this medicine begins its operation.

Ipecac, has some of this coarse rattling, but it is attended with great
expulsive power of the lungs. This medicine has the coarse rattling
that comes after many days. Ipecac, has it the first days of the sick-
ness. This remedy has the coughing and gagging and retching, but
in the stage of great relaxation, prostration and coldness. It seems
as if he will die. When you hear him cough you are at once impressed
with the idea that there must be some profound weakness in his lung
power. We know that it is in the power of the lungs to' produce an
expulsive action with the deep inspirations. They have no such power
in Antimonium tart. The chest is full of mucuous and it rattles ; the
cough is a rattling cough, but the mucus does not come up, or only
a small quantity comes up, but it does not relieve him. His chest is
full of mucus, he is suffocating and he is really passing away, dying
from carbonic acid poisoning due to a lack of expulsive power. In
cases of pneumonia ; when first coming down with a chill, it may be
a very violent attack, such an attack as from its violence produced
prostration early, that is, after three or four days. It is not indicated
in the beginning during the chill, and during the high grade of in-
flammation, but during the stage of exudation. But the violence of
the attack leads him to a state of prostration, or he is already feeble
as if he were old, and therefore he becomes easily relaxed and pros-
trated from the disease. Altogether unlike Aconite, Bell,, Ip, and
Bry., for they come down with violence — the very opposite is present
in Antimonium tart. Little fever, cold sweat, coldness, relaxation,
hippocratic aspect. So it is the remedy that closes out the scene with
the severe cases of bronchitis, pneumonia ; most of these cases die in
an Antimonium tart, state. This patient is an old gouty patient, de-
bilitated from long illness, always shivering, pale, with enlarged joints.
Every spell of wet weather brings on a catarrhal state of the chest,
larynx and trachea which runs into a state of copious secretion of
mucus. He is in bed at once, prostrated, with coarse rattling. In
children that have frequent attacks of bronchitis, from cold wet
weather, from cold rainstorms in the autumn, in the spring and in



92


ANTIMONIUM TARTARICUM


cloudy weather. No sooner do they get over one cold than another
cold comes on. The acute stage is never violent with them, but they
keep having these passive rattling colds. Recurrent rattling in the
chest. Chilly, and pale. Those florid children that do not look sick
when they have a cold, are more or less vigorous, who have rattling
in the chest, but do not come down with weakness and are not pros-
trated from it, but keep on rattling, they call for Kali siilph. That is
quite a distinguishing feature, — the weakness at once speaks for this
remedy. In very old people this weakness occurs, old broken down
people who have for years had catarrh of the chest. Every sharp cold
spell in the winter brings on catarrh of the chest, with thick white
mucus, and attended with great dyspnoea, driving him to bed. He
must sit up in bed and be fanned ; cannot lie down because of the
difficult breathing, and filling up of the chest. Antimonium tart, will
ease him over a number of tliesc attacks before he dies. When the
mucus is yellow and purulent in one of these old people, Ammoniacum
will tide him over a good many winters. Wc see a good many old
people that sufEer from catarrh of the chest during the winter ; they
have had it for years, and do not expect to be any better. When the
expectoration is yellow Ammoniacum will pull them through, and
Antimonium tart, when it is white and attended with prostration,
sweat, coldness, pallor and blueness of the face. These are the prin-
cipal uses of this remedy in practice.

It has many pains and aches. To a great exent Ant. tart, builds
upon the Antimonium crudum basis. It forms its chest symptoms to
a great extent upon that basis, Many of the symptoms arc like Anti-
monium crudum; many symptoms are worse when warmed up, and
from too much clothing. You will see this patient sitting up in bed
with no clothing around the shoulders or neck, and the night-gown
wide open in order to breathe. Suffocates if the room is too warm.
It gets that from the Antimonium crud. It is worse from bathing in
cold water, like Antimonium crud. The mucous membranes are cov-
ered with thick white mucus, like Antimonium crud. Also he does
not want to be meddled with or bothered. Everything is a burden.
The child when sick doesn't want to be touched or talked to or looked
at. Wants to be let alone. The infant is always keeping up a pitiful
whining and moaning. Many times the respiration is a moaning res-
piration. Rattling and moaning. Always in bad humor, that is, ex-
tremely irritable when disturbed. Any disturbance seems to increase
the breathing and is an annoyance and makes the patient irritable.
No wonder the patient is wonderfully anxious, because from his ap-
pearance we would say that he must have the feeling that he is dying.
He looks as if he were sinking, and if he does not get relief soon he
certainly will die, for there is a filling up of the chest that is suffo-



ANTEMONIUM TARTARICUM


93


eating him, and the feeling is that of sufEocation, dyspnoea, which is
steadily increasing. The wings of the nose move as in Lycappdium.
Lycopodium competes with it very closely and resembles it very much.

There are many headaches laid dov/n under Antimonium tart., but
Antimonium crud. is more likely to work out for Antimonium head-
aches, while this medicine is more likely to work out for Antimonium
chest troubles. Both of these remedies have very decided gastric
symptoms. Constant nausea, vomiting and indigestion. Antimonium
tart, with its difficult breathing is sick at the stomach. Loathes every-
thing, loathes food ; vomits even water. He has also a docile state
and if allowed to be quiet, in spite of all the sufferings, he will fall
into a sleep, or go into a slate of inability to feel. He will cough and
sleep, and snore through the dyspnoea, so that it is in many ways like
Antimonium crud,, but Antimonium crud. has nothing like the copious
flow of mucus from mucous membranes that are inflamed. It has
nothing like the passive state of the whole economy. It is not so
desperate in its provings, and not so dreadful to look upon.

Clinically Ant. tart, has been confined in its use mostly to the mucous
membranes of the chest, but it has the same passive conditions of all
the mucous membranes of the body. Discharges of white mucous from
the eyes. ''Eyes prominent, glaring. Dim, and swimming. Gonor-
rhoeal ophthalmia.'’ But the rheumatic conditions furnish another
form of this remedy, another phase of it like Antimonium crudum.
The joints are affected, take pn a passive, slow infiltration and become
dropsical; dropsical swelling of all the joints. Gouty infiltration of
the joints, and these are especially bad during the cold, wet weather.
Eye symptoms of this gouty character. Eyes infiltrated along with
the joints, so there is a gouty state of the eyes. The gouty state affects
the whole body. The mucous membrane is pale instead of being red
and inflamed ; it is pale and relaxed, and it appears to ooze ; mucus
forms upon it very readily. This is the state that occurs in the chest.
It is not that burning rawness found in Ars. and the more acute reme-
dies, although there is a state of prostration and the anxiety and cold
sweat which resembles Ars,

Then this gouty state affects the teeth. His teeth are all rheumatic.
“Rheumatic pains in the teeth,” with rheumatic pains in the joints.
Teeth are sensitive. “Teeth covered with mucus.”

With all the complaints the stomach gives out, and there is nausea,
inability to digest and loathing of food. Vomiting of everything taken
into the stomach ; vomiting of even a spoonful of water. In most
complaints this remedy is thirstless. It is an exception that it has
thirst. Generally in these attacks of dyspnoea the friends of the pa-
tient stand around with a very strong desire to do something, if it is
only to hand a glass of water. This patient is irritated by being



94


ANTIMONIUM TARTARICUM


offered a swallow of water. He is disturbed, and shows his annoy-
ance. The child will make an offended grunt when offered water.
Thirstlessness with all these bronchial troubles, with copious discharge
of mucus and great rattling in the chest. Sometimes there is an
irresistible desire for cold things in the stomach, but it is the exception.
“Desire for acids or acid fruits,” and they make him sick. Troubles
brought on in the stomach from vinegar, from sour things, from sour
wine, from sour fruits, as in Ant. crud. Aversion to milk and every
other kind of nourishment, but milk especially makes the patient sick,
causing nausea and vomiting. The stomach and abdomen are greatly
distended with flatulence. The abdomen is tympanitic. With the
stomach symptoms and bowel symptoms there is this constant nausea,
but it is more than a nausea, it is a deadly loathing of every kind of
food or nourishment, a nausea with the feeling that if he took any-
thing into the stomach he would die ; not merely aversion to food, not
merely a common nausea that precedes vomiting, but a deadly loath-
ing of food. The weakness takes on an increased anxiety, and he
increasingly suffocates when he is offered food. Kind-hearted people
very often want him to take something, for perhaps he has not taken
any food all day, or all night ; but the thought of food only increases
the dyspnoea, increases his nausea, his loathing and his suffering.
Vomiting is not an easy matter in this remedy. The vomiting is more
or less spasmodic. “Violent retching. Gagging and retching and
straining to vomit. Suffocation, gagging, through great torture.”
The stomach seems to take on a convulsive action, and it is with the
greatest difficulty, after many of these great efforts, that a little comes
up, and then a little more, and this is kept up. “Vomiting of anything
that has been put into the stomach, with quantities of mucus.” Thick,
white, ropy mucus, sometimes with blood. “Vomits slime, with great
exertion. Vomiting large quantities of mucus. Vomits tenacious
mucus.” “Vomiting of slime, with bile. A tough, watery mucus, then
some food, then bile.” But the principle thing vomited is the thick,
white, ropy mucus, flowing from the mucous membranes everywhere.
Tough and stringy ; can be drawn out in strings. The patient is often
choked while this thick, ropy, white mucus is expelled from the oesopha-
gus and mouth. The mouth fills up with it. It is a tremendous effort,
a spasmodic effort, for this patient to rid the stomach of its contents,
which is mucus, or mucus and bile. Early in the vomiting it is mucus,
and after much straining there is a regurgitation of bile into the stom-
ach, and the continuing of vomiting is from bile. The great straining also
induces a flow of blood intp the stomach, and the contents of the stomach
will be streaked with blood. Uulceration of mucous membranes every-
where. It has ulcers in the nose and in the larynx, and ulcers that bleed.
Bleeding ulcers in the stomach, and so there is vomiting of blood.



ANBMONIUM TARTARICUM


95


Like Antimonium crud., it has been useful in old drunkards. Old
drunkards sometimes take on a debilitated form and take frequent
colds. After getting over a big debauch, having been many days on
one of their times, they become relaxed and cold, and take cold, and
the chest fills up with mucus, and they are vomiting, suffocating and
vomiting. “Rattling of mucus in the chest of old drunkards." Ant.
tart, is someimes required. Ant. crud. when the trouble is confined
mostly to the stomach. Ant. tart, when the chest symptoms are pres-
ent with growing anxiety and the coldness and the prostration; pros-
tration from long drinking. Old gouty patients, old drunkards ; old
broken down constitutions. In children also that have broken down
constitutions, as if they had grown old. These take cold in the chest,
with great rattling of mucus, and require this remedy.

Very commonly there is anxiety in the stomach, it is not always
described as a pain, but an anxious feeling, a deathly sinking, an in-
describable sinking in the stomach as if she was going to die. “Anx-
iety in the stomach, with nausea.” A passive congestion of the liver,
with vomiting and bile.

The remedy is also full of cutting pains, cutting like a knife. Pinch-
ing in the intestines. Colicky pains. Distension of the abdomen.
The abdomen may be distended with serum, or it may be distended
with flatus. “Sharp, cutting pains, as with knives. Most violent
pains in the abdomen." Dropsy is one of the natural conditions of
all forms of Antimonium. I remember an energetic horse doctor
feeding all the horses Black antimony when the epizootic was upon the
land, going through all the stables. I learned that he was giving
Black antimony to all horses and I left instructions that mine should
not have any medicine except what I gave. Nearly all the horses that
he treated ended in dropsy, and were laid up for days and weeks with
the legs wrapped up. It was a proving of Antimonium. Ant. tart,
is full of it. It was a common thing, formerly, for old broken down
constitutions to be put on Ant. tart, at the end of pneumonia and
fevers, but they almost always had bloating of the feet for three or
four months after getting up. If they did not have that, they had
“fever sores.” Antimonium is a common cause of the “fever sore,”
the lingering indolent ulcer that forms upon the legs following old
fevers in broken down constitutions. Sometimes they never get rid
'of them. They certainly never get rid of them unless they fall into
the hands of a prescriber of our school.



96


APIS MELUnCA


APIS MELLinCA

This remedy has so many symptoms on the surface of the body we
will study the outer aspect first. All over the body is found a thick
rash, sometimes of a rose color. It is rough and can be felt as a
rough rash under the fingers. The patient at this time is greatly dis-
tressed by heat and the skin is sensitive to touch with the rash or with-
out it. Nodular swellings here and there come and go. Then comes
an erysipelatous inflammatory condition, in patches, here and there,
about the head, with great tumefaction about the face, eyes and eye-
lids. Erysipelas may occur anywhere, but it more commonly belongs
to the face and runs to a high degree of inflammatory action, with
stinging, burning and oedema. In the extremities we have a marked
dropsy, swelling with pitting upon pressure. A general anasarca may
appear. The face is greatly swollen at times, the eyelids look like
water bags, the uvula hangs down like a water bag, the abdominal
walls are of great thickness and pit upon pressure, tind the mucous
membranes in any part look as if they would discharge water if they
were punctured. Puffing or oedema, with pitting upon pressure, is
a general condition that may be present in any inflammatory state.
There is a general amelioration from cold and aggravation from heat.
The skin symptoms and the patient arc aggravated from heat. This
prevails also in the mental state, in inflammatory conditions ; in car-
diac conditions, in dropsy, in sore throat, etc. Sometimes this aggra-
vation amounts to aggravation from warm drinks, warm room, warm
clothing, warmth of the fire, etc., ; if it is heat the patient is greatly
disturbed. In brain troubles, if you put an Apis patient with conges-
tion of the brain into a warm bath he will go into convulsions, and
consequently warm bathing is not always “good for fits.” It is taught
in old school text-books so much that the old women and nurses know
that a hot bath is good for fits, and before you get there just as like
as not you will have a dead baby. This congestion of the brain, with
little twitchings and threatening convulsions, makes them put the baby
in a hot bath, and it is in an awful state when you get there. If the
baby needs Opium or Apis in congestion of the brain the fits become
worse by bathing in hot water. If the nurse has been doing that kind
of business you have learned the remedy as soon as you enter the
house, for she will say the child has been worse ever since the warm
bath, has become pale as a ghost and she was afraid he was going to
die. There you have convulsions worse from heat, pointing especially
to Opium and Apis. That is the way with Apis all through. It is
not laid down in the hooks that Apis is worse in the throat symptoms
from warm drinks and wants altogether cold things, and will not take
warm things which aggravate, but one of our graduates wrote me that



APIS MKLIJFICA


97


by making use simply of the generals, as he had been instructed, Apis
conforming to all the rest of the case, he made a beautiful cure of a
case of diphtheria which had the relief from cold, which shows how
generals are continued into particulars and how they can be made use
of. The generals continue to build and enlarge our Materia Medica.

Upon the outer surface then we see that Apis is full of dropsy, red
rash, eruptions, urticaria, erysipeals, which inflammations extend to
the mucous membranes. I'he outer part of man is his skin and mu-
cous membrane. When we are dealing with man from centre to cir-
cumference, we think of the innermost as the brain and heart and in-
ternal organs that are vital, while their coatings and coverings are
external. Apis affects the things that are external ; it affects the en-
velopes, the coverings. You notice how frequently it affects the skin
and the tissues near the skin, and it also affects the envelopes or
coverings of organs : for example, the pericardium. It establishes
serous inflammations with effusion. Apis produces an inflammation
of the membranes of the brain. In the serous sac which encloses the
heart, pericardium, and also in the peritoneum it produces the same
kind of inflammation. Thus we see that the coverings are especially
affected by Apis, viz., the skin and mucous membranes and the cover-
ings of organs ; and with these wc get dropsy, catarrh and erysipelas.
In all of these inflammatory conditions there is stinging and burning ;
burning like coals of fire at times, and stinging as if needles or small
splinters were sticking in.

The mental symptoms of Apis are very striking, and the most strik-
ing thing throughout the mental state is the aggravation from heat
and from a warm room. The symptoms themselves are great sad-
ness, constant tearfulness without any cause, weeping night and day ;
cannot sleep from tantalizing thoughts and worrying about everything.
Depression of spirits with constant weeping. Sadness and melancholy ;
extreme irritability ; borrowing trouble about everything. Foolishly
suspicious and jealous. Absolutely joyless. Absolutely indifferent to
everything that would make her happy or joyful. No ability to apply
things that would make her happy to herself, they must mean someone
else. Foolish, silly, childish behavior in a woman in confinement, in
a woman in advanced years ; talking foolish twaddle, such as a child
would talk, on serious occasions. Another aspect of the mental state
is the delirium, which comes on in serious forms of brain affections
in children. The child gradually goes into a state of unconsciousness.
Lies in a stupor, one side of the body twitching, the other side motion-
less, rolling head from side to side ; head drawn back rigidly ; pupils
contracted or dilated, eyes very red, face flushed, a stupid state or
state of semi-consciousness. Child lying with the eyes partly closed,
as if benumbed. It is suitable in congestion of the brain, meningitis

*3



98


APIS MELUFICA


or cerebro-spinal meningitis with opisthotonos when all the symptoms
are aggravated from heat. The child puts on a more dreadful stjate
if the room becomes overheated ; become extremely death-like or pale
if the room becomes overheated. If the child is able to, do so it kicks
the covers off. If it is in a position where it can look into a largo
open grate it will be much aggravated. I have seen Apis children
who had to be removed from near an open fire. They will cry to get
away from the heat tliat comes upon them from the register or open
fire. The heat increases every symptom, and sometimes causes them
to break out in a cold sweat all over the body, which does not amelior-
ate their fever nor the burning heat. Very often the head is rolling
and tossing, the teeth gnashing, and the eyes flashing with threatening
convulsions, the child carrying the hand to the head at times, a state
of semi-consciousness, and the child screams out with that peculiar
scream which is known to mean congestion of the brain — cri cncepha-
lique — the brain cry. The shriek is a very strong Apis feature. The
child cries out with this shriek in sleep when going into brain troubles.
It says in the text : “Sopor interrupted by piercing shrieks."' We must
be able to see in the general beginning of provings the disease which
they resemble, for we do not always sec the remedy in the advanced
state. We see the diseases in a state of progress, and must be able to
see it in its beginning. As was the disease in the beginning so was
the remedy in the beginning. Things that have similar beginnings
may have similar endings.

Apis also has muttering, delirium and loquacity. All kinds of
screaming and shrieking, shrill and otherwise, violent and less violent.
Premonition of death, dread of death, fear of apoplexy. “Very busy,
restless, changing kind of work, with awkwardness." Awkwardness
is especially found under the fingers, toes and limbs in Apis. The
whole nervous system shows a disturbance in co-ordination. This
disturbance in co-ordination runs through the remedy, awkwardness,
staggering with the eyes shut. Dizziness when the eyes are shut.
“Ailments from fright, rage, vexation, jealousy or hearing bad news."
“After severe mental shock paralyzed on the whole right side."

The complaints of Apis are attended with violence and rapidity.
They come on with great rapidity, rush on with violence, until uncon-
sciousness is reached. It has been my fortune to see many violent
cases of poisoning from the sting of the honey-bee. When the over-
sensitive patient is poisoned by the sting, he is dreadfully sick. The
majority of people in the course of their life have been stung by the
honey-bee and a mere little swelling occurs in the xegion of the sting,
a swelling as big as a robin's egg or a hen's egg at most, without con-
stitutional states ; that is, when the individual is not sensitive to Apis.
He may have been stung in half a dozen places, and each one gives



APIS MELLIFICA


99


him a little lump. But you meet one who is sensitive to the sting of
the honey-bee, and if he gets one little sting on any place in his body,
he comes down with nausea and anxiety that makes him feel that he
is dying, and in about ten minutes he is covered with urticaria from
head to foot ; he stings and burns and wants to be bathed in cold
water ; he fears that he will die if something is not done to mitigate his
suffering, rolls and tosses as if he would tear himself to pieces. I have
seen all these symptoms come on after Apis. The antidote for that
is Carbolic acid. I have seen Carbolic acid administered in that state,
and the patient described the sensation of the Carbolic acid going
down his throat as a cooling comfort. He says ‘‘Why, doctor, I carl
feel that dose go to the ends of my fingers.*’ When you administer
an antidote under such circumstances listen to what your patient says.
When you get the true natural antidote, and, at times, when you get
the true curative medicine in a case, no matter how high the potency
is, the patient will say : “I feel that to the roots of my hair and to the
ends of my toes.” Such is the feeling it gives when the true antidotal
medicine goes to the innermost portions of his economy, and that is
the way we want to get our medicines always, to be guided by the
symptoms of our patient that they will tell us what medicine to ad-
minister, and when the medicine is administered its highest reaction
is of that sort.

If we are well acquainted with the symptoms of Apis we can many
times get along without having a specialist to treat the eyes. They
make more people blind with their lotions, caustic solutions, etc., than
they benefit. The old-fashioned way was to cauterize with copper and
silver nitrate solution, and the modern things are not much better.
At the present day the homeopathic physician who is not capable of
taking eye symptoms as well as lung symptoms and symptoms of any
part of the body is not competent to practice medicine. Eye cases can
be prescribed for by the physician. In Homeopathy there is no such
thing as treating the eye and other organs of the body, but the patient
with all his organs, not the patient with one or two organs.

Apis is a great remedy for the eyes. It has deep-seated inflam-
matory complaints of the eyes as a result of disease. Inflammations
that are erysipelatous in character, that leave thickening of the mucous
membrane and lids, and white spots over the eye ; opacities. Inflam-
mation with opacities very extensive or in patches. Enlarged blood-
vessels. When the inflammatory condition is active it is attended with
oedema of the lids, both upper and lower, and the whole face is some-
times in a state of oedema, such as you would expect to sec after a bee
sting. The swelling of the mucous membranes of the lids is so enor-
mous that they roll out, looking like pieces of raw beef. The fluid
will run out over the cheeks in great abundance. Burning and sting-



lOO


APIS MELUFICA


ing like fire, better from washing, from cold applications, worse from
heat. Chronic eye troubles that are worse from looking into an open
fire, worse from radiated heat ; wants something cold applied. Chronic
granular lids. The results of chronic inflammation are numerous and
extensive. Worse from looking at white things, worse from looking
at the snow. Pain in the eyeballs, pain deep in the eyeballs, stitches,
burning, stinging and shooting. Chemosis. Apis is often suitable
for old scrofulous affections of the eyes. Vascular affections, the
veins are enlarged. ‘‘Iritis.” “Congestion to the eyes, blood-vessels
injected whole conjunctiva inflamed. Photophobia. Rheumatic
opthalmia, that is, a high grade of inflammation of the eyes in rheu-
matic subjects. Catarrhal inflammation of the eyes ; scrofulous inflam-
mation of the eyes. Hot tears gush out of the eyes ; burning in the
eyes. Erysipelas of the eyes and sides of the face, extending from
the right to the left. This direction is an Apis feature in many other
respects. Erysipelas commences on the right side of the face, extends
over the nose to the left side. Inflammation commences in the right
side of the abdominal viscera and extends over to the left. In inflam-
mation of the ovary the right is preferred to the left. The right side
of the uterus is preferred. Pains in the whole right side of the pelvis
extending over towards the left. Burning stinging here and there
extending from right to left.

Inflammation of the middle ear in connection with or after scarlet
fever.

Now wc come to the throat troubles of Apis. Wc have much throat
trouble. Apis cures diphtheria, especially when there is a high grade
of inflammation and the membrane is scanty or comes slowly or insidi-
ously, and it is somewhat of a surprise the gradual progress it makes ;
the parts are oedematous and the soft palate is puffed like a water-bag,
and the uvula hangs down with a semi-transparent appearance like a
bag of water. All around the throat and mouth there is an oedematous
condition looking as if it would flow water if pricked. Burning, sting-
ing pains in the throat ameliorated by cold and aggravated by heat.
Aversion to all warm substances and drinks. The tongue swells until
it fills the mouth, worse on the right half of the tongue, or involving
the right side first. Raw beef appearance, denuded appearance of the
tongue and buccal cavity and throat. Various kinds of swelling in
the throat ; benign swellings, with burning, stinging and redness. Ul-
cers in the throat that come as a result of this inflammation. Apis is
suitable in the severest forms of sore throat accompanying scarlet
fever. It cures scarlet fever when the symptoms agree, and it is not
an uncommon thing for Apis to be suited to scarlet fever, though the
rash is sometimes rough. The scarlet fever rash is not always smooth
Wt|d shiny. When the rash does not come out at all the face is very



APIS MELLIFICA


1()[


pallid, with a high grade of inflammation of the throat ; the scarlet
fever is in the family, and the skin is red without any rash ; in those
cases that are worse from heat, want the covers off, and are sensitive
to the heat of the room. The patient desires a low temperature in the
room, is worse from heat, w^ants cool things, worse from radiated heat
especially, or hot air that comes from a register or fire. He suffocates
when a little warm air is radiating over the body. He is disturbed
from heat even in the chill of an intermittent fever ; if in a warm room
when having a chill, he suffocates. So it is with the scarlet fever, with
the sore throat, and in diphtheria ; from the least whiff of radiated
heat he suffocates. He wants the doors and windows open, wants
something cold. Sometimes the scarlet fever patient will go into con-
vulsions because the rash fails to come out. Apis is sometimes a suit-
able remedy and must be compared with Cuprum, Zincum and Bry-
onia, A warm bath will intensify the convulsion.

‘‘Sensation of constriction and erosion in the throat in the morning.’’
Throat sore and swollen ; stinging pains. “Could not shallow solid
food.” With these complaints there is often shivering, shuddering,
little chills intermingled with the febrile state. Many times you will
think to comfort him by covering him up with a warm blanket, but it
will make him worse, he will throw it off. A child will kick off the
covers. An adult who is shivering while covered up will kick off the
covers. These strange and peculiar things are guiding features, things
that cannot be accounted for..

In Apis there is vomiting,' nausea, retching and vomiting, with great
anxiety. Vomiting of bile and everything eaten. Vomiting of bitter
and sour fluids.

Apis causes soreness and tightness throughout the abdomen ^ind
hypochondria. Sensation of tightness runs through many of the com-
plaints of Apis. The abdomen is distended with gas. Meteoritic con-
dition, great tension and fulness, hard and drum-like. In all inflam-
matory complaints, in peritonitis, inflammation of the liver, inflamma-
tion of the pelvis, there is great tension, tightness ; but this tightness
is not always general, sometimes it is local ; sometimes it is with little
congestion, but tightness prevails throughout the abdomen, and this
tightness makes it impossible for the patient to cough for fear some-
thing will burst. The cough makes him feel as if something would be
torn. Cannot strain at stool. This is common in the abdominal and
pelvic complaints of women. The woman will say she cannot strain at
stool, because of the feeling that if she strains something will break loose.
The same state exists in the chest. It seems that on coughing something
will tear loose, as if the fibres are in a state of tension or stretching.

Hypersensitive state of the liver ; inflammation of the liver and
spleen. Pain under the short ribs, worse on the left side. “Pains



102


APIS MELUFICA


from below the ribs spreading upward. Obliged to bend forward
from a painful contracted feeling in the hypochondria.” All the com-
plaints are likely to make the patient bend forward and flex the limbs,
because the state of tension is painful. Sensitiveness of the stomach
to touch. Over the whole abdomen .she is so sore that touch is ex-
tremely painful; in all the inflammatory complaints of women the
abdomen is very sore and painful. Soreness, distension and stinging
burning pains through the abdomen Burning heat in the stomach.

In the external abdomen there is an cedamatous state. Dropsy,
sometimes alone, sometimes with anasarca. Limbs swollen to the full
extent, pitting upon pressure, the feet and limbs swollen, with burning,
stinging and numbness in the limbs.

Feeling as if the intestines were bruised. Watery diarrhaa is com-
mon in Apis ; yellow stools, green stools, olive green stools, watery
stools, etc. Every day six to eight diarrhoeic stools, which smell like
carrion. It is especially useful in a peculiar kind of stool occurring
in children and infants, and intermingling of blood, mucus and food,
giving the stool an appearance like tomato sause. The anus protrudes
with stool and seems to remain open, an open anus like Phosph, and
Puls. Chronic diarrhoea, dysentery, haemorrhage from the bowels.
In its constipation it is related more commonly to head troubles. He
goes many days without a stool. The bowels seem to be perfectly
paralyzed, with congestion of the brain and acute hydrocephalus.

The urinary troubles arc numerous in Apis. The urine is scanty,
coming only in drops. Much straining before the urine will start, and
then only a few drops ; dribbling a little hot urine, burning urine,
bloody urine. As soon as a few drops collect in the bladder the urg-
ing comes, constant, ineffectual urging. Later the urine is almost sup-
pressed. Infants go a long time without passing urine, screeching and
carrying the hand to the head, crying out in sleep, kicking off the
covers. Very often a dose of Apis will be found useful. It is often
called for in scarlet fever when the urine is loaded with albumen.
Urinary troubles, with swelling of the genitals, and the swelling is
(Edematous. Scanty urine in little boys, with the foreskin enormously
distended, or in hydrocele. Every time the call to urinate comes ho
will shriek, because he remembers the pain he had the last time. In-
flammatory complaints of the kidneys and ureters, bladder and urethra.
The whole urinary tract is irritated, very much like Cantharis, and
these two medicines antidote each other. If you are called to a child
that has been drugged with crude Apis you can generally antidote it
with Cantharis. If you go to a woman who has taken Cantharis for
vicious purposes, you can very often overcome it with Apis. The
violent frenzy that has been brought on by Cantharis will be overcome
by Apis. The smarting, burning and stinging along the urinary tract



APIS MELUFICA


103


will be found under Apis. “Flow of urine unconscious.'' Stitching
pain in the urethra with enuresis. Morbid irritability of the urinary
organs. “Strangury. Agony in voiding urine. Retention of urine
in nursing infants." It is queer how the old women knew, long before
Apis was proved, that when the little new-born baby did not pass its
water they could find a cure by going out to the bee-hive and catching
a few bees, over which they poured hot water, and of which they gave
the baby a teaspoonful. Some domestic things like that have been
known among families and among nurses, and it is consistent because
it is just like what we give Apis for. “Urine scanty and foetid, con-
taining albumen and blood corpuscles." Especially in acute albu-
minuria. The acute inflammatory affection of the kidney with albu-
minuria, such as occurs in scarlet fever or diphtheria, or after these,
such as occurs as a sequel of acute disease. Inflammation of the kid-
ney closes up the case and kills off a good many in allopathic hands,
never in homoeopathic hands. It is closely related to the genital or-
gans of both male and female. Swelling and oedematous state of the
genitals. Apis is a great friend of the woman. It cures all of her
inflammatory complaints it seems, when the symptoms agree. That
is to say, it produces inflammation of the uterus and ovaries and dread-
ful sufferings in the external and internal parts, and we have only to
discover when the symptoms agree to cure most of these inflammatory
troubles. It even stops aboition. It will stop abortion after some
miserable scoundrel has attempted to get rid of the offspring, and she
has taken drugs and brought on pains, pains strong enough to expel
the contents of the uterus, especially in the first, second and third
months. A little hccmorrhagc has come on, a mere threatening, the
membranes are not yet ruptured, but they soon will be, and she has
stinging, burning pains, and lies uncovered and suffers from the heat,
probably from the overdose of Ergot, Apis will overcome this greatly
to her regret. This kind of villainy prevails. But women have acci-
dents and weakness. whcrel)y, in .spite of the fact that they desire to
hold their offspring, they are threatened with abortion, and Apis is a
great friend to the prospective mother. Burning and stinging pains
in the ovaries, especially the right ; when greatly enlarged and even
cystic, Apis has proved a curative remedy, has often cured tumors, and
has caused cystic formations to stop growing or to disappear. The
right ovarian region is very sensitive. Pain in the uterus and ovaries
before and during menstruation. Stinging, rending, tearing pains
cutting like knives, worse from heat. It is a very easily got symptom,
because in most painful symptoms heat or the hot water bag are tried
with the natural hope of relief, but with this remedy it aggravates.
She throws it aside, for the pain is worse from heat. “Ovaries
enlarged," etc. Dropsy of right ovary. Ovarian tumor.



APOCYNUM CANNABINUM


i 04


APOCYNUM CANNABINUM.

This remedy comes in as a good one to contrast with Apis. You
will find it analogous in its symptoms and much like the complaints
cured by Apis. You will be astonished in going over the dropsical
condition, the rheumatic condition, the tumefaction of the cellular
tissues, the dropsy of the sacs, the scanty urine resulting in dropsy ; the
inflammatory swellings with oedema, at the great resemblances ; and
if you were to start in with two cases and work them out from their
particulars, and if one feature were left out, the aggravation and the
amelioration, the cold and the heat, in many cases you would not be
able to distinguish between Apis and Apocynum, §o near alike are their
swellings, their bleedings, their distensions, and their disturbances.
Both are remedies for dropsy ; routinists will try first Apis, and then
they try Apocynum, and then they will try something else that is good
for dropsy.

But all the way through this medicine is aggravated from cold, the
patient himself is aggravated from cold. His complaints are worse
from cold applications. In his distended, dropsical state, he is chilly,
sensitive to air. He is sensitive to cold drinks. He has a pain in the
stomach, and even vomits, from cold drinks. Pain in the abdomen
from cold drinks. Uneasiness here and there in the body when cold
things are in the stomach ; you see at once how different that is from
Apts. Anyone who follows symptom hunting and does not distinguish
between circumstances that relate to the patient and modalities that
relate to symptoms cannot appreciate these two grand distinctions,
where the one patient is aggravated from heat and the other one ameli-
orated by heat, in all complaints.

The excretions are all diminished. The urine is scanty. The skin
is dry. No matter what his complaints are, he cannot sweat. He
feels if he could only perspire he would get well. There is no out-
throw of water. He drinks plentifully, and it goes into the cellular
tissues to distend them, and he becomes dropsical. He has a water
constitution, one that takes in water and lets out none. He passes
little water, and he perspires scantily or none at all ; his skin is dry,
sometimes hot, yet he is chilly. The skin feels husky and rough, but
he is chilly. Apis suffers dreadfully from dry skin, from scanty urine ;
yet Apis is aggravated everywhere from heat and ameliorated from
cold. That is the grand distinguishing feature in the dropsies and
rheumatisms and many internal complaints. ‘'Dropsy of serous mcm-
branes.’* Dropsy of the brain, pericardium, pleura, peritoneum ; all
of these are distended with serum. And there is great suffering, great
uneasiness. The inflammatory rheumatism is again like Apis, in that
it takes on dropsy with it. Inflammation of the joints, of the ankle-



APPOCYNTJM CANNABINUM


joints, of the toes, of the fingers, inflammation of the joints all over the
body. The swelling about the joint pits upon pressure like Apis,
But with the scanty urine, want of sweat, with the febrile condition,
he is all the time chilly, and wants the parts well wrapped where Apis
wants them uncovered. One might say, “Why, that is only one symp-
tom.” All who do not perceive the difl’erence between symptoms
predicated of the patient and symptoms predicated of the parts will
see that as only one symptom with the rest of them. When he takes
up a case and works it out in. the Repertory he will use it as one symp-
tom. Yet that feature will sometimes rule out all the rest, because
it is predicated of the patient and not predicated alone of his parts.
We have many remedies where the patient himself is ameliorated from
heat. He wants to be in the heat, he wants to be warm, and yet he
wants cold applied to the part. But that which is the general is the
ruling feature, and if we do not know and distinguish the things that
are general from the things that are particular, we get our Materia
Medica mixed up. We must distinguish the things that belong to the
patient himself from the things that belong to his parts. “Dropsy,
with great thirst.”

This is a great medicine for the low forms of disease, such as ty-
phoid and scarlet fever, and is useful after lingering sicknesses. Pa-
tients become greatly prostrated, very chilly, very anaemic, have great
thirst, the urine becomes scanty, the skin becomes dry. It is a bad
convalescence ; he has not r€SCovered. Dropsy sets in ; dropsy after
scarlet fever, dropsy after typhoid fever. A low form of disease, like
typhoid fever, has kept him in bed for four or five weeks, and he is
emaciated and prostrated, and now he does not gain flesh, he has no
appetite, but he drinks copiously ; he seems to want nothing but water.
His skin commences to distended, fills up, and l>ecomes dropsical. That
is like ApiSy and Apis would be indicated provided he was always
hot, and wanted to be uncovered, and wanted cold things.

The mental symptoms of this remedy have not been brought out.
We only know a few clinical symptoms, and they are of little impor-
tance It has cured that peculiar kind of stupor belonging to hydro-
cephalus, but we do not know what kind of a primary case of brain
disease this remedy would fit, because of lack of provings. We only
know the condition after it has existed for a long time, that is, for
weeks ; rolling the head and tossing about, and he is greatly emaciated.
The little one has chills and fever along with it, and his skull is begin-
ning to distend, the fontanelles are growing wider ; then we begin to
think of some of those remedies capable of curing dropsy in the shut
sacs, and this is one of them. But we do not know the beginning.
We do know the beginning of Apis, but not of this remedy. Hahne-
mann's provings arc full of particulars. He cross-examined his prov-

*4



lo6 AI^POCYNUM CANNABiNtJM

crs as to their modalities, the time their symptoms began, and where
they ended. Many of the symptoms he felt upon himself, because he
proved many remedies. Hahnemann had a sensitive constitution and
deep perception, and his provings gave him an insight into medicines
that he could not have obtained in any other way. Those who prove
medicines properly, conscientiously, prudently, learn more about Ma-
teria Medica than anyone else. They become inured to hardship, and
live longer thereform. They are hardened to their environments, to
their atmosphere, to their associates, and their surroundings. They
are made better, and they may be able to perceive something of what
Hahnemann perceived. But now-a-days provings are made and noth-
ing recorded but common symptoms, that is, stomachache, nausea,
headache, pain in the back, cold feet. Many of our remedies are not
proved much further than that. What, when and how much, are left
out. The modalities are left out. The finer sensations are not de-
scribed, because they are considered emotional. “Low-spirited and
bewildered. Feels as if she could do nothing but cry.” We do not
know the affections of either the male or the female. Wc do not know
the desires or aversions, mental or physical ; and hence it may be said
that this is only a partial proving and suitable only for those complaints
that show themselves upon the surface.

“Hydrocephalus, with great stupor.” That is the last stage of it
where there is great prostration, loss of flesh, stiffness of all the limbs,
with dropsical swellings. Many times in hydrocephalus pains shoot
along the nevers and attack the joints. Then it is that such remedies
as Apis and Calc, carb, and this one take hold with wonderful depth.
The first permanent and substantial indication that the remedy is work-
ing in a hydrocephaloid case is that it increases the flow of urine, which
has been scanty all the time. For hydrocephalus study Tuberculinum,

The expression of the face is that of anguish. “Face bloated, puffed,
swollen. Bloating under the eyes. Pitting upon pressure. Tongue
dry ; great thirst.” There is another lemedy that comes into this
sphere that will be very often misunderstood, too, and will be likely
in most instances to be given before this remedy. It is Ars, It has
all the dropsical conditions of Apis and Apocynum. It has all the
coldness and distension of the abdomen and of the shut sacs. It, too,
is ameliorated in all of its symptoms, and the patient himself is ameli-
orated, from heat, and intense heat is required for that purpose. He
wants to be in a very hot room, but it has something else. It has a
deathly prostration, a deathly anxiety and terrible restlessness, not
found in either of these remedies. It has also such a cadaveric odor,
discovered on entering the room, which is not common to either of
these remedies. In this way we have to take up our medicines and
study them only one at a time, but wc have also to study them by com-



APPOCYNUM CANNABINUM


107


parison. The medicines that are similar in generals have to be com-
pared, as to heat and cold. In that way wc get a list of those that are
ameliorated by cold, and a list of those that are ameliorated by heat ;
and another nondescript list not ameliorated by either. That is the
starting point, and we have to divide and sub-divide these, and so on.

'Thick, yellow mucus in the throat. Great thirst. Stiffness in the
thoracis region. Fullness. A sense of distension.*' You will think
a moment and see that filling up the pleural cavity does not cause very
much outward distension, because the ribs prevent it. They form a
wall, and hence the growth or distension is towards the lungs, and
downward towards the diaphragm. By this means we get increasing
dyspnoea, with cough. This medicine, like Apis, must sit up ; cannot
lie down. You will find it is a common feature in hydrothorax for
the patient to be compelled to sit up, because lying down increases the
pressure upon the lungs and narrows the breathing space ; and hence,
he must sit up in order to let this heavy water-bag, the pleural sac,
hang down, against the diaphragm, and that produces pressure in the
abdomen and distension of the bowels. 'Thirst on waking. Thirsty
all day. Great thirst but water disagrees.” He likes cold water, but
it so disagrees with his stomach, causing pain in the stomach, or caus-
ing him to vomit before it even gets warm, or causing distension, or
causing uneasiness, so that he dreads to take cold drinks. He is more
comforted by hot drinks. Warn drinks warm him up, make him more
comfortable, cold drinks aggrairate. Yet his thirst is for cold.

Then come distension and> vomiting. You will find patients so dis-
tended in all their cellular tissues with a general anasarca that it seems
that no more water can be taken from the stomach into the blood. He
is full. The blood vessels are distended, his stomach is distended and
he must vomit ; and with this distension of his whole body he drinks
and vomits. It is with difficulty he can cat ; cannot keep it down ; it
will not digest. From this comes a part of these symptoms. ‘'Sense
of pressure in the epigastrium, in the chest/' so that it is almost im-
possible for him to get breath enough to move. Very little food makes
him feel distended. He wakes up and wants something in his stom-
ach. There is a gnawing hunger, but every little thing, even a mouth-
ful, makes him feel distended. His stomach is already full of water
and he vomits up great quantities of water, of bile, and of undigested
substances that he has swallowed. The stomach finally, in dropsical
conditions, becomes very irritable. It seems as if nothing passes
through him. He finally becomes paralyzed in the bowels. The kid-
neys are not acting, and scarcely any urine passes. The tongue be-
comes inflamed. The mucous membranes are all inflamed, and probably
the stomach is. Abdomen very much distended ; dropsy of the abdomen.

The another phase comes on. It seems that one by one each organ



APPOCYNUM CANNABINITM


io8

ceases to perform its functions. The ovaries and uterus fail to per-
form their functions, and amenorrhcea comes on with dropsical condi-
tions. Many times this seems to be the beginning of such troubles ; a
failure of these organs to perform their functions, and then dropsy sets
in. A woman passes along to a low state of weakness and nervous
excitement, no menstrual flow, tenderness of the abdomen, distension
of the abdomen, and then distension of the limbs.

Apocynum has been a curative remedy in diarrhoeic conditions alter-
nating with dropsy. Sometimes a diarrhoea will set in and all the other
troubles go away. The diarrhoea is copious, yellow, watery and invol-
untary. I once knew large doses to be given in a case of dropsy, and
it established its own peculiar diarrhoea, and while that diarrhoea lasted
the enlarged spleen and the dropsical condition of the body all went
away apparently, to the doctor, in a natural manner. It was brought
to my observation, and 1 said, “Wait.” Finally he was brought to stop
the poisoning by Apocynum, and heart failure followed at once. A
similar effect is to be seen from the allopathic use of Digitalis. The
time comes when the doctor will be compelled to stop Digitalis, and
the patient dies of heart failure ; Digitalis is never charged with the
death, and the doctor never seems to learn that Digitalis will kill.

Everywhere the functions are impaired, in the skin, the kidneys,
bowels, uterus, and all tends toward the formation of tlropsy. Uri-
nary troubles are exceedingly troublesome. Scanty urine accompanies
many complaints among the early symptoms. Retention of urine ;
painful micturition ; urging to pass urine constantly. The bladder is
sometimes only partially full, but he cannot pass urine. “Retention
with great urging.” “Paralysis of the extremities. Urging to uri-
nate.” Numbness, tingling in the extremities, and finally entire loss of
power. Some patients remain this way for a while, and finally dropsy
will set in. ^It has alternating conditions, as I have mentioned ; drop-
sies, alternating with copious discharges. The dropsy may be relieved
with copious watery discharges from the bowels or by copious spas-
modic action of the kidneys, the urine being so profuse that he can
hardly realize where so much water comes from. All at once it ceases.
The urine becomes scanty, and then the tissues fill with serum, and
the dropsical condition progresses. These conditions cease after a
while, and the heart fails. “Urine diminishes to one-third its usual
amount, without pain or uneasiness about the kidneys or bladder
Urine suppressed. No urine at all in brain affections.” It was a
routine medicine once, given to all children for wetting the bed, and
as It cured many it must have that symptom, but that is a clinical symp-
toin. It IS not surprising, seeing its action is so marked upon the
bladder, that it has cured involuntary passage of urine. “Dropsy of
the genital organs." “ ^



ARGENTUM METALUCUxM IO9

I have mentioned the suppression of the menstrual flow, the amen-
orrhoea, but it has also a marked haemorrhagic tendency. It will estab-
lish haemorrhage anywhere, but especially from the uterus. Copious
haemorrhage. The menstrual flow may become copious, too frequent,
last too long ; but it will also establish a uterine haemorrhage at another
time. It will cause the patient to bleed so copiously that she becomes
anaemic from uterine haemorrhage *, and then will follow dropsy. The
old practitioners were in the habit of giving China in most instances
where dropsy followed a haemorrhage. It was so generally useful,
and so commonly relieved, that they seldom used any other remedy.
But Apocynum is also a remedy for dropsy following haemorrhage.
Many times it will fit the symptoms clearly in dropsy following haemor-
rhage. '‘Prolonged menorrhagia, or haemorrhage from the uterus for
six weeks. Blood expelled in large clots, sometimes in a fluid state.”
Moderate flow for a day or two : suddenly sets in with such violence
that she cannot be out of bed. Compels her to lie quietly. ‘'Shreds,
or pieces of membrane with the fluid blood. Menorrhagia continuing,
or paroxysmal,’* that is, a continuous flow until the patient is exhausted.
That is like Phos, and Ipecac, and Secale. In most instances, a uterine
haemorrhage will cease after about so much blood has been lost. In
medicines where the flow is so liquid as it is in this medicine that tend-
ency to cease does not come until a state of profound exhaustion has
come on. Then the dyspnoea, as has been described, will not permit
the patient to lie down. This is commonly from hydrothorax. It has
also a hypostatic congestiem of the lungs in patients that have been
sitting up a long time, so that it fills up from below, gradually creeping
up so that a large portion of the breathing space is destroyed. “Great
oppression about the epigastrium. Difficult breathing. Gasping for
breath. Wheezing and coughing.*' It has all the rattling that is found
in Tartar emetic and Tartar emetic has a similar filling up of the chest,
cannot lie down.

Pulse small and irregular ; almost pulseless. Disposed to faint when-
ever she attempts to raise her head from the pillow. Small weak
pulse. Dropsy of the pericardium. Palpitation very troublesome.

ARGENTUM METALLICUM

We will take up the study of Metallic silver. No wonder that this
is a very deep acting remedy, for it has been used symbolically, and
medically throughout all history. It has been a valuable substance
throughout all history. It is an anti-psoric, and from its symptoms
I believe it to be an anti-sycotic. It goes deep into the life. Especially
affects the nerves, nerve sheaths. Has complaints along the nerves.
All cartilages in the body are affected by it. It produces a hyper-



no


ARGENTUM METALLICUM


trophy of cartilages, a thickening of the cartilaginous portions of joints,
of the cartilage of the cars, and of the nose. Produces cartilaginous
growths and tumors ; infiltrations. It acccts the nerve substance, it
is a deep organic remedy. It is more than an ordinary remedy, for it
affects all there is of man. In those nerve fibers especially that carry
messages. It affects the brain in a very profound manner, bringing
about changes and a gradual softening. A strange feature about it in
its general action upon man is, that is singles out mostly the intellectual
faculties. It scarcely disturbs his affections ; only makes slight and
vague changes in his voluntary system. But the memory, the intel-
lectual part of man is disturbed increasingly to imbecility. In great
sufferings — and it is full of suffering — it affects his ability to reason.
In nearly all the headaches and pains in the back, and the rending,
tearing pains that it produces over the body, it disturbs his memory
and reasoning faculties. Disturbs his ability to think. And it comes
on in persons who are in the habit of laboring with the intellectual
faculties. Business men, students, readers, and thinkers. Reasoners
come to a point when they can no longer reason, and the slightest men-
tal effort brings on vertigo. He is fatigued. All symptoms arc worse
after sleep. Instead of being rested for the day, he wakes in the morn-
ing with mental fatigue and weakness, so that he can hardly move, and
it is with great difficulty that he gets himself together for a mental or
physical effort of another day. If he undertakes to do any more men-
tal work, he gets a headache. Headache mostly in the front of the
head, but also in the occiput.

Another strange feature about it, it is full of rending, tearing pains
along the nerves, predominantly of the lower extremities. Tearing,
as if the nerves would be torn in pieces diirmg rest. Cold, damp
weather, stormy weather will bring on rheumatism — not so much with
swelling, although it has that, but pains apparently in the cartilages,
and pains along the nerves. And these pains are so severe that he
cannot keep still. Hence, it has a rheumatic state from cold, damp
weather, from becoming chilled, in the joints and in the nerves, so that
he walks and walks. Many symptoms arc better from motion and
especially walking. So tired and exhausted, but the pain is so severe
that it drives him to walk. These pains arc many times palliated by
copious drafts of coffee, and this will suppress the sickness, and leave
upon him all sorts of difficulties, under which he is threatening with
break down, and in time he becomes almost useless. “Mental weak-
ness. Physical prostration.’' Rending, tearing pains. Affections of
the joints, the cartilages of the joints. Tearing pains along the bones
— and he is really a wreck, an old broken down constitution when he is
yet young. '"A man of forty is like one of eighty.” All these pains
are better from motion.



ARGENTUM METALLICUM


111


Again, it is full of infiltrations. Inflamed cartilages infiltrate and
form into hard knots. A superabundance of cartilaginous tissue, so
that round about the joints the cartilages arc thickened. In the ear
and nose the cartilage is thickened. The infiltration that belongs to
epithelioma. It has been a wonderful palliative in scirrhus, and in
epithelioma. It has cured epithelioma. It is on record as curing an
epithelioma of the cervix uteri.

Ulceration everywhere ; but ulcers that have their beginning in the
cartilaginous tissue, and break out through the cellular tissue, and
copiously discharge. The ulcers infiltrate at their base, and become hard.

Another marked feature is that it affects both testes, but it has a
predominant action in the right. The left ovary and the right testis.
Such things are singular, that in one sex it should produce symptoms
in one side of the body, and in the other sex on the opposite side.

It has cured all sorts of tumors, enlargement of the ovary, and
infiltrations of the tissues. It is a chilly remedy. Wants to be kept
warm, and its pains arc ameliorated by heat. Its headaches are ameli-
orated by heat — arc ameliorated by pressure, by bandaging. I have
many times cured these symptoms in headaches when the patient had
the head wrapped up.

Now, in this medicine we class the patient as one having a lack of
vital heat. He wants to be Warm. Likely to be lean, growing increas-
ingly lean, increasingly nervous, increasingly sensitive. Takes on all
sorts of whims. Women netding Silver very often do such strange
and unaccountable things in (compare Argentum nitricum) their
nervous states that they bar out all sympathy of their friends, and are
called hysterical. Deep seated trouble of the nerves. Growing in-
creasingly sensitive to surroundings.

Now, the mental state of Argentum met, is just such as is aroused
by confusion, just such as is arounsed by the emotions, just such as the
loss of balance from fear, from anger, from fright, from disturbance
of the mind. Because this patient is so sensitive to his surroundings
and so disturbed by annoyances. With his pains he becomes delirious,
and it is not that involuntary delirium tliat we see in low forms of
fever, but he becomes wild and full of rage. He takes on mental ex-
citement, rage and a state in which he talks nonsense with great rapid-
ity. Sometimes there is a stage of unusual excitement in his conversa-
tion all mixed up about the character of his thought. All of the time
looks as if he were intoxicated, and he flies from one subject to an-
other, and prattles. For a moment appearing to be very intense and
active in mind, and forgets all that he was talking about.

*Tn society indisposition to talk.” Because he is incompetent. He
is tired mentally and he forgets what he is talking about. Loses the
thread of his discourse ; and he dreads to talk because he gets com-



1 12


argentum METAUJCUM


plaints while talking. It compelled to answer, he becomes dizzy, and
feels strange all over, and has nervous shakes or shocks. And shocks
go over him when tired like an electric shock. It comes suddenly, but
the most favourable time for that to come is just w^hen he wants to go
to sleep. He thinks, now he is away from all the troubles of the day
and can rest, and the instant sleep comes over him he is roused from
head to foot by a shock, and another one, and another one, sometimes
the whole night he jerks from head to foot. His limbs jerks up, his
lower limbs twitch and jerk, then he gets out of bed and walks — tries
to walk it off. This comes out in the proving of Argentum nictricum,
but it belongs as much to Argentum met., and Argentum met. has long
cured it. In Hahnemann’s study of the remedy he lays down the im-
portance of shock on going to sleep. Shocks in the limbs. But it is
an electric shock that causes the whole body to jerk. Anxious about
the health. Thinks he is certainly breaking down,'' for he is growing
weaker. He cannot walk, though he is growing increasingly restless.
He cannot exercise mentally or physically without distress. From-
meditation or as soon as he enters a warm room he becomes dizzy —
and that is an exception belonging to a few of the head troubles and
the sensorium ; he usually is sensitive to cold. In the house when the
room is close he becomes dizzy.

It has been an astonishing feature in this remedy that precisely at
the hour of noon a great many troubles come on, and the pains and
aches. Chills. Headaches. Pains in the ovary at noon. Dizziness
with vertigo as if intoxicated. The headaches arc frontal and occipital.
One-sided brain affection. One-sided headaches. Violent neuralgia
in the head upon one side at a time, as if deep in the brain, as if in-
volving one-half of the brain. Mostly the headaches have been on the
right side — the one-sided headaches. Those broken down patients that
have become prostrated and over-wrought by exposure to the sun.
Upon the scalp, the ears, here and there upon the body, itching places.
Itching and burning, like frost bite. It has an itching and burning
like Agaricus, in the toes, in the ears, and he scratches the part, and
scratching does not relieve it until the skin is off, until it oozes, but no
relief from scratching. Rawness in the ears, kept up by constantly
boring and scratching in the ears. Scratching the skin off because of
the tingling, itching and burning.

Another strange feature is that about the eyes Silver affects the lids
more than the globe. It affects the sight, producing dimness of vision,
and loss of vision ; but it produces infiltration of the lids, thickening
of the lids until they are almost as hard as cartilage. The mucous
membrane is infiltrated and hard, and the eyelids cannot be opened.
They spasmodically close, they cannot be pulled apart except by vio-
lence. It is a blepharitis, with thickening and infiltration. Copious



AHCENTITM METaLlICUM


discharge. Now, as we strike this as a catarrhal region, let me say
that all through the remedy we will find passive catarrhal discharges.
In some instances thick and yellow, but at the same time passive, a
passive state of the mucous membrane. But the characteristic, the
principal discharge of Argentum met. is gray, thick, tenacious mucus.
He expectorates from the lungs — and from the air passages, from the
trachea and from the larynx, gray mucus. Gray mucus from the va*
gina, gray mucus from the urethra, gray mucus from the eyes. Only
in a few instances does it have yellow discharges. When ulceration
takes place, as in the larynx and on the eyelids, we have from this
ulceration thick, yellow discharges ; but from the ulcerated mucous
surfaces it will generally be found to be gray, except in the urethra.
It has cured old cases of chronic gonorrhoea. If we get the general
character of the remedy we know what to expect when it goes to each
region. If we do not know the general character of a remedy we do
not know what to expect ; and if we get into a region where we have
the very opposite of it we know then that that is a particular, and does
not conform to its generals. But first of all we have to single out what
is general, what may be expected, what belongs to the nature of the
remedy, so that when we see its opposites we may recognize it and
know it as an opposite, as a particular, and as an exception. Here is
one of the characteristic features of Argentum itching. '‘Scratching
until bleeding, in the ear." Now, this itching involves the whole out-
side ear, and extends into tjic ear, to he scratches the ear until it is
red, and swollen, and bleeds. The cartilage of that car is lumpy and
nodular ; is infiltrated. Tire cartilages of the nose are also infiltrated.
Argentum met. cures many of these cases that are operated on when
they have some portion of the inside of the nose removed by the
surgeon, so that the patient can breathe better. “Thickening of the
bones in the nose, the thickening and building up of the mucous mem-
brane and the cellular tissue in the nasal passages." Argentum met. is
often indicated in such cases. This remedy has a very decided action.
Infiltrations go on thickening and hardening, and then we have scrum
in joints. This is one of the most improtant remedies to know in the
necrosis of cartilages everywhere in the body. But with it must go
such nervous and mental symptoms as the remedy has, such as I have
described. The patient looks sickly, pale, careworn, tired. A broken
down patient. An Argentum met. patient is a sickly one who should
have had a homoeopathic doctor years ago, but one who can be patched
up and benefited now if he has not gone too far.

“Painful tension and drawing in the throat. Throat feels raw and
sore during expiration." Tliis is extended into the larynx. “Painful
soreness from breathing. Rawness from coughing in the larynx.
Great quantities of gray mucus expectorated easily. Tension in the

^5



ARGENTUM METALUCtn^J


U4

fauces on the right side.”

Argentum met. has abdominal troubles. Bruised, sore feelings in
the abdomen. If these progress from a catarrhal inflammation of the
mucous membranes to a general congestion of all the tissues in the
abdomen, diarrhoea comes on, or constipation of the most inveterate
character, tuberculosis of the mesenteric glands, emaciation, weakness,
trembling. Paralytic feelings here and there in the body. Painful
soreness in the whole abdomen in connection with the urinary troubles.
It has a low form of tissue making, such as tuberculosis, cancerous
affections, infiltrations, such as we have mentioned. Dry stool, like
sand. Undigested stool ; very offensive. Catarrhal inflammation of
the mucous membranes of the urinary passages, the whole urinary
tract. It cures albuminuria ; it cures diabetes, with sugar in the urine ;
and many of the broken-down conditions of the kidneys. Low,
broken-down constittitions. Enormous quantities of whey-like urine.
A copious flow of urine.

Children lose the urine in sleep. Broken-down, nervous constitu-
tions lose the urine in sleep.

It has a very decided action upon the genitalia of both male and
female. In tlic male it especially affects the testes and the mucous
tract. It infiltrates the testes, producing hardness. In the text it
reads, “crushed pain the right testicle.” “Clothing increases pain
on walking.” Inflammation with infiltration. Chronic orchitis. It
has cured a very suspicious testicle believed to l)e a cancerous affection,
which began in the epididymus, following a gonorrhoea. Inflamma-
tion, great hardness, pain, swelling, burning and stinging.

Another symptom here is of great importance: “Yellowish-greenish
gonorrhoea of an indolent character from the beginning, of eight
months’ standing.” That clinical symptom has been verified. Now,
it is a natural feature of gonorrhoea for the discharge to be yellow, or
yellowish-green, and thick in the early stage, for it then to become
lighter and lighter until it is whitish thick or thin, growing lighter in
.character until it becomes white and gleety. Argentum met. is the
remedy when the discharge remains yellow. The pain has all ceased,
and generally when the pain ceases the discharge soon begins to be
lighter, but in the Argentum met. cases the pain ceases, it becomes a
passive discharge, the urethra loses its sensitiveness to pain, and the
mucous membrane loses its sensation to a great extent, but the thick
greenish or yellowish discharge remains. Now, in these thick passive
discharges that are long-standing, old cases, we are very much troubled
to find remedies. These old stubborn cases that still remain yellow,
and still remain thick. 'They will not yield to ordinary remedies — they
come under a peculiar class of remedies. Argentum met.. Alumina,
Alutnen, SulphuT. Ones not usually thought of in the early, period.



ARGENTUM METAU.ICUM


”5

but the general constitutional state of the patient forms the character
of his symptoms.

In the female we have ovarian troubles, inhltration, hardness, cystic
troubles, cystic ovaries, that are cured by this remedy ; ovarian tumors ;
very large, hard indurated ovaries — especially the left. The right
testicle, the left ovary. Pain in the left ovary and back. Prolapsus,
with pain in left ovary. Pain in the small of the back while sitting.
The cures have been predominantly of the left ovary, although it cures
complaints of both.

Another grand fetaure found in this remedy is weakness, relaxation
of muscles through the whole body ; trembling ; and now, if that
thought is applied — if that feature of the remedy is observed in the
pelvic organs — it will be seen that those muscles that hold up the uterus,
the broad ligament, etc., are in a state of relaxation, they allow the
uterus to sag. In other words, we get prolapsus. You will be aston-
ished to know that homoeopathic remedies are wonderful in their ability
to create tonicity, and thereby restore the prolapsed uterus to its nor-
mal position, and to remove the dragging down feeling women gener-
ally describe, a sensation as if the inner parts were being forced out.
All of these arc sensations that accompany a prolapsus. Argentum is
one of the medicines. In fact, the whole pelvic system is engorged,
increased in weight ; tissues infiltrated likely to be hardened. Cervix
congested and indurated. Takes on ulceration. Greatly enlarged,
congested. It has been a palHative medicine in epithelioma of the cer-
vix, with burning, stinging piains, copious, putrid, yellowish-green and
bloody discharge. It has cured a tendency to menorrhagia, copious
menstrual flow ; the relaxation that must be present in haemorrhages
will soon be overcome when the symptoms agree, when the general
state is present. Ulcer of the uterus ; discharge purulent, ichorous.
“Sometimes bloody water, with unbearable stench.” It is a medicine
increased in weight ; tissues infiltrated likely to be hardened. Cervix
“Neck of the uterus very much swollen, presented a spongy mass,
deeply corroded with ulcers in different directions.” Where it w'as
given in case of scirrhus of the uterus it says. “In less than three days
foul smell was lost entirely.” When a remedy acts in that manner it
actually stops the growth. In fact, a cancerous state that would go
on to its termination in fourteen to sixeen months will go two or three
years and die patient remain comfortable. The remedy that is indi-
cated stops the ulceration, it checks the destruction, and keeps the pa-
tient comfortable and with her friends for years. In cancerous affec-
tions the state of life is very low. The state of order is generally be-
yond restoration.

Then we come to a state of the larynx. It is a wonderful laryn-
geal inedicine. Loss of voice with inflammation, from overuse of the



ARGENTUM METALLICUM


I l6

voice, sucli as occurs in singers and talkers. One who b compelled to
use the larynx much. It is then a paralytic weakness of the vocal
cords* Running all through this remedy there is aggravation from
any little prolonged exertion—a paralytic tendency with aggravation
from exertion. So it is in the lungs — in every part of the lx)dy. And
then comes the loss of voice. Now, apply all that we know of its
ability to infiltrate. We have tuberculosis of the larynx. Singers,
public speakers, who arc broken down, nervous, of poor digestion, bad
inheritance, take on tuberculosis of the larynx, and the voice is lost.
Ulceration follows. And this trouble finally .goes into the lungs.
They emaciate and get night sweats. “Loss of voice.” Generally of
a painful character.

Again, colds settle in the larynx. “Cannot vspeak a loud word ; con-
stant tickling in the larynx, provoking cough.’’ Rawness and soreness
in upper part of larynx. Laughing aggravates the coughing — laugh-
ing will cause tickling in the larynx, and he will scrape out quantities
of gray mucus. If the irritation is in the smaller air passages, in the
lungs, laughter will set him to coughing, and he will scrape out gray
mucus. “Over the bifurcation of trachea, a raw spot ; when using the
voice, talking, laughing, or singing.” In the middle of the chest a
raw sensation. “Roughness and hoarseness of the voice. Phthisis of
the larynx in those withered young people ; a young man w^hen he is
not more than twenty five looks to be fifty. Many wrinkles as though
he had had many cares. Has a dry? cough ; gets up a little gray mucus.
Yet he may be somewhat wiry, getting about fairly well. Has in-
herited phthisis. The cough is a deep cough, is aggravated from
laughing, talking and in a warm room. Laughing causes cough and
causes mucus in the larynx. This remedy will turn aside this threat-
ening phthisis, this dry teasing cough. A little dry, hacking cough
especially comes under this remedy. In no instance are we likely to
have those violent spasmodic shaking coughs, such as we find in Bry.
When coughing a sore feeling in the larynx. “The cough is accom-
panied with an easy expectoration.” He does not usually cough so
much to get up the mucus as he docs to relieve a little irritation ; but
when there is mucus it generally comes up easily. It is not so diffi-
cult to detach as we find in many remedies. “Easily detached mucus
in the larynx.” He simply scrapes it out by an effort of the larynx.
Cough and scraping of the larynx during the daytime and evening,
worse in a warm room and better in the open air and from motion.

It has a sense of weakness of the chest. There are two remedies
having this weakness of the chest and you cannot easily tell them
apart. Weak voice, weak chest ; a feeling that it is so difficult to
breathe, and so difficult to talk, and so difficult to cough, because the
muscles of the chest feel so weak, These two medicines arc Argentum



ARGENTUM MTRICUM


met. and Stannutri. Great weakness of the muscles of the chest. The
patient dwells upon it much, and it is a weakness far beyond w^hat can
be accounted for in tuberculosis, a sense of muscular weakness in the
chest. A paralytic weakness of the chest. Of course, this is wholly
different from the Antimonium tori., which has a dreadful weakness
of the chest, but in that remedy you will remember it is in the acute
affections. It is suitable in lingering complaints, sickness of long
standing, so that “great weakness of the chest/' means that which I
have tried to describe and it is that which patients will often fail in
their efforts to descril)c. “Doctor, I feel so weak in the chest.”

Now, this remedy is full of cardiac disturbances. Palpitation when
lying on the back. “A sense of trembling in the chest,” A sense of
quivering, fluttering, or trembling, as it will be described by the dif-
ferent patients, trembling in the chest. Tliat tremulous weakness of
the whole body, hands and feet ; palpitation with general trembling is
strong in this remedy. “Frequent palpitation. During pregnancy,
palpitation. Palpitation at night. Palpitation awssociated with head-
aches.” With general weakness. Gradually increasing weakness.
From his general weakness the knees knock together when walking.
Trembling in the knees with palpitation and general weakness. The
limbs become stiff. ‘'Numbness in the limbs, as if asleep.'" Loss of
power. Many of the complaints are increased during rest. Pain in
the back and limbs while sitting, better while walking. All the nerv-
ous excitement that is possible in remedies comes up in this remedy.

ARGENTUM NITRICUM

We shall find by examining the symptoms of this remedy that the
intellectual feature predominates, as in the metal ; that the affections
are disturbed only in a limited way. There is a predominance of men-
tal symptoms. First of all, disturbance in the memory, disturbance
of reason, he becomes most irrational in his explanations of his actions
and methods. He is irrational and does strange things and comes to
strange conclusions ; does foolish things. He has all sorts of imag-
inations, illusions, hallucinations. He is tormented in his mind by the
inflowing of troublesome thoughts, and especially at night his thoughts
torment him to the extent that he is extremely anxious, and this puts
him in a hurry and in a fidget, and he goes out and walks and walks,
and the faster he walks the faster he thinks he must walk, and he walks
till fatigued. Strange notions and ideas and fears come into his mind.
He has an impulse that he is going to have a fit or that he is going
to have a sickness. A strange thought comes into his mind that if he
goes past a certain corner of the street he will create a sensation, will
fall down and have a fit, and to avoid that he will go around the block.



ARGENTUM NITRICUM


1 18

he avoids going past that comer for fear he will do something strange.
He is so reduced in his mental state that he admits into the mind all
sorts of impulses. There is inflowing of strange thoughts into his
mind, and when crossing a bridge or high place the thought that he
might kill himself, or perhaps he might jump off, or what if he should
jump off, and sometimes the actual impulse comes to jump off the
bridge into the water. When looking out of a window the thought
comes to his mind what an awful thing it would be to jump out of the
window', and sometimes the impulse comes to actually jump out of the
window\ There is fear of death, the over-anxious state, that death is
near, and often at times like Aconite he predicts the moment he is
going to die. Looking forward to times he is anxious. When looking
forward to something that he is about to do, or that he has promised
to do, or in the expectation of things, he is anxious. When about to
meet an engagement he is anxious until the time comes. If he is about
to take a railroad journey he is anxious, full of fear and anxiety and
tremulous nervousness iintill he is on the car going and then it passes
away. If he is about to meet a certain person on the street corner he
is anxious and breaks out often in a sweat from anxiety until it is
over with. Not only is this particular symptom present, but the symp-
toms come on as a result of his anxiety. He is excitable, angers eas-
ily, and as a result of this pain comes. When he becomes angry he
becomes vehement and pain in the head comes on ; cough, pain in the
chest and weakness follow this anger. The anxiety he has from these
circumstances will bring on complaints. When he is going anywhere,
going to a wxdding, or to the opera, or any unusual event, it is attended
with anxiety, fear and diarrhoea. So it is we have in this a wonderful
medicine. It says in the text that he gave all sons of queer reasons
for his strange conduct, endeavoring to cover up, as it were, his fool-
ishness which he himself realizes. Sadness, melancholy and confusion.
Defective memory. The sight of high houses makes him dizzy, and
his vertigo is increased or comes on from closing the eyes ; with the
vertigo there is buzzing in the ears, great w'eakness and trembling.

Constitutional headaches from brain fag, from exertion of the mind.
In such mental exhaustion, headaches, nervous excitement and trem-
bling, and organic troubles of the heart and liver in business men, in
students, in brain workers, in those subject to long excitement, in act-
ors who have kept up a long time the excitement of appearing well in
public. This state of mind progress until there is a general state of
weakness ; with trembling, paralysis, numbness, disturbed functions,
palpitation, throbbing all over the body, with the mental state. The
nervous state , continues until there is disorder of all the organs of the
body. The stomach refuses to digest, everything taken seems to go
into gas, and he becomes distended and suffers with pain. The circu-



ARGENTUM NITRICUM


119

Ifttion seems to be greatly disturbed in addition to tlie palpitation.
Fulness of the blood vessels and throbbing all over the body. The
blood vessels become diseased. Atheromatous degeneration and dila-
tation of the veins, varicose veins. Upon the mucous membranes and
skin ulceration, and this progresses and the heart becomes increasingly
feeble, and the extiemities become cold and blue and the lips are cold
and blue, with aggravation of all these complaints from mental excite-
ment, from going to the opera, from meeting a friend, from keeping
an engagement. The medicine is pre-eminently a nervous one, full of
spinal symptoms, rending, tearing pains down the extremities ; such
pains are found in locomotor ataxia, fulgurating, shooting pains.
There is one grand feature running through this patient modifying
most of his symptoms, with few exceptions, and that is that he is like
a Pulsatilla patient ; he wants cold air, cold drinks, cold things ; he
wants ice, ice cream ; wants tlie head in the cold air ; suffocates in a
warm room. He suffocates from warm clothing, wants the door and
windows open ; cannot breathe in a stuffy room, suffocates if other
people are in the room ; cannot go to church or to the opera, cannot
go to places of amusement or gatherings, must stay at home. He
dreads a crowd, dreads certain places.

Everywhere tve find ulceration, but particularly upon the mucous
ntembrane. The throat has ulcers in it ; ulceration of the eyelids, and
of the cornea ; ulceration of the bladder. Ulcers of the uterus, of the
vagina and of the external soft parts. This tendency of ulcerate seems
rather strange, peculiar that it should have in its pathogenesis such a
tendency, when the old school has been using it to cauterize ulcers, and
yet it heals them up. We know that Phosphorus will burn and it
intensifies the tendency to ulcerate, makes the ulcer go deeper, while
Argentum nitricum sets it Healing. Upon mucous membranes we find
red elevations, granulations, enlargement of vessels, purplish aspect.
Sensitive ulcers. The complaints in W’^omen come on before and dur-
ing the menstrual period. It is a favorable time for all her com-
plaints to be aggravated ; if she have Argentum nitricum symptoms
they are likely to be at their worst at this time. She suffers from most
violent dysmenorrhoea, from nervous excitement, from hysterical mani-
festations, and an unusually increased flow. A tendency to hsemor-
rhages belongs to this remedy. The ulcers bleed ; there is bleeding from
the nose, bleeding from the chest, the urine is bloody ; leucorrhoea
copious, menstrual flow copious ; menorrhagia ; bleeding from the mu-
cous membranes generally, from the uterus. Vomiting of blood. It
has cured prolonged and most inveterate ulceration of the stomach,
when there has been vomiting of blood.

The aggravation at the menstrual period is a strong feature and she
is free from symptoms during the interim. The palpitation, the trem-



120


AflCKNTUM NITRICUM


hling, the coldness of the surface, though desiring cold open air, blue-
ness of the lips, coldness of the extremities, blueness and coldness of
the lower extremities to the knees and of the hands and arms to the
elbows, and yet the patient wants cool things, wants something cold.
This may not be seen at any other time. Here is a striking feature.
“Patient cannot lie on the right side because it brings on so much palpi-
tation.'’ We have plenty of remedies with palpitation worse lying on the
right side are rare {Ahimen, Badiaga, Kalmia, Kali n,, Lil, t,, Platina,
Spong,). It is uncommon, strange, rare and peculiar. It is such a
strong feature in this remedy that to a great extent it becomes quite
general, because it is a heart symptom and is intermingled with the
general symptoms. With this sensitiveness he is compelled to get into
some other position ; must get up and walk, because of lying on the
right side. The patient will say he throbs from head to foot while
lying on the right side. Do not forget in this medicine all these gen-
eral things when we come to apply them in their particulars and the
particulars in the generals. Do not forget that this medicine is one
of the most flatulent medicines in the books. He is distended to burst-
ing ; gets scarcely any relief from passing flatus or eructations.

He is possessed with the distressing idea that all his undertakings
■must fail. When walking he becomes faint with anxiety which makes
him walk faster. Everywhere you will find the intellectual symptoms
predominant.

The headaches are of a congestive character ; considerable throbbing,
ameliorated by cold, and tight bandaging. Headache from mental ex-
ertion, from excitement, with vertigo, nausea and vomiting. Pains in
the right side of the head, jagging, cutting, stitching, pulsating. Head
feels much enlarged.

The eye symptoms are too numerous to mention. They are of a
general character such as we find in catarrhal conditions with ulcera-
tion, relieved by cold. All of the eye symptoms are worse in a warm
room, worse from sitting by the fire. Wants cold applications, cold
washing. Intense photophobia ; aversion to light, and this is worse in
a warm room ; wants it cold, wants it dark. There is much swelling
and tumefaction of the blood vessels of the eye, and redness, and it has
a raw denuded excoriated appearance. “Chemosis with strangulated
vessels.” “Cornea opaque.” “Ulceration of cornea in new-born in-
fants ; profuse purulent discharge from the lids," and this is what the
“Regulars" in former days and almost up to date have been using for
the eyes, treating them with Argentum nitricum. Photophobia: after
long looking at fine sewing, fine print. In one who has suddenly taken
on far sightedness, it has come on as a congestive condition ; not of
old age but something that should be cured. All at once he cannot
see print at the usual distance but must hold it away off ; if it occurs



ARGENTUM NITRICUM


i2i

in some one twenty-five years of age or in a child. At close distance
it is indistinguishable. Such a disturbance of accommodation produc-
ing far sightedness it has caused and cured. “CEdcma of lids/' etc.

CEdema is a word which runs through the remedy. That is to say,
it has a dropsical state wherever dropsy may occur.

The face is the next place we find particulars worthy of note,
‘Tace: sweat stood in drops on his face.” “Face sunken, pale, bluish.”
“Looks prematurely old.” “Face blue, heavy breathing, pulseless.”

Then come the throat symptoms. Another feature of this remedy
is its general tendency to produce warts. There is a tendency to favor
the growth of warts and in the throat tliere are little wart-like growths ;
polypoid growths in the tliroat and about the genitals and anus ; hence
Its great use in sycotic constitutions. It has all the discharge neces-
sary to its use in the sycotic constitution.

“Felt as if he had a stick in the throat when swallowing.” At once
you will sec its close relation to Hepar, In inflammatory conditions
of the throat with ulceration. In Argentum nitricum he wants to be
in a cold room, wants cold air, and to swallow cold things. In Hepar
he wants warm things to drink, warm clothing, warm room, and can-
not put even his hand out of bed or his throat will begin paining him.
Things, you see, just exactly opposite, but they botlr have “sticks” in
the throat. In dry chronic catarrh Alumina and Natrum muriaticum
have “sticks” in the throat ; .but in red throat with tumefaction and
pain these two remedies give no relief, the former two are better.
“Sticks” in the throat like fish-bones. Nitric acid, Hepar and Ar-
gentum nitricum are the most striking remedies for the fish-bone sen-
sation. Many remedies have sticking in the throat, but these arc the
most prominent. We know how Argentum nitricum has been used
for ulceration in the throat, and here it comes in as one of the most
useful remedies in congestion of the throat of long standing. Ca-
tarrhs with loss of voice. Warty growths, condylomata, etc. Loss
of voice, tumefaction of the mucous membrane round about the vocal
cords and paresis of the vocal cords. Condylomata on the vocal cords.

“Loss of appetite” and refuses drink. This is another feature.
Desires sugar. He feels tliat he must have it and it makes him sick,
brings on eructations, increased flatulence, sour stomach. He cannot
digest it ; it acts like a physic and brings on a diarrhoea. So marked
is the aggravation from sugar that the nursing infant will get a green
diarrhoea if the mother eats candy. Then is it astonishing that the
baby can get a dynamized dose from the mother, when the dynamized
dose can travel like lightning, and sugar takes all day to be digested
and dynamized and fed as poison to the baby ? I remember a case that
I figured and figured on. The baby had Mercurial stools, sure enough,
they were grass green. Well Chamomilla has grass green stools and

i6



12:2


argentum NITRICUM


Arsenicum and Mercurius and lots of remedies have grass green stools.
Routinist that I was in those days I could not get anything but Mer-
curius out of it, and although the baby had gotten Merc,, Ars, and
Cham, there was no relief, until I found that the mother had been eat-
ing candy. When she was asked if she ate sweet things, sugar, etc.,
she said, “Oh, no.” “Why, yes, you do,” said the husband ; “I bring
you home a pound of candy every day. What do you do with it ?’
“Oh, that was nothing,” she replied. But the baby did not get well
until it got Argentum nitricum and the mother stopped eating sugar.
^'Irresistible desire for sugar.*' Quite a number of medicines have
craving for sweets, but many of them can eat sweets with impunity.
It is always a peculiar thing when one of the articles of diet, such as
milk, sugar, salt, starch, etc., and the things of the table make sick.
When it is said that “I cannot cat a leaspoonful of anything with
starch, egg or sugar in it without being sick,” it is always strange and
peculiar, because it is not something that comes in only as a craving
and affecting the stomach, but it affects the whole patient. The pa-
tient says: “1 become sick,” and hences it becomes a general. When
the patient gets a diarrhoea from eating sugar it is not merely a local
and particular symptom, because the whole patient is sick before the
diarrhoea begins ; the diarrlioea is the outcome. Hence as it is a gen-
eral it is necessary that it should be examined into.

“The vomited substances tinge the bedding black.” Incessant vom-
iting of food. He sometimes spits up food by the mouthful until the
stomach is empty. Eructations of air accompanied by a mouthful of
undigested food, like Phosphorus and Ferrum. Spitting it up ; well-
ing up in mouthfuls.

“Eructations relieve.” “Flatulence passes upwards, in quantities.”
Frequent eructations. Eructations do not always relieve. It is more
like China in its eructation. The eructations of Cargo veg, relieve
for some time and he feels better. This is the way with Carbo veg, ;
he is distended almost to bursting and he cannot get up any wind, but
finally after much pain and distension it wells up in empty eructations
and then he gets relief. With China he is distended, and every little
while getting up gas, but with no relief. It docs not seem to help, and
sometimes patients will say they seem to get worse after it. So it is
with Argentum nitricum at times. It evidently has both. “Most gas-
tric ailments are accompanied by belching.” “Belching difficult ; finally
air rushes out with great violence.” “Nausea after every meal; nausea
with troublesome efforts to vomit.” I have seen these Argentum
nitricum patients vomiting and purging in the same moment, not vom-
iting one second and purging the next, but gushing out both ways with
great exhaustion like cholera morbus, so relaxed, prostrated and weak.
•'Vomit; streaked brown, flocculent, like coffee grounds.”



ARGENTUM NITRICUM


123


The stomach, liver and abdomen are full of pain. The abdomen
distended with all this troublesome flatulence. Inflammation of the
stomach, ulceration of the stomach, most troublesome diarrhoea. Diar*
rhoea with copious flatus. Stool with copious flatus in nursing children,
with tormina and viscous sanguinolent stools and tenesmus. “Diar-
rhoea of children after weaning.*' Another feature in connection with
the diarrhoea and dysentery is that casts are passed with the stool, like
diphtheritic membrane or deposit ; casts like the rectum, strings of
membrane, come with the stool. Stools of green, foetid mucus with
noisy flatus at night.

''Urine passed unconsciously and uninterruptedly.’* “Urging to
urinate ; the urine passes less easily and freely.” “Bleeding of the
urethra ; painful erections ; gonorrhoea.” It has most painful gonor-
rhoea with painful erections in the male. In the female the vagina is
extremely sore, and the external soft parts arc swollen ; tumefaction.
Vagina feels sore on urinating ; bloody discharge. In the male, orchitis
from suppressed discharge. In the female, ovaritis, inflammation of
all the pelvic organs. Great soreness all over the pelvis. Bleeding
from the vagina. Ulceration of the uterus. Coition is painful or im-
possible. “Pains like sticks or slivers in and about the womb,*' etc.
This sensation prevails wherever there are ulcers. “Prolapsus with
ulceration of the os or cervix/* Haemorrhage of short duration ; shoot-
ing pains through abdomen and stomach. Metrorrhagia. Complaints
of nervous women and at the menstrual period. Menses suppressed
or scanty. Complaints during pregnancy.

Under the symptoms of the heart and pulse: “Anxiety with palpi-
tation and throbbing through the whole body.” “Violent palpitation
from the slightest mental emotion or sudden muscular exertion. Pal-
pitation obliges her to press hand hard against heart for relief. Heart’s
action irregular, intermittent,” etc.

Pain in the lumbar region comes on while sitting, but is better when
standing and walking. Pain in the back from flatulence. Sore pain
in the spine. Pain in back at night. Great weight in the lumbar re-
gion. It is a very useful remedy in locomotor ataxia.

Great restlessness. The nervous symptoms are very numerous.
Periodical trembling of the body. Chorea, with tearing in the legs.
Convulsions preceded by great restlessness. Neiwous, faintish, tremu-
lous sensation, etc.

The sleep symptoms are quite general. Distressing nightmares.
The dreams are horrible. Wakens in excitement and with starting.
All sorts of strange, horrible things in sleep. Dreams of vicious and
violent things, and that everything is going to happen to him. Dreams
of departed friends, etc.

On waking in the morning limbs feel bruised ; aching in the chest,



124


ARNICA MONTANA


etc. Cannot sleep at night because he is so nervous.

Erysipelatous bed sores. While riding, palpitation and anxiety com-
pelling him to get out of the wagon and walk, and that real fast.

Purplish rash, such as appears in the most serious forms of scarlet
fever and zymotic diseases.

Its most natural antidote is Natrum muriaticum. When you have
the ulceration where the throat has been cauterized or the cervix uteri
or eyelids have been cauterized by Nitrate of Silver study Natrum mur.
and sec if the symptoms of the case would not justify its administra-
tion. It is the most common natural antidote for these vicious prac-
tices.


ARNICA MONTANA

The Arnica patient is morose, wants to be let alone, does not want
to be talked to, does not want to l>e approached. He does not want
to be approached, both because he does not wish to enter into conver-
sation, a mental state, and also because he does not wish to be touched
on account of the great bodily soreness. These are the two most
striking things in this medicine. Irritable, morose, sad, fearful, easily
frightened, imagines all sorts of things, especially that he has heart
disease, or that he will mortify, or that some deep-seated trouble is
upon him. Full of nightmare, dreadful dreams, dreams of muddy
water, robbers, etc. Horrors in the night. He frequently rouses up
in the night, grasps at the heart, has the appearance of great horror,
fears some dreadful thing will happen. A sudden fear of death comes
on at this time, rousing him up in the niglit ; he grasps at the heart, and
thinks he is going to die suddenly. He is full of dreadful anguish,
but finally he comes to himself, lies down and goes off into a sleep of
terror, jumps up again with the fear of sudden death and says: ‘'Send
for a doctor at once.’' This is repeated night after night in persons
who are fairly well in the daytime, who have no sympathy because

there seems to be no reality in their sickness, only a mental state. It

is also seen in persons who have gone through a railroad accident, or
through some shock, who are sore and bruised from injury. They

rouse up in the night with a fear of sudden death, with an expression

of terror ; the horrors they really went through are repeated. This is
similar to Opium, only the Opium fear remains, even in the day time.
Arnica dreams of it.

When sick in bed afflicted with a zymotic disease, with violent fever,
or with fever after an accident or injury, he becomes greatly prostrated,
stupid and unconscious. He can be aroused and will answer a ques-
tion correctly, but goes into a stupor, or he hesitates about a
word and is unable to find correct words when trying to answer and



ARNICA MONTANA


1^5

goes back into the coma. When roused up, he looks at the doctor and
says : “I do not want you ; I did not send for you ; I am not sick ; I
don t need a doctor. He will say this even when he is seriously ill.
I have seen an Arnica patient lie back upon his pillow after emptying
the stomach of a black fluid like blood, seriously ill, with the face mot-
tled, in zymotic sickness or such as threaten malignant chill, that one
would think he was almost going to die, look up and say: ‘‘I am not
sick ; I did not send for you ; go home.” Yet when in a state of health
he was friendly, kind-hearted, knew me well, glad to shake hands with
me ; but now he is irritated at seeing me there and insists there is noth-
ing the matter with him. Such is the “shock"’ state, almost a delirium.
After finishing such a sentence he will lie down in a stupor, will lie in
bed drawn up in a heap and merely groan when spoken to. He wants
to be left alone, does not want to be bothered, does not want to be
talked to. That state ushers in complaints after a shock that has
shaken the whole system, that has disturbed the circulation. When a
symptomatic typhoid is coming on, i.c., when an intermittent or re-
mittent is taking on symptoms that are typhoid in character, when the
tongue becomes shiny, and sordes appear about the teeth and lips, w'hen
there is sinking, and soreness all over the body, there are times when
this mental state that I am describing will appear and the patient must
have Arnica. Arnica will interrupt the progress and prevent a typhoid
state. Arnica is sometimes suitable to the scarlet fever, when the
eruption does not come out, in those severe forms when the body is
dusky, mottled and covered with red spots ; the patient is constantly
turning and that mental state is coming on with moroseness, and
stupidity. It is a wonderful remedy, a misunderstood remedy, a mis-
used remedy, because it is almost limited to bruises. It is one of the
sheet anchors in certain seasons, in the malarial valleys of the West,
for intermittent fever. In congestive chills, in those dreadful attacks
with prostration, stupor, mottled skin, with congestion that comes on
suddenly, with anxiety. The doctors know these fevers, they dread
them, and can only cope with them by using such remedies as Arnica
and Lachesis and other deep-acting medicines. It is not true that these
patients must have Quinine. For many years I practiced among these
cases, and I have seen numerous congestive chills and had no need for
Quinine. I would rather have my repertory and a few potencies than
all the Quinine in the drug stores. The sugar pills cure safely, per-
manently and gently, while the Quinine never cures, but suppresses,
and there is nothing in the after history of that patient drugged with
Quinine and Arsenic but congestion and violence so long as he lives.

“Horror of instant death, with cardiac distress in night.” From
that it spreads on throughout the system, but that horror of instant
death is a striking feature and it comes on regardless of heart disease.



126


ARNICA MONTANA


A horror in the night when there is nothing to come upon the patient ;
a horrible congestion, which affects especially the cerebellum and upper
part of the spinal cord.

‘‘Stupor with involuntary discharges/’ “Coma, insensibility/’
‘‘Lies as if dcad.“ These symptoms come in the low forms of disease,
in the typhoid type of disease. Many of the remittent fevers, if badly
treated, or permitted to run their course under bad nursing, will turn
into a continued fever. While the true idiopathic typhoid comes on
after many weeks of gradual decline, a symptomatic typhoid may come
on suddenly, and it has symptoms of graver form than the ordinary
typhoid. The idiopathic typhoid will seldom kill and will generally
run to to a favourable termination, if the doctor stays at hime. This
remedy is full of delirium in these low types of fever, even deliriumi
like delirium tremens, “Hopelessness ; indifference/’ “Hypochondri-
acal anxiety, peevishness.” “Fears being struck by those coming
towards him.” That is both bodily and mental.

Now, with this mental state thoroughly in mind, we are prepared
to take up the general physical state, which has in all complaints, all
over the body a feeling as if bruised. It is not strange that Arnica
is used for bruises, but it is very foolish to put it on the outside and
to rub it on in the form of the tincture. It produces in its pathogenesis
mottled spots, like bruises. If you take Arnica internally, in large
doses, you will have mottled spots, bluish spots, which become yellow-
ish, due to ecchymoscs, from extravasations of the smaller capillaries.
This is, to a certain extent, what takes place in bruising. It is an
extravasation of blood from the capillaries, and sometimes from the
larger vessels. But all over the body he is sore and bruised, as if ho
had been beaten. If you watch an Arnica patient in order to get the
external manifestations of his state, you will see him turning and mov-
ing. You will at once ask yourself. Why is he restless ? and if you
compare remedies in your mind, you will say, He is like Rhus tox. ;
he stays in a place a little while and then he moves. No matter if he
is only scmi-conscious. you will see him make a little turn, part way
over, and then a little further over, and so on until he is over on the
other side. Then he commences again, and he will shift a little and
a little, and so he turns from side to side. The question is, why does
he move so, why is he restless ? It is an important matter to solve.
We notice the awful anxiety of the Arsenicum patient that keeps him
moving all the time. We notice the painful uneasiness felt all over the
body with the Rhus patient so that he cannot keep still. The Arnica
patient is so sore that he can lie on one part only a little while, and
then he must get off that part or to the other side. So if we ask him,
''Why do you move so ?” he will tell us that the bed feels hard. That
Is one way of telling that the body is sore. A more intelligent individ-



ARKICA MONTANA


127


ual will say it is because he is so sore and feels as if bruised and beaten,
and he wants to get into a new place. This state of soreness is pres-
ent if it be a symptomatic typhoid, an intermittent fever, a remittent
fever, or after an injury when he is really bruised all over. You get
the same continual uneasiness and motion, moving every minute. He
moves and thinks that now he will be comfortable, but he is comfort-
able only for a second. The soreness increases the longer he lies, and
becomes so great that he is forced to move. With Rhus tox, the longer
he lies the more restless he grows and the more he aches, until he feels
as if he will fly if he does not move. With Rhus tox, the uneasiness
passes off after moving, and with Arnica the soreness passes off if he
gets into a new place. With Arsenicum you see him moving about and
look wild, and he is anxious, and this anxiety forces him to move, and
he gets no rest, for he keeps going. The Rhus tox. and Arnica patients
get better from every little motion.

The Arnica patient bleeds easily ; his blood vessels seem to be re-
laxed, and extravasation is easy. Blue spots come easily upon the skin,
and internally the mucous membranes bleed easily. The parts that are
inflamed bleed. He is subject to catarrhal conditions, and if he has
a cough he bleeds easily. The mucus that is hawked out of the chest
and throat is streaked with blood, or dotted with liny pin-head blood
clots. His urine contains blood and there is bleeding from the various
orifices of the body. There is not sufficient tone in the fibres of the
vessel to hold the blood within the vessel walls and they ooze.

All over the body there is a lameness, and soreness, and a feeling as
if bruised ; a rheumatic lameness ; the joints are swollen, sore and lame.
If an acute disease becomes more severe, we shall find the mental symp-
toms as described, and there will be an increasing soreness in the mus-
cles. Arnica is very suitable for that sore, bruised condition of the
body, therefore Arnica is a very important remedy in injuries, bruises
and shocks, injuries of joints, injury of the back with lameness and
soreness. In such conditions Arnica becomes one of the first remedies,
and unless there are general decided symptoms calling for other reme-
dies it should be the first remedy. Arnica will very often take all the
soreness out of a sprained ankle and permit him in a few days to go
walking about, to the surprise of everybody. The black and blue ap-
pearance of sprained joints will go away in a surprisingly short time,
the soreness will disappear, and he will be able to manipulate that joint
with surprising case. I have seen a sprained ankle when it was black
and blue, so swollen that the shoe could not be put on, but after a
dose of Arnica, the swelling disappeared in an astonishing way, the
discoloration faded out and the patient was able to stand on the foot.
No such result can be obtained with the use of Arnica lotion externally.
A high potency of Arnica is most satisfactory in bruises, and when no



1 28


ARNICA MONtANA


decided contra-indication is present Arnica is the first remedy ; but for
the weakness of tendons that follows such a condition Arnica is not
always sufficient, and the Rhits tox, is its natural follower. If the
weakness and tenderness remain in the joints, follow the Rhus with
Calcurea, One will not, of course, give these remedies all on the same
day, and not in the same glass, but will wait until all the good has been
gotten out of the Arnica before following with Rhus, It is quite a
common thing for aching and restlessness and weakness to come into
a part that has been injured, and Rhus is then a suitable remedy ; and
it is quite common fdr a joint that has been badly treated to remain
sore and weak, and then Calcarea comes in as a natural follower of
the Rhus, Now and then we have to resort to Causticum, Staphisagia,
and other remedies, because of some peculiar feature in the case, but
these remedies arc all related more or less to Arnica, Rhus and Cal-
carea, For another class of injuries compare Ledum and Hypericum.

Arnica is useful in some chronic cases ; especially in old cases of
gout. It is quite a common thing for old cases of gout to rouse up
into a new soreness of joints, with great sensitiveness. You will see
the old grandfather sit off in a corner of the room, and if he sees
little Johnnie running towards him, he will say, ‘*Oh, do keep away,
keep away.” Give him a dose of Arnica and he will let Johnnie run
all over him. He does not w^ant to be touched or approached ; he feels
that anything that is coming towards him is going to hurt him. He is
extremely sensitive, his joints arc sore and render, and he is afraid
they will be hurt.

This medicine has erysipelatous inflammation. If you have an ery-
sipelas of the face with the mental state described, with soreness, and
sore, bruised feeling all-over the body, you need not wait longer before
prescribing Arnica. The sore, bruised feeling all over the body, and
the mental state, would decide in favor of Arnica against any medi-
cine. In inflammation of the kidneys and bladder, of the liver, and
even in pneumonia, the mental state and the sore, bruised feeling all
over the body would enable you to do astonishing w’^ork in such cases,
even though Arnica has never produced pneumonia. It has all there
is of the rusty expectoration, with all the soreness of the chest and
catarrhal state, the coughing and gagging, and sore, bruised feeling all
over the body, and then add to this the condition of stupor and the
mental state that belongs to the inflammatory condition of any organ
and is especially strong in this medicine. We do not have to worry
about any particular fineness of dignosis to settle upon Arnica.

Arnica has aversion to meat, broth and milk. There is great thirst at
particular times ; for instance, during the chill of intermittent fever he has
thirst, while at other times he is thirstless. “Vomiting of dark-red coagula,
mouth bitter ; general soreness.’* Vomiting of black, inky substances.



ARNICA MONTANA


129


Arnica is a useful remedy in inflammatory conditions of the abdo-
men, liver, intestines, with tumefaction, tympanites, prostration, tend-
ency to uneasiness, and so sore that he cannot be touched. This state
also comes with typhoid. Do not forget the symptoms of Arnica in
appendicitis. You do not need to run for the surgeon for every case
of appendicitis if you know Bryonia, Rhus tox., Belladonna, Arnica
and similar remedies. The homoeopathic remedy will cure these cases,
and, if you know it, you need never run after the surgeon in appendi-
citis except in recurrent attacks. If you do not know your remedies,
you will succumb to the prevailing notion that it is necessary to open
the abdomen and remove the appendix. It is only deplorable ignor-
ance that causes appendicitis to be surrendered to the knife.

Offensiveness is a feature of Arnica ; there is offensiveness of the
eructations, and the flatus. The stool is horribly offensive. ''Night-
ly diarrhoea.*’ "Stool involuntary during sleep.” "Stools of undi-
gested food, purulent ; bloody, slimy, mucus.** Dark blood, very foetid
stool. Here we see the tendency to oozing from the mucous mem-
branes Black watery stools with black vomit. "Retention of urine
from exertion,** from overwork, from injury, from concussion of the
brain, from some violent accident. The urine is brown, or inky, dark.
"Piercing pains as from knives plunged into the kidneys.” "Urine very
acid, with increase of specific gravity.”

Another feature of Arnica occurs in pregnant women. The extreme
sensitivencvss, soreness or t;ei|derncss throughout the wdiolc body is es-
pecially felt in the abdomiml viscera, in the uterus and pelvic region.
Sensitiveness to the motioii of the foetus, sore and bruised : the mo-
tions of the foetus are very painful and keep her awake all night.
Arnica will remove that soreness and she will not distinguish the
motion of the foetus. It is not an increased motion of the foetus, hut
that she is sensitive to it. "Constant dribbling of urine after labor.”

A general feature also of the remedy is tliat the body is cold and
the head hot ; the whole body and the extremities are cold, but the head
feels hot. This is a marked condition in sudden congestive attacks, in
congestive chill and congestive intermittent fevers. This, sometimes,
is the very beginning of a severe attack when there has been almost
no warning except a night or two of bad dreams and distress, fear-
fulness and stupefaction, with soreness in the body. If he comes out
of this, an increased soreness in the body comes on, which grows worsei
and worse until he is sore and bruished all over. Children going into
severe attacks of infantile fever may threaten convulsions, the head is
hot and the body cold. Most physicians will think of Belladonna,
which has such cold extremities and such a hot head. Do not forget
Arnica, especially in those children who seem to have an aversion to
tcing touchicd, and serwm out every time the mother takes hold of the

n



130


ARSENICUM ALBUM


leg or arm. Look into the history a little and you will see that this is
a soreness, and if you strip the child you may observe dusky spots,
which give an added indication of Arnica.

This is a whooping-cough remedy ; you can easily conjure up what
the indications are for whooping-cough ; aggravation from touch, sore,
bruised condition, spasmodic cough with expectoration of blood, or
dark blood-streaked mucus, or little tiny pin-head dots all through the
mucus. Vomiting of food with black mucus. The mental state of the
child can easily be imagined. The child is cross and fretful. ‘‘Cough
exicited by cries in children when accompanied by anger and tossing
about.” “Paroxysms of cough at night.” “Whooping cough ; child
cries before paioxysms as though in fear of soreness.” You can easily
apply that which we have seen in the remedy to the various diseases
that come on. Stitching pains in whooping cough, pleuritic pains with
catarrh of the chest, with pneumonia or pleurisy, inflammatory condi-
tions. It has also more lingering complaints, “fatty degeneration of the
heart.” Stitches in the cardiac region, stitches from left to right. “Weary,
bruised, sore, great weakness, must lie down, yet bed feels too hard.”

It will be well to read over all these symptoms ; there are numerous
particulars in the remedy, many little symptoms that are of great
interest.

It follows well after Aconite and is complementary to Aconite, Ipe-
cacuanha and Veratrum.

ARSENICUM ALBUM

From the time of Hahnemann to the present day Arsenicum has been
one of the most frequently indicated medicines, and one of the most
extensively used. In the Old School it is most extensively abused, in
the form of Fowler’s solution.

Arsenic affects every part of man : it seems to exaggerate or depress
almost all his faculties, to excite or disturb all his functions. When
all our medicines have been as well proved we will effect wonderful
cures. It is a substance easily proved because of its active nature, and
from its very abuse we have learned much of its general nature.
While Arsenic impresses the whole economy and disturbs all the func-
tions and tissues of man, there are certain prevailing and striking
features in it. Anxiety, restlessness, prostration, burning and cadav-
eric odors are prominent characteristics. The surface of the body is
pale, cold, clammy, and sweating, and the aspect is cadaveric. In
chronic sickness with great debility, anaemia, from long exposure to
malarial influence, in the poorly fed and from syphilis this remedy is
of great service.

The anxiety that is found in Ars. is intermingled with fear, with



ARSENICUM ALBUM


131

impulses, with suicidal inclinations, with sudden freaks and with mania.
It has delusions and various kinds of insanity ; in the more active form,
delirium and excitement. Sadness prevails to a great extreme. So
sad that he is weary of life ; he loathes life, and wants to die, and the
Arsenic patient does commit suicide. It is a remedy full of suicidal
tendmeies. The anxiety takes form also in the restlessness, in which
he constantly moves. If he is able to get up he goes from chair to
chair ; the child goes from nurse to mother, and from one person to
another. When in bed, unable to sit up, the patient tosses and turns
from side to side ; if he is able, he climbs out of bed and sits in the
chair, keeps moving from one place to another, and, when thoroughly
exhausted, he gets back into bed again. The restlessness seems to be
mostly in the mind ; it is an anxious restlessness, or an anguish, with
the idea that anguish is a deathly anxiety. That is an clfort to ex-
press it in the extreme. It seems that he cannot live, and it is not
pain that drives him to anguish, but it is an anxiety intermingled with
restlessness and sadness. This state prevails in all diseases inter-
mingled with prostration. An uneasiness comes in the early stage of
disease, and lasts but until the prostration becomes marked. While
lying in bed, at first he moves his whole body, moves himself in bed
and out of bed ; but the prostration becomes so marked that he is able
to move only his limbs unt^l at last he becomes so weak that he is no
longer able to move and h4 lies in perfect quiet in extreme prostration.
It seems that prostration l|akes the place of anxiety and restlessness,
and he appears like a cadaiker. So remember that these states of anx-
iety and restlessness go towards the cadaveric aspect, tow’^ards death.
This is seen, for instance, in the typhoid, where Arsenicum is indi-
cated. At first there is that anxious restlessness with fear, but the
increasing weakness tends towards prostration.

Running all through the remedy there is the burning mentioned as
one of its most marked generals. There is burning in the brain, which
makes him want to wash his head in cold water. This sensation of
heat in the inner head with pulsation is ameliorated by the cold bathing,
but when there is a rheumatic state that affects the scalp and outward
nerves, and there is burning, the burning then is ameliorated by heat.
When the headache is of a congestive character, with the sensation of
heat and burning inside the head, and there is a feeling as if the head
would burst, and the face is flushed and hot, that headache is better
from cold applications and in the cool open air. So marked is this
that I have seen the patient sitting in the room with clothing piled on
to keep the body warm and with the window open to relieve the con-
gestion of the head. Therefore, we say a striking feature belonging
to this medicine is relief of all the complaints of the body from wrap-
ping up and from warmth in general, and relief, of the complaints of


ARSENICUM ALBUM


the head by cold, except the external complaints of the head, which
arc better from heat and from wrapping up. The neuralgias of the
face and eyes, and above the eyes, are better from heat.

riic burning is felt in the stomach ; there is burning in the bladder,
in the vagina, in the lungs. It feels as if coals of fire were in the
lungs at times, when gangrenous inflammation is threatened, and in
certain stages of pneumonia. There is burning in the throat and burn-
ing in all the mucous membranes. The skin bums with itching, and
he scratches until the skin is raw, and then it burns, but the itching
ceases ; as soon as the smarting lets up a trifle the itching commences
again. All night the itching and burning alternate, burning for a
minute, when he scratches it until it is raw, but soon the itching begins
again and it seems that he has no rest.

The secretions and excretions of Arsenic are acrid; they excoriate
the parts, causing burning. The discharge from the nose and eyes
causes redness around the parts, and this is true of all the fluids from
the various orifices. In ulcers there is burning, and the thin, bloody
fluid discharged excoriates the parts round about. The odor of the
discharge is putrid. If you have ever discovered the odor of gan-
grene, of mortified flesh, you know the odor of the Arsenicum dis-
charges. The stool is putrid, like decomposed flesh, putrid blood.
The discharges from the uterufi, the menstrual How, the leucorrhoea,
the hi'ces, the urine, the expectoration, all the discliarges are putrid.
The ulcer is so putrid that it smells like decomposing flesh.

Arsenic produces a tendency to bleeding. The patient bleeds easily
and may bleed from any place. There is vomiting of blood ; bleeding
from the lungs and throat. Bloody discharge from the mucous mem-
brane, at times, when inflammation is running high ; haemorrhage from
the bowels, kidneys, bladder and uterus ; anywhere that mucous mem-
brane exists, there may be haemorrhage. Haemorrhage of black blood
and discharges that are offensive.

'Gangrene and sudden inflammatory conditions like gangrenous and
erysipelatous inflammations arc common in Arsenic. Parts suddenly
take on erysipelas, or parts that are injured suddenly take on gangrene.
Gangicne in internal organs, malignant inflammations, erysipelatous
inflammation. No matter how you look upon the condition, no matter
what it is called, if it is a sudden inflammation that tends to produce
malignancy in the part it belongs to Arsenicum. Inflammation will
go on in the bowels for a few days attended with a horribly offensive
discharge, vomiting of clots of blood, great burning in the bowels with
tympanitic condition. You may almost look upon this as a gangrenous
inflammation, so violent, sudden and malignant is it, and it has the
anxiety, prostration, fear of death, and chilliness, the patient wanting
to be covered warmly. When with this inflammation of the bowels



ARSENICUM ALBUM


^33


the patient is relieved by heat, it means Arsenic. You should remem-
ber that Secale has a similar state ; it has all the tympanitic condition,
all the ulceration and prostration, all the offensive odor and expulsion
of offensive clots, and all the burning, but the Secale patient wants to
be uncovered, wants things cold, wants the windows open. The only
distinguishing feature between these two remedies in a case may be
that Secale wants cold and Arsenicum wants heat, but this is the way
we individualize in our homoeopathic prescribing. When there is gan-
grenous inflammation in the lungs, we find the patient has been taken
with a chili, there has been restlessness, prostration, anxiety and fear :
as we enter the room we detect a horrible odor, and on looking into
the pan we see the patient has been spitting up by the mouthful, black,
foul expectoration. Look and see if the patient wants to be covered
warmly ; if he is easily chilled, and heat feels good ; then it is a hard
thing to cover that case outside of Arsenicum. The prostration, the
vomiting, the anxiety, the restlessness, the cadaveric aspect arc pres-
ent, and where will you find a remedy wdih that totality outside of
Arsenic ? I have many times gone a long distance to detect, from the
very aspect of things, these symptoms that could be gotten while walk-
ing from the door to the bedside. Every symptom is Arsenic ; he looks
like it, acts like it and smells like it. You may go to a patient with
high grade inflammation of the bladder, with frequent urging to uri-
nate, straining to urinate, and there is bloody urine intermingled with
clots. It has been found ;by the attending physician when he intro-
duces the catheter to draw oft the urine that clots dam up the catheter,
a little is drawn off and then it stops. We have a history of restless-
ness, anxiety, fear of death, amelioration from heat, great prostration.
You must give Arsenic, not because there is inflammation of the blad-
der, but because it is a rapidly progressing inflammation, and because
it is gangrenous in character. The whole bladder will be involved in
a short time, but Arsenic will stop that. So it is with all the internal
organs, the liver, lungs, etc.; any of them may take on violent and
rapid inflammation. We are not now speaking of the particulars, but
only illustrating the general state of Arsenic, in order to bring out
what runs through the whole nature of it. We shall find when we take
up the remedy and go through it in a more particular way thcvse feat-
ures will stand out everywhere.

The mental symptoms show in the beginning anxious restlessness,
and from this a continuation towards delirium and even insanity with
all that it involves ; disturbance of the intellect and will. ‘Tie thinks
he must die,'' I went to the bedside of a typhoid patient once with
all the general aspect I have described ; he was able to talk, and he
looked up at me and said: “There is no use of your coming, I am
going to die ; you might as well go home ; my whole insides are morti-



i34


ARSENICUM A1J3UM


fying/' His friend was seated on one side of the bed, giving him a
few drops of water, and just about as often as he could get there with
it he wanted it again, lhat was all he wanted ; his mouth was black,
parched and dry. He got Arsenic. One of the characteristic features
of Arsenic is thirst jar small quantities often, just enough to wet thei
mouth. It is commonly used as a distinguishing feature between Bry-*
onia and Arsenic for the purpose of memorizing the Bryonia has
thirst for large quantities far apart, but Arsenicum little and often, or
violent unquenchable thirst.

‘‘Thoughts of death and of the incurability of his complaints.’'
“Thoughts crowd upon him ; he is too weak to keep them ofE or to
hold on to one idea.’’ That is, he lies in bed tormented day and night
by depressing ideas and distressing thoughts. This is one form of
his anxiety ; when tormented with thoughts, he is anxious. In the
delirium he sees all kinds of vermin on his bed. “Picks the bed-
clothes.” “Delirium during sleep, unconscious mania.” Whimpering
and gnashing teeth.” “l.A)ud moaning, groaning and weeping.” “Lam-
entations, despair of life.” “Screaming with pains.” “Fear drives
him out of bed, he hides in a closet.” These arc instances of insanity
that take on first a state of anxiety, restlessness, and fear. Religious
insanity, with the delusion that she has sinned away her day of grace,
the bibical promise of salvation do not apply to her, there is no hope
for her, she is doomed to punishment. She has been thinking on re-
ligious matters until she is insane. Finally she enters into a more com-
plete insane state, a state of tranquility ; silent, and with aversion to
talk. So we see one stage enters into another ; we have to take the
whole case together ; wc have to note the course that the case has run
in order to sec it clearly and note that in one stage there were certain
symptoms and, in another stage, other symptoms. For instance, we
know that in the acute conditions of Arsenicum there is cither thirst
for ice cold water, and for only enough to moisten the mouth, or there
is thirst for water in large (quantities and yet it docs not quench tlie
thirst ; but this thirsty stage goes on to another in which there is aver-
sion to water, and hence we see that in chronic diseases Arsenicum is
rhirstless. So it is in a case of mania ; in the chronic state he is tran-
quil, but in the earlier stages, in order to be an Arsenicum case, he
must have gone through the Arsenicum restlessness, anxiety and fear.

Fear is a strong element in the mental state, fear to be alone ; fears
something is going to injure him when he is alone ; full of horror ; he
dreads solitude and wants company, because in company he can talk
and put off the fear ; but as this insanity increases he fails to appreciate
company and the fear comes in spite of it. He has a violent increase
of his fear and horror in the dark and many complaints come on in
the evening as darkness is coming on. Many of the mental troubles,



ARSENICUM ALBUM


135


as well as the physical troubles, come on and are increased at certain
times. While some complaints, pains and aches are worse in the morn-
ing, most of the sufferings of Arsenicum arc worse from 1-2 p . m . and
from 1-2 A. M. After midnight, very soon after midnight sometimes,
his sufferings begin, and from 1-2 o’clock they are intensified. Ex-
treme anxiety in the evening in bed.

*‘A verse to meeting acquaintances, because he imagines he has for-
merly offended them.” Great mental depression, great sadness, melan-
choly, despair, despair of recovery. He has dread of death when alone,
or on going to bed with anxiety and restlessness. He thinks he is
going to die and wants somebody with him. The attacks of anxiety
at night drive him out of bed. This is an anxiety that affects the
heart, and so the mental anxiety and cardiac anxiety almost seem to
coincide. A sudden anxious fear comes over him at night ; he jumps
out of bed with fear that he is going to die, or that he is going to suf-
focate. It is full of dyspnoea, cardiac dyspnoea, and varying forms
of asthma. The spells come on in the evening in bed or after mid-
night ; from 1-2 o’clock he is attacked with mental anxiety, dyspnoea,
fear of death, coldness, and is covered with cold sweat. '^Anxiety like
one w'ho has committed murder.” This is one form of his anxiety ;
he finally works up to the idea that the officers are coming after him,
and watches to see if they are coming in to arrest him. Some un-
usual evil is going to happen to him ; always looking for something
terrible to happen. ‘Irritable, discouraged, restless.” “Restlessness,
cannot rest anywhere.” a consequence of fright, inclination to

commit suicide.”

The Arsenicum patient with this mental state is ahvays freezing,
|iovers around the fire, cannot get clothing enough to keep warm, a
great sufferer from the cold. Chronic Arsenicum in\alids cannot get
warm ; they are always chilly, pale and waxy, and in such invalids,
after they have had several unusual weak spells, dropsical conditions
come on. Arsenicum is full of puffiness and dropsy ; oedematous con-
dition of the extremities ; dropsy of the shut sacs or of the cavities :
swelling about the eyes ; swelling of the face, so that it pits upon
pressure. Arsenicum in these swellings is especially related to the
lower eyelid rather than the upper, while in Kali carb. the swelling is
more in the upper eyelid than the low^r, between the lid and the brow.
There are times when Kali carh, looks very similar to Arsenic, and
little features like that will be distinguishing points. If they run to-
gether in generals, then we must observe their particular peculiarities.

In the headaches we have a striking general feature of Arsenicum,
brought out in their periodicity. Running all through this remedy
there is periodicity, and for this reason it has been extensively useful
in malarial affections which haver as a chajacteristic •of their- nature#



ARSENICUM ALBUM


136

periodicity. The periodical complaints of Arsenic come on every other
day, or every fourth day, or every seven days, or every two weeks.
The headaches come on these cycles, every other, or third, or fourth,
seventh or fourteenth day. The more chronic the complaint is, the
longer is its cycle, so that we will find the more acute and sharp troubles
in which Arsenic is suitable will have every other day aggravations
and every fourth day aggravations : but, as the trouble becomes chronic
and deep-seated, it takes on the seventh day aggravation, and in the
psoric manifestations of a long, lingering and deep-seated kind there
is a fourteenth day aggravation. This appearing in cycles is common
to a good many remedies, but is especially marked in China and Arse-
nic. These two remedies are similar to each other in many respects,
and they are quite similar in their general nature to the manifestations
that often occur in malaria. It is true, however, that Arsenic is more
frequently indicated than China, In every epidemic of malarial fever
that I have gone through I have found Arsenicum symptoms more
common than those of China,

These headaches bring out the interesting point that we mentioned
above. Arsenicum has in its nature an alternation of states^ and this
carries with it certain generals. Arsenicum in all of its bodily com-
plaints is a cold remedy : the patient sits over the fire and shivers,
wants plenty of clothing, and wants to be in a warm room. So long
as the complaints arc in the body this is so ; but when the complaints
arc in the head, while he wants the body warm he wants the head
washed in cold water, or wants the cold air upon it. The complaints
of the head must conform to the generals that apply to the head, and
the complaints of the body must be associated with the generals that
apply to the body. It is a difficult thing to say which one of these two
circumstances is most general, and it is sometimes difficult to say which
one is the general of the patient himself, because he confuses you by
saying: am worse in the cold,’’ but when his headache is on he says:

"I am better in the cold, 1 want to be in the cold.'' It is really only
the head, and you luive to single these out and study them by the parts
affected. When things are so striking you must examine into it to
see what it is that brings about modality. You will see a similar
state running through Phosphorus ; the complaints of the stomach and
head are better from cold, i, c,, he wants cold applications upon the
head with head sufferings, and wants cold things in the stomach with
stomach complaints, but in all the complaints of the body he is amelior-
ated from heat. If he steps out into the cool air, he will commence
to cough, if he have a chest trouble. So we see that the modalities
that belong to the part affected must always be taken into account
For instance you have a patient suffering from neuralgia or rheumatic
«ia these s^me pains extend to tho head, then he wants the



ARSENICUM ALBUM


»37


head wrapped up because they are ameliorated from heat. But when
it comes to cases of congestive conditions of the head, he then is bet-
ter with his head very cold. Now, as I have said, there is an alterna-
tion of these states in Arsenicum. I will illustrate by mentioning a
case. Once a patient had been dragging along with periodical sick
headaches. The sick headaches were better from cold water, cold ap-
plications to the head, could hardly get them cold enough, and the
colder the better. These headaches came every two weeks, and so long
as they were present he desired cold to the head. Then these period-
ical headaches would be better, for long periods ; but when they were
away he was suffering from rheumatism of the joints, which was also
periodical, and also more or less tenacious, and when this rheumatism
of the joints and extremities, with more or less swelling and oedema,
was present he could not get warm enough ; he was at the fire and
wrapped up ; he was relieved by heat, and wanted warm air and a
warm room. This would last for a period and then subside, and back
would come his sick headaches and last for a while. That is what I
meant by the alternation of states. Arsenicum cured that man, and he
never had any of them afterwards. The alternation of states some-
times means that there are two diseases in the body, and sometimes the
remedy covers the whole feature in alternation of states, I remember
another case, which will illustrate this peculiar nature of alternation
of complaints, which is shared by other remedies besides Arsenic. A
patient suffered from a pressure in the top of the head, such as I
recently described to you under Ahimen, She would suffer for weeks
from that pressure on the top of the head, and the only relief she
could get was from hard pressure ; she tired herself out with hard
pressure and would contrive all kinds of weights to put upon the head.
That would go away in the night and she would wake up the next
morning with constant urging to urinate. The irritable bladder alter-
nated with pain on top of the head. Alumen cured. In many of
these anti-psoric remedies we have an alternation of states. This illus-
trates the necessity for getting the symptoms of all the states that
present themselves for cure, otherwise you will many times prescribe
in a chronic case of psoric character and temporarily relieve it, when
back comes another aspect of it. You have only hastened the disease
a little faster than it would go if let alone. But that is not homoeo-
pathic prescribing. Be sure, when a remedy presents one state, that
it is a clearly indicated in the other state, otherwise that remedy is not
the similimum. You must hunt until you find the remedy that has both
states, or you will be disappointed. We sometimes do not discover
this alternation of states until we have brought it back two or three
times by incorrect prescribing. Some people are so reticent and so
difficult to get symptoms frpin that wp do not always get these symp

i8



ARSENICUM AEBUM


138


turns. But you examine your record and you find where you havC;
made a foolish prescription, that you drove a new condition away and
back came the first trouble, and you keept on with this see-saw business.
Now remember in doing this your patient is not improving, and that
you must re-study the whole case, taking the alternating states into
account. In Arsenic, the head symptoms alternate with physical symp-
toms. You will find running through certain remedies, as a part of
their nature, that mental symptoms alternate with physical symptoms ;
when the physical symptoms arc present, then mental symptoms are not
trates the necessity for getting the symptoms of all the states that
is determined it is a good point, but sometimes you do not find a
remedy, because many of our remedies are not well recorded : they
have not yet been observed in their alternations and marked as such.
We find in Podophyllum the peculiar feature that the headaches alter-
nate with diarrhoea ; he is subject to sick headaches and to diarrhoea,
and one or other will be present. In Arnica the mental symptoms
alternate with uterine symptoms. The uterine symptoms, when ob-
served, look like Arnica^ but these go away in the night and mental
symptoms come on, the mind being heavy, gloomy and cloudy. When
we have remedies that have these manifestations it requires a greater
depth of vision to sec the alternation of states, because these things
are not always brought out in the proving, for the reason that one
prover had one group of symptoms, and another, another. Yet a
remedy that is capable of bringing out the two groups of symptoms
is sufficient to cure this alternation of states.

The periodical headaches of Arsenic are found in all parts of the
head. They are the congestive headaches with throbbing and burn-
ing, with anxiety and restlessness : hoi head and relief from cold.
There arc headaches in the forehead, which are throbbing, worse fronii
light, intensified from motion, often attended wdth great restlessness^
forcing him to move, with great anxiety. Most of the headaches are
attended with nausea and vomiting. The sick headaches arc of the
worst sort, especially those that come every two weeks. In some of
these old, broken-down constitutions you will find he is cold, pallid,
sickly ; he is always chilly and freezing except when the headache is
on, and it is better from cold ; the face much wrinkled, great anxiety
and no desire for water. Remember that it was said in the acute state
of Arsenic there is thirst, thirst for little and often, dry mouth and
desire for water enough to moisten the lips, but in the chronic states
of Arsenic he is generally thirstless. There are headaches on one
side of the head involving the scalp, one-half of the head, worse from*
motion, better from cold washing, better from walking in the cold air,
though very often the jar or stepping starts up a feeling as of a wave
of pain, shakings vibration or looseness in the brain ; such are th^



ARSENICUM ALBUM


^•39


sensations and these arc conditions ot pulsation. Then there are
dreadful occipital headaches, so severe that the patient feels stunned
or dazed. They come on after midnight, from excitement, Irom ex-
ertion ; they come on from becoming heated in walking, which pro-
duces determination of blood to the head. Nat, mur, is a medicine
analogous to this in its periodicity and in many of its complaints. It
has congestive headaches from walking and becoming heated ; espe-
cially from walking in the sun. The Arsenicum headaches are gener-
ally worse from liglit and noise, better from lying down in a dark
room, lying with the head on two pillows. Many of the headaches
commence in the afternoon from i to 3 o’clock, after the noon meal,
grow worse into the afternoon, lasting all night. They are often
attended with great pallor, nausea, prostration, deathly weakness.
The pain is paroxysmal ; violent head pain during the chill of an inter-
mittent fever ; headache as if the skull would burst during an inter-
mittent fever. Arsenicum has this head pain of a congestive charac-
ter in intermittent fever, as if the head would burst. A peculiar feat-
ure of the thirst is that there is no thirst during the chill except for
hot drinks ; during the heat there is thirst little and often for water
enough to moisten the mouth, which is almost no thirst, and during
the sweat there is thirst for large drinks. Thirst begins with tha
beginning of the heat and increases as the dryness of the mouth in-
creases ; he desires only to moisten the mouth until he breaks out in a
sweat, and then the thirst becomes a desire for large quantities very
often, and the more he sweats the more desire he has for water. The
headache is during the chill ; it increases, so that it becomes a con-
gestive, throbbing headache during the chill and heat ; this grows bet-
ter towards the end of the heat as the sweat breaks out, it is ameli-
orated by the sweat.

In chronic headaches, congestive headaches and malarial complaints,
a tendency to shrivel is observed upon the skin ; a prematurely old,
wrinkled appearance of the skin comes on. The mucous membrane
of the lips and mouth often shrivels and becomes wrinkled. This is
also found in the diphtheritic membrane of the throat as a peculiar
feature of Arsenic, and belongs, as far as I know, to no other remedy.
The exudation in the throat is leathery looking and shrivelled. A
shrivelled membrane is not a sure indication for Arsenic, but when
Arsenic is indicated you would be likely to find this kind of membrane ;
such cases as are very malignant in character, very offensive, putrid,
those with a gangrenous odor. ,

At times the head is in constant motion when there arc complaints
in the body, because parts of the body are too sore to be moved ; then
the motion of the head comes on because of restlessness and uneasiness,
and he keeps it in motion even though it docs not ameliorate. The



140


ARSENICUM AISUM


face and head are subject to oedema ; dropsy of the scalp and erysipe-
latous inflammation of the face and head. The scalp pits upon press-
ure and there is a little crepitation under it from pressure. The scalp
is subject to eruptions and is very sensitive. So sensitive is the scalp
that the hair cannot be combed ; it seems as if the touch of the comb
or brush when rubbing over the scalp went into the brain.

Sensitiveness is a feature of Arsenic ; sensitiveness to smell and
touch ; ovcrscnsiiiveness of all the senses. A peculiar feature that
perhaps I have not brought out is the oversensitiveness to the circum-
stances and surroundings of the room. The Arsenicum patient is an
extremely fastidious patient. Hering once described him as “the gold-
headed cane patient.” If this is carried out in a woman who is sick in
bed she is in great distress if every picture on the wall does not hang
perfectly straight. Those who are sensitive to disorder and confusion
and the disturbed and made worse until everything is placed in order
have a morbid fastidiousness which has its simillimum in Arsenic.

The eye symptoms of this remedy are very prominent. In old cases
of suppressed malaria, in broken down constitutions, in pallid, sickly
people who are subject to general catarrhal conditions, and such catar-
rhal conditions as localize more especially in the nose and eyes, the
eye symptoms will be troublesome. There are discharges from the
eyes. It may be a conjunctivitis, in a general w^ay involving the lids
and the globe, going on sometimes to ulceration with thin, bloody dis-
charge. increasing to thick, acrid discharge that excoriates the eye,
making the canthi red and causing granulation with burning. I'he
burning is better from washing in cool water and also better from dry
heat. Very often ulcers appear on the globe of the eye, often upon
the cornea. It has various kinds of hypertropjiy beginning in patches
that will form scars, and in old ulcerated patches little growth similar
to a pterygium growing towards the centre of the eye and threatening
blindness. The inflammations are sometimes attended with swelling,
burning and excoriating discharge ; this swelling is bag-like in charac-
ter, and so we find ‘'baggy*' lids and little bags forming under the
eyes. The face is waxy and pale, presenting the appearance of a
broken down constitution or a dropsical condition.

The catarrhal state involves throat and nose, and it is sometimes
difficult to separate the nose symptoms from the throat symptoms.
The Arsenicum patient is always taking cold in the nose, always sneez-
ing from every change in the weather. He is always chilly and suf-
fers from drafts, and is worse in cold, damp weather; always freez-
ing, chilled through. These pale, waxy, broken down constitutions
with catarrhal discharges from the nose on looking at a bright light
become blind. Sneezing and coryza with inflammatory conditions
through the whole nasal cavity, throat, larynx and chest. The cold



ARSENICUM AI-BUM


141

begins in the nose and gose down into the throat, very often causing
hoarseness with dry, tickling, hard, rasping cough. It is a difficult mat-
ter to find remedies for a coryza that begins in the nose and extends
into the chest with bronchial troubles ; very often you require a change
of remedy, as the chest symptoms often run to a different remedy. It
is difficult to find a remedy that covers the symptoms of both nose and
chest.

Arsenicum is the remedy for old, chronic catarrhal troubles of the
nose where the nose bleeds easily, and he is always sneezing and tak-
ing cold, always chilly and pallid, tired, restless, full of anxiety in the
night and has troublesome dreams. The mucous membrane is easily
inflammed, producing patches of red and ulcers that bleed easily. Great
crusts form in the back of the nose. There is a striking tendency to
ulcerate in Arsenicum, If it is a sore throat it ulcerates ; if colds
settle in the eyes, they may end in ulceration ; catarrhal troubles in the
nose end in ulceration ; and this ulceration tendency, no natter where
the troubles locates, is a very strong feature of Arsenicum. It is the
remedy for catarrhal complaints of the nose and other places in broken
down constitutions from syphilis or malaria, or a constitution that has
gone through blood poisoning of some kind, either poisoning from a
dissecting wound, or from erysipelas or typhoid fever or other zy-
motic states improperly treated, or poisoning with quinine and like
substances that break down the blood and establish a state of anaemia.
If an ulcer comes upon the leg, if a leucorrhoea comes on, if any dis-
charge is established the patient is relieved thereby. Now let some
of these discharges slack up and you have a chronic state apparently
from retained secretions, but it is a form of blood poisoning. So it is
with suppressed ear discharges, suppressed throat discharges, sup-
pressed leucorrhoea and ulcerations. Arsenicum is one of the medi-
cines that will conform to the anaemic state that follows each suppres-
sion. At the present day it is fashionable to use the cautery, to make
local applications to stop leucorrhoea and other discharges and to heal
up ulcers. Now, when these external troubles go there is an anaemic
state established in the economy, the patient becomes waxy and pallid,
sickly looking, and these catarrhal discharges come on as a means of
relief because of the suppression of some other condition. For in-
stance, since the suppression of a leucorrhoea the woman has had thick,
bloody or watery discharge from the nose. It is frequently suitable
to the constitution when an ulcer has been dried up by salves, or an
old car discharge has been stopped by the outward application of pow-
ders. The doctor thinks he has done a clever thing in stopping such
discharges, but he has only succeeded in damming up the secretions
which are really a relief to the patient. Such medicines as Sulphur,
Calcarea and Arsenicum are suitable for the catarrhal discharges that



AHSENICUM AI.BUM


I4dt

come from these suppressions, in broken down constitutions. Arsenic
is also like unto the condition that has been brought about froni the
absorption of animal poisons. It goes to the very root of the evil, as
it is similar to the symptoms brought on from a dissecting wound.
Arsenic and Lachesh arc medicines that will go to the cause at once
and antidote the poison, establishing harmony and turning things into
order.

The nose symptoms, then, of Arsenic arc very troublesome and fur-
nish and extensive part of the symptom image of an Arsenicum patient.
They always take cold easily, are always sensitive to cold and the
catarrh is always roused up on the slightest provocation. When an
Arsenicum patient is at his best he has discharge more or less of a
thick character, but when he takes a little cold it becomes thin ; the
thick discharge that is necessary to his comfort slacks up, and then he
gets headache and on comes thirst, restlessness, anxiety and distress.

1 his goes on to a catarrhal fever of two or three days’ duration, and
then the thick discharge starts up again and he feels better ; all his
pains and aches disappear. It has been ol great service in epithelioma
of nose and lips.

Inflammation of the throat and tonsils with burning, increased by
cold and better by warm drinks. There is redness and a shrivelled
condition of the mucous membrane. When there is blood poisoning
going on, as in diphtheria, and exudate appears upon the mucous mem-
brane and it becomes gray and shrivelled, ashy colored, and this some-
times covers the whole of the soft palate and the arches. It looks
withered. He is prostrated, anxious, sinking, weak, not a great deal
of fever, but much dryness of the mouth.

The catarrhal state goes down into the larynx with hoarseness, and
into the trachea with burning, worse from coughing, and then comes
constriction of the chest, asthmatic dyspnoea and dry, hacking cough
with no expectoration.. This testing cough is attended with anxiety,
prostration, restlessness, exhaustion and sweat, and the cough does
not seem to do any good. The cough is the early part of it and keeps
on as a dry, rasping, harsh cough for several days without doing any
good , and then asthmatic symptoms come on, when he expectorates
great quantities of thin, watery sputum. There is constriction about
the chest, a great sense of tightness and wheezing, and he feels he will
suffocate. Bloody mucus is expectorated at times, but the symptoms
are more generally of a catarrhal character. Symptoms of pneumonia
sometimes appear with the rusty expectoration. The expectoration is
excoriating. There is in the chest a sense of burnning, as if coals of
fire were in the chest, and it goes on to bleeding and liver-colored
expectoration.

Arsenicum is a bleeding medicine, one that predisposes to hsemor-



ARSENICUM ALBUM


143


rhage, and bleeding takes place from all mocous membranes : com-
monly of bright red blood, but in this region the parts take on a gan-
grenous sute and the haemorrhages become black and there arc little
clots like portions of liver. The same are found in the vomited mat-
ter and in the stools. The expectoration is horribly offensive, so much
so that you soon get the idea that there is a state of gangrene. The
patient is at this time going into a state that perhaps cannot be any
better described than a gangrenous inflammation ; there will be signs
to indicate the inflammatory condition, and there will be the smell of
the expectoration which you will detect as soon as you open the door.
The expectoration is a thin, watery fluid intermingled with clots. In
the pan you will find this watery expectoration looking like prune
juice, and in the midst of it will be clots of blood ; the offensiveness
is horrible. He has gone through the period of restlessness and is now
prostrated, sinking, pallid, and likely enough covered with a cold sw'cat.

When we come to the stomach we find everything that may be called
a gastritis, vomiting of everything taken, even a teaspoonful of water,
extreme irritation of the stomach, great prostration, horrible anxiety ;
dry mouth ; a very little hot water will sometimes comfort him for a
minute, but soon it must come up ; cold fluids arc vomitted immediately..
The whole oesophagus is in a state of inflammation ; everything burns
that comes up or goes down. Vomiting of bile and blood. Extreme
sensitiveness of the stomach is present ; he does not want to be touched.
Heat applied externally relieves, and there is a temporary relief from
warm drinks; the heat is grateful. In the bowels we have much
trouble : this remedy has all the symptoms of peritonitis ; distension
of the abdomen, a tympanitic state ; cannot be handled or touched, yet
he will keep moving because he is so restless, he cannot keep still, but
finally he becomes so weak that exhaustion takes the place of restless-
ness. Dysentery is likely to come on, with involuntary passages of
urine and faeces, one or both, with haemorrhage from the bowels and
bloody urine. As the bowels move, wc get the cadaveric odor to the
stool, a smell like putrid flesh. The stool is bloody, watery, brown
Hke prune juice, or black and horribly offensive. Sometimes dysen-
teric in character with dreadful straining and burning of the auns ;
every stool burns as though there were coals of fire in the rectum;
burning in the bowels, burning all the way through. The pain in the
abdomen is better from the application of hot things. The tympanitic
condition is extreme. Sometimes tltcrc is a gastro-enteritis that takes
on a gangrenous character that in olden times used to be talked about
as gangrene of the bowel, a mortification that always ended in deaths
A thick, bloody discharge is passed witli a horrible odor, all substances
are vomited, the patient desires to be in a very warm room, wants to
be well covered, wants hot applications and warm drinks, looks cadav-



144


ARSENICUM ALBUM


eric and smells cadaveric, with a dry, pungent odor that penetrates
everything, but if he wants the covers off, wants a cool room and win-
dows open, wants to be sponged with cold water, and wants ice cold^
drinks then he must have Secale,

I want to warn you against the too promiscuous use of Arsenic in
the summer complaints of young babies, for dysentery and cholera
infantum. It has so many little symptoms that are so common to these
complaints that if you do not look out and are not warned you will be
likely to give your patient Arsenic, suppress some of the symptoms,
changing the aspect of the case so that you cannot find a remedy for
it and yet not cure the case with Arsenic. There is a strong tendency
to be routine and give Arsenic without a sufficient number of generals
being present ; i.e., if you give it on particulars and not on the gen-
erals of the case.

This medicine is full of diarrhoea and dysenteric symptoms ; in these
conditions there will be the pallor, the anxiety, the cadaveric aspect
and the cadaveric odors. In the dysentery there is most distressing
and frec|uent urging to stool, scanty, slimy, black, fluid, inky stools
with cadaveric smell, great prostration, restlessness and pallor. In
the bowel troubles, in low forms of disease, the stool becomes involun-
tary. This is a condition of the rectum, a relaxation of the rectum,
great prostration. Involuntary stool generally indicates either local or
general exhaustion, and in this remedy there is terrible exhaustion, so
that there is involuntary diarrhoea in typhoid and in low forms of
zymotic disease ; involuntary urine.

Purging is sometimes present in Arsenic, but generally he docs not
have much purging, such as we find in Podophyllum^ Phos, ac. Usu-
ally there will be little, frequent gushes, little spurts with flatus and
the great exhaustion that occurs in cholera, little spurts with mucus,
slimy, whitish stools. Arsenic is not so commonly indicated in cholera,
i, 6*., during the gushing period, but sometimes after the gushing is
over and the vomiting and purging have passed, leaving a state of
extreme exhaustion, we have a state that appears like coma, the patient
looks almost as if dead, except that he breathes. We find, then, that
Arsenicum will establissh reaction. Cholera infantum with great pros-
tration, sinking and cadaveric appearance, great coldness, covered with
cold sweat, cold extremities, cold as death ; cadaveric, sickly, foul,
pungent, penetrating odor in the room from the faeces and urine and
even of what is vomited. The passages from the bowels are acrid,
excoriating, causing redness and burning. Very often the burning
extends into the bowels. The rectum and anus burn, smarting all
about the anus. It has tenesmus, painful, unbearable urging, great
distress in the lower bowel, in rectum and anus, terrible state of anx-
iety of the patient and the pain is so violent and the suffering so in*



ARSENICUM ALBUM


H5


tense, the anguish so intense, that he can think of nothing but death ;
the fearfulness and frightful feelings are such as he has never ex-
perience in his life, and he feels confident these mean he is going to
die. This, like all other complaints, is attended with restlessness, and
when not at stool he is walking the lloor, going from bed to chair and
from chair to bed. He will get on the stool and then back to bed,
then he is hurried to stool again, sometimes he loses it. Sometimes
there is a chronic hamiorrhoidal state with burning, and the haemor-
rhoids protrude when at stool, he is much exhausted after getting
back into bed after a stool, with these protruding lumps which are like
grapes and feel like coals of fire. They are hot, dry and bleeding.
Fissures of the rectum that bleed at every stool, with burning Itching
and eczematous eruptions about the anus with burning.

This kind of pain may be felt anywhere in the body ; burning is
characteristic of Arsenic, stitching is characteristic of Arsenic. Now,
put these together and the patient often describes it as being stuck with
red hot needless all over him. This red hot sensation, which is a
common feature all over, is felt at the anus, and especially when there
are haemorrhoids, burning and sticking like hot needles in the haemor-
rhoids.

At times when a patient is coming down with the early stage of a
violent attack he will have all the rigor and chill that it is possible to
find in the Materia Medica and that can be found in disease. Rigors
and chills of violent character,- and at such times he describes a feel-
ing as if the blood flowing through the vessels were ice water. He
feels a rushing through the body of ice cold waves. When the fever
comes on and he is intensely hot from head to foot, before the sweat
has appeared, he feels that boiling water is going through the blood
vessels. Then comes on the sweat and dyspnera and all complaints
in which he is prostrated and becomes cold. While the sweat some-
times relieves the fever and pains, yet it is prolonged and attended
with great exhaustion and does not relieve his exhaustion. Many of
his complaints are increased with the sweat ; for instance, thirst is
increased, the drinking is copious and does not relieve, it seems he
cannot get enough and patients will say: “I can drink the well dry,'’
or '‘Give me a bucket of water.” Such things are indicative of the
state of thirst. During the fever he wants little and often ; during the
chill he wants hot drinks.

Arsenicum is a very useful medicine in the eruptions of the genitals
with burning. In little ulcers that burn, even when they are syphilitic ;
herpetic vesicles that appear upon the foreskin and upon the labia ;
chancre or chancroid with burning, smarting and stinging, but espe-
cially in those that are weak, that offer no willingness to heal, but that
do the very opposite, that spread, those that we call phagedenic, those

19



146


ARSf^NlCUM


that eat from their outer margins, become larger and larger. Arsenic
and Merc corr. are the two principal medicines for spreading ulcera-
tions such as cat in every direction, very offensive. Such ulcerations
as follow the opening of a bubo in the inguinal region where there is
no tendency to heal. A little, watery, offensive discharge keeps com-
ing and extending, ulceration keeps spreading round about the open-
ing, no tendency to heal. Or the patient has been in the hands of a
surgeon who has passed his knife down the threatening suppurating
bubo and it has been followed by red, angry, erysipelatous appearance
and shows no tendency to heal. The edges have been removed by
ulceration, and now the surface has cleared off, leaving a surface the
size of a dollar : sometimes becoming serpiginous. These ulcers are
sensitive to touch and burn like fire.

In the male and female sexual organs there are many symptoms of
importance. In the male organs a dropsical condition, dropsy of the
penis, oedematous appearence, so that the penis is enormously swollen
and looks like a water bag ; the scrotum, especially the skin of the
scrotum, greatly swollen and humid round about the parts. In the
female the labia are enormously swollen with burning, stinging pains,
hard and swollen. Erysipelatous inflammation of these organs, ulcera-
tions of a syphilitic character ; these when such symptoms as burning,
smarting and stinging are present. In the female, violent, burning
pains in the genitals with or without swelling, burning that extends
up into the vagina, with great dryness and itching of the vagina. The
Icucorrhoeal discharge excoriates the parts, causing itching and burn-
ing with gi-eat suffering. Whitish, watery, thin discharges that ex-
coriate : so copious sometimes that it will run down the thighs. The
Arsenicum menstrual flow is very often excoriating in character. Co-
pious leiicorrhoeal flow intermixed with menstrual flow, very profuse
and very acrid. Suppressed menstruation going on for months ;
amenorrheea in prostrated, ncrvotis patients, wrinkled, careworn, hag-
gard faces. Of course, Arsenic has a ’wonderful reputation in the old
school for anaemia, .and it is said to be as good as Ferrum for anaemia ;
Ferrum and Arsenic are the strong drugs for anaemia, so that it is
not to be wondered at that these pallid mortals find benefit from Ar-
senic. '"During menstruation, stitches in the rectum.*' Leucorrhoea
acrid, corroding, thick and yellow,’' etc. After parturition the woman
does not pass the urine ; no urine in the bladder ; suppression, or the
bladder is full and it does not pass. In connection with this subject
you will find Causticum the most frequently indicated remedy when you
go back, and the woman has not passed the urine and it is time that
she should ; you will frequently find it indicated when you have no
other symptoms to go on. Aconite will be more frequently indicated
than any other remedy if the infant has not passed the urine. This is



ARSENICUM ALBUM


147

ke3mote practice and is to be condemned when there arc other symp-
toms to indicate a remedy. If there are no other symptoms study
Aconite and Causticum and see if there is any reason why they should
not be given. Another feature in connection with the woman, Arsenic
is a wonderful palliative in cancerous affections, such as occur in the
uterus and mammary glands. Burning, stinging pains have entirely
disappeared, in incurable cases, of course. It becomes one of the
palliatives.

Arsenic has loss of voice, laryngitis, with dry teasing cough ; a cough
that does not seem to do any good ; hacking constantly, dry, hacking
cough. Study its relation to asthma and difficult breathing, dyspnoea.
Arsenic has cured some long-standing cases of asthma of a nervous
character ; asthma tliar comes on after midnight, in patients who suffer
from the cold, those who arc very pallid, dry wheezing cough, must
sit up in bed and hold the chest, anxious restlessness with prostration.

The heart symptoms arc troublesome to manage when they get to
be like Arsenic ; the symptoms correspond to a state of great weakness,
great palpitation, palpitation from the least exertion or excitement,
great anxiety, anguish, weakness ; he cannot walk, he cannot go up-
stairs, he can hardly move without inti casing the palpitation ; every
excitement brings on palpitation. '‘Severe j^aroxysms of palpitation
or attacks of syncope during endocarditis.’' Arsenicum corresponds
to most serious complaints of the heart, corresponds to many of the
incurable complaints of the heart ; i. c\y when you see Arsenic corre-
sponding in all of the symptoms with these marked cardiac affections,
dropsy of the pericardium, etc., you have a class of cases that are very
serious, “Angina pectoris,'’ etc. “Rheumatism affecting the heart."
etc. “Hydropericardium with great irritability," etc. “Pulse frequent,
small, trembling." “Pulsation through whole body," etc., etc. Again
this goes on to another state when the heart becomes weak, pulse
thread-like, patient pale and cold, covered with sweat, pulse very feeble.
When this is not a state of the heart itself then Arsenic becomes a
wonderful remedy ; that is, it is capable of cure.

I want to say a few things concerning a few essentials, some few
things most general to the Arsenicum type of intermittent. You can
read the general state of intermittent fever and fevers generally and
apply what has been said. Arsenic has all the violence of the chill
that you can find in any remedy, with excitement, headache, prostra-
tion, dry mouth, desire for hot drinks and to be covered up warmly,
with all the anxious restlessness and prostration that you can find in
any medicine ; but the time of the Arsenic case is an important thing.
A striking feature of the Arsenic time of chill is its irregularity, com-
ing not twice alike, coming at any time. It has afternoon chill and
after midnight chill, sometimes in the morning, sometimes at 3 or 4



148


ARSENICUM lODATUM


p. M., sometimes at i p. m. It has a striking periodicity in its nature.
Hence it has an intermittent nature. It has a striking feature of thirst.
During the chill, while there is sometimes great thirst, he has aversion
to cold things, hence can take only hot drinks, hot teas, etc. During
the fever the thirst increases because he has dry mouth, and he drinks
little and often, just a teaspoonful to wet his dry mouth. Water does
hot quench his thirst, for he wants but a tablespoonful, little and often.
This runs on into the sweat with prostration, increased coldness, desire
for copious drinks, unquenchable thirst for cold drinks. The chill is
attended with great aching in the bones, likely to commence in the
extremities, and during the chill there is a great head congestion with
purple fingers and toes. Put these things together and the prostration
that occurs with the awful anxiety, and you can most always in a gen-
eral way pick out the Arsenic case. But it has so many details in its
chill, fever and sweat that if you take the details of symptoms and
leave these general features out you will be likely to be able to cover
almost any case of chills, i.e., you may think you will, but unless some
of these general states are present that stamp it as Arsenic you will
fail. It is one thing to stamp the whole case as Arsenic and another
thing to say that these are Arsenicum symptoms. So it is with China
and Quinine ; they have numerous particular symptoms, and yet to
make the case a China or Quinine case the striking general features
must be present.


ARSENICUM lODATUM

From a study of the elements making up this agent, it may be known
that it is a deep-acting constitutional remedy. Its complaints come
on in the morning, afternoon, evening, night, after midnight. In
hectic conditions, with many abscesses. Extreme anaemia, such as
belongs to tuberculous subjects. The patient craves open air when
not too cold : wants the windows open, is sensitive to a close room.
Marked general physical anxiety. The hands and feet tingle as if
asleep and the limbs feel as if tied with a band. Complaints are worse
from bathing ; takes cold from bathing. It has been of the highest
use in cancerous affections and has cured lupus and epithelioma. Its
symptoms are often found in chlorotic girls ; it has cured choreic action
of muscles in girls. Some are very sensitive to cold, like Arsenicum,
and others to heat, like Iodine ; it is sensitive to both heat and cold ;
cold wind and cold w'et weathet make the patient worse and bring out
symptoms. Always taking cold, which brings on coryza and increases
his catarrhal troubles. Many constrictions, internal and external, and
constrictions of orifices are found in this remedy. Convulsive move-
ments of limbs. Dropsy, external and internal, like Arsenicum. He



ARdENICtJM JODATUM


<49


is worse when hungry and, like Iodine, better after eating. Increas-
ing loss of flesh and weight in phthisical patients ; emaciation in chil-
dren, extreme aggravation from slight physical exertion.

In women who are subject to faintness and fainting spells. Formi-
cation all over the body. Haemorrhage from any mucous membrane.
A sensation of being too warm, must have fresh air. Feeling of
heaviness of the whole body. Induration is a strong feature ; some-
times in glands, in ulcers, in skin affections. The glands arc swollen
and hard. Inflammation, external and internal, in many parts, glands,
bones and serous membranes. He has symptoms as though he had
lost fluid. Extreme lassitude ; lack of reaction, lying in bed and lying
on the painful side makes the symptoms worse. She is worse during
the menses ; worse from motion, but desire to move. Mucous secre-
tions generally increased, copious, catarrhal discharges, thick, yellow,
or yellowish-green and honey-like. Numbness of the limbs and pain-
ful parts ; flushes of heat and surging of blood in the body ; pain in the
bones and glands. Bruised sensation in the body. Burning internally
and in outer parts ; paralyzing pains, pinching, pressing, stitching and
tearing pains. Predisposition to phthisis and complaints in the con-
sumptive diathesis. There is much soreness, and pressure increases
his suffering. Pulsation, internal and external, like Iodine; the pulse
is frequent and small, full, hard, intermittent, irregular. Burning is
a strong feature, like Arsenicum, It has been very useful in all scor-
butic conditions when the symptoms were similar. Very sensitive to
pain. The symptoms predominate on the right side ; he is sensitive to
the summer heat and the cold in winter. Dropsical and inflammatory
sw^elling ; swelling in affected parts and in glands. It has been cura-
tive in all stages and forms of syphilis. Trembling and twitching of
muscles, walking makes him worse, especially walking fast ; worse
from warmth, w^arm air, warm bed, warm room and warm wraps.
Weakness, like a vital prostration, in the morning, when ascending,
on exertion, during menses, and on walking ; worse in wet weather,
worse from the worm south wind.

Anger and irritability during all complaints ; aversion to answering
questions ; extreme anxiety, restlessness and fear ; worse in a warm-
bed ; confusion of mind morning and evening ; delirium during the
night ; illusions of fancy and delusions about dead people. Sadness,
even to despair ; discontentment, and he is often in a state of great
excitement ; mental exertion increases many of his symptoms ; there is
marked mental weakness ; fear of insanity, of misfortune, of people,
and he is generally timid. He is impatient and in a constant state of
hurry; he becomes indifferent to his friends, to happiness and to his
surroundings. Aversion to work. He seems to be going toward in-
sanity. He is unable to decide between two opinions. He suffers


AK3ENlCt7M lODATUM


from a sudden impulse to kill somebody. Very talkative at times ;
mirthful ; changeable moods and alternating conditions of mind ; a de-
gree of mental prostration prevails continuously. He is over-sensitive,
especially to noise. Inclination to sit ; averse to being spoken to and
he starts during sleep. Persistent tormenting thoughts ; wandering
thoughts ; stupefaction of mind. In the woman there is much weep-
ing. Vertigo while walking. It will cure the particulars given below
when the generals above mentioned strongly predominate.

Although there is hypenemia of the brain, the scalp feels cold.
Eruptions crusty, scurfy ; eczematous ; the hair falls out and the head
feels heavy ; itching of the scalp, with and without eruptions. Pain in
the morning and afteinoon ; better in open air ; worse in worm room ;
better after eating and worse when hungry ; worse from motion, noise,
walking ; pain in head from catarrh of nasal passages, with coryza ;
periodical headaches from malaria, with heart troubles and from syph-
ilis ; pain in forehead in the evening ; above the eyes, over the root of
the nose ; pain in occiput, sides of head, temples and vertex ; j)rcssing
pain in forehead, with sleepiness ; pressing pain in occiput and temples ;
sore, bruised pain in the head ; stitching in head, in temples ; tearing
pain in head. The head pains arc stunning. Perspiration of the fore-
head ; pulsating in the head, forehead, temples.

Inllainmation of the conjunctiva, and of the iris ; chronic catarrhal
condition of the eyes in psoric and syphilitic subjects ; easy lachryma-
tion, worse in cold air ; pain in eyes when reading ; soreness of the
eyeballs ; stitching pain in eyes : protrusion of the eyeballs ; pupils
dilated ; redness of eyes. Starting look. Sunken eyes. The lids are
swollen and oedematous ; twitching of the lids. Wild look in the eyes ;
the eyes are jaundiced ; vision is dim, flickering, foggy and weak.
Sparks before the eyes.

The ears discharge an excoriating foetid pus ; buzzing, humming,
ringing and roaring in ears. Catarrh of Eustachian tubes and middle
ear ; the pain is aching, stitching and tearing. Stopped sensation in
ears ; hearing is impaired.

Most stubborn nasal catarrh with bloody, acrid, copious, excoriating,
greenish, purulent, thick, yellow or yellow-greenish discharge ; honey-
like discharge ; coryza with watery discharge ; coryza in open air wi±
cough. It has been a most useful remedy in hay fever. Dryness in
nose and epistaxis. Obstruction of nose, pain in nose. Smell lost.
Much sneezing. Swelling inside of nose ; ulceration in nose.

The face becomes cold. Bluish lips and bluish circles about the eyes ;
brow.nish, earthy, or pale face ; again the face is red and there are cir-
cumscribed red cheeks ; the face is sallow and jaundiced ; yellow spots
on the face ; sickly look ; the face looks drawn and emaciated ; eruptions
on face and nose ; acne, eczema, pimples, pustules, expression sickly



ARSi^NlCt/M lODATOM


*51

and old ; pain in the face. Swelling of the glands of the lower jaw.
Swelling of the submaxillary glands. Twitching of the face.

In the mouth there are aphthae ; the gums bleed easily, and the
tongue is cracked. The tongue is coated brown or white; mouth and
tongue are dry at night and during sleep, the tongue feels enlarged, in-
flammation of the gums. Mucus in the mouth in the morning ; the
mouth is offensive, even putrid. Pain in the gums ; vsore, burning
tongue ; salivation ; scorbutic gums. Speech stammering. Swollen gums.
The taste is bad ; bitter, putrid, saltish, sour, sweetish ; teeth feel elong-
ated ; pain in the teeth after eating ; tearing pain in the teeth.

Much choking in the throat ; dryness in the tliroat ; membranes
from in the throat ; burning in the throat ; constantly scraping the throat.
Swallowing difficult. Swollen throat ; ulceration of the throat from
syphilis.

The appetite is increased, even ravenous ; aversion to food; constric-
tion of the stomach; the stomach is distended. He desires stimulants.
Sensation of emptiness ; eructations empty, sour ; waterbrash ; sensa-
tion of fullness in the stomach. Frequent attacks of heartburn : load
in the stomach after eating ; indigestion and much hiccough ; chronic
gastritis ; loathing of food ; nausea after eating. Pain after eating ;
burning, cramping, cutting, gnawing, pressing , and stitching pains in
the stomach ; pulsating, retching when coughing ; sensation of tight-
ness in stomach ; thirst, evening, extreme ; thirst during ineal ; un-
quenchable thirst. Trembling in the stomach. Continuous vomiting.;
vomiting with diarrhoea, after drinking, after eating, after milk, violent
vomiting ; vomiting of bile, blood, food ; v omiting yellow, watery sub-
stance.

The abdomen is distended with flatus ; the flatulency is obstructed
and there is much rumbling. Enlargement of liver, spleen, mesenteric
glands, glands of groin. Inflammation of the intestines, liver and
spleen. It has many complaints of the liver. Pain in abdomen after
eating ; during menses : during stool ; better by external warmth. Pain
in hypogastrium, hypochondria, groin, liver, spleen and umbilical re-
gion ; burning, cramping, drawing pain in abdomen ; cutting in abdo-
men during stool ; cutting pain in liver ; pressing pains and soreness in
liver. Stitching pains in hypochondria ; pulsating in abdomen : restless
feeling in abdomen : pain and soreness in spleen.

Very troublesome constipation ; diarrhoea alternating with constipa-
tion ; stool hard, knotty and light colored. The diarrhoea comes in the
morning and after eating ; in old people, excoriating stool. Dysentery
with bloody mucous stools and tenesmus ; diarrhoea with brown, copi-
ous, frequent, offensive, yellow or white watery stools ; ineffectual
urging to stool ; urging after stool ; offensive flatus. External piles.
Itching of anus. Burning in anus after stool



ARSEKibUM lObATUM


153


It acts deelpy upon the bladder and kidneys. It has been most use-
ful in Addison’s disease. Retention of urine ; constant or frequent
uring to urinate ; worse during the night ; urination is dribbling and
involuntary, suppression of urine ; the urine is albuminous, cloudy,
dark, red, copious or scanty and offensive.

The genital organs present many symptoms and complaints. Erec-
tions, strong toward morning ; later incomplete and wanting. It cures
hydrocele and induration of the testes. Itching of the penis and
glans ; perspiration of the genitals ; seminal emissions ; swelling of
the testes ; ulcers on the penis ; chancres and chancroids with bubos.

It has been a great comfort to the women in many complaints. It
has restrained the progress of cancer of uterus in a notable manner ;
the burning and odor are removed and the ulceration is lessened. Life
has been prolonged to four years in several cases. Sexual desire is
increased. It has cured enlargement and induration of the ovaries ; it
has cured inflammation of the ovaries. Leucorrhcca, acrid, bloody,
burning, copious, after menses, thick or thin, yellow ; menses absent
or suppressed, copious, frequent, late, painful, short. Haemorrhage
from the uterus ; pain in ovaries, especially the right ; sore, bruised
genitals and ovaries. Prolapsus of the uterus ; swollen ovaries. It
has stopped the growth of ovarian tumors.

Croupous condition of the larynx. Dryness in the air passages. In-
flammation of the larynx and trachea ; much mucus in the larynx and
trachea ; spasmodic conditions of the larynx like laryngismus ; burning
rawness and soreness in larynx and trachea ; phthisis of the larynx.
The voice is hoarse, rough and weak and finally lost ; respiration is
fast and asthmatic ; respiration is difficult at night, on ascending, on
exertion and motion, with palpitation ; respiration is irregular, rattling,
short, suffocative and wheezing. Asthma from 1 1 p. m. until 3 a. m.
The cough is in the morning, evening and after midnight ; the cough
is asthmatic, croupy, deep, dry, exhausting, during fever ; cough from
irritation and tickling in larynx and trachea ; the cough is loose, spas-
modic, suffocative ; worse from motion and talking ; worse in a warm
room. It cures whooping cough. Expectoration most in the morning ;
is bloody, copious, greenish-yellow, difficult ; mucous and bloody ; mucus
offensive, purulent, tough, viscid, yellow, tasting putrid, saltish, sweetish.

There is marked anxiety in the region of the heart. Catarrh of the
broncial tubes ; constriction of the chest, of the heart ; fatty degenera-
tion of the heart. Enlarged and painful mammae. Heat in the chest.
Inflammation of the bronchial tubes, endocardium, pericardium, lungs
and pleura ; murmurs of the heart ; stitching of the skin of chest ;
oppression of the chest and heart in a warm room ; pain in the side
of chest ; in the heart ; burning in the chest ; cutting pain in chest and
in the heart ; pressing pain in chest ; rawness in chest : stitching pain



ARSENICUM lODATUM


^53


in chest on coughing ; palpitation from excitement, from exertion ;
tumultuous palpitation. Paralysis of the heart, of the lungs. It is
a very useful remedy in ulcerative conditions during phthisis ; swollen
axillary glands ; tremulous heart ; tumor of the axilla. Great weak-
ness of chest and heart.

Pain in the back during menses ; pain in the lumbar region during
menses ; pain in sacrum and coccyx.

Coldness of hands, legs and feet : cramps of upper limbs, lower limbs,
thighs, legs and feet ; scaly eruptions, eczema and vesicles ; heat of
hands ; heaviness of the limbs as though tired ; heaviness of the feet.
Hip joint disease. Itching of all the limbs ; numbness of all the limbs,
fingers, legs and feet ; pain in all the joints, gouty and rheumatic ; rheu-
matic pain in upper limbs ; pain in elbow forearm, hip, thigh, knee,
foot ; drawing in lower limbs, thighs, knees ; stitching pain in shoulders,
wrists and knees ; tearing in joints, elbows, fingers ; paralytic weakness
in upper limbs ; paralysis of lower limbs. Cold perspiration of hands
and feet. Stiffness of limbs, of fingers. Dropsical swelling of hands,
legs and feet ; trembling of hands and lower limbs ; twitching of upper
limbs and legs ; weakness of upper limbs and knees.

Dreams amorous ; anxious ; of dead people ; distressing; vivid; night-
mare. Restless sleep ; sleepiness in the evening ; sleepless after mid-
night, waking too early.

Chill at night in bed ; chill external and internal, worse from motion.
Quartan, tertian shaking-chill ; periodicity marked ; warm room does
not ameliorate the chill. Fever afternoon and night ; fever alternates
with chill ; fever and chill intermingle ; dry, external heat : flushes of
heat ; chronic intermittent fever ; internal heat with external coldness ;
fever with no sweat, and desire to uncover. Hectic fever. Perspira-
tion morning and night ; cold sweat ; exhausting sweat ; sweat on mo-
tion, or on slight exertion ; profuse night sweats.

Amesthesia of the skin ; burning skin ; the skin is jaundiced ; liver
spots and red spots. The skin is cold to touch ; dryness of the skin
with inability to perspire. Many eruptions on the skin : boils, pustules,
rash and scales ; moist eruptions, eczema, itching eruption ; herpes ;
psoriasis. It has cured ichthyosis. Dry, scaly, burning eruptions ; urti-
taaria;. It cures all syphilitic eruptions where the symptoms agree,
where eruptions have been suppressed by local treatment. Excoria-
tion ; erysipelas ; formication, indurations : itching, burning an<^ sting-
ing ; rough skin ; purpura haemorrhagica. Dropsical, spongy swelling
of skin ; ulcers with bleeding or bloody discharges, with corrosive
watery, yellow discharge. Cancerous ulceration. Indolent and in-
durated ulcers ; sensitive and suppurating ulcers ; ulcerative pain in
ulcers ; in old syphilitic ulcers,

I ''tfi

20



J54


ARUM,IWPWU.VM..


ARUM TRIPHYLLUM

(Indian Turnip)

Many boys have wandered in the low grounds where this wild turnip
grows, and have taken a nip out of it, and probably remember the sen-
sations in the mouth that they received at that time. I distinctly
remember making an endeavor to enjoy a piece of wild turnip. The
tingling that is left in the lips and tongue and from the throat to the
end of the nose, and wherever sentient nerves come to the surface, is
astonishing. The prickling and tingling is painful. It is a sensation
that cannot be let alone. It requires a continued manipulation, and
from this we gather the sensations that must be present in children
when they are suflFcring from acute diseases and this remedy is indi-
cated. For, in spite of the rawness and bleeding and smarting of tho
parts, they will insist on pinching and scratching and picking the lips
and pressing around the mouth and boring into the nose. It has been
a guiding feature in acute diseases, scarlet fever, many throat affec-
tions, diseases that take on a low type, such as continued fever and
eruptive fevers. Among other complaints, sore throats, zymotic affec-
tions, delirium and excitement, even maniacal manifestations. It is
manifested to a great extent in these associated symptoms. It must
be that there is in the nose and lips painful tingling that the patient
persists in boring the fingers into the nose. Manipulating and pinch-
ing the lips, picking the lips. It is altogether a different symptom that
occurs in delirium of a low, muttering type, which we call carphologia,
picking the bed clothes, picking all the time, picking and handling the
clothing, a busy, lov/ form of muttering, must be doing something all
the time groping around with the lingers and feeling for something.
This is the carphologia and it is a mental symptom. While ‘‘picking
the lips” is given under the “mental” symptoms in the repertory, it is
not intended to mean that it is a mental symptom like carphologia.
Now, you will find two expressions in the repertory, and it is necessary
to have two — the one is that “the nose itches,” and the other is “he
rubs the nose,” he docs something ; that is what an individual would
do if his nose itched. One’s mind is not always directed towards the
two — one is a direct and the other is an indirect expression.

This remedy has not been sufficiently proved to bring out the nature
of its chronic manifestations. It has undoubtedly something of that
kind, but it has been used in a limited way among acute affections of
a zymotic character. It has not been used to any great extent fcH*
chronic sick headaches, but it has cured some headaches that are worse
in the heat, worse in a warm room and from warm clothing, worse
from becoming warm, worse from wrapping up the body. Heat in the
bead, determination of blood to the head. It has also cured eruptions


^S$

upon the scalp like eczema. It has also been found useful in catarrhal
affections of the nose, eyes and lids. About the nose its affections
have been mostly of the acute kind. It has most dreadful coryza.
The nose is stopped up, and more stopped up on the left side. Must
breathe through the mouth. Sneezing worse during the night ; lluent
acrid coryza. The discharge of saliva flowing over the lips produces
rawness, smarting and burning of the mucous membranes, and the lips
bleed. The fluid from the nose as it flows over the skin leaves red
streaks. “Acrid ichorous discharge excoriating the inside of the nose,
the alai and upper lip.“ That is cxpressi\c and occurs in diphtheria,
in various forms of sore throat, in scarlet fever, when this remedy is
indicated.

Inflammation of the tongue, with acrid discharge from the nose.
Inflammaiion of the root of the tongue, of the throat and soft palate,
of the tonsils, llic glands of the neck art swollen. This inflamma-
tory condition is followed l)y ])aialytic weakness, making it impossible
for him to swallow liquids or food, and when the mouth forces food
into the pharynx the ersophagus refuses to operate, and then fluids and
li(|uid3 arc forced up into the nose and run out of the nose. This has
been clinically observed many times in diphtheria and sore throats.
The sneezing is like an ordinary coryza, with repeated chills over the
body, and aching in the holies as if the bones would break, like Nux,
Eupator,, Arn.y Rhus, Bry^ and Ars., that Jiavc aching all over during
“cold.'' This is one of tine most striking medicines as an illustration
of the keynote system, that is, with those who prescribe on one symp-
tom and give this medicine whenever the patient bores his nose or pieks
his lips, notwithstanding that Cina bores the nose and picks the lips.
Cina has more of the congestive and nerve symptoms. The nostrils
are really so sore from the acridity of the fluids inside of the nose
that it feels as if the nostrils were filled with fire. This is the language
of the patients who narrate their symptoms in an Arum triphyllum
case. They conic into the office with a sore, raw nose, and it tingles
and tickles and he cannot let it alone. Fluids run down over the lip
and excoriate. The glands of the neck are often enlarged. When
he takes cold in the nose there is soreness of the neck and parotid
gland. Desire to bore into the nose. This boring into the side of
the nose is another symptom and differs from the one “boring the
nose." You will see children boring in the nose, inside of nose. It is
an inflammation of the nasal duct, the duct that leads from the eye to
the nose, and accompanied by a discharge of tears over the cheeks,
with the tickling that extends up there which they cannot reach, but
they undertake to reach it. Can hardly talk on account of phlegm in
the back part of the nose. He talks through the nose. The nose is
filled with mucus and there is great tumefaction of all the mucous



arum tKtPHYIitJM


^56

membranes, which gives him a nasal tone. ''Swollen, bloated face/^
If you observe the nose and face you will be surprised to see that so
much of the trouble is on the left side of the face, left nostril, left
lachrymal duct, etc. There is bleeding of the lips, upper and lower.
The under lip especially is denuded and drops of blood stand upon it,
and the patient is constantly picking and pinching the lips, and when
you request of the little one to stop it or take his hands away he yells
with a sort of sepulchral yell. “Children will often pick and bore into
raw surfaces, though it gives them pain and they scream with it, but
they keep on boring.” That is a striking symptom. Fluids make the
lips raw and then this tickling comes on and he cannot let it alone, he
must keep at it. “Appearance of raw bleeding surfaces on the lips,
buccal cavity, nose, etc.” Great itching tingling describes it. In ty-
phoid, where you would hardly expect much swelling of the parotid,
these glands are enlarged. In diphtheria, scarlet fever and sore throat
enlargement of the salivary glands. This inflammatory condition with
soreness and swelling of these glands ; the glands arc hard and tender
to the touch. The tongue is red, the papilUe elevated ; the tongue
appears to l)c almost denuded. It is raw and bleeding, sometimes does
bleed in a few places, and sometimes, after this has gone on for a
few days, when the tongue is projected it looks like a big red straw-
berry, and for that reason has been called “Strawberry tongue.”
"Tongue cracked, bleeding, burning, painful ; smarting on tongue and
fauces.” Putrid odor from the mouth. Mouth foul, so sore that he
was unwilling lo drink. All this points to tingling and raw condition
of the buccal cavity far back into the throat. It you look into the
buccal cavity you will see the parts raw, denuded and bleeding. Ex-
cessive flow of saliva, which is acrid. Mouth burns and is sore. Cries
when anything is offered. Buccal ^cavity covered with diphtheritic
ulcers, also with aphthous patches, which cover the whole mouth and
tongue. It says “stinging,” but it is a painful tingling, stinging like
the sting of a bee, stinging pains in the throat, and the parts arc ulcer-
ated, raw and bleed.

It has a diarrhoea, such as occurs in idiopathic typhoid. If you
have ever seen the yellow corn-meal mush when it is dropped on a
plate, it has the appearance of the typhoid yellow stools. When this
medicine is suitable diarrhoea is yellow like corn-meal ; frequent, faecal,
thin, mushy, yellow, is the description of this typhoid stool. There
are other times that the stool is dark brown, watery, thin. As is usual,
the faeces are acrid. The thin faeces escape from the anus and keep
the parts raw and burning. With other complaints, in typhoid espe-
cially, in the groin where the thigh bends upon the abdomen an ex-
coriation takes place with acrid moisture. Again, we notice rawness
over the coccyx. A moisture and rawness from acrid fluid in the pos-



ARUM TRIPHYLLUM


157


terior part of the fissure back of the anus so that over the coccyx and
back of the anus there is rawness and acrid moisture.

The voice comes in for an extensive part of the trouble. It has
been found especially to relate to singers and public speakers. At
times when a lawyer has had a long case and lie is making a final effort,
and has been speaking three or four hours, and while in a sweat has
got into a draft or gone out, he finds himself hoarse and cannot finish
his speech, a dose af Arum triph. will enable him to go on with his
speech in a clear voice. If clears up the hoarseness. In public speak-
ers and singers who have been compelled to strain the \oicc and have
taken a little cold and the voice is hoarse after prolonged exercise ; this
is the most striking feature of the Arum triph. voice. “Voice hoarse ;
from over-exertion of the voice is speaking or singing.” “Voice un-
certain, uncontrollable, changing continually, now deep, now hoarse,
etc.” It manifests itself in this way. A person starts in a certain
pitch and he cannot talk to you, but he tries another pitch and can talk.
It is a cjuecr thing that on certain notes they are voiceless, which sho\ws
that there is an irregular and patchy inflammation of the vocal cords ;
it is not a uniform inflammation or the voice would be uniformly
affected. “Clergyman’s sore throat,’' is not a good expression, because
it is clergyman's hoarseness that is meant ; hoarseness and rawness of
the throat of public speakers when talking. Qf course you would say
any voice that is hoarse is aggravated when talking, but it is not al-
ways so. The Rhus hoarseiless carries with it its characteristic relief
from motion, and the use of the voice is motion of the larynx.

When the Rhus patient commences to use the voice he finds that
he is hoarse, but after using the voice a little it loosens up, becomes
freer, or, in other words, it is better from motion. This may be so
either in acute or chronic hoarseness. Now, in this remedy as in
Phosphorus, the voice is ameliorated from clearing the vocal cords of
a little mucus. It is not so in Rhus tox,, for it is a weakness and
paralysis from cold. It is well known under Rhus tox, tliat the tend-
ons and muscles that are rheumatic become weak, they are stiff on
beginning to move and are ameliorated when they are warmed up ; so
it is with the voice.

Now, in the chest there is burning and rawness when coughing ; this
extends to the pit of the stomach. “Raw feeling in chest.” “Lungs
feel sore.” “Soreness in 1. lung.” You will notice that many times
patients and provers state sufferings arc in the lungs, w'hich may not
really be the region affected. Most likely from what is known of other
symptoms this burning is in the trachea, although it says in the lungs.
This remedy does have burning in the trachea, the whole length of it,
during an attack of coughing, and burning in the larger branches of
the bronchial tubes. The catarrhal state is largely confined to these



• asapcetida


158

parts, the trachea and bronchi, but this medicine has crued pneumonia.
It has been found useful as a palliative in phthisis. It is used in crude
form among the farmers as a domestic medicine for coughs and colds
and as a palliative in consumption. In many of the farm houses you
will find the wild turnip hung up in strings like beads to be dried and
grated and used with sugar and cream.

I mentioned the fact that it seems to favor the left side of the head,
the left nostril, the left side of the face. It also prefers the left chest
and the left lung. It has soreness in the left side of the chest and left
arm. It has a sensation of fullness in the thorax and soreness extend-
ing down and invohing the left lung.

Here is a clinical picture of fever : “Typhoid forms of fever ; pick-
ing ends of fingers and dry lips till they bleed, ere.”

In most of these complaints the urine is very scanty and is some-
times suppressed. You will very commonly note a good action of
this medicine in these complaints by its immediately starting up a
copious flow of urine. It is a sign of relief.

It has upon the skin all the scarlet rash that you would expect to
find in scarlet fever, and it has also the typoid patechia*.

ASAFOETIDA

This remedy in olden times was freijucntly abused for man and
beast. Our grandfathers supposed it was a j^totection against disease,
and hence they used it in the stables. Lumps of “foety,” as they called
it, where put in the corn for the horse, to keep off distemper. What it
has accomplished I am unable to say, but it is certain that these farm-
ers looked upon Asafoetida as a great protective against disease. It
has been used also by the laity as a medicine for fainting, for hysteria,
and all sorts of nervous symptoms and complaints. The use is justi-
fied by the proving. These things are scarcely worthy of note, but it
shows the general use among the people, as a domestic medicine, in
crude form. It has been used more extensively in this form than in
professional practice in a legitimate way.

There is one class of patients you will find who will trouble you.
Those cases that come into your office with puffed, venous, purple
faces ; they have an appearance of plethora ; the face looks puffed,
bloated and dropsical at times ; it is a dark red, dusky face ; such a
face we shall cure sometimes with Asafoetida. Carho an,, Aurum,
Cabo veg, and Pulsatilla are also related to this kind of face, but it
is a very troublesome face, it shows more or less cardiac disturbance
and venous stasis. The venous side of the heart will often be involved,
or be about to be involved, when you have this kind of face. I never


159


like to see them come into my office, for they are hard cases to man-
age. They have deep-seated troubles, with bleeding, they arc subject
to sudden inflammations, and they do not rally quickly. In this con-
stitution we have ulcerations ; a little place will ulcerate and suppurate,
and the ulceration will burrow ; this is just what this remedy does.
Another thing this kind of constitution will do is to set up an inflam-
matory condition of the periosteum with swelling, periostitis of the
tibia for instance, where the circulation is not very active ; inflamma-
tion of cartilages with tumefaction and purple skin, stitching pains and
dropsy, ulcerations and fistulous openings. This medicine is good for
just such states. “Ulcers with extreme sensitiveness.”

Patients often say, “I get no sympathy wdien I am sick because I
look so well fat, flabby and purple. This remedy will seldom be
thought of in lean persons ; they seem to be free from complaints like
those of Asafoetida, but in fat, flabby persons, extremely nervous, ex-
tremely sensitive to pain, full of hysteria. Purple w^licn out in the
cold, purple when excited. In other w^ords, you sec before you the
venous constitution, and these people get the worst kind of hysteria :
they go off almost from no cause into fainting : from a close room,
from excitement, from any disturbance ; sometimes cramps come on,
but more especially fainting. They are subject to stitching pains from
the bone to the surface : that ir, from wdthin out. The periosteum'
becomes irritated, and glands become sW'Ollcn. Syphilis sometimes
produces this kind of condition. Vascular disturbances in the body ;
periostitis, necrosis, induration of glands, nerve syphilis and head
pains. In old syphilitics with this kind of venous face, subject to
bleeding, ulcers turn black or become purple. In this there is a simi-
larity to Lachesis. Old scars turn purple, threaten to suppurate, take
on a venous aspect, become painful and turn black. Ulcers form at the site
of old scars in old syphilitic patients and soraciimcs in psoric patients.
Most complaints come on during rest and are better by slow motion.

There is another grand feature running through this remedy : it is
full of discharges, catarrhal discharges, discharges from ulcers, tvaicry
discharges from different places and even watery stool ; and all thesci
discharges are horribly offensive and ichorous. Deep, fiat ulcers from
bone and periosteal affections give out a watery, bloody discharge that
is horribly offensive, with pains shooting outwards. Get the idea of
the venous stasis well fixed in your mind and with this syphilitic state
added to it.

There are many pains running through the remedy and they arc
night pains like those of syphilis, nightly bone pains, and pains in the
periosteum. The ulcers are deep, with bluish edges. Varicose veins
surround the ulcers. Inflammation of the bone and periosteum, with
blueness all around the ulcers. When there has been, an inflanimatQry.



l6o ASAFCETIDA

condition of the periosteum, somewhat passive in character, the skin
adheres to the bone, glues down to it by adhesion. It is too feeble to
ulcerate, it does not get up a likely inHammation, but only a passive
state. The glands all over the body arc hot and throbbing, with shooting,
jerking pains, in syphilis or old psoric and scrofulous complaints.

The bone pains that arc felt in the head arc sometimes very dis-
tressing. Old syphilitic bone pains in the head, stitching, penetrating.
It seems where there are lumps and nodules, about the head, this
medicine seems to hurry things. Shooting, stitching, tearing pains
under left frontal eminence. This stitching pain is sometimes de-
scribed as if a nail or plug were driven into the head. These nervous
headaches are syphilic, hysterical or scrofulous ; hysterical pains de-
scribed as rending, tearing, stitching. All over the head there is stitch-
ing pain, but in the frontal eminence, in the temples, there is a sensa-
tion as if a nail or plug were driven in, and most of the pains seem to
bore, as if they extended from the hone to the surface, and hence
are said to be from within out.

It is useful in old syphilitics who arc subject to eye complaints,
ulcers on the eyeball, ulcers on the cornea, ameliorated in the open
air, with a sensation of numbness in the eyes ; inflammation of the iris,
with ragged appearance of the iris ; they arc subject also to severe,
sharp stitching pains that come from within out. The remedy is full
of burning, and so the eyeballs burn, better in the open air. Iritis,
but the inflammation sometimes involves the choroid, the retina, and
mucous membrane, making a general inflammatory condition of syphi-
litic character. There are tearing pains in various places around the
eyes ; sticking, stitching pains, worse at night. Ulcers, with stitching
pains, worse at night. Burning, stitching in the eyes with dryness, so
that the lids stick to the balls of the eyes, pain worse at night. There
is a misty appearance before the eyes, dullness as if looking through a
fog. It also seems as if the atmosphere were filled with little floating
black flies. “Muscae voliantes.'’ You have looked into the air and
seen little gnats and mosquitoes ; well it appears to these patients as if
these were there when they are not there. The discharge from the
eyes is ichorous, bloody and often offensive.

This same syphilitic miasm may attack the ear and the bones of the
ear. These bones may decay and the hearing he lost. '‘Burning in the
ear with discharge of foetid pus.” Stitching pains in the ears from
'within out,

A horribly offensive discharge comes from the nose ; ulcers high
up in the nose ; caries of the bones of the nose ; syphilitic ozaena.
Putrid old catarrhs. “Feeling as if the nose stopped high up, as if
he could not breathe through it, with fulness of the head, when riding
in a carriage.'* (Aurum, Aurum mun)



ASAFCEIXDA


l6l

Numbness is a great feature of this remedy, numbness of the scalp^
or deep in the head ; numbness here and there ; numb, dead feeling
associated with the pain ; numbness after pain ; often numbness after
sleep. Other nervous manifestations occur besides those that are
hysterical. It has choreic motions. You would expect such a peculiar
nervous constitution to have almost everything among its nervous
symptoms. ''Constantly chewing and working frothy slime out of
mouth, with swollen tongue.” “Speech unintelligible.” “Grinding of
teeth ; starting at night.” Swelling of the lips, and of the whole buccal
mucous membrane, especially the lower lip, with burning in the mouth.

There are syphilitic symptoms in the throat, attended with the usual
burning, darting, stitching in ulcers ; pain when swallowing ; a sensa-
tion of a ball rising in the throat, such as occurs in globus hystericus ;
choking, must constantly swallow. Hysterical and choreic affections
of the oesophagus and trachea. Spasms of the oesophagus. This lump
in the throat, or suffocation, is a sort of hysterical spasm of the
oesophagus. “Dryness and burning in the oesophagus.”

In the stomach troubles, if you have ever seen a typical case of
Asafoetida, you will wonder where all the air comes from ; it comes
up in volumes. “Hiccough-like contractions of the diaphragm.”
Choreic jerkings of the diaphragm, with expulsion of wind like the
sound of a pop-gun going off almost every second. It is a condition
that the patient has no control over. It is like the shooting off of little
guns forcing loud belching, loud eructations of wind from the stomach.
There are a few symptoms mentioned in the text just here that are
worthy of note. “Pulsation in pit of stomach ; perceptible to sight
and touch.” “Pressing, cutting, stitching pains.” A queer observation
has been made that flatus was not passed downward, but all upwards.
“Eructations ; smelling like garlic ; tasting rancid, sharp or putrid.”
Always horribly offensive, Offensivencss is a characteristic of the
remedy. And then there is a “gone empty feeling in the pit of the
stomach,” not a pain. “Pulsations after eating.” “Meteorism of the
stomach.” The remedy has many gastric and abdominal complaints ;
full of bellyache ; stitching pains, colic. The diarrhoea is more or less
troublesome. These patients are afflicted with diarrhoea from the
slightest indigestion, after any indiscretion in diet, a painful, watery
diarrhoea. “Liquid stools of most disgusting smell.” “Blackish-brown
papescent offensive stools, which relieve.”

“Bearing down in genitals, worse when riding in a carriage.”
“Uterine ulcer sensitive and painful.” This medicine has been very
useful in palliating uterine cancer in such constitutions as described ;
those with purple faces, never the very pallid ones. Women of feeble,
flabby, venous constitutions are subject to haemorrhages and mis-
carriages. Women who are not pregnant sometimes have the breasts



AtJRUM M£TALLICI;M


162

fill up with milk, wonderfully annoying thing, and but few remedies
have it ; this is one of the few. It has also deficiency of milk. ‘Ten
days after delivery milk diminished.’'

These patients sometimes get hysterical asthma ; all sorts of disturb-
ance in breathing, dyspnoea. “Asdimatic feeling in trachea." “Asth-
matic attacks at least once a day all her life, brought on by every bodily
exertion, coition, especially by every satisfying meal." Attacks of
dyspnoea after coition, like Ambra. “Obstinate titillating cough < at
night." Many of these complaints are worse at night ; nightly aggra-
vations. Syphilitic complaints are commonly worse at night and such
antisyphilitic remedies as Mercurius, Staphisagria, Hepar, Nitric acid,
etc., are all worse at night. Among the other chest complaints, I will
read a few of those that are marked here prominently and are striking
ones. “Pressure and burning of the sternum." “Compression of
chest as from a heavy weight." “Stitches in chest." “Single, violent
stitches from within outward, at short intervals.

This remedy is full of rheumatism and gouty symptoms ; gouty
affections in general, in nervous constitutions. When such a nervous
constitution finally produces gouty formations, the nervousness often
disappears ; for it has been relieved by the deposit in the joints ; a
transformation scene has taken place.

AURUM METALLICUM

The general features of the remedy are such as relate to the mind
and such as relate to the tissues of the body in general. If you run
through the mental symptoms, taking them all in as one great whole,
you will see that all the affections, natural to healthy man, are per-
verted, So great in extent is this that one of the fundamental loves,
which is the love of living, of self-protection, is perverted and he
loathes life, is weary of life, longs to die and seeks methods to commit
suicide. No love of life. The affections pre-eminently are deranged,
the intellectual sphere is only secondarily changed. Of course in-
sanity runs through the remedy, but it is an insanity that be-
gins in the will and proceeds to the intellect ; it is first ob-
served as a perversion of the affections. It is astonishing that one
could get into such a state of mind, such horrible depression of
spirits that there is an absolute loss of enjoyment in everything. You
take away a man’s hope, and he has nothing to live for, he then wants
to die. Such, it seems, is the state in this medicine. Self-condemna-
tion, continual self-reproach, self-criticism, a constant looking into
self; she does nothing right, everything is wrong, nothing will suc-
ceed, hopelessness. “Imagines he cannot succeed in anything, and he
does everything wrong; he is in disunion with himself." Imagines



AURUM METALLICUM


163


he sees obstacles in his way everywhere. He is all the time imaging
that he has neglected something, that he has neglected his friends.
He imagines that he deserves reproach in consequence of having
neglected duty; he has neglected something, he is wrong, is wholly
evil, has sinned away his day of grace, is not worthy of salvation ;
this is the train of thought that constantly runs through his mind.
The thought really becomes uncontrollable ; he is absorbed in himself
and sits and broods over it, and by brooding over it he only intensifies
his present state and hatches new grievances, continues to worry over
himself, thinks he is wholly unfit for this world, and then he longs to
die. He looks on the dark side of everything, constantly expecting bad
news, looking for everything to go wrong. The future looks dark
to him, and he wants to die ; he never will succeed, for everything
goes wrong that he turns his hand to. His business is dark, his
family troubles him, his friends annoy him ; he becomes extremely
irritable, easily angered, is worried over trifles, and easily excited.
Every little thing rouses him into anger and turmoil, he is always in
a vexation. The Aurum state of mind is an insanity dreadful to
look upon because of its turbulence and melancholy. It is suitable
in the most profound states of melancholy and depression where the
patient sits silent and says nothing. When disturbed he is aroused
to great vehemence, anger and violence. ‘‘Melancholy, feels hateful
and quarrelsome.’' 'Terrible melancholy after abuse of Mercury/*
The causes of this state of insanity are prolonged anxiety, unusual
responsibility, syphilis and lois of properly. Persons who have been
repeatedly drugged with Mercury, have established upon themselves a
mercurial disease, with enlargement of the liver, and this is almost al-
ways attended more or less by melancholy and sadness and such hope-
lessness as we find in Aurum. Aurum produces such affections of the
liver as are associated with cardiac affections, endocarditis, dropsy of
the heart and rheumatic affections that have gone to the heart. You will
notice that wherever the affections are pre-eminently disturbed in mental
disease that there is either cardiac weakness, endocarditis, enlargement
of the heart, or some organic or functional disease of the heart. You
will very often find a history of taking Mercury that has superinduced
a rheumatic state that has been rubbed away with liniments until the
heart is affected, and with this comes hopelessness, insanity of the
will, disturbance of the affections. Then it appears to spread in this
remedy from the will to the understanding, and the intellectual portion
of man becomes involved. Think w'hat a state It is for a man whd
has been in good condition of health, respected in his business circles,
to have a desire to commit suicide. You will see other kinds of in-
sanity and a breaking down or a state of feebleness of the intellect,
he cannot think nor reason ; his affections are practically intact, but



164


AURUM METALLICUM


he finally goes into a state of imbecility, or he becomes wild and com-
mits suicide from impulse. That is an instance where the intellect
has been affected first and spread to the will. Sometimes this state
comes on, and no disturbance in the man’s intellectual nature has been
observed ; it is intact, it is sound. He has been sound in his business
affairs, he has been a good father, he has been observed by those
around him to be intelligent, but he has silently brooded over his
state and his hatred of the world ; he has told nobody of it, and then,
he has been found hung in his room. The man’s intellectual nature
keeps the man in contact with the world ; but his affections are largely
kept to himself. A man can have affection for all sorts of things and
perversion of the affections, but his intellect will guide him not to
show his likes and dislikes to the world. The affections cannot be
seen, but man’s intellect is subject to inspection. He cannot conceal his
intellect. We shall see that the affections are interior, they are covered
with a cloak, they are his innermost and are hidden from inspection ;
but the understanding is the outermost garment, it surrounds and
hides his affections, just as does the garment he wears over the body
hide the body. The affections that Aurum resembles are those like
unto the very innermost nature of man.

‘‘Ailments from grief, disappointed love, fright, anger, contradic-
tion, mortification.” “Pain makes her desperate so that she would
like to jump out of the window.” He meditates upon death, upon
suicide ; he wants to get out of the world, wants to destroy himself,
has no love for his life which he thinks is worthless.

The remedy is full of rheumatic affections, not unlike such as are
found in old mercurial cases ; rheumatic affections with swelling of
the joints ; affections of the cartilages and bone, inflammation of the
periosteum ; thickening and induration of the periosteum. Indura-
tions of glands ; induration of the cartilages about the joints. These
are all of syphilitic and mercurial character. It is useful in old syphi-
litics when the bones are breaking down in any part of the body ; the
shin bones, nose bones, ear bones, any of the small bones. Like
syphilis and mercury, the complaints are aggravated at night, com-
ing on in the evening and keep up all night. The pains are violent,
they tear, the bones ache as if they would break, not in acute fevers
but in old syphilitic bone troubles. Knife-like pains in the periosteum.
Pains in the joints rendering them immovale. Inflammation of the
bone itself with caries. It is not strange that the vascular coating
of the bones, the periosteum, should be greatly affected because there
is a strange vascularity, all over the economy, in this medicine. The
veins are enlarged, in a state of congestion and inflammation, and
friable. The veins become thickened and tumefied. The blood vessels
pulsate all over the body. “Erethism or vascular fulness characterizes



AURUM METALLICUM


^^5

nearly all complaints.” Fulness of the veins of the extremities; this
goes on until swelling appears with weakness so that dropsy is preva-
lent throughout the remedy. (Edema of the extremities, with
pitting upon pressure, which occurs in heart and liver affections. A
false state of plethora seems to exist in the body and finally
turmoil and excitement occur. Violent orgasms in the body, sometimes
demonstrated as violent heat, coming in flushes with excitement.
Fidgetiness, feeling as if something dreadful were going to happen
throughout the economy. Then it settles into a state of quiescence for
awhile and then this repeats itself. These violent orgasms come pre-
paratory to the localization or establishment of some breakdown in
the economy. At times it is a cardiac affection, with marked op-
pression behind the sternum with dyspnoea on walking fast for going
upstairs. Endocarditis will have this turmoil in the body ; by and by
look for albumin in the urine, look for enlargement of the liver, look
for signs of cancer of the uterus, and deep-seated affections.

**Boring in lx)nes.” *Tams drive to despair.” The pains drive
the patient out of bed at night and make him walk. This is seen
in old syphilitic bone pains, and old mercurialized patients. The
patient has been taking Mercury all his life and his liver is enlarged,
and his joints are enlarged, He goes to every doctor, with an
endeavour to get relief from his distressing sufferings. Mercury and
disease are so mixed up that a great turmoil will result from your
first prescription. He will go through these stages of violence and
periodical attacks. You will have to know such medicines as Aurum,
Chelidoniuffi and Staphisagria to get this patient over these awful at-
tacks which he is obliged to go through.

This medicine wonderfully affects the glands, the parotid glands,
the glands about the groin, the lymphatics in the abdomen ; in fact,
the glands everywhere. The mammary glands, the testes and ovaries,
are involved, and undergo states of hardness, infiltration, etc. Aurum.
cures chronic enlargement of the testes, and lumps in the mammary
glands. Tumors in these glands, of cystic character, have been cured
by Aurum. Hahnemann potentized Aurum and gave some of it to a
patient, and it did not work, but he thoroughly triturated it until he
got it to the fifteenth potency and then it worked and restored that
patient to the bosom of his family. Hahnemann says that in the
earlier triturations the dose wa& yet too large to cure ; so he went higher
until it was sufficiently small to cure, sufficiently attenuated to go into
the interior of the economy through the various envelopes of man.

There is one grand feature running through the Aurum state ; it is
the manner in which he is affected by temperature, and by the weather.
Here are some symptoms that relate to the whole man, which must
be examined in this connection. “Desire for open air.” This patient



i66


AURUM METALLICUM


ranks along with Pulsatilla as to temperature ; but Aurum is not mild,
gentle and yielding, he is obstinate, irascible, the veji7 opposite of the
Pulsatilla patient. ‘‘Generally > growing warm.^* This is in con-
nection with the headaches. “Cold water ameliorates pain in eyes.''
“Averse to uncover,” but he desires open air like Pulsatilla. “Warms
air, asthma <.” Many symptoms disappear after washing, especially
cold washing ; but whenever the patient is suffering from great excite-
ment, turmoil and vascularity, constitutional orgasm, pulsations, he
wants the doors and windows open, wants to get out in the cool air ;
wants the clothing thrown off. This state of excitement and pulsa-
tion is ameliorated by the open air. It has those flushes of heat so
common to women at the critical period, and these are followed by
sweat, sometimes by chilliness.

Most that we have said of the remedy is about its general aspect,
for everything about the mind is general.

In Aurum the pain in the head is very intense, maddening, often
accompanied by a sensation as if air were blowing upon him ; he looks
around to see where the draft comes from when there is none ; ex-
tremely sensitive. Often has to have the head wrapped up, although
it feels hot, with a good deal of congestion and rush of blood to the
head. The head is sore and feels bruised. Stitching, burning, tearing
pains in the head ; much throbbing in the head. The face is bloated,
flushed and shiny with the congestive headaches. These headaches
are often found in syphilitic subjects ; often associated with cardiac
disease. Pain in the back of the head associated with cardiac disease,
with sluggish circulation, purple face, duskiness of the skin. Exostoses
as in syphilis. The skull bones are sensitive to touch ; the periosteum is
tender to touch. In old mercurialized cases with bone affections and
necrosis of the skull, as in syphilis and mercury, the hair falls out
copiously ; the head becomes bald. Baldness due to syphilis ; the
scalp is left shiny and the hair will not grow in again. In acute dis-
eases there is falling out of the hair, but it grows in again. But young
syphilitics often lose the hair and remain bald all the rest of their life.

There are disturbances of the eye, of a catarrhal character, even to
the extent of ulceration and infiltration of the various coatings of the
eye. Iritis : great disturbance of the whole visual apparatus ; some
of the striking features I will read from the book, but remember the
constitution that we must always have in view ; remember the mental
state, the mercurial and syphilitic states, the gouty tendency, and the
complaints that belong to joints, remember the cardiac disturbances*
As we review the eye symptoms we thus see the constitution with
which they are likely to be associated. “Photophobia.” Weak sight
and eyes. “By gaslight a number of bright, floating specks and dots
arc seen." “Eyes ameliorated by moonlight.” “Large letters cannot



AURUM METALUCUM


167


be distinguished/' ‘Tellow, cresent-shaped bodies floating obliquely
upward in field of vision/* “In upper dark section of field of vision
occasional showers of bright, star-like bodies/* In Calcarca there is a
queer symptom ; he sees a sudden flash arise from the lower portion of
the field of vision ; it shoots up and divides, and then he secs stars in
every direction. It is the appearance you will sec sometimes in the
shooting off of one of those rockets that explode and come down in
a shower. That has been observed in Calcarea, “Hemiopia of thq
left eye.** And so it goes on with many of these peculiar things that
can hardly be described except in the language of the text. “Protrud-
ing eyes.** Protrusion of the eyes, such as occurs in exophthalmic
goitre, with enlargement of the heart, has been cured by Aurum. En-
largement of the thyroid gland with rapid and full pulse. Exophthal-
mic goitre has been cured by Aurum. Natr, mur, “Starting, dreary
look.** “Iritis marked by much pain around eye, wliich seems to be
deep in bone.** Such a state would be likely to be produced by syphilis
that had been treated with Mercury and Aurum would come in as an
antidote to both the syphilis and the Mercury. “Pupils irregularly
dilated.*’ It has catarrhal states of the eye. It has inflammation of the
conjunctiva, choroid, iris and retina. Well, syphilis does this, taking
hold of the eye in just this way and causing great infiltration. Pains round
about the eye ; the thin plate bones, and the skull bones are all sensitive
to pressure ; the bones seem tender ; periostitis ; opacity of the cornea.

Syphilis often takes hold of the car, affecting the bones of that or-
gan. “Caries of mastoid process, obstinate otorrhoea.** Caries of the
bones of the ear. “Parotids swollen, painful to touch.** “Oversensi-
tiveness to noises ; but music relieves.** “Humming, buzzing and rush-
ing in ears. Rushing like the rushing of wind and falling water.
“Annoying dryness in ears and nose.** This is all like the complaints
of syphilis, which are cured by Aurum, but Aurum also corresponds to
and has cured many times otorrhoea following scarlet fever where
there is even entire loss of the drum of the ear and loss of the bones.
Of course it does not restore hearing. Patients will come to you for
car troubles, and you may find that the whole ear apparatus is de-
stroyed ; the mucous membrane and bones of the ear are all in a state
of ulceration and necrosis and the discharge is foetid. The patient
consults you in order to have the hearing restored and it may not be
possible ; stops that ear discharge and restore the hearing are the only
two things he thinks about. If you go to-day to our ear specialists and
speak about curing the patient, they would not know what you were
talking about ; the only thing that would be thought of would be the
stopping of that ear discharge as quickly as possible. They would
examine the ear to see whether it is intact or not ; and if it is not, the
hearing is of course gone and the stopping of the discharge is then



i63


AUKUM METALUCUM


all that is taken into consideration. Homoeopathy teaches that the
patient should be treated and the patient only, after which the organs
and tissues become normal. The whole duly of the physician is to*
restore health to the patient. We have the nose specialists with their
local applications. These things will only bring on bone disease, and
tubercular troubles ; they stop the discharge from the nose, and of
course nature must have a vent somewhere and so she establishes a
discharge in the chest ; the trouble progresses from the mucous mem-
branes into the lung, into the parenchyma of the lungs, and is often of
a tubercular character, and then these men tell you the bacilli have come.
This is spurious science. Clean, healthy tissues are the only safeguard.

Aurum is full of nasal troubles, with foetid discharge. The bones
of the nose necrose ; syphilitic necrosis, the nose flattens down ; the
bones are discharged. You sec these people walking about with flat-
tened-down nose and if you get near enough to them the stench will
be observed. They are nearly all syphilitics. A few remedies have
the power of curing this syphilitic nose condition ; Aurum, Mercury
and Hepar are three of them. I have cured this state a number of
times with Hepar, I once cured a man after the bones were com-
pletely softened, so that when the nose was handled it would bend
right over ; only a sort of cartilaginous structure held the nose in
place. I gave that patient Hepar, It cured him of syphilis after he
had been filled in vain with Mercury, “Coryza, thick discharge, like
white of egg.*' “Mucous discharge from posterior nares in morning.’'
Tip of nose knobby, red, like Lack,; strawberry nose. Little knobs on
the nose composed of varicose veins in heart cases, with disturbance
of the right side of the heart ; sometimes found in old drinkers and in
heart affections generally. Face red and swollen. Aurum has cured
epithelioma of the wing of the nose and lip. Remember the horribly
offensive odor from the nose, loss of smell following pains in the nasal
bones ; nasal catarrh. “Ulcerated, agglutinated, painful nostrils."
“Crusts in nose." “Nose feels obstructed as in dry coryza." With
nearly all of these nose affections, the patient is bowed down with sor-
row, full of grief ; black clouds hang over him and he wants to die.
Loathing of life and wants to find some way to commit suicide.

“Puffy under eyes." “Blue about nose and lips." “Face glowing
red. “Violent boring in right zygomatic process when walking."
“Carious teeth." “Toothache at night." “Foul breath." “Syphilitic
ulcers in palate and throat." “Boring in hard palate." This medicine
has cured craving for alcohol, the craving of drunkards.

Another marked feature of this medicine is its ability to harden,
enlarge and inflame the liver ; induration with cardiac affections ; en-
largement of the heart and liver. When you take into consideration
the venous system, the portal system and its close association with the



AURUM metalucvm


169

hcat-t in establishing the circulation of blood in the abdomen, and the
work that it docs in the abdomen as a great receiving apparatus, you
will not be surprised to find that heart and liver aftections are asso-
ciated with hopelessness and despair. Notice, on the other hand,
something that will set you to thinking perhaps, in cases of phthisis,
none of them is hopeless, they think they are going to get well ; the
lungs arc almost gone with tubercles, but he knows if he could only
get up that little something out of the throat he would get welL No-
tice then that peculiar relation bewcen the lungs and the understand-
ing, and between the heart and the will. With every little trouble
located in the heart there comes hopelessness, but when the manifes-
tation of disease is in the lungs there is hopefulness.

Dropsical conditions of the abdomen. ‘Inguinal hernia.’^ ‘Tabes
mesenterica.’’ All of the glands of the body are involved more or less.
All sorts of disturbances of the sexual organs. “Testes indurated.''
“Frequent nightly emissions." Complaints as the result of vices.
“Hydrocele." “Ulcers on scrotum after gonorrhoea." “Burning and
stinging in perineum." “Condylomata around anus." “Induration of
utcius."' “Menses too late and scanty." “Uterus prolapsed and in-
durated." “Leucorrhoea thick white." Complaints in the uterus and
region of the pelvis from straining and reaching up the arms ; abortion
from reaching up at the windows and fixing a curtain, etc. Aurum is
a medicine that is suitable for , induration of the uterus and ulceration
of the uterus as a result of re|)eated abortions. When you study the
loss of affections that is invotvM in such a state and the affections or
lack of affections that are found in Aurum you can see a deep well-
grounded similitude in the symptoms, and that is the way to hunt for
a remedy. It is in the sphere of the physician to examine into this
state of mankind in which he can destroy his offspring and to examine
into the nature of remedies producing such a state. We see in Aurum
this entire perversion of all the loves, of mankind, and finally their en-
tire destruction.

The symptoms of asthma and of difficult breathing you would nat-
urally expect to be associated with the cardiac affections. Notice this
also, that the difficult breathing is of two kinds, such breathing as in-
volves the lung, and such breathing as involves the heart. So it is
we have an asthmatic condition of dyspnoea that is cardiac in character,
and dyspnoea that is purely respiratory. These are entirely distinct in
character ; one belongs to such remedies as have a predominance of
action on the affections, and another belonging to those having a pre-
dominance of action on the intelligence ; one will involve the lung and
finally bring on emphysema ; the other one is entirely different in its
character, with irregular heart action, and only secondarily associated
with emphysema. Study your pathology with these things in mind

22



AUrUm MUtUAllcUM


ijo

and you will be able to perceive the nature of sickness and its results.
These things are not mere observation, whims and theories, but are
the outcome of studying things from internal to external.

In this remedy the pains wander from joint to joint and finally
locate in the heart. Angina pectoris is often the ending of an old
rheumatism that has wandered from joint to joint, “Difficult breativ
ing.” If the case goes on a little while, there will be blood spots, and-
if he lie on the right side the lower part will be dull on percussion and
the upper part will be resonant. Palpitation with great agony. Ex-
treme oppression in the region of the heart on walking fast and going
upstairs with oedema of the lower limbs.

AURUM MURIATICUM

This remedy exercises a profound action upon the mind and body.
The patients suffering from latent syphilis are over-sensitive to it, and
often require it in their complaints. It has many bone symptoms and
pains and they are worse at night. Its catarrhal condition is very
much like that found in old cases of syphilis, such as had long treat-
ment with Mercury and Iodides. It is a rheumatic constitution also
and is useful in acute and cluonic rheumatism. It has cured rheu-
matic fever where the joints have been mostly affected but are now
better and the heart is the principal scat of suffering. Many com-
plaints are associated with cardiac disease. Dropsical states from
heart disease, from liver affections, with albumin in the urine after
scarlet fever or with intermittent fever. Where old syphilitics con-
tinue to lose flesh. The glands and parts inflamed become indurated.
It has been useful in cancerous glands. Inflammation of the bone and
periosteum ; caries, exostosis after Mercury in latent syphilis. Caries
of tlie joints with nightly boring and gnawing pains. It has burning
pains in many parts. The pains are tearing, drawing, pressing and
stitching. Many symptoms comt: on during rest and some during
motion. Cold, wet weather ameliorates. Warm air, warm bed, warm
room, warm wraps, becoming warm even in open air, and warmth in
general aggravates the general leeling. Exertion and walking in-
crease many symptoms. The palpitation, suffocation and great weak-
ness come from walking and exertion. While open air ameliorates
he is even in the open air incapable of exertion. Fast walking is im-
possible. The nervous symptoms are very marked. Excitement, sen-
sitive to noise, starting when spoken to, starting in sleep. When the
above symptoms are concomitants of heart and liver diseases this rem-
edy will most likely be useful. Fullness of the veins all over the body
is a strong feature of this remedy. It is a most useful remedy in
patients suffering from the chronic effects of gonorrhoea and syphilis,



AtJRUM MimiATICUM


171


where fig warts and syphilitic ulceration are present together.

The mental symptoms are largely such as are found in Aurum. It
has the same suicidal disposition. His mind dwells upon his broken
health until he becomes low-spirited and desires death. He loathes
his life. Weeping and aversion to his occupation. Indolence, The
melancholia of old syphilitics. Extremely anxious with palpitation.

Said to be “full of whims and notions.'* Extremely irritable.
Nothing can be done to please him. Constant fretting. Extreme
mental and physical restlessness. He walks the streets slowly, to be
in the open air which ameliorates ; he is much worse in the house, and
in the warm room. Thinking about his complaint caused the heart to
beat strong and fast. Symptoms worse after fright, vexation and
mortification. When the general symptoms mentioned above strongly
predominate it will cure the particulars in the various parts below.

It cures violent syphilitic headaches with vertigo. Violent left-sided
headaches. Intense ache in forehead. Burning in occiput. Cerebral
congestion. Pulsating in the head. Pain ameliorated by cold appli-
cation. His forehead is hot. Heat of the head and cold extremities.
Great soreness of the periosteum and exostoses of the skull. Tearing
pains in the skull. Worse nights.

It cures chronic eye troubles due to syphilis. The mucous membrane
of the lids and ball is red, thickened and very vascular. The lids stick
together in the morning. Dii^ vision in the evening by artificial light.
Loss of vision after syphilis, and after scarlet fever. Very slow accom-
modation. Amaurosis, chronic inflammation of margin of lids. Burn-
ing pain in the eyes.

Buzzing, ringing and roaring in the ears followed by deafness. A
sensation as if the ears were open. Music relieves the ear symptoms.
Eczema behind the ears. Burning and itching behind the ears at night.

It is one of the most useful remedies for catarrh of the nose in pa-
tients who are sensitive to the warm room. It classes with Pulsatilla
and Kali sulphuricum, as both of these are better in the open air. The
discharges of the remedy are thin or thick like pus, very offensive and
sometimes bloody, and there are many hard crusts in the nose. Bleed-
ing of the nose on blowing out of the crusts. Yellow, greenish dis-
charge. It cures the most stubborn syphilitic catarrh. The nasal bones
become sensitive to pressure. Caries of the bones of the nose. Red,
swollen nose. Deep cracks about the wings of the nose. Lupus of the
wings of the nose. Infants with inherited syphilis with snuffles and
indented nose.

The circumscribed red face with pallor of face and neck in heart
complaint, palpitation on slight exertion, pressure behind the sternum
when walking, suffocates in a close room, wants cool air, ameliorated
by gentle motion and we have a combination that this remedy often



AURUM MURIAUCUM


172

cures. The pale face with red spot on each cheek is not that which
is found in consumption, but in heart complaint. The infant's face
looks old. Acne on the face. There is often a red, healthy look on’
the face of very sickly people. Red faced from venous stasis; it is a
false plethora, like that described in Aurum. CJaries of the lower jaW
like Phosphorus and exostosis of right cheek bone. Burning and swell-
ing of the lips. Indurated lips. Cancerous ulcer of the lips. Painful
swelling of the submaxillary gland.

It has been useful in cancer of the tongue. Inflammation of the
tongue followed by induration. Dry, red, excoriated tongue. Warts on
the tongue. Metallic taste and salivation.

Pains in the throat and ulceration. Ulceration of the tonsils. Inflam-
mation with dryness in throat.

The stomach is very weak and digestion is slow. Nausea, distension
and diarrhoea after eating. Coffee, tea and wine disagree. Eructa-
tions putrid. Nausea in the morning, better after breakfast. Vomiting
of green fluid. Gastritis, cramps in stomach. Sharp pains in the stom-
ach with burning, intense thirst.

Enlargement of liver and spleen. Chronic inflammation of the liver.
The liver is large and hard. Burning in the liver. Tight feeling in
the region of the liver. Liver troubles associated with heart disease with
albumin in the urine and dropsy of the limbs.

Abdominal dropsy. Drawing pains and distension from gases.
Great tenderness of abdomen.

Frequent fluid stools, grayish, white, bileless. Diarrhcea with liver
affection, or with Bright's disease. Diarrhoea worse at night. Haem-
orrhoids with bleeding at stool. A heavy ring of warts around the anus
with copious moisture. Marked excoriation around the anus. It has
cured fistula in ano. Fig warts of the anus with ulceration.

Frequent urination day and night, but worse during the night.
Urine dribbles. Increased flow of urine. Urine turbid, reddish sedi-
ment. Gonorrhoea in old syphilitic subjects where they have been bad-
ly treated. Chancre on the prepuce and scrotum. Fig warts on the
penis, scrotum or anus. Bubo in left groin. Surceased sexual desire.
Induration of testes.

Enlargement and great hardness of uterus. Indurated cervix. Chron-
ic inflammation of uterus and ovaries. Menses frequent and profuse,
flow excoriating. Leucorrhoea copious, yellow. Uterus prolapsed and
heavy. Inflammation of vagina and labia. Gonorrhoea and swelling of
glands in the groin. Heat, burning and itching of the vagina and labia.

Suffocation in a warm room, from the clothing, from ascending
stairs and from walking fast. Dyspnoea at night. Dry paroxysmal
cough at night. Heart cough. Loose cough with thick yellow expec-
toration. Most distressing pressure under the sternum as if it would



BAPTISIA


173


burst on ivalking fast, ascending steps or on any exertion, with palpi-
tation. Palpitation on exertion and from excitement. Palpitation if
suddenly spoken to. Sharp pains in the chest, going from place to
place. Pain in the heart. Drawing and cutting in the heart. Violent
pressure in the region of the heart. Cardiac anguish. Angina pec-
toris. Endo-carditis. Enlarged right side of the heart. The palpita-
tion keeps her from sleeping. Rheumatic heart. Palpitation from
mental exertion. Pulse small, weak and fast. The heart is feeble.
Pulsation strong in neck and temples. Violent, irregular heart.

Trembling of the hands in the morning. Shocks in the arms.
Burning, shooting pains in the forearms. Drawing in the shoulders.
Worse in the warm bed and during rest. Tearing pains in the shoul-
ders. Stiffness of arms and fingers.

Dropsical swelling of the lower limbs. Exostoses on the tibia.
Periostitis . of the labia. Extreme sensitiveness of the tibia. Pain in
leg at night. Burning feet. Pain in feet worse from warmth and
motion. Cutting in the toes when walking. Burning, redness and
swelling of the toes. Limbs cold and covered with a cold sweat. Drawing,
tearing in all the limbs. Venous engorgement of the lower limbs.

Sleeplessness from palpitation and from excitement, wakes with
a start. Violent dreams, tormenting dreams of sadness.

BAPTISIA

Baptisia is suitable for acute diseases. It is principally a wshort-acting
medicine, suitable for complaints that are not long lasting. So far as
we know it is not an antipsoric, does not go deep into the life. All of
its acute diseases and complaints have the appearance of zymosis, like
scarlet fever, diphtheria, typhoid, and gangrenous complaints. There
is one thing that is unusual about it, it brings on this septic state more
rapidly than most other remedies. The zymotic complaints of Ars,,
Phos,, Rhus, and Bry,, are much slower in their pace. But Baptisia is
suitable for typhoids that come on rapidly, and hence it is not so often
suitable in idiopathic typhoids. When an individual comes down sud-
denly from cold, from malaria, from drinking poisonous waters, and
from any zymotic or septic cause he is hurled into bed in a few days,
instead of going through a period of four, five or six weeks. The old
idiopathic typhoid fevers come on slower. Baptisia is suitable for
those blood poisons that arc highly septic, such as- the puerperal state,
such as scarlet fever. He comes down perhaps with the appearance of
a sudden violent break down, with a remittent fever. But all at once
it turns continued, and takes on septic symptoms. So much for its
progress and its pace. Every medicine must be observed as to its
velocity, as to its pace, as to its periodicity, as to> its motion, and its



174


BAPTISIA


wave. We get that by looking at the symptoms. You take an indi-
vidual who has been down in a mine, in the swamp, down in the mud,
in the sewers, who has inhaled foul gases, who goes into bed with a
sort of stupor, from the very beginning he feels stupid. It is not grad-
ual, but he goes down very suddenly, and he is stupid. He is pros-
trated. His face is mottled. Sordes begin to appear on the teeth
much earlier than in the regular typhoid. The abdomen becomes dis-
tended much earlier than in a regular typhoid ; that is, one who is ac-
customed to observing those things knows they are postponed for a
number of days ; while with this remedy the third day the abdomen is
distended, his mouth is bleeding, and is putrid. His odors are hor-
rible ; and he is in a marked state of delirium, such as would not be
expected until the typhoid is out for many days. So it has rapid run-
ning diseases. It has velocity. That is, he is going down toward
death rapidly. He is increasing in his prostration more rapidly than
usual. It is not a gradual decline of days and weeks. He goes into
a state of stupor. When aroused he takes on delirium. It does not
matter whether it is scarlet fever, or typhoid fever, or a septic surgical
fever, or a puerperal fever, or what. He has fever, and if you look at
him, and talk to him, and turn him over, and rouse him up, and make
him realize that you want to say something to him — which is difficult —
he gives you the impression that he has been on a big drunk. That is
the first thought you will have in a Baptisia case. His countenance is
besotted. It is bloated and purple and mottled. Blood oozes from the
mouth. You have seen the besotted countenance of drunkards, and it
is like an old drunkard.

His mind seems to be gone. He does not know what he is talking
about. He is in confusion, and when aroused he attempts to say some-
thing, and utters a word or two and it all flits away, and he is back in
his state of stupor again. No matter what disease that comes in, no
matter what inflammation is present, no matter what organ is inflammed,
if that slate of the blood that can give rise to such symptoms and such
sepsis is present, if that state of the mind is present, it is Baptista.

All of the discharges are putrid. The odor is cadaverous, pungent ;
penetrating. His perspiration, if he has any, is sour, foetid, pungent,
and penetrating. If he has no sweat the body gives oft an odor that
is unaccountable. The odor is so penetrating that on going into the
front door the whole house, if the room is open, is filled with the odor.
The odor from the stool is putrid and so penetrating that it can be de-
tected on first going into the house.

Now, a strange thing that runs through the remedy is a peculiar
kind of mental confusion, in which he is in a constant argument with
his parts. He seems to feel that there are two of him. He realizes a
dual existence whenever he is roused up. He will begin talking about



BAPtlj^U


^75


the other one in bed with him. It is said clinically that “his great toe
is in controversy with his thumb.” Or, “one leg is talking to the other
leg.” Or, one part is talking to another part ; or, he is scattered around
over the bed ; tumbles and you ask him what he is trying to do — “why,

1 am trying to get those pieces together.” He never succeeds ; he is
in delirium, of course. These are only examples ; you will get a new
phase every time you get a Baptisia case. Most of the time he is un-
conscious except when roused. Sometimes mutters. You will see his
lips go, and you rouse him to see what he is about, and he is trying to
get the pieces together. “Confused as if intoxicated.” There are
stages when he is not quite so stupid, and he is sleepless and restless.
That is the exception. Most generally you will hnd him lying upon
one side curled up like a dog, and he does not want to be disturbed.
Again, when the stupor is not so great he is restless and turns and
tosses. In that case he cannot sleep, because he cannot get the pieces
together. He feels if he could once get matters together he could go
to sleep, and these parts that are talking to each other keep him awake.
His mind wanders as soon as his eyes are closed. Dullness, especially
at night. Indisposition to think. Mind seems wx*ak. There you find
the whole picture of the mental aspect in all complaints, in all acute
diseases — ^but they all come on in a hurry. They are zymotic, of a low
form such as scarlet fever, such as malignant diseases ; and yet it takes
on a continued type of fever* These patients will die in from ten to
twelve days if let alone. Whereas, ordinary typhoid will run for
weeks, and sometimes die at |he dose of four weeks in a crisis. The
bleedings arc black and offensive. The putridity is marked. In the
mouth, the mucus from the throat and nose is bloody and putrid. It
has a diarrhoea. Thin, faecal, watery, yellow. It has a typical typhoid
discharge ; the most typical typhoid stool is like yellow corn-meal mush,
coming on many times a day, but soft, pappy, just about the consist-
ency of soft mush. This remedy has that stool, but it is not the com-
monest form — but the black, the brown, the dark. In treating a good
many cases of typhoid it was my fortune to observe a large number
of Baptisia cases, which the remedy cured promptly. The s^tool where
the Baptisia did the most service was like ground up slate, slate col-
ored, brownish. The odor was penetrating. In addition to that 1
have seen this medicine cure that kind of diarrhoea when it was slate
colored, even thin as water, if it was horribly putrid like decomposed
meat ; like the cadaver, attended with great prostration — I have seen
it cure that diarrhoea when there were none of the elements of typhoid
fever present. A simple prostrating form of diarrhoea. Exhaustion.
Exhaustion comes rapidly. In three days he has a deathly sinking
coming over him.

The headaches are nondescript. Only tliose congestive attacks,



176


BAPtll^lA


frontal headaches — violent pains in the head, and especially in the
occiput, such as occur in the low forms of disease. I hardly ever go
into the details of headaches, Baptisia is not a headache remedy. It
is, not a remedy that we would single out to treat headaches with, ex-
cept such violent pains in the head of a congestive character that are
associated with this low form of fever.

It has characteristic: eye symptoms. Congestion. Redness. Pains
in the eyes, and back of the eyes. So it has with hearing. So it has
with nasal symptoms. But associated with fevers. But as soon as
we come to the face we begin to realize the Baptisia symptoms, that
besotted expression. The countenance shows that. The eyes show it,
the face shows it. And these are the symptoms: ‘‘Dark red with be^
sotted appearance. Hot and perceptibly flushed ; dusky.’' That tells
the whole story. Burning; heat in the face. '‘Critical sweat on fore-
head and face. Anxious, frightened look.’’ On rousing from sleep
looks as if he had a horrible dream.

And then comes the mouth, and the teeth, and the throat, and the
tongue, all show marked Baptisia features. The tongue is swollen,
painful, offensive. Covered with black blood. Raw ; denuded. Stiff
and dry as leather. Described as if it was made of wood, or burnt
leather ; ulcerated. Ulceration runs all through the remedy. Aph-
thous patches. These little ulcers that start no bigger than a pin-head
become black and are so offensive and run together so that the whole
surface of the mouth will be in a state of ulceration ; raw and denuded,
oozing a thick saliva that is putrid. The throat takes on ulceration ;
is raw and bleeding. There may be diphtheritic exudations in the
throat. But round about it there are those low, dark, offensive sur-
faces. The throat is greatly swollen, and it is with difficulty that he
can swallow. Baptisia has been a very useful remedy in gangrenous
sore mouth and sore throat. "Cancrum oris.” The ulcers spread rap-
idly and eat rapidly. They arc really phagedenic. Sordes form rap-
idly on the teeth. And when he is roused from sleep after a few hours
of stupor there is a building up on the lips and around the corners of
the mouth ridges of dry blood ; very offensive. Bleeds much from the
mouth, throat and nose. Thick oozing. Putrid. “Tongue red, and
dry in the middle. The roof of the mouth swollen and feels numb.
Foul or bitter nauseous taste in the mouth. Tongue of a dark hue.
Tongue dry, brown down the centre. Tongue covered with a thick,
brown crust. Tongue yellowish white, deeply furred/’ Ulcers all
over the mouth. Baptisia has cured the ulcerated sore throat of young
motliers — and nursing sore mouth in children, when the parts become
dusky and ulcers spread, and the mouth is putrid, and prostration
is coming on rapidly. The child or the mother is growing weak with
great rapidity, is becoming prostrated Now, all this without fever.



BAPTlSU


m


Many of these ulcerative states in Baptisia are not attended with fever.
It seems sometimes as though there were not life enough to get up a
fever. Aphthous appearance in typhoid, in children, and with nursing
mothers. Canker sores in the mouth. “Putrid ulceration of the whole
buccal cavity Now, with all tliis trouble saliva pours into the mouth,
is thick and ropy and runs all over the pillow ; like we find in Mercury,
The sore throat may be gangrenous. A strong feature of it is that
the ulcers are rapid and painless, as if numb, without sensation. But
it has a painful sore throat, “f auces dark red ; dark, putrid ulcers ;
tonsils and parotids swollen. Putrid sore throat. Tonsils and soft
palate swollen, not accompanied by pain.'’ Great swelling ; great tume-
faction ; purplish. The darker it is the more likely would 1 be to think
of Baptisia — but never a bright red. I have never seen the Baptisia
mental state associated with a bright red appearance. That low form
of mental state is associated with blood decomposition, with duskiness,
with a dark appearance of the skin, and of the mucous membranes.
Not bright red, not pink, as we find in Bdl, Bell is more commonly
bright red, although it has duskiness, but nothing to the extent of Bap-
lisia. There is nothing like the putridity in Bell, that there is in Bap-
tisia. “(Esophagus feels as if constricted from above down to stom-
ach.” Now, we have another phase of it. From the sore throat the
trouble extends into the oesophagus, and the oesophagus is at first in a
state of spasm. I^ater it is piftralyzed. Fluids will at first go down
the throat, but he cannot swallow a particle of solids. The bolus of
food will go into the upper enil of the oesophagus and there it chokes
him and feels like a lump, and he chokes and struggles and gags and
throws it back, and then takes water or fluids. He can swallow fluids
but he cannot swallow solids. Every particle of solid food gags ; but
he can swallow liquids. Natr, mur, and quite a number of other reme-
dies have spasms of the oesophagus coming on with nervous complaints,
but in this low state I know of no other medicine having that one
symptom, having these features, and the paralysis, and the spasmodic
condition of the oesophagus. “The oesophagus feels as if constricted
from above down to the stomach.” Constrictive feeling causing fre-
quent efforts at deglutition ; throat sore, feels constricted. Ckm swal^
low only liquids. Children cannot swallow solids. The smallest solid
substance causes gagging, thus he cannot use anything but milk ; some-
times, thin, watery, offensive passages day and night; associated with
putridity, with the offensiveness, with the duskiness and with the pros-
tration. You need to know no more, if it is diphtheria, or scarlet fever,
if it is typhoid fever, that will lead you to a certain remedy. “Paralysis
of the organs of deglutition.” To draw out from every remedy that
which is positive, to get the associations that make up a particular rem-
edy, and that only is the duty of every clinician.

23



J&AkYtA dAkeONiCA


178


The abdomen is distended ; the stomach is distended. may have
these symptoms in inflammation of the liver, when this remedy would
be useful. Along with the diseases that I have mentioned, tympanitic
abdomen. Great soreness in the right iliac fossa ; so sore and tender,
no bigger than a fist ; but all of this putridity, I am sure, would prevent
you from using a knife to cut off that little appendix.

“Foetid, exhausting diarrhoea. Aphthous diarrhoea;’' which means
that the parts of the anus that roll out are ulcerated, little aphthous
patches inside of the margin. “Involuntary diarrhoea." Involuntary
urine and stool in these low forms of disease. “Dark brown, mucous
and bloody stools. Foetid stools." It has dysentery. After confine-
ment the lochia stops. Great tenderness of the abdomen. All these
putrid signs — breaking down of the blood, the appearance of the face,
the sudden prostration, suddenly becoming stupid ; and add to that the
mental symptoms — these are all signs for Baptisia in puerperal fever.
Now, intermingled with this after the case has been running on a few
days the limbs become helpless and tremulous. The tongue when it is
put out is tremulous. The hand when it is raised is tremulous, and tho
limbs are tremulous. Quivering all over the body. Prostration in-
creases. The jaw drops and he lies upon the back unconscious, with
the mouth wide open. He gradually slides down toward the foot of
the bed. A peculiar sort of paralytic weakness. This is how the pros-
tration increases with the disease ; but even yet when he is as low as
this, with the signs present, Baptisia will break that fever. Baptisia
will stop the typhoid fever, when it is indicated. Prostration and trem-
bling. Huddles down in bed, feels as if sinking away. Lies in a semi-
conscious condition when she appears dying. Excessive drowsiness.
Delirious stupor. Lies in a semi-comatose state. “Discharges and ex-
halations foetid." Breath, stool, urine, ulcers ; all putrid. Ulceration
of mucous membranes.


BARYTA CARBONICA

Baryta carbonica is an interesting study, because it is fully proved
and a constitutional remedy. Such remedies are always more inter-
esting than the short-acting, superficial ones. They take hold in deep-
seated, long-lasting, miasmatic troubles. This remedy looks towards
the development of the young. You will see in the text commonly
expressed under this medicine, “dwarfishness." That does not always
mean small in stature as it is spoken of in this remedy. Dwarfishness
in body and mind ; mental dwarfishness, and dwarfihsness of organs.
You realize what precocity means ; young persons who are unusually
brilliant; well advanced mentally. We say they are beyond their
years. They are precocious. Get this in mind first, and think what



BARYTA CARBONIGA


179


it means ; and then in the Baryta carb. constitution we have the very
opposite state- That is what we mean by dwarfishness. Children are
late coming into usefulness ; or activity ; late with their studies ; latd
learning to talk ; late learning to read ; late learning to make the com-
binations that enter into life ; late learning to take in images, and form
perceptions ; to take on their activities ; to do their work. We say
sometimes that Calc. carb. is late in learning to walk, but Baryta carb.
is also late learning to walk, although it has an entirely different cause.
To express it in a common, old-fashioned way, Baryta carb. is late
learning how to walk, even with pretty good limbs. Calc, has miser-
able, weakly limbs, flabby muscles, poor bones, and hence he is late
learning to walk. “Late walking’* is Calc. “Late learning to walk”
is Baryta carb. It competes also with Borax and Natrum mur- All
three of these medicines have a peculiar kind of tardiness in the devel-
opment of the brain, so that they are late learning to do things ; late
in developing. But Baryta carb. leads them all in this late coming into
the activities and uses of life.

You will have patients to treat, where this slow development mani-
fests itself in girls 18 to 25 years of age, who do the things they did
when they were children, and say things as they said them when they
were children- ^'Childish manner of doing things, and childish be-
havior. Playing with dolls and saying foolish things.” They have not
come into womanhood. They are late in taking on the activities and
uses of the woman. They lick the prudence of the woman. They
have not become circumspect^ and say things just as a boy or just as
a little girl would say them- That is the dwarfishness of the mind.
To appreciate that late development, and to see it in Baryta carb. front
all of its symptoms and peculiar features, leads to a strong grasp of
the remedy. There is some of this found in such remedies as Graph.,
Sulph. and Cate., but nothing compared to this remedy. This seems
to suspend the development that makes the child into a man or a
woman. It is not a small person that makes me think of Baryta carb.,
but the dwarfishness that is mental, and that is of organs. Organs, as
it were, become paralyzed, or one organ does not develop. It stops,
and the others go on. That would make me think of this remedy.
A single organ fails to mature, and the others go on ; onesidedness, a
partiality of development-

The next grand feature of this remedy is its affinity for the lymphatic
glands all over the body. The glands all over the body enlarge and
indurate ; the glands of the neck, the glands of the groin, the lymphatics
in the abdomen are all affected— knotty chains form in the neck. With
a few other things that we will put together shortly we will see in this
patient a peculiar figure. It has emaciation — ^gradual dwindling in
persons who have been fat, who have been well nourished, It has an



l8o BARYTA CARBONICA

enlarged abdomen. It has been found suitable in marasmus, for chil-
dren with enlarged glands, enlarged abdomen ; emaciation of the tis-
sues, emaciated limbs and dwarfishness of mind> you have there the
whole Baryta carb. marasmus.

The patient himself is chilly ; sensitive to cold ; wants to be well
wrapped. Marked weakness with feeble pulse is a strong feature and
he must lie down ; he is worse standing and sitting. The weakness is
worse after eating. His pains are better from motion and in the open
air. His complaints are aggravated by cold. The enlarged glands
take on tenderness and congestion from being exposed. The tonsils
gradually increase. The glands of the neck increase in size, and in
hardness, from every cold and from becoming chilled.

‘‘Swelling and induration of glands. Inflammation of glands with
infiltration.” Infiltration belongs to the remedy. The glands become
harder and harder. Ulcers become indurated in their base. Open sur-
faces become indurated in their tvalls. When a child has almost any
disease, measles, scarlet fever, mumps, or even a bad cold, or a malarial
attack, the development ceases and dwarfishness results, a state in
which he was not born, but a state that he has acquired, arrest of de-
velopment. It brings on emaciation and dwindling of the whole body,
except the abdomen, which gradually enlarges. These are phases not
to be overlooked in the very beginning, because the symptoms only
help to establish this basis and these troubles and tissue changes come
on as ultiraates.

Another grand feature in this remedy is the application of these
things to more advanced years. We say this is a childhood state, this
is the state of youth and arrested development. Now it does not mat-
ter whether we have this arrested development in youth, in childhood,
or at the advanced age of fifty. From some strange circumstance
which we are not able to fathom we say the individual is taking on the.
appearance of old age. We call it premature old age. Baryta carb.
has cured lingering complaints that have resulted from malaria, over-
work, mental or physical, prolonged mental strain, when the appear-
ance of premature old age was a prominent feature. Old age creeps
upon him too soon. There is but little difference between childhood
and old age, and hence old age is called second childhood ; but we al-
ways regret to see a man under seventy becoming childish, and yet we
do see many becoming simple and childish. It does not mean merely
imbecility, but childlike behavior. Doing and saying things like a
child. So in premature old age these symptoms lead us to think of
Baryta carb.

Baryta carb. has cured fatty tumors, encysted tumors, lupus, out-
ward growths of tuberculous character, sarcoma ; and it has mitigated
the pains and sufferings, and has prolonged life in cancerous affections.



BARYTA CARBONICA


l8l

Mentally it is worthy of careful study, and we will see cropping out
in the mental symptoms all of the phases intermingled with tissue
changes. The Baryta carb. child will be seen hiding behind the furni-
ture when strangers come in ; will hide as for shame of something, or
as if afraid. It imagines all sorts of strange things, that it is talked
about, or laughed at. It does not seem to advance. It docs not seem
to do any good to teach it, for it does the same things over and over
and remains untrained. They either cannot comprehend, or they can-
not memorize, or they cannot maintain a thought, and you go over it
and over it, and the mother wonders if that child is ever going to learn
something, and the teacher reports that the child lacks capacity. The
teacher cannot comprehend it, the mother cannot comprehend it, but
the homoeopathic physician should know all about it at once. If he
knows his Materia Medica he should be well up in the development
of a feeble child ; those who are going towards rickets, who arc feeble,
who are always depending on somebody, fitted only for menial places.
The homoeopathic physician does well when he trots the little Johnnies
and the little Susies on his knee and takes a good, fair observation of
their ability, and of what they lack, and understands how to build up
what is lacking. Is not that in itself worth working for ? It requires
all of the potencies that have ever been made to master constitutions.
Some will require medium potencies, some very low, some very high.
Let us not deprive our little oites of anything they need. Only so we
look forward to the highest use, to develop them into their fullest
capacity.

There is an expression here in the text, “Want of clear conscious-
ness.” Do we not see from what I have said what that must mean in
this remedy, and that it is different in this remedy from what it is in
a good many others ? And yet if you had read that symptom first you
would not have appreciated it. “A want of clear consciousness.” Es-
pecially in old age has that been useful. It is not that confusion of
mind that we know to be dizziness. But he is not clear in his intellect.
We see how this medicine takes hold of the intellect. It takes hold of
his memory. It begins with a feeble state, and it gradually travels
toward imbecility. You press it to its extreme and it has imbecility,
and up to this we have degrees all along the line from the very begin-
ning, from a mere matter of cloudiness in his thoughts to imbecility.

When the Baryta carb. babies appear in the clinic they will keep the
hand up over the face and peek out through the fingers. Bashful.
Timid. Easily frightened. Afraid of strangers. Other remedies have
similar features, but it is a strong feature of this medicine. Withered
face. Sickly countenance. It is the idea of hiding, the idea of timid-
ity. The child does not want to play, and it sits in the comer. Dow
not pay any attention to its hammer, if it is a boy ; or its doll, if it is



BARYTA CARBONICA


182

a girl. Sits and sits. Does not seem to be thinking ; a lack of ability
to think. Children grow up without any distinctiveness, without any
ability to perceive, and therefore fail to develop. Always borrowing
trouble. Like Caust,^ fear of something going to happen. Full of
imaginations ; imaginary cares and worries. Hatching up all sorts of
complaints and grievances that may happen. A good deal like Ars.
Children in a constant whining mood ; always whining. Running
through the complaints will be the sufferings of the parts, or the men-
tal symptoms. ‘The more he thinks about the complaint the worse it
gets.’" If he thinks about his troubles, his sufferings, they at once
grow worse. Premature old age and brain fag from prolonged men-
tal work.

Troublesome headaches. “Pressure in the brain.’’ A feeling of
looseness in the brain, as if the brain fell from side to side or was ris-
ing and falling. A sensation of motion in the brain when moving the
head or from sudden jar. Seems as if the brain moves to and fro td
correspond to the motions of the head when the head is turned fromi
side to side. “Pressing headaches.” Headaches ameliorated in fresh
air, in the open air, and aggravated from heat. That is the opposite
of its general state. The Baryta carb. general state is aggravated from
cold ; he is sensitive to cold, and his complaints come on from becoming
cold ; but his headaches are ameliorated in cool air. The Baryta carb.
patient is often sensitive to the extremes of heat and cold. Hot weather
will bring on complaints. Hot weather will cause the blood to mount
to the head, and favors apoplectic conditions. It has many complaints
of the head like unto the stupor of apoplexy. It has some of the para-
lytic conditions analogous to the complaints in old apoplectics, and it
has been very useful in re-establishing the supply and flow of nerve
force along the nerves. It parallels Phos,, and is an excellent remedy
for old paralytic conditions that have come from a rupture of a blood-
vessel, and therefore pressure upon the nerve supply. The headaches
are congestive, pressive headaches ; a feeling of pressure in the brain.

These puny infants, such as we have described, have eruptions upon
the head ; eczema upon the head ; and those who are born for better
things have the eruption driven back by ointments and applications.
“Moist crusts upon the scalp.” “Dry eruptions upon the scalp. Fall-
ing off of the hair. Baldness.” Head complaints and a dwarfish state
of mind, an intellectual defect, as results of suppressed eruptions.

It is full of eye symptoms. “Granular lids. Thickening of the eye-
lids ; thickening of all of the membranes and tissues abouj the eyes.
Opacity of the cornea.” Infiltration of the various coverings. It has
cured cataract, it has cured various kinds of dimsightedness, but espe-
cially in those that things look hazy, “looking as through a fog, or
through smoke.” Ulceration of the cornea. Little white spots, caus-



ttARYl'A CAkBONICA


‘83


mg defective vision. “Lids agglutinated in the motnlng;’ Styes. “A
sensation of weight in the upper lids.” A sensation of weight in the
brow with headaches as if the forehead was pressing down over the
eyes. Like Carbo veg,, Carbo an. and Natr. mur. I’he patient will
often grasp the whole forehead with the hands, and say, “1 feel as if
the forehead was pressing down over the eyes.”

It has many noises in the ears, but especially cracking and flapping
when breathing, swallowing and chewing ; better while lying. It af-
fects the right car most. Rushing sounds in the ears when breathing.
“Eruptions about the cars. Glandular swellings and eruptions about
the ears.” Inflammation of the parotid glands, with hardness. First
it may be called swelling, but it is finally a permanent enlargement and
induration, and it means a great growth sometimes. Other glands
about the neck are affected in association with the ear troubles. Knots
of lymphatic glands down the neck under the ear (Bar. m., Tub.).
Sometimes the sub-maxillary gland is affected, being enlarged and in-
durated. Sometimes the tonsils enlarge and indurate. All these
glands inflame and become sensitive, and get a little larger, after any
exposure to cold, and from sudden changes of the weather. It is a
wonderful medicine for the cure of enlarged glands. Clinically it is
laid down in the books for suppuration of these glands, but all my life
I have failed to find it a good remedy for suppuration. The inflam-
mation is more likely to turn ihto an increased infiltration. It is laid
down in the books here for 8U|Jpuration of die tonsils, but from long
experience it is one of the last i*emedies I would think of for suppura-
tion of the tonsils. It may have done so, but it has not been my ob-
servation that it runs that way, and I am very much in doubt about the
great value and high marking of that observation. But it certainly
has infiltration gradually increasing from becoming cold. The en-
larged tonsils will redden up and inflame and become painful, and the
acute inflammation and pain will subside, but the tonsils are a little
larger than with the last cold. In that way the tonsils keep growing.
In children these are often cut out. There are instances in which I
might admit it was necessary to cut them off, when there is a wonder-
ful superabundance, creating much disturbance in swallowing and in
speaking. Two or three times I have absolutely failed to cure with
remedies selected to the best of my ability, and they have gone to the
surgeon and he has cut them off; but I believe these tonsils ought to
be all cured. One thing in Homceopathy taught in Hahnemann’s Or-
ganon is that unless there are symptoms to indicate the remedy, no
great things should be expected from the administration of the remedy.
The enlargement of the tonsils alone is not a symptom upon which a
remedy can be selected, and it necessitates guessing a dozen times, and
perhaps not hitting at all. That is the worst sort of practice, guessing



184


BARYTA CARBONICA


at a remedy ; yet there are children having enlarged tonsils that appear
to us without any symptom whatever to select a remedy by. The
symptoms to prescribe on are such as represent the patient, not the
glands ; not the changed tissue. We must always regret that the sur-
geon must come in, for in cutting off anything it may be effeipe to the
constitutional detriment of the patient. Yet there are things tliat have
to be done that we know are to the constitutional detriment of the
patient. We have to keep servants on their feet to earn their living,
and operations have to be performed upon them, beacuse they cannot
lie up a year or two to be cured. The surgeon will always have a
place with us, but let us do our part as physicians first.

Eruptions upon the face. The face :s sickly, often purple, red and
bloated, or lean and emaciated, looking old and withered. The infant
looks like a little old person, like the state we find in Nat. mur. and
Calc, With face troubles, with teeth troubles, and especially with
throat troubles, enlarged glands under the jaw and down the neck.
Ear diseases following scarlet fever. Enlargement and induration of
the parotids and of the submaxillary glands after scarlet fever. Scar-
let fever often stirs up much trouble in the economy, especially when
it has not been properly treated, when it has been treated by the allo-
path, or by a nervous homoeopath. A nervous homoeopath is one who
does not wait for his own convictions to be ultimated, does not wait
for his remedy to work, and he gives another and another, and by the
time the scarlet fever runs its course the patient becomes dreadfully
sick, ends up with ear troubles, enlarged glands and sometimes kidney
affections. When it runs into ear troubles and enlarged glands of the
neck this is one of the several remedies to be studied.

“Paralysis of the tongue in old people. Weakness of the tongue
in old people. Hardness of the tongue in old people.” Premature old
age and giving out of muscles.

There is a catarrhal state in this remedy, an accumulation of mucus
in the nose, throat, larynx and trachea. It is very suitable for old
people who have rattling in the trachea. On every cold change of the
weather, and on every exposure to the cold, he gets an additional
aggravation of the rattling. Rattling respiration. There are a few
remedies that have, in such high degree, this coarse rattling in the
chest of old people, that it is well to emphasize it. Baryta carb. is one
of them. Senega, Ammoniacum and Baryta muriatica should be com-
pared. When there is coarse rattling in the chest all the time in an
old person, an octogenarian, who is pretty comfortable in summer,
but miserable all winter from the coarse rattling in the chest, and
there are no other symptoms, Ammoniacum will keep him comfortable

The sore throat in this remedy has numerous symptoms. “Inflam
mation of cellular tissue of fauces and tonsils.” ITiis remedy is one



BaRVTA CARB6NieA


««5

in general catarrhal symptoms of the throat. Granulations of the
throat, so that the pharynx looks shiny, studded with coarse granules
becoming inflamed with every cold spell, or from being chilled. Every
cold change inflames the tonsils, and in children they very soon en-
large. Children with enlarged tonsils, and with enlarged glands in
Other places, somewhat dwarfish intellectually, slow to learn — ^Baryta
carb. ^11 cure the enlarged tonsils. But these, you see, are consti-
tutional symptoms. You are not selecting the remedy purely on en-
larged tonsils. '‘Inflammation of tlie tonsils."' The inflammation is
not so violent as that which comes in Bell., it does not come on in
a night, it does not go on rapidly to suppuration ; but it is a very
sore throat, has come on slotvly after many days of exposure and
there is gradual growth and gradual development. That is the char-
acter of the Baryta carb. tonsilitis ; while that of Bell, comes on with
great rapidity. Hepar is also rapid and goes on to suppuration. There
is a remedy for inflammation of the tonsils where the ear is involv-
ed and is ameliorated by heat, that very few use, but it is of great
value ; it is Chamomilla, and it is especially indicated if the patient
is irritable. The pain is ameliorated by heat and comes on with great
violence. It might be mistaken for a Bell, inflammation, but Cham.
cures it permanently. “Sensation of plug in the throat that is, the
tonsils arc so large they fed like a great ball or great lump in the!
throat. They change the character of the voice, cause difficulty.
“Much burning in the throat. Inalnlity to swallow anything but
liquids.'" This irritation ke^s up a constant choking and spasmodic
constriction in the throat ; contractions, and drawings, and crampings
in the throat. It also has a spasm in the oesophagus when swallow-
ing, especially in old nervous, or prematurely broken-down people.
“Spasm in the oesophagus. Difficulty in swallowing." The bolus of
food goes down a little way, and then causes spasms, and he gags and
chokes. This gagging and choking with a little food is a very strong
feature in Kali c.. Graph, and Merc. cor. This is also a strong feature
of Baryta carb., but much stronger in Merc cor.

The troubles of eating and drinking and appetite and stomach can
all be run together. There is weakness of digestion. All sorts of dis-
orders and disagreeable sensations in the stomach after eating. Some-
times gastralgia ; sometimes distension. “Stomach aches after eat-
ing." Extreme weakness after eating. Abdomen hard and tense.
“Mesenteric glands swollen and hard ; with a big belly ; abdominal
muscles sore to touch." It has cured, in the early stages, tabes me-
senterica. It has cured the enlarged abdomen of children, when there
was emaciation of the limbs, emaciation everywhere, knots of enlarg-
ed glands and a dwarfed intellect.

Baryta carb. has an inveterate constipation. “Difficult knotty

24



i86


Baryta dARBbNiCA


stools. Stool hard, and insufficient.” A lack of action in the rectum,
and haemorrhoidal protrusion during stool and urination.

Of the male sexual organs we have some strange features. This
medicine takes away all sexual desire and ability, leaving the genitals
relaxed, and in a state of impotency. '‘Relaxed penis. Impotence,
Diminished sexual desire. Hypertrophied prostate. Atrophied testi-
cles,” It cures old gleety discharge from the uicthra. An old, pain-
less, whitish, gleety discharge that has been in existence a long time.
It is an offensive discharge and there is no inflammation. “Numb-
ness of the genitals.”

The female has many troubles. Sterility. Dwindling of the ovary.
Dwindling of the mammary glands, and yet the lymphatics become
enlarged and infiltrated. A passive leucorrhoeal discharge, whitish,
thick, persistent, often copious, w^orse about a week before the men-
strual period.

With some a constitutional weakness takes hold of the larynx ; a
paralytic weakness. Voice entirely lost. Or, “hoarseness and huski-
ncss.*' Low, deep voice. Aphonia from constitutional weakness, and
from paralysis. Feeling in the larynx all the time as if inhaling
smoke, or pitch, or sulphur fumes, or dust. With the hoarseness
there is a chronic dry, hoarse, barking cough ; not a hard cough, but
it comes every night. Suffocative cough of old people. It says here,
“impending paralysis of the lungs.” That is in keeping with the gen-
eral nature of the remedy. Chest full of mucus, but unable to ex-
pectorate it. You observe from the effort made in the cough that
there is a weakness somewhere, a lack of power. It is not a strong
effort. “Night cough, with asthmatic breathing.” Cough excited by
irritation in the larynx and trachea. There is a cough in Baryta
carb. where he coughs and coughs, and gets no relief until he lies
on the abdomen ; and so long as he lies on the abdomen he is free
from cough. Palpitation from slight exertion when lying on the left
side when thinking about it, with anxiety and orgasm of blood, with
strong pulsation in the head, rapid pulse. Palpitation in chlorotic girls.

Tension in the muscles of the back. Swelling of the glands of
the back of the neck.” Swelling of the cervical glands. “Fatty
rumors upon the back.” A number of times a patient has said, “Doc-
tor, did you intend to take away that fatty tumor I had on my back ?”
The chances are I did not know he had one. That is generally the
way such things appear in the practice of the homoeopathic physi-
cian,. for he does not prescribe for the tumor, and the chances are
he thinks little about the tumor in his prescription ; he gives the con-
stitutional medicine, and they often disappear after a while, and then
the patient thinks the doctor has done a wonderful thing. He gets
fn6rt glory and more credit for curing a wart than he does for cur-



BARYTA MUBIATICA


187


ing the patient. The doctor who prescribes correctly turns the vital
state into order. He cures the patient, and the patient, being in a
state of order, commences to repair his body, and the tissues go
through a general house cleaning, and such things as are not need-
ed are dispensed with; and the physician is considered a wonderful
man. So this remedy cures tumors and wans. Warts upon the limbs,
and upon the back, and upon the hands.

The pains arc of a gouty, rheumatic character, worse from be-
coming cold and from cold weather. Paralytic weakness and trem-
bling and numbness of the feet. Offensive perspiration of the feet
which causes soreness of the soles, ulcers on the feet, checked foot sweat.
Trembling of the feet while standing and tottering while walking.
Tearing, drawing pains in lower limbs. Sudden sharp pains in knees.

BARYTA MURIATICA

This is one of our deep acting constitutional remedies and one much
neglected. It was much used by the earlier men in our school with
great effect. In mental weakness, insanity, enlarged glands and sex-
ual excitement we have a group of symptoms hard to cure without
Baryta muriatica. Add to this profound increasing muscular weak-
ness and we must have this remedy sometime during the case or the
cure will be slow. Its complaints are prominent in the morning, fore-
noon, afternoon, evening, nigh$ and after midnight. In the diseases
most amenable to this remedy are the affection of the lymphatic
glands and other glands. The patient desires the open air, yet the
open air often increases the symptoms. Many cases of aneurism have
been benefited by it. General physical anxiety is a strong feature.
Complaints are worse ascending stairs such as dyspnoea, palpita-
tion and weakness. Dread of bathing, like Sulphur. The symptoms
are often worse in cold air and from becoming cold. The convulsive
tendency is a very important feature ; convulsions with headache,
deafness, vomiting and burning in the stomach ; convulsions with
full consciousness with electric shocks ; clonic spasms. It has cured
most stubborn cases of epilepsy. Distension of the blood vessels ;
emaciation, fainting spells. Complaints worse in fall and spring.
Formication all over the body. Sensation of internal fulness. Bleed-
ing from mucous membranes and from ulcers. Heaviness externally
and internally as from weakness and relaxation. Induration of glands ;
inflammation and swelling of glands. Extreme lassitude, compelled
to lie down. Symptoms come before and during menses. Some symp-
toms are better from motion ; bruised feeling internally ; burning in
many parts ; cutting pains in internal parts ; digging pains are not un-
common ; gnawing in external parts. Painless symptoms pfedomi-



BARYTA MURIATICA


z88

nant and pain is the exception. Convulsive jerking in the limbs ;
stitching in glands and along nerves ; downward tearing as if in the
muscles ; one-sided paralysis ; left side. Many parts are tender to
pressure. Pulsation in abdomen and limbs. Pulse fast, x2o ; full,
hard, small. Rising up brings on many symptoms. Electric shocks
with convulsions. Complaints left-sided — worse while sitting ; must
lie down. Symptoms come on during sleep — worse while standing.
Painful swelling of glands. Dropsical swelling after scarlet fever ;
tension, trembling, twitching ; weakness in whole body, can hardly
move a limb ; while walking ; general muscular weakness ; paralytic
weakness ; weariness. Complaints and symptoms grow worse in wet
weather. It is the natural complement of Conium in glandular af-
fections and it is very similar, but much deeper acting.

Easily angered. Anxiety in the evening ; about the future ; with
nausea ; retching and pressure in the stomach. It is useful in children
who are slow to learn or understand ; children do not desire to play
like other children. Concentration impossible. The locality around
him seems strange, transformed ; timid and cowardly ; delusion that
he walks on his knees. Dullness of mind. Thinks she is going to
die. Fear : of evil, of men ; foolish behavior ; idiocy ; imbecility, in-
difference, insanity ; erotic insanity. Insanity where the sexual ex-
citement becomes strong. Irresolution. Irritable in the evening.
Mania in every form when sexual desire is increased; nymphomania.
Sadness in the morning ; sits in silence. Children sit in the corner
and give confused answers. Easily startled ; suspicious ; indisposed
to talk ; talks in sleep ; unconsciousness ; fainting ; vertigo when walk-
ing ; things turn around.

The scalp feels constricted. It is a remedy of great usefulness in
eruptions of the scalp. Thick, offensive crusts ; eczema of the whole
top of the head, extending to sides and occiput ; suppurating with co-
pious pus. Crops of pimplse. The head feels so heavy he cannot
keep up ; heaviness of forehead and occiput ; sensation of looseness of
the brain ; a feeling of movement in the head. Pain in the head in
the morning on rising ; afternoon, evening, worse in open air ; from
binding up the hair ; after eating, while lying ; on moving the eyes ;
from noise ; from pressure ; on stopping ; while walking ; in the fore-
head, occiput ; sides of head, temples ; boring in temples ; bruises in
head ; burning in head ; pressing in head and in forehead ; outwards ;
stitching in forehead, occiput, sides of head, in temples ; stunning pain in
head ; tearing in occiput, sides of head ; shocks in head, ulcers on scalp.

Agglutination of the lids in the morning ; discharge of mucus and
pus from the eyes ; inflammation of the eyes in scrofulous patients.
Itching and smarting, pressing pain in eyes ; paralysis of upper lids ;
photophobia ; pupils dilated and immovable. Redness of the eyes ; of



BARYTA MURIATICA


189


the lids ; veins injected ; stiffness of the eyes ; ulceration of the cor-
nea ; swollen lids ; complaints of the eyes and head from exertion of
vision, much like Conium; dim vision with flickering.

Abscesses behind both ears ; discharge from both ears ; copious ;
offensive ; like spoiled cheese ; purulent ; after scarlet fever. Eruptions
on ears ; recurrent inflammation of the ear ; auditory canal ; itching
in the ear ; noises in the car on chewing and on swallowing ; catarrh
of the Eustachian tube ; buzzing, ringing and roaring ; pain in both
ears ; deep in ; worse in the right ear ; pain in the ear with sore
throat ; worse lying on the painful side ; better from cold drinks ;
drawing, stitching, tearing pain in ear ; tearing behind ear ; pulsation
in ear ; tingling of the ears ; twitching ; hearing impaired, finally lost.

Catarrh of the nose with copius, thick, yellow discharge ; coryza
fluent with fever ; dryness in the nose ; epistaxis. Itching in the
nose ; the nose is obstructed ; rawness in the nose. A red nodule on
the side of the top of the nose ; stitching pains in the nose. Frequent
sneezing ; sneezing in sleep without waking.

The face is red with fever, otherwise pale. Drawing and spasms
of the face. Dryness of the lips. Enlarged and indurated submax-
illary gland with otorrhoea ; eruption on forehead and nose ; crusty,
pimples, expression is anxious and the face is hot. Inflammation of
the right parotid gland after scarlet fever ; swelling of the glands of
neck and jaw ; very hard ; right parotid ; submaxillary. Tension of
the face with nausea and dia^hoea.

Bleeding gums. Cracked? tongue ; white tongue. Dryness of the
mouth in the morning, of ^e tongue ; coated tongue ; viscid mucus
fills the mouth and covers the tongue ; odor from mouth offensive ;
putrid ; like from mercury. Burning in the mouth ; the gums are sore.
Paralysis of the tongue. Salivation with every paroxysm. Speech
difficult. Swollen gums and palate. Taste is bitter ; putrid, sour,
sweetish ; food tastes putrid. Ulceration of tongue. Looseness of
the teeth with salivation ; pulsating pain in the teeth. Compelled to
sit up in bed ; w^orse after midnight and after sleep ; jerking ; stitch-
ing, tearing.

Inflammation of the throat and tonsils ; recurrent tonsilitis from
taking cold ; dryness in throat. Enlarged tonsils ; elongation of the
uvula with sore throat ; viscid mucus in the throat ; pain in the throat
and ear, worse on right side ; with salivation ; worse on swallowing ;
burning in the throat. Suppuration of the tonsils. Swallowing very
difficult. Swollen tonsils. Varicose veins in the throat. Swelling
and induration of the cervical glands.

Appetite ravenous ; wanting ; aversion to food. Desires dry wheat
bread* Distension of the stomach. A feeling of emptiness in the
stomach. Eructations after eating ; bitter ; water.



190


BARYTA MXmiATlCA


Flushes of heat rise from the stomach to the head. Fullness and
weight in the stomach after solid food ; heartburn, hiccough. He can
eat only the stimplest food, as digestion is slow and the stomach is
feeble ; inflammation of the stomach ; loathing of food ; nausea. Pain
in the stomach ; cramping ; pressing after eating ; sore ; stitching.
Retching. Tension. Thirst with dry tongue ; during chill ; extreme.
Vomiting in the morning ; with headache ; incessant, bile, blood, mu-
cus, watery, with purging and great anxiety.

Distension of the abdomen. Enlarged and hard liver and mesen-
teric glands. Flatulence ; fullness ; hard abdomen. Pain in abdomen
in the morning, after eating, before stool, in hypochondria, burning,
cramping, cutting, stitching in hypochondria and inguinal region.
It has been of great benefit in abdominal aneurisms. Swollen liver ;
swollen inguinal glands after suppressed gonorrhoea. Abdominal tension.
Ulcers in the inguinal region.

Constipation ; difficult stool ; no desire for stool ; stool hard and
covered with mucus ; generally painless, diarrhoea which is also gen-
erally painless. Dysentery, bloody mucus ; jelly-like stools ; frequent ;
generally painless. Much offensive flatus. Haemorrhage from rec-
tum and from intestines. External piles, protrude during urination ;
itching of the anus ; involuntary stool ; moisture about the anus ; some
pain in the rectum during stool ; burning during and after stool ;
pressing pain ; soreness, stitching ; tenesmus. Paralysis of the rectum,
and of the sphincter ani. Stool bloody, jelly-like, hard, green, foetid,
soft, thin, watery, white and hard ; yellow and slimy ; worms with
stool.

Inflammation of the bladder. Retention of urine. Urging to uri-
nation ; constant, frequent, ineffectual, violent. Urination difficult ;
frec|uent at night ; frequent during perspiration ; involuntary during
the night. Glcety urethral discharge. It has cured chronic gonorrhoea.
Pain in the urethra during urination. The urine is hot, copious, of-
fensive, with whitish sediment ; watery, yellow, with great stench.

Enlarged testes. Induration of testes ; Inflammation of testes from
suppressed gonorrhoea ; seminal emission ; sexual passion greatly in-
creased, even violent. Induration of the ovaries. Leucorrhoea.
Menses copious, too often, painful. Pain in the uterus. Sterility.

Catarrh of the larynx and trachea ; irritation in larynx and trachea ;
tickling in the larynx. Voice is hoarse, husky and weak. Respira-
tion is fact, anxious, asthmatic, deep, difficult, with cough, and she
must sit up ; rattling, short.

Cough in daytime, morning, evening, night, before midnight ; asth-
matic, dry, chronic dry cough of scrofulous children; from irritation
in larynx and trachea ; rattling, whooping cough. Expectoration iii
the morning ; mucous ; copious ; muco-purulent expectoration from



IftEtLABONNA


19t

bronchial tubes ; yellow. It has cured phthisical conditions of the
chest with herpetic eruptions and indurated testes. Marked palpita-
tion. It has been a very useful remedy in spinal curvature.

Cold hands and feet ; cramps in the toes ; drawing up the limbs
ameliorates. Eruptions on the limbs ; pimples. Hot hands. Heavi-
ness of the whole body, must lie down, itching of the limbs ; the
thighs. Painless jerking of the arms at night. Violent periodi-
cal jerking of the limbs with convulsions. Lassitude ; numbness of
the lingers. Pain in the upper limbs and thighs. Paralysis of the
left side ; paralysis of the lower limbs. Perspiration of the feet ; sup-
pressed foot sweat. Pulsation of the shoulder. Swelling of the hands,
lower limbs, knees, feet. Tension in knees. Trembling of the limbs.
Twitching of the upper limbs, thighs, feet. Ulcers on the legs. Weak-
ness of the limbs.

Dreams ; amorous, anxious, frightful, of misfortune, pleasant, vivid.
Restless sleep ; sleepiness ; afternoon, evening, after dinner ; sleep-
less before midnight ; frequent waking.

Coldness in the morning ; evening ; in bed ; chilliness ; external chill;
shaking chills every third day. Fever in the evening and during the
night ; burning heat ; heat with chilliness ; dry heat all day ; dry heat
during the night.

Dryness, biting and burning in skin ; cold skin ; eruptions ; eczema ;
herpes all over body ; pimplei ; scabs, yellow scales ; stinging, urtica-
ria ; erysipelas, formication, hoirripilation. Inflammation of skin. Itch-
ing. Swelling and tension. Whole body covered with small ulcers.
Unhealthy skin. Burning ulcers.

BELLADONNA

Belladonna is a remedy that takes hold of the system with great vio-
lence. It is especially suitable to plethoric, vigorous individuals and
inrellectual people. Brainy people have complaints coming on sud-
denly, providing they are in a substantial state of health, and are rea-
sonably plethoric and vascular. The complaints of Belladonna come
on suddenly, run a regular course, and subside suddenly. The pains
and suffering come on suddenly and with great violence, and subside
suddenly. Colds ultimate rapidly, run a sharp course, a course of
great violence, and subside suddenly. Belladonna especially affects
the whole vascular system, the heart, lungs, brain and nervous sys-
tem.

Among the earliest conditions to examine is the heat. It has in-
flammations of all the organs, especially the brain, lungs, and liver.
The intestines are also involved as well as the other organs. These
inflammations are always attended by violent heat; the heat is some-



BEIXADONKA


19a

thing unusual. It is more marked in Belladonna than in almost any
other remedy. When you put your hand upon a Belladonna subject
you will suddenly withdraw it, the heat is so intense. The memory
of the heat is carried in the hand and fingers for some time. Pains,
inflammations, and sufferings, nightly attacks of delirium, violent at-
tacks inflammatory in character are attended with that kind of heat.
No matter where the inflammation is, there is that same intense heat.
There are times, though, when that kind of heat is present, and it is
not Bell., and that is when the fever is of the continued type. Bell,
has no continued fever in it. It is true the older books tell you about
Bell, for this violent heat in typhoid and some other continued fevers,
but if you examine Bell, from beginning to end you will find nothing
continued in its fever. Its fever is remittent. It never comes on in
its complaints gradually like typhoid. It has not the gradual rise and
the gradual fall like a continued fever. I only mention that so that
you will not be lost. Our lamented Bering, one of the ablest teach-
ers the world ever had, classes Bell, for typhoid fever when the de-
lirium and the heat are somewhat like Bell., but let me tell you just
what will take place. When you give Bell, for the delirium in typhoid
fever — for such a delirium as looks like Bell. — ^you may subdue the
delirium, but other manifestations will rise in that fever. You will
not subdue the fever, but you will subdue tire patient. The patient
will be sick longer, will go into a greater state of prostration than if
you had let that delirium alone. But Stramonium fits perfectly Ber-
ing’s description of a case in which he says Bell, should be given.
The idea of that heat must be well fixed in the mind. Heat, intense
heat, violent heat.

There is another phase of Bell, that runs all through these inflam-
matory complaints and its fevers. The inflamed parts, and very com-
monly the skin, are very red, and, as the inflammation advances, grow
dusky ; as the fever advances the face becomes mottled ; but the first
representation of Bell, is bright red, and the skin is shiny. An in-
flamed part that can be seen will be red. In inflammation of glands
the skin over the glands will be bright red in spots. Bence red spots
in the neck over inflamed glands. Inflammation of the parotid glands,
inflammation of the sub-maxillary glands, inflammation of the glands
of the neck — there will be a spot as red as fire over each. The throat
is as red as scarlet. The mucus membrane is inflamed, and red as
scarlet. After a little it grows dusky, finally mottled; showing the
character and direction of the Bell, constitution. It travels gradually
towards a zymotic state, such as we see in scarlet fever, in low in-
flammatory conditions; at first intense congestion, but vaso-motor pa-
ralysis follows. Intense congestion and blueness, or purple and mot-
tled.



BELLADONNA


»93


Another grand feature of Bell, is present in its inflamed parts, and
in its painful parts. Whenever Bell, brings out anything like a de-
cided action, it has burning; intense burning. The burning in the
throat with a Bell, sore throat is like a coal of fire. Inflammation of
the tonsils, burning like fire. The skin burns, and it is burning hot
to the sensation of the patient, and intensely hot to the doctor. The
skin burns in scarlet fever. He says, ‘‘It burns so, doctor, it burns
so in bilious or remittent fever. In inflammation of an organ, the
skin burns, there is a burning fever, and the part itself burns. Inflam-
mation of the bladder, with burning. Congestion of the brain, and the
head burns. Congestion of the throat, and the throat burns. It is
hot locally, and it also burns subjectively. In gastritis there is burn-
ing. In inflammation of the liver, the liver burns. Congestion
of the liver with jaundice, and the liver burns. Now, we have
three leading features ; do not call them “key notes,’' for that is not
what I mean ; heat, redness and burnmg. We will see how they
modify the whole feature of die sickness, how they permeate and ram-
ify, and how they take meaning.

But, that is not all. We have much swelling in Bell. The inflamed
parts swell rapidly ,• are extremely sensitive to touch ; are very pain-
ful, with the sensation as if they would burst, with pressive pains,
stinging and burning. There is heat, redness and burning in these
inflamed parts, as well as ^swelling. Swelling, stinging, burning,
throbbing. All over he tkfOqs, With all congestions and inflamma-
tions he throbs. The part itsdf throbs, and his carotids throb. When
children are sick in bed wifc congestion of the brain, they have an
intensely hot head. If old enough to talk about it, they will say “it
burns." But then we will notice the throbbing. The temporal
arteries and the carotids pulsate, with great violence. A turmoil is
going on. An earthquake is taking place. Everything is being

shaken when the patient needs Bell. It is one of the mo&t painful of

remedies, It is so sensitive to pain. So sensitive that he suffers

more than ordinary people do from the pain. And, remember, the pains
come suddenly, they remain longer or shorter, and they go suddenly.
They do this in neuralgia ; they do this in inflammatory conditions ;
they do it in inflamed organs ; they do it wherever they come.

Pains, tear, shoot, burn, and sting, and press, and smart, all at once.
All of these characteristics are bundled up into one bundle, so that he
suffers. All of his pains are worse from motion, worse from light,
worse from a jar, worse from cold. He wants to be wrapped up
warmly, and is worse from any exposure or a draft. The headaches
are like matiy of the other pains ; it feels as if the brain was going up
ahd down, tearing and burning at every step he takes, and from -every
motion of the eyes, or turning the eyeballs, or going up stairs, fMng



194


BELLADONNA


from his scat, or sitting do\vn ; all motion creates violent pains ; feels
as if the head wouid burst, as if the eyes would be pressed out. If
he moves he starts the heart to pulsate on liis sore parts and he calls
them “hammering pains.“ Wherever that pain is he cannot have it
touched. If it is touched it will throb. If uncovered it will become
worse. If some one walks across the floor, the jar makes him worse.
The jar of the bed, if he is in bed, is a common aggravation of Bell.
If he is so sick that he is in bed, the jar of the bed makes all of his
complaints worse. You go to the bedside of a patient suffering from
an inflamed liver, and he will not let you put your hand on the bed,
for the jar makes him worse. If the pain is in the abdomen ; if it is
an inflamed uterus ; if it is in confinement, it is the same. This aggra-
vation from the jar is such a marked feature that it is not always con-
fined to inflammations. It is often a modified in a state of nervous
hyperaesthesia. A woman in confinement, when there is no inflamma-
tion, and none threatening, is in such a state of hyperaesthesia that she
wants the windows closed to keep the air out ; she does not want to be
touched ; she does not want the bed moved, any little jar aggravates ;
she is so sensitive to a jar, even when there is no sensitive part. You
go to such a case, and you will realize in time that you are going to
have a difficult and painful labor, without Bell. But with a dose of
Bell, all of these complaintvS pass away quickly, so quick is the action
of this medicine. The jar of the bed will often reveal to you the nature
of the remedy. If you walk to the bedside of a patient suffering from
gallstone colic, with violent pains, he cannot have the bed touched.
His face is red, his skin burns, he cannot be touched, he is in excru-
ciating agony, and he tells that before you have crossed the room.
You see it all. He says, “Don't touch the bed, doctor." That is a
special feature ; the aggravation from a jar is marked.

Spasms — general spasms and local spasms. Spasms of little canals,
lof the circular fibers, of tubular organs, like that I have spoken of in
the gallstone colic. In the ductus communis choledochus there is a
clutching — or it may be in the cystic duct that the circular fibers,
clutch that little bit of stone and will not let it through. The passage
is large enough to admit it and it has started to go through — ^but the
irritation of the part causes a spasm and it clutches that little stone.
You put a dose of Bell, on his tongue, the spasm lets up, stone passes
on, and there is no more trouble ; in fifteen minutes the gallstone colic
is gone. There is never a failure in homoeopathic prescribing in gall-
stone colic. The symptoms are not always Bell., but in this instance,
where that horrible sensitiveness is present, it is Bell.

“Convulsions in infants." They are violent and are usually asso-
ciated with cerebral congestion. The skin is always in “a state of fever.
They are brought on from light, from a draft of cold air, from thf'



BELLADONNA


infant becoming cold. Nervous, brainy children, those with a good
sized head, and plump, large-headed boys ; boys especially, but also
girls that have boys’ heads, when exposed to the cold have convulsions.
Light, motion and cold will bring on these convulsion. The Bell,
subject as an individual, like Bry,, is worse in all his complaints from
motion* Motion brings on convulsions, motion brings on pain ; motion
increases the action of the heart and brings on throbbing ; motion
brings on many complaints and increases the sufferings. Now think
of these generals whenever you come to Bell. This idea of Bell, must
prevail. No matter how many little symptoms you accumulate, get
at these first.

The mental symptoms of Bell, are delightful to study, but dreadful
to look upon. The mental symptoms are such as come on in intense
fevers, such as are observed in maniacal excitement, in delirium. Ex-
citement runs all through. Violence runs all through the mental
symptoms. The mental symptoms are all active, never passive.
There is no passive delirium in Bell. It is a wild state. He is wild ;
striking, biting, tearing things ; doing unusual things ; doing strange
things ; doing unexpected things. He is in a state of excitability.
These mental symptoms that come on during fevers, the delirium and
excitement, are very commofily ameliorated by eating a little light
food. That is not generally known in Bell., but it is cjuite a strong
feature. But remember the violence, and with it, if you go to the
bedside where there is this i|iolent delirium, keep in mind the heat,
redness and burning.

Full of imaginations. Stes ghosts, and spirits, and officers, and wild
things. In the early part of the fever the delirium is very violent and
excitable ; but as it passes on he goes into a sleep, a sort of half-slumber,
a semi-comatose state. Apparently in a dream, and he screams out.
Dreams horrible things. Sees in his dreams the things that he talks
about. When he has real sleep, or resting, as near as it is for him to
rest, he has violent dreams ; night-mare. Secs things on fire. He is
in a delirium, and in torment. He becomes stupid at times, appears to
lose consciousness. Loses the memory of all things and then becomes
wild. His delirium goes on when he appears to be sleeping. These
symptoms often occur with cerebral congestion, the violent cerebral
congestion of the infant. If they are old enough to talk they will
talk about the hammering in the head. In Bell, the infant also com-
monly remains in a profound stupor, the profound stupor that goes
with congestion of the brain ; pupils dilated ; skin hot and dry ; face
red, throbbing carotids. Finally the child becomes pale as the stupor
increases and the neck is drawn back, because as it progresses the
base of the brain and spine become involved, and the muscles of the
neck contract, drawing the head backwards, and he rolls the head ;



BELLADONNA


196

eyes staring, pupils dilated. This mental state is associated with
scarlet fever and with cerebro-spinal meningitis.

Again, these mental states take the form of acute mania, when the
patient will bite the spoon ; will bark like a dog ; will do all sorts of
violent things ; even jump out of the window. He has to be restrained#
put in a strait-jacket. The face is red, and the skin is hot, and the
patient at times says that he burns all over, or that the head burns,
and the head is very hot. During all this time the feet are cold. Head
hot, feet cold, or feet and hands cold as ice. It seems all the blood is
being hurried to the head. All sorts of delusions and hallucinations
are mingled with the acute mania ; ghosts ; horrid monsters ; strange
things, and deformed subjects. Fear of imaginary things, and wants
to run away. In the delirium of Bell, he wants to jump out of the
window, wants to run, wants to get away from his attendants. He
thinks they are doing him injury. Throughout the acute mania, and
throughout the delirious state, all the manifestations partake of vio-
lence. Destructiveness. The Bell, patient in the most acute state
must be watched, controlled, handled, and sometimes tied. In the’
text it describes these states as “rage, fury.'" He wants to do violence.
“Moaning. Instead of eating, bit wooden spoon in two, gnawed
plate, and growled and barked like a dog. A boy violently sick ran
around the room laughing immoderately.’' It has an insane laugh-
ter. A loud, boisterous laughter, “A piece of bread, which he took
to be a stone, he threw far from him. He turns and rolls in bed
in a perfect rage. Aversion to noise and company.” Aversion to
light ; is better in the dark. At times a more passive state intervenes
between these attacks of violence. The active time is always that of
violence ; but there is sometimes a more passive state when the pa-
tient will sit or lie in bed and tear the bed clothing, or break anything
that she can get her hands on. If it is a stick, she will break it up.

Running all through the complaints, whether delirium, fever, or
pains, there is starting. Starting in sleep like an electric shock. Just
as soon as he falls asleep a sensation like an electric shock throughout
the body. “Starts in fright at approach of others. Fear of imagi-
nary things, wants to run away from them.” ^'Great anxiety^^ runs
through the remedy. As a patient comes out of these attacks of
delirium, as he comes out of convulsions, fear is depicted upon the
face. The patient is in great excitement ; the circulation is in a state
of great excitement ; the heart is in great excitement ; motion and
emotion increase the beating of the heart.

It may have been gleaned that Bell, is a remedy that is over sensu
the ; a state of hyperaesthesia ; extreme irritability of tissues. This is
said to be an increased irritability of the nerve centres. This develops
a state of increased ability to taste, and to smell, and to feel; excita-



BELLADONNA


197


bility of the sensorium. Sensitive to impressions. Sensitive to light,
to noise, to touch, to jar. The sensorium is violently excited. Ex*
cessive nervous irritability stands out, perhaps, as one of the most
prominent features of Bell, in contrast with medicines like Opium,
that deprive the patient of all sensitivity. Tlie more congestion there
is in Bell, the more excitability. The more congestion there is in
Opium the less excitability. And yet they are very similar in many
respects ; very similar in aspect ; in the appearance of the eyes and
face; similar in pathological states. If I were to prescribe on the
pathological state, the congestion of the brain, the appearance, without
taking in the intensity of the one or other, I would not be able to
distinguish between Opium and BeU. They often antidote each
other. But we do not prescribe on pathology, but upon symptoms,
after careful individualization.

“Vertigo, ’ with this intense excitability. Turning in bed, or mov-
ing the head makes him dizzy. “Things go round.” “Vertigo with
pulsations.” Moving the head increases the pulsation, and the vertigo.
The patient lies in bed ; cannot hold the head up. This increased
sensitiveness especially applies to the scalp. We notice it particularly
in the woman. She cannot have the hair bound up. It is often the
case that Bell, patients will not have the hair combed or brushed.
“Lets the hair hang down the back so sensitive is the scalp. “Hair
feels as if pulled. Does not 'want the hair touched.” There are some
remedies that correspond fto extreme irritation in very sensitive
natures ; like Hepar, where ihe faints with the pain ; like Nitric acid,
when cannot bear the noise of vehicles going along the street, because
it creates such violent sufferings ; like Cofjea, where footsteps aggra-
vate all the complaints ; he was so sensitive to pain that the noise of
one entering the door when he was on the third floor aggravated his
sufferings intensely, though no one else could hear it. In Nux vomica,
even the sound of footsteps increases the pain all over the body. Bell,
has in its nature all this sensitiveness to pain. It is a part of the
general sensorium ; the whole bodily state is intensified. The Chamo-
milla patient is oversensitive to pain, but we do not need to sympa-
thize with the Chamomilla patient, he will fight it out himself. But
you will pity the Bell, patient, you will pity the Pulsatilla patient, and
the Nitric acid patient,

A strange part of it also is the reactive excitability. The reaction
to medicine is so quick and so sudden that I have many times heard
a patient say, before I had turned my back away from the bed, “That
medicine has relieved me,” so quick is the reaction. In many medi-
cines reaction is slowed down, but in Bell, it is intensified. So it is in
Nux vomica and in Zincum. When the case is very acute, but some-
times also when the case is somewhat chronic, this sensibility is



BELLADONNA


igH

marked. Cuprum is so sensitive all over. It has sensitive warts ; it
has sensitive skin, sensitive polypi, everything sensitive ; and it is so
sensitive in its reaction that, when it is needed, partially indicated
remedies will not work, because the patient is so oversensitive to
everything that everything overacts. The smallest dose, the mildest
dose, the simplest dose overacts and everything aggravates. Odors
aggravate ; well selected remedies disturb instead of cure. Cuprum
tones down, relieves that sensitivity, and well-selected remedies will
then act curatively and long. Cuprum lacks it in that high state of
congestion — it is not like Bell, in that ; Cuprum does not have that
sensibility along with the active fever and congestion, the throbbing
and disturbance of the circulation ; but it has it in a chronic state.
Women and children are so sensitive that they get no sympathy —
and it is not suitable for hysterical ones either, but those that are not
able to control themselves perfectly. Such is Cuprum, Wc have
medicines that are suitable to sensitive people, and especially sensitive
women. Sensitive to odors, sensitive to every conceivable influence.
The doctor who will go out and take care of these poor sick little
mortals, who understands their nature, perceives their quality, and
relieves them of their suffering, will command the whole community,
in spite of the reputation of all the doctors that are there before him.
He must not be one who measures everybody by his own sensorium ;
he may be a pachyderm, but he will find patients that are sensitive.

This sensitivity is present in most of the Bell, headaches. There
are stabbing pains, throbbing pains, shooting pains, all in connection
with congestion. They are all sensitive to motion, to every jar, to
light, even to the winking of the eyes ; sensitive to draft. Bell, will
be indicated when the head is rolling — the patient rolling the head
because the pain is so severe he cannot keep still, although the motion
increases the headache. A child lies and turns and tosses its head
with congestion of the brain, screaming out with the brain cry, a
sudden shriek. After awhile it wakes up and commences to toss
the head, and every few minutes it shrieks with that brain cry ; it is
going into a stupor, the neck is drawn back, the face is flushed, it is
now becoming pale. There are times of stupor, and in that stupor
the child cries out. In all brain troubles we must be careful about
feeding much, or overloading the stomach, because the stomach is
very feeble. It will not digest much, but the food should be well
selected and light.

Great heaviness of the head. The head feels like a weight, and is
drawn back. Sometimes we see the head drawn back from contrac*
tion of the muscles of the neck when the membranes of the upper por-
tion of the spine are involved. Again, we see the Bell, patient draw-
ing the head back himself, because drawing the head back often amclh



BELLADONNA


*99


orates the violent headaches. This amelioration is kept up so long as
he holds the head back. Aggravated from bending the head forward
when sitting, from bending the head forward when standing, or stoop-
ing. It feels as if the brain would fall out or push forward. This in-
creases the headache so much that it sometimes turns into knife-like, or
hammering pains. These are the expressions used. Sensation of nails
and hammers, jagging and tearing ; but with all, pressure and throbbing.
When rising from a seat these sensations are all intensified. Throb-
bing ; pulsation, like hammers hitting the inside of the sore skull,
described by patients as if the inside of the skull was one continuous
sore and was being pecked by hammers with every pulsation. Some
times it will settle down while sitting still, or while lying ; but rising
up from a chair will set that hammer going. ‘‘Expansive” is an ex
pression that is often used by the patient, and it was used by the
provers. Expansive sensation, as if the head was enlarged ; press-
ure from within out. All these headaches are relieved by pressure
upon the outside. Sudden touch or pressure will aggravate ; but
pressure that is gradually increased and brought to bear carefully
upon tlie head will ameliorate, like the pressure of a bandage, or a
tight-fitting cap. Again, all of these headaches are brought on by
exposure to the cold air ; from standing in the cold air with the head
uncovered. Sometimes a severe headache will come on from merely
having the hair cut. Congestion of the head lasts for days, with throb-
bing and pulsating ; from hiving the hair cut. Ear troubles, chest
complaints, rheumatic complaints come on from having the hair cut,
or from standing in the coo9 air with the hat off ; so sensitive is the
head to cold. It may be said of this remedy that complaints of various
parts of the body come through the head and go downwards. Com-
plaints in^the lower extremities, rheumatic complaints of the joints,
with great redness and swelling, come on from uncovering the head,
from exposure of the head, or from getting the head wet, or from be-
ing caught in a shower. There is one complaint which will puzzle you
if you ever meet it and you do not know just what I am going to tell
you. The complaints of Bell, in a general way are ameliorated from
rest, and aggravated from motion ; but there is a kind of restlessness
with tearing pain from the hips down, most troublesome to observe,
that keeps the patient walking all of the time. The instant there is
rest the pains come on. Tliey sometimes shoot downwards, they
sometimes tear up and down the nerves ; and this comes on from
exposure of the head, and not from getting the feet wet. Complaints
of Aconite and Pulsatilla come on from getting the feet wet, and
these complaints rise upwards, come on through the feet and go
upwards and affect the head. Bell complaints come on from ex-
posure of the head apd go downwards ; sometimes affect the head,



300


BELLADONNA


sometimes the chest, sometimes the stomach, sometimes centre in the
abdomen, sometimes centre in the uterus and ovaries. Rhus has com-
plaints from getting wet, but the complaints are in the parts that are
wet. If he gets the legs wet he will have rheumatism in the legs.
There is a vast distinction, and this distinction has to be made in
almost every prescription you will make. Homoeopathy is a matter
of individualization as to how complaints spread. Some complaints
begin on the right side of the body and spread to the left. Some
complaints begin in the top of the body and go downwards. That is
the way this remedy acts. In some iremedies the exposure of the
feet to an ice cold draft will bring on headache (Silic.) ; but in Bell,
the exposure will bring on a headache, or neuralgia of the lower
extremities. Now that pain that comes on from rest is an exception
in Bell. That illustrates again the importance of distinguishing very
decidedly between generals and particulars. Without knowing “gen-
erals’" and “particulars” you will never do accurate prescribing. The
lower extremities here arc the particulars. The patient and the
general condition of the patient are ameliorated by rest ; the symptoms
of the patient are ameliorated by rest. All of those symptoms that can
be predicted of the patient himself are ameliorated by rest, but the
pains of the lower limbs, as described, those neuralgic pains are
ameliorated by motion, and come on in rest. That does not mean
that all the pains in the lower extremities arc ameliorated by motion,
because the pains in rheumatism arc invariably ameliorated by rest,
and aggravated by motion. Those tearing pains, from the hips down-
wards, with no swelling, come on during rest. All remedies are full
of freaks, and it is the figuring out of these peculiarities that enables
us to do good prescribing.

With all the complaints of Bell, do not lose sight of the congestion
upwards. “Rush of blood to the head. Cold extremities.” Cold
feet, cold hands ; hot head.

Inflammatory conditions of the eyes. “Glistening eyes. Dilated
pupils. Flushed face. Intense redness of the inflamed part.” In-
flammation of all the tissues of the eyes, the lids, and all the parts of
the eyeball, with most violent pain. Heat, redness, and burning.
These three strong features that run through the remedy tfrill be
found in the eye sufferings. Pulsation, tumefaction, lachrymation ;
intense pains ; sufferings all worse from motion, and worse from
light. Most intense photophobia. “Flashes of light and fiickerings
before the eyes,” When reading, lines appear crooked. "Dimness
of vision, or actual bfindness.” Intense congestion and fullness of all
the parts. “Apoplexy of the retina. Half-opened, protruding, staring
eyes.” You will see that in the infant when the child lies in a stupor ;
eyes’ half open ; congestion of the brain ; face flushed and intensely



BSLLADOI^A


aot


hot ; rolling the head from side to side ; if it has been going on for
several days the face will later become pallid, and the neck drawn
back. In these congestive troubles, lying with the eyes half open;
almost no winking. “Orbital neuralgias. Protruding eyes, with
dilated pupils. Inflammation of the optic nerve and retina. Eyes
congested and red.” Another feature belonging to the eye is strabi^
mus. Not those cases coming on gradually, such as will need the
surgeon, but those that come on with congestion of the brain, with
this state of congestion and dilated pupils and rolling the head from
side to side, flushed face, throbbing carotids and intense heat. After
a day or two the eye begins to turn in, and the little one is cross-eyed.
That is an additional indication for Bell. Sometimes, coming out of
a severe congestion, the strabismus remains and Bell, is sometimes the.
suitable remedy. All of these cases coming on from the circulatory
conditions should be cured with remedies. They should never be
sent to the surgeon. Though they remain some time, even months,
they will be cured by well-selected remedies, while those that come on
gradually, and those that are born so, will not be relieved by remedies.
Only those spasmodic ones that are associated with, and come on
from, congestion of the brain. In connection with congestion of the
liver and duodenal catarrh there is yellowishness in the eyes.

In inflammations of the car which go on to suppuration Bell, is rarely
useful. We have to look to c|eep acting remedies. We may have the
pain, tenderness, oversensitivc^iess, all inflammatory conditions ; but
cases requiring Bell, rarely go con to suppuration.

Now wc come to the mucous membranes, the nose, mouth, throat,
larynx, chest, the mucous membrane extending into the ear through the
Eustachian tube, and we have another strong feature of Bell, which
characterizes most of its conditions. Great dryness; a sensation of
dryness. Dryness in the nose ; mouth ; of the tongue ; in . the

throat; in .the chest, and such evidences as dry cough and
spasmodic conditions. These are so general that with the
nose symptoms, the coryza, the throat symptoms, the cough,
this is intensified ; dryness of mucous membranes will generally be
found. It is that way with Phos, When Phos, has .a sore throat it

will have dryness of the mouth, tongue and air passages. This is

general as to the respiratory tract. Then there is coryza with much
sneezing. “Pricking, burning in the nose.^' Hot sensation in the

nose. The general states present much redness of the face, much
heat with the coryza ; hot head, cold extremities ; marked headache,
because there is dryness. /The very dryness itself is sometimes causative
id pain, because the natural flow from the. mucous membranes is dried
up. Whenever we have checked secretions wc have fever, and ..in
BdL this is maAcd, . Checking -of the discharge with .fever;, with

t6



302


BELLADONNA


heat, redness and burning ; red face, burning face ; heat in the face
and head, and cold extremities. It says in the text, “maddening head-
ache, with suppressed catarrh.”

Now, in such a climate as this most people during winter and
cold weather and the changes have more or less mucous flow from the
nose, and eyes, and air passages. They are better when this takes
place. All at once it stops, and all the parts become dry ; then look
out. An awful, maddening, throbbing headache comes on. It is
not so suitable for those old catarrhs where there is a copious flow of
thick, yellow mucus. The catarrhal state wherein Bell, is useful is
simply the exaggeration of the whitish mucous flow. Where it has
been thick and yellow, and then stops suddenly from a cold, and a
coryza comes on. Bell, is worthless. Always bear in mind that you
select for suppressed catarrh a medicine that is within the sphere of the
symptoms that have been suppressed. Hence, the medicine for
thick, yellowish-green discharges might be Merc., Sulphur, or Pul-
satilla; then you are within the range of medicines capable of re-estab-
lishing the flow, and at the same time beginning a curative effect on
the state of the tissue, leaving the patient in a much better state.

Violent faceaches. Rending, tearing pains in the face ; throbbing
pains in the face. Pains in the face worse on the right side ; worse
from a jar ; with much heat ; throbbing carotids ; hot head ; brought
on from exposure to cold wind, and riding in the cold wind. Bell, has
cured paralytic conditions, but Causticum is generally the remedy for
paralysis of the face from riding in a cold wind. Spasms of the
muscles of the face. Extraordinary twitchings of the face. Erysipelas
in the face ; a bright red gradually becoming purple if there is a fever
accompanying it. In the neuralgic pains there is always more or less
congestion of the face with violent pains, and the face will be bright
red. With the zymotic state, as the febrile condition becomes more
profound, and as the blood becomes more zymotic, the face grows
from duskiness into a mottled state, as you will see in Bapfisia, more
marked in Baptisia than in Bell. “Red face, with burning heat." The
teeth are full of pains, congestions, and aches of a similar character.
Very sensitive teeth.

The tongue should be a dry tongue, as that is general with its
mucous membranes. Dry mouth ; dry tongue ; swollen tongue ; pro-
truding tongue, dry and hard, feels like leather. Loss of sensation,
loss of taste, loss of power of the tongue and loss of speech are all
BeH. features. “Paralytic weakness of the tongue : trembling of the
tongue wdien it is protruded,” It comes out weak. In a very few
days die Bell, fever patient is greatly reduced, is greatly exhausted,
has almost a paralytic weakness. When he raises the hand and holds
it. a moment it trembles in the same way. That which is found in thQ



belladonna


ao3

tongue is only a part of the general state. Trembling from congestion
of the nerve centers. The papillae of the tongue are erect, and the
tongue is bright red. Bright red tongue in scarlet fever. Bright red
tongue in congestion of the brain, with the erect papillae. When going
over Arum tnphyllum I told you it had been pronounced ‘‘strawberry
tongue.'" It is the same with Bell. The tongue looks as red as a straw-
berry, and the papillae stick up like seeds. “Red streak in the middle
of the tongue, wide and broader towards the point. Tongue, white
centre with red edges.” White tongue with brain afEections is not
uncommon. It has thick, milk-white, delicate fur all over the tongue
in brain troubles. “Dryness of the mouth, with thirst." “Dryness of
the mouth, with no thirst." Bell, is full of thirst, we will find when
we come to study the stomach symptoms. Sometimes Bell, wants
large quantities, sometimes water constantly to wet the mouth, like
Ars, It is a common feature in Bell., like Ars,, to want water little
and often. Just enough to wet his parched tongue, mouth and throat.
Dryness in posterior nares, and the mucus that he drags down from
the posterior nares is tough and stringy, and very scanty, and it is
white, or, if changed at all from white, it is bloody. Yet I have not said
anything about this remedy for bloody discharges and for bleeding.
We will find before we finish that it is a haemorrhagic remedy, that
parts bleed easily. There is bleeding from the eyes, bleeding from
the nose, bleeding from the throat, bleeding from the larynx, bleeding
from the chest, bleeding fronjj the bladder, bleeding from the uterus.
Ulcers bleed. Little fine ulcers in the throat no bigger than a pin-
head. Little aphthous patched bleed. An aphthous inflammation of
the throat ; but the most of the complaints of the throat are dry and
red. Great tumefaction. Extremely sensitive ; much swelling ; ina-
bility to swallow. Great pain on swallowing, with all the sensitivity
of the surrounding parts, with the sore throat, and with the inflamed
throat. Inflammation and swelling of the tonsils, with red face,
•intense heat, throbbing carotids, high fever, coming on from cold.
Fauces and pharynx deep red. Soft palate and tonsils swollen. Swal-
lowing painful, particularly of fluids. Speech thick. “Feels like a lump
in the throat" — that is from the swollen tonsils. Constant scraping
and hawking in the throat. The pharynx and larynx are very com-
monly in a state of spasm ; partly from dryness, partly from extreme
sensitiveness of the nerves of the part. Clutching of the throat on
going to sleep, clutching of throat on coughing. Spasms of the
oesophagus. “Spasmodic constriction of the throat." Constrictions
that are spasmodic. Constrictions of the larynx, of the pharynx, of
the throat. Bell, has constructive pains in parts that feel like the clutch
of fingers. That sensation of clutching is felt in the uterus ; it is a
spasm. It is felt in the liver ; it is felt in the brain ; it is felt in the



>04


B£LLA1X>NNA


throat. Jerking and twitching of muscles, with violent pain, in. painful
parts. That is a strong Bell, feature. Patients sometimes in their
inability to describe their feelings will say, “Doctor, I feel a clutching
in there.”

This constriction that comes in the sore throat occurs just in the
act of swallowing fluids or solids, and that action will force the food
and fluids up into the nose, and sometimes out of the nose. Some
remedies have it as a paralytic condition, because the muscles of deglu-
tition are paralyzed and they do not favor the natural contracting
actions to force the food down the oesophagus, and in that way the
food is forced up into the nose and causes strangling. In Bell., in
its acute states, its inflammatory conditions and its spasms would
distinguish it from Lachesis, where it occurs as a paralytic condition
after diphtheria, and from Alumina, which has a spasm of the oeso-
phagus. These are slow in coming on. Bell, is early. The early part
of the fever is the time of its irritation. The latter part of the fever
is the time of its relaxation. Rapidly forming aphthous patches upon
the tonsils. With the sore throat such as we have described you
will nearly always find an enlargement and inflammation, or soreness
of the glands, under the jaws about the neck. Tenderness along with
a Belladonna sore throat is a natural concomitant.

A strange feature running through the Bell, fevers of all sorts is
an unconquerable craving for lemons, and lemon-juice. Lemonade
seems to agree sometimes. In acute diseases when they crave lemon
it is good for them. They often crave things to eat. You must not be so
violently temperate and in favor of prohibition that if a patient longs
for beer in acute sufferings you will not give it. “Thirst for water
changed into thirst for beer.” Thirst for things that could not be
endorsed in health, even. “Excessive thirst for cold water.”

In the stomach and bowels we have inflammatory conditions which
can all be grouped as one. Pain, burning, distress, distension ; sensi-
tive to a jar, and to the slightest motion, and to the slightest pressure.
Sensitive to a jar, and sensitive to motion. “Pain in the stomach ex-
tending through to the spine.” Inflammation of the stomach from
becoming chilled, with intense heat ; with much burning. It has
violent colic, intense cramping pain in children. Face red and hot;
pain relieved only by bending forward. There are exceptional in-
stances where it has been relieved by bending backward, when it is
similar to Dioscorea. The mother finds that by holding the child
on her hand it will relieve the colic. That is like Colocynth ; but
Colocynth is without much fever, without much thirst, a pain in one
^CK}t, an intense colic in the abdomen ameliorated by doubling up,
ameliorated by bending across something hard, is Colocynth. In that
inataate Colocynth tan be prescribed on that one group of symptoms.



BELLADONNA


305


"Great pain in the ileo-coecal region ; cannot bear the slightest touch,
even the bed clothes.” There are instances where Bell is the remedy
in appendicitis.

Belladonna has dysenteric troubles. Diarrhoea, witli scanty fluid
stool ; marked straining, but with it the face is flushed. Heat, redness
and burning in the face and head. Cold extremities, with hot head
Much straining, but passes scanty stool. “Spasmodic constriction of
sphincter ani ; with haemorrhoids.” Haemorrhoids that are violently
painful, that are intensely red, that arc greatly swollen and inflamed,
a high grade of inflammation ; cannot be touched ; must lie with limbs
wide apart, the haemorrhoids are painful and there is much burning.

No remedy has a greater irritation in the bladder and along tha
urinary tract than Bell. The urging to urinate is constant. The urine
dribbles, and it bums intensely along the whole length of the urethra.
The whole urinary tract is in a state of irritation. Bell, has cured in-
flammation of the bladder. With the irritation and tlie congestion
there is all the sensitiveness to pressure we find in any other part
where Bell, is indicated ; sensitive to a jar. Irritable state of the mind,
irritable state of the whole nervous system. “Tenesmus of the blad-
der. After passing urine sits and strains,” in torment. The urine is
diminished, bloody, sometimes pure blood, or little blood clots. A
considerable quantity of blood in the bladder comes away in little
clots. “The urine looks as if mixed with brick dust, or streaks.
Strongly acid.” There is a s|>asmodic retention of urine and there is
involuntary passing of urine! Dribbling of urine in brain troubles.
During sleep, dribbling of urine. Dreams that he is passing urine,
and involuntarily passed it. Retention of urine after shock, or from
congestion of the brain, or after confinement. Bladder full ; great
pain ; great sensitiveness. Involuntary dribbling while standing and
walking ; or sometimes from mere motion the urine spurts. The
urging is violent and sudden. When a little urine has collected in
the bladder he has a sudden, painful urging. Much of the trouble is at
the neck of the bladder, and it is spasmodic. He feels the spasmodic
clutching. At the time of the urging, and at other times, he has
spasm of the neck of the bladder, from shock, from cold, from anxiety,
from mental disturbances. When becoming old, or chilled, or in very
cold air, women lose their urine, like Dulcamara and Causticum, Starts
in sleep, and wets bed. Dreams of a fright, which causes a starting,
and she wets the bed. On going to sleep, a sudden electric shock goes
through the whole body, and she wets the bed. Bell, is rich with
such strange little peculiarities ; but it only shows the general spas-
modic condition and the general irritability of the whole Belladonna
cemstitution. We see those strange conditions and states, the irri-
tability in all parts of the body, especially where there are sphincters.



2o6


BEUADONNA


where there are circular fibres clutching in the neck of the
bladder ; clutching at the mouth of the vagina ; constriction of tubes.
Constriction of the uterus. Here we see a special marked

feature of it, in the neck of the bladder. It has more troubles

in the woman than in the man ; that is in the symptoms and conditions
in relation to the female sexual organs, and to parturition, and to the
breasts, and during the period of gestation there are many conditions
where Belladonna will be needed. It is really an important remedy
for the nervous sensitive woman, the woman of irritable fiber.

In the male genitals we have scarcely any important symptoms ; but
with the female there are many, and some very distressing ones.
They have symptoms of great suffering, of great excitability. The
parts are sensitive ; the uterus and ovaries are congested, sore to

touch, sensitive to jar. Irritable uterus, until it has become enlarged

and painful, and sore to the touch. Sometimes it remains in this state
after parturition. Or, after every menstrual period it is a little larger,
and remains. It does not return to its normal state, but remains con-
gested, and the woman feels all through the interim as if she was men-
struating. Bruised feeling ; sensitive to a jar. The flow is copious
and clotted. But the most striking feature here is the uterine haemor-
rhage. Uterine haemorrhage. from congestion, with spasms, with great
sensitiveness. The uterus contracts with violence, hence, a spasmodic
contraction. Great soreness, with a copious flow of bright red fluid
mixed with clots, is the characteristic of the Belladonna flow. It is
like Sabina in that respect. Those two medicines have that in a high
grade. The uterus fills with a clot, and then comes a contraction like a
labor pain and expels it ; for a while a copious flow of fluid ; and then
contractions like labor pains come on again, expelling the clots, and
then comes the flow. The blood clots soon, and the haemorrhage is
attended with great exhaustion. Now this occurs almost without any
provocation. This haemorrhage occurs also in connection with abor-
tion. Belladonna is a great remedy to check the haemorrhage in con-
nection with abortion or from any cause whatever where the symp-
toms of sensitiveness are present. Sensitive to touch, sensitive to a
jar ; the patient herself is in that state of irritable sensitiveness, great
nervous excitement manifested both when awake and in sleep, often
with fever. Haemorrhage, with febrile conditions, but usually the
haemorrhage takes the place of the fever, and commonly if there is
haemorrhage it will relieve the fever.

It is also a great remedy for haemorrhage after confinement. The
blood feels hot. Haemorrhage, with hour-glass contraction. It is
not an uncommon thing for the placenta to ^ grasped in its middle
by a contraction like an hour-glass tearing it loose here and there,
and from below comes the bleeding ; a copious flow of blood. BelL



BELLADONNA


307


relieves this hour-glass contraction.

It has also the most violent dysmenorrhoea. Pains like labor-pains.
Spasmodic labor-pains. Circular contractions are the commonest
forms in Bell. All of the fibers should take part uniformly and do their
work uniformly, and thereby gradually bring to bear a tightening
upon the contents. In Bell, it is just like a cord going around the
body of the uterus, tightening it, and it interferes with labor. That is
the way it is in its dysmenorrhaa. Violent contraction of the circular
fibers, and hence, a woman will often describe it as feeling as if the
uterus was clutched with a string. As if it were tightened. Bell, is rich
in spasmodic conditions, in haemorrhagic conditions, in states of irrita-
tion, and in soreness, and the parts are sensitive to pain, and the woman
herself is dreadfully wrought up and shocked by pain. In addition to
that, pains in the ovary. Belladonna acts in many instances on the
right side. It is common for the right ovary to be more painful than
the left, or the right to be entirely affected and the left not at all, in
Belladonna. So it is with the right side of the throat. So it is some-
times in the right side of the body. “Pains in the ovaries with the
appearance of the menses. Pains in the pelvic region, which come
on suddenly, and cease as suddenly.” The characteristic Belladonna
pains come on suddenly, sometimes stay a few seconds, sometimes a
few minutes, and leave suddenly. Pains from uterine congestion.
Acute inflammation of the uterus. “Enlargement of the uterus, and
periodically spasmodic bearing’ down.” It has a relaxation in the
parts as well. The uterus ha» been congested and is enlarged, and
heavy, and the little suspemory attachments have become relaxed,
and tired, and weak, and have stretched and elongated, and the
already distended and overweighted uterus keeps pulling on them,
and this creates the sensation that women so often describe, a bearing-
down sensation as if the uterus would escape. It is sometimes
described as a funneling sensation. These are the expressions of
women when they suffer from prolapsus. That relaxation is com-
mon in a great number that have been poisoned with Ergot. The
uterus comes down and is partly exposed between the labise. Pro-
lapsus as if the whole inner parts were coming out is a common
feature, and with this she is worse from a jar. There is a great sen-
sitiveness in the parts. There is a great soreness in the uterus, and a
sensation of heaviness. I have seen women sit with their limbs wide
apart so sensitive is the neck of the uterus that is protruding from
the vulva. “Must sit ; cannot lie down.” Many of the Bell- cases
cannot lie down, because of the stretching of the abdominal muscles.
When they lie down they must draw up the limbs to relax those
muscles. Must sit, or take a flexed posture. Great sensitiveness in
the j^ns. Pressing and urging towards the genitals. There are all



BELLADONNA


ao8

sorts of positions, and aggravations, and ameliorations in Belladonn^t
in accordance with what particular muscles are involved. Some
patients can lie better than they can sit. Almost all are worse stands
ing. Some arc made better by sitting with the limbs wide apart.
Most arc aggravated by bending forward too much. Sitting in a chair
she cannot bend forward too much, neither can she bend backwards
without increasing the suffering. So sensitive, and so much swelling
in these parts. She is worse from motion, worse from jar, worse from
excitement, worse from the slamming of the door, because that makes
the muscles twitch. All this illustrates how sensitive the irritated parts
are. Then in the external and internal genitals and ovaries there is
burning, and twitching, and much heat. Often tearing pains ; the
tearing pains are generally an exaggeration of those clutchings and
constrictions, and such are known as spasms especially of the circu-
lar fibres.

Belladonna is well suited to pregnant women who are extremely
sensitive, who are plethoric, who have congestion from taking cold,
who have soreness, where there is threatened abortion, or during
or after abortion when there are haemorrhages. Then again Bell, is
useful in red-faced plethoric, vigorous women who have married
late in life and become pregnant, and when the day of delivery comes
the muscular fibres are in a state of tension. The uterus will not
relax. She is flushed and has heat, and is in a state of excitement,
sensitive to touch, sensitive to jar. Relaxation will soon follow. It is
not to be expected that she will have an easy labor, because women
who marry at 28 or 30, or later, suffer from prolonged labor.

There is one strong feature of the haemorrhages, and of the dis*
charges ; the flow of blood feels hot. During confinement gushes
of blood that feel hot. After abortion, gushes of blood that feel hot.
A lochial discharge that feels hot, along with the sensitiveness and
soreness of the parts. Tenderness to pressure. There are inflammatory
conditions of the breasts accompanying confinement. Milk fever. When
the breasts become red, extremely sensitive to touch. She cannot turn
over in bed ; she cannot have the bed jarred, the face is flushed and
die carotids are throbbing ; there is fever ; the sensitivity is aroused
throughout the economy. Great induration ; hard as a stone. Bell, will
: stop the pain in the breast in a few hours. It will stop that congestion,
and will relieve all suffering.

When the mammary glands arc inflamed without any general symp-
toms, but merely an inflammation of the glands give Phytolacca.

Inflammation of the larynx. There is that clutching again, and
choking. It begins with a rawness in the throat, a smarting and
scraping, and the formation of a little mucus. After much icrapu^
md hawking it extends up the throat a little ; but before he to



BELLADONNA


209


cough it is quite dry. There is smarting, and loss of voice. As soon
as he attempts to go into a sleep, that clutch comes on and wakes him*
up. Hoarseness and rawness and clutching in the throat. Laryngitis
with sensitiveness, ^'Sudden attacks of hoarseness every motion,
or the slightest attempt to talk, the slightest effort to move the larynx
or to touch it causes suffering. Moving the head backward, or
moving the head from side to side, causes pain and cough. Swallow^
ing aggravates. As the bolus goes down behind the larynx he feels a
great big sore place, it is the larynx. The voice changes. One minute
it is one key, and in another it changes. Sometimes it is hoarse and
sometimes it is squeaky. And then, there is complete loss of voice,
unable to utter a sound. “Croup-like spasms in the larynx. Spasms
of the glottis. All the symptoms of croup,'* but no membrane. It is
simply a dry, denuded larynx, with rawness and scraping ; an inflamed
condition. And this is the form of the acute laryngitis ; it comes on
very suddenly. His respiration is short, rapid and painful. Often
asthmatic. Asthmatic condition, with spasmodic breathing. And
again, these symptoms seem to involve the whole chest. Oppression
of the chest. Asthma in hot damp weather.

The Belladonna cough comes on from clutching in the larynx. As
if a little speck of something had crept into the larynx ; a little dust,
or a little food, or a drop of water had gotten into the larynx, and he
coughs. '*Dry, spasmodic cough." An intense cough. Cough at
night. Cough when lying dowii, more at night than in the daytime.
The cough is spasmodic, barkiog. short. It is a remedy for whooping
cough, with spasms of the larynx which cause the whoop and diffi-
culty of breathing. Finally after long coughing, the expectoration of
a little blood, or a little thin white mucus, is the result of the violent
turmoil going on in the air passages from coughing. The Belladonna
cough is peculiar. As soon as its great violence and the great effort
have raised a little mucus he gets peace for a little while, and stops
coughing. But during the restful pcrio<l the larynx and the trachea
and the air passages grow dryer and dryer, and finally they com-
mence to tickle, and then comes on the spasm, as if all the air pas«
sages were taking part in it, and the whoop and the gagging, and
sometimes vomiting. Then he gets up a little mucus and the cough
subsides. Another little interval and he has another spell. That is
the way its goes on, like whooping cough, but during all of the interim
there is constant dryness. Hence the cough is called paroxysmal.

Tightness in the chest. Painfulness in the chest. Soreness in the
chest In Bell, the child will cry the instant it feels that urging to
cough, because it knows what a great suffering is going to take place.
The chest is so painful, the child dreads the cough and screams. By
the child's cry knQ\v that: it is going to have a coughing spell. Just



2X0


BELLADONNA


like Bry., Hepar and Phos,, which have that feature more than other
remedies. There is burning in the chest ; violent congestion in the
chest. With all of these chest complaints there is that dry, harassing,
spasmodic cough ; worse at night.

This remedy cures pneumonia and pleurisy, I am sure every one
here could picture a Belladonna pneumonia, or a Belladonna pleurisy.
I am sure you know the patient so well that I need not describe the
patient, the head, the congestion, the red face, or the burning ; but in
pleurisy I will tell you its secret. Bell, prefers the right side. Great
pain ; extreme soreness of the part ; cannot lie on it ; worse from the
jar of the bed — and you have the Bell, pleurisy. Bry, also prefers the
right side, but the Bry. patient must lie on that side ; must have pres-
sure, and is not so sensitive to a jar ; he has not the intense heat, he has
not the great throbbing, and the burning. Every kind of sickness that
you go to you have to individualize in that way. There is no other
way to practice Homoeopathy.

Remember, with all the inflammatory conditions there will be throb-
bing, heat, redness, burning, soreness to touch, and sensitiveness to a
jar. With Bell, it means he cannot lie on the inflamed part ; while with
Bry. he is ameliorated from lying on the inflamed part.

Throbbing in all the arteries. Great congestion. Vascular excite-
ment. These are present with all the congestions, and inflammations.

Belladonna cures inflammatory rheumatism, when all the joints
are swollen, or a great number of them, and they are hot, red, and
burn. We have in the rheumatism the heat, redness and burning run-
ning through ; with the same sensitiveness of the whole patient, and
a sensitiveness of the joints tc the jar of the bed. He wants to lie
perfectly still, is very much worse from motion and has considerable
fever. Sometimes when the fever in inflammatory rheumatism
runs pretty high there is delirium. But the striking features are,
the swelling of the joints with the redness, and great sensitive-
ness to motion and to a jar. It is especially suitable to those
that are very sensitive to cold, who cannot bear the least un-
covering, cannot bear a draft, very sensitive to the motion of
the covers, and ameliorated by heat. The very stamp and charac-
ter of Bell, is in its rheumatic state, like it is in all of its other
complaints. It is the patient that has given Bell, that character in the
provings ; it is the patient that gives disease that character when he has
it, and it is only the fulfilment of the Law of Similars when these
come together, and the remedy annihilates the sickness.

Inflammation of the joints, coming on from sudden exposure of that
particular joint. Or from a severe attack of cold one joint becomes
inflamed. A trouble that is localizing itself. It may be any joint of
the hody* for Bell affects all the joints. The sudden exposure to poldi



BELLADONNA


tit

in plethoric individuals, is one of the most prominent causes of the
Bell, sickness. In chronic cases the taking of cold generally locates,
or creates, a ^disturbance, and increases disorder, that manifests itself
in the weakest place. Vigorous people take cold in the nose, where they
throw it off easily. You can often say to sickly patients that ' your
cold now affects you in the weakest place. If you have liver trouble,
your cold will settle in the liver,** and so on ; “but when you get well
you will take cold like other people, in the nose.'' Absolutely healthy
people seldom take cold, but we do not have many such, they are so
rare that we do not often see them ; and the snuffles, and sneezing,
and the running at the nose are simply throwing off of the cold of
ordinarily healthy people.

In the limbs, again, we have convulsions, which is a parr of the
generals. In all the muscles in the limbs, and throughout the body,
convulsions. Children go into convulsions with head troubles, with
congestion of the brain, with irritation of the brain. Convulsions
from taking cold, in plethoric children, and the limbs are most likely
to show forth these convulsive efforts of the muscles. Violent cramp-
ing, All the limbs are in a state of convulsive move-
ments. Sometimes the spasms are clonic, and sometimes tonic. The
convulsions in the limbs are sometimes such as draw them up sud-
denly, throw them out suddenly ; sometimes convulsions that throw
the body backward, called opisthotonos, and sometimes throwing the
body forward, called emprostliotonos. The most of the complaints
in Bell, are ameliorated by keeping still. The drawing pains, the pul-
sations, the inflammatory conidtions drive the patient into a desire
for perfect rest, arc aggravated from morion. The disinclination and
aversion to the slightest motion is common in Bell., and as strong in
Bell, as in Bry, Bell, is so sensitive in parts that the motions of talking
are painful ; so sensitive that the conclusion of the voice is painful
in the sore spots. A person with a strong voice, a bass voice, hardly
thinks of the concussion that takes place ; and much less is that of the
female voice, and yet I have seen that aggravation from motion, and
that aggravation from jar so marked in the female that her voice
was like the pounding of hammers. In inflammation of the uterus,
and ovaries, and the bowels, she refrains from talking, because her
voice creates a concussion in the sore parts. That only illustrates the
extremes of this great sensitiveness to motion, and to jar. Jar is
only an exaggerated form of motion, bringing out that sensitiveness.

If you will study the nerves you will find the greatest array of pecu-
liar nervous manifestations, such as sensitiveness of the nerves, aggra-
vated from shock ; spasms ; various disturbances of the whole nervous
system ; twitching ; jerking ; trembling ; subsultus tendinum, etc.
Cramps, and spasms, and convulsions in children. Convulsions come



312


BELLADONNA


on with great suddenness. They come on entirely unexpected. In
most instances of convulsions in the long acting remedies and medi-
cines of the zymotic type, the patient has not been prospering in the
last days of her gestation ; but with Bell, she goes on part way through
the labor, or finishes it, and little is expected. Perhaps her face is
a little too red, but she goes into a convulsion unexpectedly, a violent
one from head to foot. Congestion of the brain, with excitement. In-
tense heat ; everything is intense, violent, sudden and unexpected.
The pains sometimes leave in confinement suddenly, and a convulsion
comes on. But look and see that all the sensitiveness that I have
described runs through the patient. The pains cease suddenly. The
blood seems to mount to the head. The face becomes red. Con-
gestions come on suddenly. Convulsions epileptiform in character.
Bell, is not suitable for those numerous recurrent complaints, even
though the single attack should be mitigated with Bell. Take any of
these attacks ; whether they are convulsions or headaches, or con-
gestion of the brain, they are running down and become excitable,
take on congestive attacks of the head, go right to bed, and roll the
head. You treat those with Bell. ; the attack is relieved. Take notice,
1 start out by saying this is only one of a scries. You may not know
it. This may be the first one. You reduce that one, and when that
same exposure comes again, that same attack comes back ; but Bell,
does less this time than it did before. After two or three attacks Bell,
will do no more and you are worse oft this time than you were before.
When it has broken the first one the physician should see that this is
one of a series, and that Bell, is not suitable. Often it is a case that
needs Calc.^ I say often, not always. All the symptoms should be
examined between the attacks, so that the child may be elevated above
these attacks because the acute remedy will do no more than suit the
first, or second, or third at most. It has not the depth of action. It
has not the length of action. It does not affect the economy pro-
foundly enough. It passes away after a few days ; has to be frequently
repeated. The patient should be followed up and watched in all these
recurrent spasmodic and periodical complaints. Bell, is not a good
remedy for recurrent complaints for it lacks periodicity, just as it lacks
continuance of complaints. Even if the first attack looked like Bell,
the next attack would come back just the same. Belladonna is suitable
in those complaints that if conquered have no tendency to recur ; those
complaints that end in death or recovery. It will only mitigate those
complaints that are periodical.

Its sleep is a congestive sleep, a stupor ; full of dreams ; full of
violence. Wakes with fright from a horrible dream, a nightmare.
Jerks and twitches in sleep. "Restless sleep.” Moaning and groaning
in sleep. Doing all sorts of violence. Delirium in sleep. "Starts in



belladonna


sleep as x£ frightened/’ In sleep sometimes the patient will commence
to talk, will talk faster and louder, the head becomes hot, and the
feet cold, and he ends with a shriek. ‘^Restless tossing in sleep. Feet
becoming icy cold in sleep. Head getting hot in sleep. Wakes up in
a fever, and excitement/'

It has symptoms so much like a typical old-fashioned Sydenham
scarlet fever that it has been useful in scarlet fever. Perhaps it is
one of the most frequently indicated medicines in that disease. In
some seasons, at least, it will rim all through, and the majority of
cases will be Bell, cases, with the bright red face and glossy appear-
ance of the skin. Bright red, intense heat, great congestion ; after a
short time if Bell, is not administered it will grow darker. But run-
ning through all this are those three words, heat, redness and burning.
Burning everywhere. The temperature I described among the gen-
erals as being so marked, so intense that you will carry it with you on
the ends of your fingers for hours after you have touched a Bell,
scarlet fever. It differs wholly from the Afris case, which has
a rough rash. Bell, is smooth and shining. Apis wants to be cool,
wants to be uncovered ; Bell, wants to be warm, wants a warm room ;
Apis has no thirst, to speak of ; in Bell, it is the exception to have no
thirst, generally very thirsty for water, little and often. The intense
dryness of the mucous membranes and skin. Coldness of the ex-
tremities with hot head. In Armn triphyllum there is a constant
picking of the mouth, with suppressed or scanty urine ; pale surface,
only here and there a little raSh ; the itching of the fingers, toes, nose
and lips will lead you to prescribe Arum. You remember the Baptisia
case, with that mental state where he is feeling all over the bed “to
get the pieces together.’’ On the other hand, where there is no rash to
speak of, now and then a patch enough to make a diagnosis, or the
diagnosis is made from the fact of some one else having the disease
in the family, the child is swallowing ice water, but vomiting it up
when it gets warm in the stomach, who would not give Phos ?
So it is at the bedside we pick out the distinguishing things and see
that these remedies are not at all alike. Bell, stands out with its
heat, its redness, its turmoil. Remember it has not continued fever ;
it is not suitable in typhoid. Bell, in a night will bring down the
fever, will allay the delirium ; but how is it the next night ? On comes
the fever, and the patient is worse than he was before. Simply because
Bell, cannot hold what it starts with. It is not suitable. It has not that
continued feature in it. We are led to a medicine that corresponds
to continuous fevers, and such must be selected when we go into the
typhoid state. Our earlier practitioners often only thought of what
they saw at the time. It was only after our school had considerable
experience that it was found that periodicity constitutes a symptom.



114


BELLADONNA


Every remedy has its pace, its times of aggravation and its times pf
amelioration. So it is with Bell. Its time is 3 o’clock in the after-
noon, commonly. Its complaints are generally worse in the night.
It complaints commonly start about three o’clock in the afternoon,
and run till three in the morning, or until after midnight. So that
during the night its fever is highest. The fever comes on, and rises
rapidly, to a very high temperature, sometimes 104*’ or loj"", and runs
down again to almost normal ; but not with a complete apyrexia. It
is not suitable in complaints with complete apyrexia, for that marks
complete periodicity which Bell, has not.

The heat, the redness and the burning characterize most of the skin
symptoms. It has a fine rash ; not the coarse rash, but the fine,
scarlet led, smooth rash. It has inflammation of the skin, phleg-
monous, a deep inflammation. First bright red, gradually grows
bluish or purple, or mottled ; and in this there is the heat, redness and
burning. It is not suitable generally for the erysipelatous inflam-
mation of the skin and deeper tissues, covered with vesicles, like Rhus.
Vesiculation is sometimes present, but it is the exception, while in
Rhus it is the general Icharacter. RJius begins with inflammation ;
it has heat, redness and burning ; but whenever Rhus begins an in-
flammation, just that instant it throws out a great blister, and it fills
with serum. Almost any Bell, surface that is inflamed is likely to
throw out a red rash. In intense fevers, where there are not scarlet
fever or any of the common rashes, a red, fine, glossy eruption is
likely to come out. It is not an uncommon thing in congestion of the
brain, and in bilious fevers, for this rash to appear, and it sometimes
deceives the physician into making a diagnosis of one of the eruptive
diseases, whereas it is a mere hybrid. The Bell, skin, while it turns red,
has such a passive redness that you can write your name, almost, on
the skin. As you take your finger and make a line on it, it leaves a
white line behind your finger. That was an old diagnostic phase of
scarlet fever, and it shows that Bell, produces upon the surface that
peculiar passive congestion very much like the scarlatina. So we
have in the Bell, provings a symptom that is even a pathognomonic
symptom of scarlatina. But we do not prescribe on a symptom. Of
late years no homoeopathic physician ever thinks of giving a medicine
simply for the purpose of bringing the pulse down, or bringing the
fever down. He prescribes for the patient. It is true that the tem-
perature does come down, if we get the right remedy ; but to pre-
scribe a remedy to bring the pulse down is going at it wrong end to.
One who thinks homoeopathically never prescribes to remove a symp-
tom ; but guided by the symptoms he selects the remedy, no matter
what follows. It is true the symptoms subside. Others might say
he prescribed to remove the symptoms, because they subside. Learn



BENZOIC ACID


2«5


to keep the ideal of Homoeopathy in mind, and think rationally ; in
tBrder to do that you will have to rid yourselves of a tremendous amount
of inheritance. We have inherited the way to think wrong end to.

'Tellowness of the skin from congestion of the liver, and catarrh
of the duodenum.” When persons have been over-medicated with
quinine until they take cold on every occasion, and a sudden attack of
congestion of the liver comes on, with the great soreness, and the skin
becomes yellow with all the sensitiveness of this remedy. Bell, will
cure such cases.

There are conditions that follow Bell, that relate to its chronic state.
Where Bell, has been suitable for the acute conditions, the congestions,
but there is that periodicity that I have mentioned, it has its natural
followers, and Calcarea is one of them. In boys that are big-headed,
plump, plethoric, precocious, that take cold easily, and come down with
headaches and congestion ; school children that get headaches which
Bell, at first helped ; very commonly if you look carefully into the
case it will turn out to be a Calc. case. It is so common for Calc, to
relate in this way to Bell. Now-a-days we frequently find the dry.
hacking cough in the hands of doctors who have given too much
Lachesis. Lachesis is commonly given to over-sensitive women, and
it produces many of those conditions; it sometimes cures great trou-
bles, but it leaves behind for weeks a dry, hacking cough that keeps
her from sleeping. Sometimes it comes on after the first sleep, which
is commonly about 1 1 o’clodk ; a dry, hacking cough from lying
down. Bell, will cure this old' effect of Lack., the nervous state and
excitability and the cough. Bell, will be suitable as an antidote for
Lack., that is, for the acute symptoms. Calc, is an antidote for the
more chronic effects of Loch. After the abuse of Bell., Calc, comes
in as one of the natural antidotes.

BENZOIC ACID.

Whenever we see in the nature of a remedy a well-defined state and
condition of the human system pointed out by certain distinctive groups
of symptoms we may know that there is such a diseased state in the
human family. They have not the power to create by themselves
any diseased state except there is first such a state in the economy
of the human race to be aroused. They simply call up in a single
individual something that the individual has, and that something be-
longs to the human race, and so whenever we see a diseased state in
the remedy we know that it exists in correspondence to something
in the human race. Things are so adjusted that everything is for use.
There may be conditions in the human race that we, as yet, know no
remedy for. We see certain groups of peculiar symptoms frcqhfcijtly



2i6


BENZOIC ACID


repeat themselves and we know they are representatives of a state of
the economy, but up to this day we may not have seen in the Materia
Mcdica their counterpart. In medicines we have the exact counterpart
for the diseases of the human race.

Now this remedy has a state and condition that is sometimes called
the gouty constitution, the uraemic or the lithaemic constitution, and
these cases are very difficult to manage, as the state is so persistent.
It is one of the manifestations of Psora. These patients sufEer more
or less from irregularity in the action of the kidneys ; sometimes the
urine is scanty and then they suffer from bodily complaints ; again the
urine is copious and then they are relieved of their complaints. They
are subject to rheumatic attacks and pains in the joints, showing the
gouty constitution, and then they have relief when the urine is copious
and heavily laden with deposits ; but on comes an attack when they
have more or less urine, but it is light in specific gravity, and then
they are full of pains ; in that way they fluctuate. Now, the young
prescriber will sometimes see the patient when he is passing large
quantities of uric acid forming the red pepper deposits and he thinks
he must stop that ; his main idea is to check that one particular thing.
But the patient is a great deal belter off while he has it. To check it
is like suppressing a skin eruption, or restraining any other manifesta-
tion of disease.

It will be noticed, as one of the foremost things in this remedy’s
manifestations, that it has strong smelling urine ; the urine is pungent,
and it sometimes becomes so strong that it smells like hippuric acid,
and so it is said urine smells strong like that of a horse. The odor in
this remedy approximates that of hippuric acid.

The complaints, then, of Benzoic acid are such as are changeable,
and we know why they arc changeable ; when the urine is copious and
plenty of uric acid is being passed, and the urine is full of deposits,
then the patient is at his best ; when the urine is scanty or of light
specific gravity he suffers from backache and pains in the joints,
he suffers from atmospheric changes, is sensitive to cold drafts and
to the air ; but let the urine start up again, which it does in a sort of
alternating way, light urine alternating with heavy urine, and the
patient is comfortable again. Then, there are complaints in which the
urine smells strong and pungent ; this often occurs in children. It is
astonishing that these little ones manifest the uric acid diathesis in
early life. Mothers often describe it as intensely urinous. It smells
like intensified urine; it is not the smell, so much, of decomposed
urine nor of foetid urine, but urine intensified. It has cured many
times wetting the bed involuntary urination in sleep, when riie bed
that has been wetted several times becomes uncleanable. You can
it almost as quick as you go into the room ; the children all tmt\l



BENZOIC ACID


2x7


like urine, strong urine ; the house smells like urine. If two or three
of these little fellows wet the bed at night, the urine is so strong it
tells the story at once.

This medicine needs reproving ; details have not been brought out,
yet its nature is known. We have a good many medicines having this
nature, but this is perhaps as intense as any. This remedy does not,
of course, fit all these patients, because it docs not fit their special
symptoms ; but it has the nature or general state which, of course,
precedes everything, and when it relates to all the particulars as well
it does make wonderful changes.

There arc a few mental symptoms. “Inclined to dwell on un-
pleasant things ; if he saw anyone deformed, it made him shudder,*'
Alternation of profound sleep with prolonged periods of wakefulness.
In the period of wakefulness, he dwells, during the night, upon all
the unpleasant subjects that he can think of. This state alternated
with nights of stupid sleep for weeks, and this fluctuates in accordance
with the fluctuation of the state of urine. “Sadness." “Anxiety while
sweating.** “Child cross.’*

There are many headaches ; they arc urtxmic in character and come
in many regions with many details. “Fearful pain in occiput or cere-
bellum.” “Rheumatic pains in head.” That is well described, because
these headaches of unxmic character take on a similarity to rheumatic
pains, “Pain and heat in regidn of organs of reverence and firmness.”
“Tearing pain in vertex.” Xte headaches arc very numerous ; thp
remedy is full of dull, achingf occipital headaches, coming on in the
night from change of weather. Pains located in the base of the brain
after pains have existed for some time in the joints, and they are
passing but little urine. Every time he takes a little cold the urine
becomes scanty and he is full of dull aches and pains in the head and
especially in the occiput.

Perversion of smell. “Sense of smell diminished.” “Pain in nasal
bones.”

Another form of transformation scene takes place in this remedy,
when all the gouty symptoms of the body cease and inflammation of
the tongue comes on. The pains in the joints cease suddenly from tak-
ing cold, from stormy weather and on comes a sudden swelling of the
tongue. Mercury also has this state. “Extensive ulcerations of
tongue, with deeply chapped or fungoid surfaces.” Then, again,
peculiar kinds of sore throat take place from this same /ause. Sudden
stoppage or slacking up of the quantity of urine ; it becomes scanty,
high colored, and pungent, smelling like that of a hoarse {Nitric acid)
along with acute inflammation and swelling of the tonsils and throat ;
inflammation of the tonsils with scanty, strong, pungent urine smell-
ing like that of a horse. Another feature that seems almost like

28



2t8


BENZOIC ACID


metastasis. Take an individual who is going around with more or
less rheumatic aches in the joints; he takes cold and all this ceases,
but the next day he comes down with inflammation of the tongue or
sore throat, or inflammation of the stomach ; so that he vomits every-
thing he cats. The gout goes to different parts and in this instance
it goes to the stomach ; and then Benzoic acid, Antimonium crud. or
Sanguinaria is likely to be useful. When it goes to the throat or is
followed by swelling of the tongue Mercury and Benzoic acid should
be thought of. Whenever this gouty condition goes to the stomach,
of course it must conform to those symptoms that are in the nature
of this remedy. In this remedy we have ‘loathing, sickness at stom-
ach,'* “nausea with gagging,’* “vomiting of a salty substance ; bitter.”
When we think of Benzoic acid for the stomacli symptoms, it is im-
portant that we have in mind its whole nature, how it brings about its
complaints and what characterizes a Benzoic acid patient. We would
not be able to distinguish from the stomach symptoms alone ; wc must
carry with them the character of the remedy.

It has much disturbance of the liver, and many liver symptoms.
As to the bowels, the stool, the rectum, anus and urinary organs, it is
very rich in symptoms. Its striking ones I will call your attention to,
but remember its migrating, metastatic nature, its complaints going
from one part to another, which will accompany these symptoms.
“Stools, copious, watery.” This is true in ssummer diarrhoea, that has
come on suddenly, “excessively offensive,** The white stool, like
soap-suds, is so strong a symptom that the remedy does not fail to cure
even when the gouty constitution is not present. “Excessively offensive,
scenting the whole house.” “Putrid, bloody.” “Watery, light-colored,
very offensive stools (in children).** So wc get the idea that the stools
are white and that the first passages are like soap-suds, but later the
soap appearance subsides and leaves a white stool. It is well, often,
when a stool is passed that is of a light liquid/ to bear in mind a few
lemedies that produce this state and ascertain whether it is like soap-
suds or filled with bubbles of air. “Diarrhcea of children.** The urinous
odor of the body, and especially that peculiarly pungent, intense smell
of the urine. “Slightly elevated, wart-like, round surfaces around anus.”

The urinary symptoms are too numerous to read. “Foetid urine.”
“Urine of a very repulsive odor.** “Effervescing with hydrochloric
acid.” The odor is sometimes like hartshorn ; it is pungent ; these are
only efforts to describe the strong smell. “Urine dark brown,” It is
true that normal urine after standing a while will get a foetid odor,
but, in this remedy, that just passed is properly described as being in-
tensely urinous. “Urine contains mucus and pus.” “Morbid condi-
tion of urine.*’ “Renders urine acid.” It says in the text “hippuric
acid,” but this i^ a rare condition. “Brown urine smells sour.” “Too



BENZOIC ACID


m


frequent desire to evacuate bladder/' “Nephritic colic." ‘‘Urine dsurk/
urinous odor highly intensified.’* Gouty troubles of the liver ; rheu-
matism ; nephritic colic ; it has cured such states after gonorrhoea, but
it is not much of a gonorrhoeal remedy. When the rheumatic states and
these symptoms are present there are more or less pains in the kidney.
“Sore pain in the back ; burning in the kidney." “Prolapsus uteri
with foetid urine." “Retention of urine in infants."

“Asthma with inflammatory rheumatic complaints." “Cough fol-
lowed by expectoration of green mucus."

The organ that is most commonly affected in these rheumatic com-
plaints is the heart. No organ is so likely to be affected when rheu-
matism leaves the outermost parts as the heart. Pains in the heart.
So in this diathesis, with the strong smelling urine and the gout, we
may expect affections of the heart. “Pains change place incessantly."
“Palpitation of the heart." The rheumatism, of course, is affecting
the heart. “Awakens after midnight with violent pulsations of the
heart." Think a moment and you will sec in what kind of a case you
will need Benzoic acid The constitution of the remedy comes to
mind at once with the heart symptoms, the dyspnoea, pain in the heart
with rheumatic symptoms ; “cannot go io sleep." Think of the alter-
nation of sleeplessness with sleep ; think of the strong urine, of the
fluctuating complaints, of the erratic constitution. “Palpitation worse
at night." “Rheumatic pains in extremities relieving heart." There
we get relief ; complaints gqilig back to the extremities with relief to
the heart. The heart will |elieve when the urine becomes copious
or when the rheumatism goes back to the extremities, into the fingers
and knees, especially the knees in Benzoic acid. Rheumatism alternat-
ing between the extremities and heart. This medicine has cured af-
fections of the heart when the rheumatism has a long time ago dis-
appeared from the extremities and has ever since been affecting the
heart ; after Benzoic acid has been administered a very good sign of
its action is that the extremities become painful and the urine becomes
copious ; free urine and solids increased ; the urine becomes heavy,
whereas it was light. “Hard, frequent pulse.”

The extremities are full of rheumatic affections. “Lassitude in lower
limbs." “Swelling of knee." All gouty affections belong to this
remedy. “Gouty concretions." “Nodes on joints." Benzoic acid is often
an excellent palliating remedy in old gouty constitutions ; they want to
be relieved of the pains in their fingers and in the nodes and joints.
The fingers crack and are clumsy and painful. But often the pain
has been relieved and gone to other parts. This is one among the
remedies that will drive the complaints away from the internal organs
and generally increase the pain in the extremities, which they will scold
about. “Trembling with palpitation of heart." “Extreme weakness ;



fiEBBElUS


120

sweat and comatose condition.” Note that comatose condition with
sweat ; the Benzoic acid patient sweats without relief. Copious, ex-
haustive sweat and profound sleep, but there is no relief. “Awaken
with difficulty of breathing.” Pulsation all over.

“All sorts of catarrhal states ; gouty diathesis, gout with arthritic
nodosites syphilitic rheumatism, etc,” These patients are getting
low down in the scale of life, the tissues become feeble. Ulcers form
upon the skin and mucous membranes.

BERBERIS

When we have finished the study of Berberis we will see that it is
not a very extensive remedy, but it is a very important one. Like
Benzoic acid, it fits into the gouty and rheumatic sphere. It corre-
sponds to such gouty conditions as do not determine to their proper
places. A low state of the economy is present ; anaemic condition ;
feeble constitution ; pallid and sickly, old and worn out ; prematurely
old and wrinkled men and women. They are too feeble to determine
the gouty deposits to the finger joints, where they naturally belong,
and the trouble is yet, as it were, wandering around through the
economy Wandering pains in the nerves, and nerve sheaths. The
wandering, stitching, tearing, twinging pains that run through Berberis
are found in old gouty constitutions, and that is where we get the
greatest benefit from Berberis. Its proving would lead us to see it
is similar to the wandering, t\»^inging and tearing pains of old gouty
constitutions, in persons wdio are pallid, and sickly, and chilly, where
the deposits have not been so marked in the joints ; but where the
twinging in the fingers and in the toes are just such as are found
where the deposits do exist. Of course in all of the gouty states we
must look to the liver and kidneys for pains and various distresses ;
they are centers of observation, because these organs are more or less
disturbed. And very often cardiac troubles go along with them. The
kidneys, liver, and heart are more or less disturbed in their functions
and we see that Berberis takes hold of these organs. We have the
uraemic state, and the state of disorder that ends in these conditions.
We will have twinging pains along with kidney disturbances.

Irregularities of the urine. Copious discharges, alternating with
scanty discharges. Light urine, and heavy urine, excessive deposits
of uric acid and urates. It is changeable, like Benzoic acid. These two
remedies run very much together, yet their symptoms arc wholly
unlike. We find among these sensations that stitching pains are
found in almost every region of the body, and they are all the time
changing. Wandering and stitching pains ; little twinges. As you
sit by his side and talk to a gouty patient— “Ow,” he will say. What



J&ERBZRIS


221


does he mean by it ? He has had one of those twitching pains. The
next thing he knows it is in his knee ; then it is in his toes ; then it is in
his head, all over him. Finally the gouty deposits become prominent
in the fingers, and after the gout has determined itself, then we have
sore fingers ; but these corresponds more particularly to Ledum, Sulphur,
AlscuIus and Lycopodium, where the disease has become marked and
has located in the joints. In Berbeiis these twinging, tearing, stitch-
ing, burning pains are everywhere, they never remain in one place,
but are always moving, and they are not often affected by motion.
Whether he moves, or keeps still, they keep coming. In a few in-
stances we have pains aggravated by motion, but a very few^ in propor-
tion to the many pains in Berberis. He moves many times, because
he cannot keep still. He moves, because he suffers. There arc also
many pressing pains. But the burning, stinging, tearing, stitching,
wandering pains are the main feature, the grand feature of Berberis.
If you single them out in places, in a given joint, from that one joint
they will radiate in every direction. It it is the knee joint, they will
go up ; and down, and every way ; if it is the finger joint, they will
run in every direction. If it is the kidney, they will go down the
ureters ; if it is the liver, they will go down into the abdomen in every
direction. ‘‘Radiating from a particular point,' is a distinguishing
feature, and it puts Berberis almost alone for radiating pains. This is
such a strong feature that Berberis has cured renal colic in many in-
stances because of its well kooivn ability to shoot out in every direc-
tion. It cures gall-stone colit when these little twinges go in every
direction from that locality* We see these twinging, shooting pains
in gouty constitutions are associated with urinary troubles, and with liver
troubles, and we begin to lay a foundation for the study of Berberis,

The joints sometimes swell. “Enlargement of the joints,” But tlie
swelling is not so common as the pains without swelling. Soreness,
lameness in the joints, with these radiating pains. There will be burn-
ing, stitching, tearing, and the pains will radiate and appear in one part
of the body then in another. “A pain in the heel as if it were ulcerat-
ing," and then the pain shoots oft’ in every direction. Numbness.
Lameness.

As to the heart, the pulse becomes slow. Very often it is slowed
down astonishingly.

The mental symptoms are very defective, that is, we do not know
the mental symptoms. There are a few. We know this, that the
mind is weak, that he is unable to sustain a mental effort, and that
he is forgetful. “Defective recollection and weak memory. Terrify-
ing apparitions in ‘ twilight.” It is not a strange thing for a child
in the dark to imagine all sorts of things, because they have heard
graveyard stories from old people ; but with this remedy between



BEHBEi^lS


b:22

the daylight and darkness he sees ghosts, imaginary forms coming
round him. It has melancholy, apathy, prostration of mmd. Some
dizziness. The headaches are of the same character as the general
pains in uraemic subjects, where there is plenty of sand in the uritte^
red pepper deposit. The head comes in for its share of these wander-
ing pains. Stitching, tearing, twinging in the scalp ; in tlie skull ; in
the eyes, ears, back of the head. Burning pains. “A feeling in the
head as if it was becoming larger,'" is a peculiar symptom ; a puffy
sensation. Always putting the hand to the head ; it feels as if he had
on a skull-cap. It fits down over the brow, and it is not an uncommon
thing witli such patients to put the hand to the head to take off the
cap. ‘Teels as if he had a cap on the head,' when there is. none
there. This symptom is not alw^ays described like a cap on the head.
It is convertible into numbness of the scalp ; many patients describe a
sensation of numbness in the scalp, as if they had on a cap. Some-
times patients will deny that it is a sensation of numbness, and say
it is just a cap. At one time I fully believed the “cap" belonged to
two sensations. If it was painful I placed it under “pressure." If it
was not painful it was supposed to belong to “numbness but I have
now made a new rubric, “the sensation of skull-cap," which I now
think is entirely distinctive from numbness ; but they both have to
be compared.

Then the eyes take on that same gouty condition, wdth stitching,
tearing pains, twinging pains, shooting pains. Shooting off in various
directions. There is one grand feature about Berberis, that it has
no particular direction ; it has all directions. Most remedies have pains
taking a direction from one part to the other, pains going from the
eye to the temple, etc,, but in Beriberis it cannot be said the pains go
to any place in particular. They are wandering pains and they radiate.
Pains in the ears of the same character. In every part of the body we
have these twinging, tearing, burning, shooting pains coming and go-
ing, causing the patient to scowl and make a shaq) noise.

The patient has a sickly look ; face pale, earthy complexion, with
sunken cheeks and hollow, blue-cncirclcd eyes. That is a description
of a sick face. Berberis has been very useful in phthisical condiuons ;
and in the pains, and twinging, and sufferings in persons who have
been operated on for fistula in ano. When the fistula has been clpsed,
these pains will come if it is a Berberis case. The kidney manifesta-
tions will come on, or the liver manifestations, or the enfeebled heart,
or these wandering pains. At one time feverish, full of pains, with
violent thirst ; alternating with the very opposite state. Prostration
and' aversion to water. Want of appetite at one time ; canine hunger
at another. The stomach is disordered, digestion is slow and feeWe,
and we have manifestations usually known to patients, as “Bilious,"



BEKBERIS


aa3


Eructations that are bitter and of bile.

The liver is full of suffering. In the liver we have these pains, and
added to them sudden stabbing like a knife puncturing the liver.
Shooting, tearing, burning, stitching, twinging pains, wandering from
one place to another. “Gall-stone colic.’* These pains with jaundice.
The liver seems to slow down in its actions, and the patients becomes
jaundiced. The stool becomes white, bilelcss. “Sharp, pinching pains
in the liver, which come suddenly and with great severity. Violent
stabbing pain in the region of the liver, taking bis breath away. Had
to bend double.** These pains last a moment and pass away. In gall-
stone colic pains are spasmodic, increase in intensity and diminish,
but do not let up entirely. Berberis when it is indicated will let the
little gall-stone loose, and it will pass through, and the patient will
take a long breath and wish he had sent for the doctor sooner. Any-
thing that is spasmodic can be relieved instantly.

Pains through the abdomen. Copious, thick, mushy stools, and these
are yellow, like yellow corn meal mush. “Diarrhoea ; mush-Hke yellow-
ish discharges.** “Clay-coloured.** From what we have seen it is not
surprising that it is clay-colored, that it is bilelcss, that it is white.
The action on the liver does that. When you have these symptoms
associated with radiating pains, and with wandering pains in broken
down constitutions, persons who are suffering from cold, who arc pallid
and sickly, you have a Berberis case.

Then the patient becomes cofistipatcd, but the stool is white, or very
light colored. “Burning, sting^g pain before, during, and after stool.^’
Enlargement of the prostate gUnd, which causes a constant pressure
in the perineum. Pressure as if there were a lump, or as if some-
thing was pressing down.** “Tearing extending around the anus.
Herpes around anus. Fistula in ano.’* Now the surgeons nearly all
advocate that if there is a fistulous opening around the anus it must
be operated upon. Homaeopathy cures such cases. I have not
operated on one for twenty years. The remedy that is indicated for
the patient will cure the patient, and the fistula. Above all things,
they should not be operated on. To close up that fistulous opening, and
thus neglect the patient, is a very dangerous thing to do. Knowing all
that I know, if such a trouble should come upon me and I could not
find the remedy to cure it I would bear with it patiently, knowing J
was keeping a much less grievance. Nor could I advise my patient to
have a thing done that I would not have done upon myself. It is a
dangerous thing to operate upon a fistula in ano. It is a very serious
matter. If it is closed up, and that patient is leaning towards phthisis,
he will develop phthisis ; if he has a tendency towards Bright’s disease,
that will hasten it ; if he threatens to break down in any direction, his
weakest patts will be affected, and he will break down. Occasionally



224


BERBEKIS


time enough elapses so that the physician who is ignorant does not see
the relation between the two. But now that you have heard it, you
tan never forget it.

And then the kidneys and the urinary organs come in for their
troubles. There is such a soreness in the lumbar region, in the region
of the kidneys, that he can bear no pressure. He cannot step down
from a carriage to the pavement without letting himself down very
carefully. A jar is a great shock to him, and sometimes the soreness
is so great that he almost faints. Soreness in the back ; in the muscles
of the back, and in the region of the kidneys ; and this associated with
all sorts of disturbances in the urine, with excessive deposits. The
kidneys radiate in every direction. Pains run up into the kidney, and
they become worn out if he does not get relief, he will have some
serious disease. Hence we have these symptoms. ‘‘Burning and sore-
ness in the region of the kidneys. Burning stitches, single or several
in succession, in regions of loins and kidneys. Much pain, soreness and
tenderness in back, in the region of the kidneys. Sensitiveness in the
region of the kidneys so great that any jarring motion, riding in a
wagon, jumping from it, was intolerable. After kidney complaints, a
foul, bitter taste, rush of blood to the throat. Great urging, with pain
in the neck of the bladder, with burning, scanty urine. Violent, cutting,
tensive pain, deeply seated in left side of bladder, at last becoming a
sticking, obliquely in female urethra, as if in its orifice, lasting a few
minutes.^' Now we see how these symptoms manifest themselves. Sore,
inflamed, sensitive kidney, one or both. And then, the formation of
little calculi in the pelvis of the kidney — little stones like pinheads ; and
every now and then one of them lakes a start down the ureter to the
bladder, and, oh, how he suffers. Then it is that the pains in the
kidneys radiate in every direction. Pains run up into the kidney, and
down into the bladder. In the male they appear as if they ran down
the spermatic cord into the testes, and he is a great sufferer. You
will be astonished to know how quickly Berberis will relieve this
particular kind of renal colic. Burning pain in the bladder ; burning
pain in the kidney. “Urine dark, turbid with copious sediment. Urine
very slow to flow. Constant urging.’' The bladder becomes very irri-
table. Catarrhal conditions of the bladder. Smarting, burning, stitch-
ing pains. Many troubles, pains and aches in the spermatic cord and
testes in gouty constitutions. Burning pains along these regions.

Berberis especially fits a woman who is tired, with a gouty con-
stitution ; though not old in years she is physically tired, so that all
of her domestic affairs fret and tire her. Coition becomes painful, and
she has an aversion to it. The orgasm is delayed, or is entirely absent,
and she is prostrated by it. In all the affairs of her innermost life she
is a drudge. Full of twinging pains in all of her nerves. ‘"Burning in



BORAX


22S


female urethra. Burning pain in the vagina.” A lack of sensation
normal to these parts in the woman.

BORAX

Borax is one of those domestic remedies that has been long used
for local conditions as a soothing substance and for a healing purpose.
In "nursing sore mouth” of mother or child Borax has been used in
the families of old, in the form of Borax and honey, as a wash. The
extensive use that has been made of it would make the homoeopath
wonder if the people had not hit upon something, and it is a fact that
Borax will rapidly heal up a sore mouth. It is not strange that it
docs so, for Borax, in its proving, produces aphthous conditions of the
mouth, which extend to the throat and even into the stomach. It
cures where the genitalia and anus are covered with these aphthous
appearances.

Anxiety, fidgetiness, and sensitiveness are prominent in Borax. He
is anxious about trifles. He starts at every noise, on hearing un-
expected news, from music, from excitement. This anxiety or nervous-
ness, this indescribable feeling that is within him, is aggravated from
upward or downward motion. Such a motion as going up in one of
our elevators nearly drives him to distraction, but he is made worse
going down. All complaints are aggravated from downward motion.
It has been said in routine practice, that in all cases of sore mouth in
children, when the child is worse from downw^ard motion, Borax is
the remedy. When the mother is in the act of laying the child down
on the bed it often rouses up in its sleep and cries out in fright. The
anxiety may be better appreciated if you will go to the top of one of
these high buildings and go dowm in the elevator. It is natural for
every one to feel, with the rapid motion, an anxious feeling in the
stomach, a sensation of falling ; that is natural to the healthy man,
but if you exaggerate that intensely you have the Borax condition in
which the slightest downward motion, of even riding down hill or
walking down stairs, or, in the child, when being carried down stairs
in the mother's arms, produces a violent aggravation. All the nerves
are in a fret.

We notice that Borax has an intensified activity throughout the
body ; all of his senses are made more acute. His hearing is intensi-
fied, he is oversensitive to his surroundings, over-anxious. He has an
excitable spirit throughout. Riding dovm hill produces vertigo. On
nervous excitement, fear and apprehension. This is a strong feature
of Borax. It has many such symptoms, but the nervous elements
partake of this type. As we go through the remedy many other things
will be called out ; but this may be said to be the principal feature of

29



226


BORAX


the mental state, and it is to a great extent the key to Borax cases.
“Anxious feeling during downward morion or rocking.’’ The diar-
rhoea will be cured when that state is present. Aphthae will be cured
when that state is present. The rheumatism, menstrual troubles and
numerous other complaints will disappear upon the administration of
Borax, when this key is present.

It has hysterical manifestations. “Changes from one work to an-
other.” It has a restless, nervous, anxious, excitable state that runs
through his body. The child screeches and screams when it is dandled
and tossed up and down. The motion of the brain, the upward and
downward motion, as in swinging, rocking, etc., makes the patient lose
himself, he hardly knows where he is ; confusion and vertigo come
over him. If one rocks the child, it has an anxious expression of face.
“Very anxious on riding rapidly down hill.” “Anxiety increased until
1 1 p. M.” That I have noticed in Borax as a peculiar time of ag-
gravation of the anxiety. I have noticed it in women who had periods
of insanity, whose nervous trouble and mental state would keep up
until 1 1 p. M. You will notice sometimes in insane people that it seems
as if they were possessed of the devil : and at once a lucid interval will
come and they will talk just as if nothing had happened. So it is in
Borax that a great change may occur at 1 1 p. m. ; this state of anxiety
and nervous excitement may stop at that hour. “Fretful, ill-humored,
indolent” state increased until there is a stool and relieved by stool.
**He starts on hearing an anxious cry on hearing an unexpected
noise, on hearing something drop from a chair to the floor, or if a door
opens unexpectedly. This is all in keeping with the nature of Borax.
If you compare Borax with other Natrums you will find an astonishing
likeness in the nervous excitability ; Natrum carh, and Natnun niur.
Aggravation from noise, oversensitiveness to noise and overexcitement
of the nerves run through all the Sodium family. They are wonder-
fully intense people.

“While engaged in thinking at his work, strong nausea.” Borax has
many times cured this kind of trouble, I have seen it come up in this
way ; from any sort of meditation he becomes nauseated and excitable
and must leave his work and rest a little while, and then he goes at it
again until he becomes sick at the stomach and so must rest again.
With the aggravation from mental exertion, from noise, from excite-
ment, from downward motion, we get the mental aspect of Borax.

A further examination of the sensorium shows: “Vertigo and ful-
ness in head on descending a mountain or stairs.” This is a form of
the same anxious feeling. This remedy has a good deal of vertigo,
sometimes constant vertigo, which is made so intense on downward
motion that he must sit still, and do nothing. It has many congestive
headaches, pressive headaches and much heat in the head.



BORAX


227


There are many eye symptoms. “Granular lids.“ "Lashes turn in-
ward towards eye and inflame it. Entropion." Granulation and thick-
ening of the mucous membrane of the lid ; contractions and scars and
drawing inward. "Lower lids entirely inverted." "Dillicult opening
of lids.'’

Like all the salts of Sodium the nose suffers Irom chronic inffamiiia-
tion of the mucous membrane, a catarrhal state, with copious dis-
charge, and crusts in the nose ; stoppage of the nose. The whole
Natrum family has these dry crusts in il)e nose, and copious discharges
from the nose. Natrum mur. predominantly produces white discharge,
and so does Borax ; Natr, sulph. produces yellow discharge, and so
does Borax ; Nair. sulpli. produces yellow discharge from the nose,
even yellowish-green. Borax is laid down as producing greenish dis-
charge ; its characteristic discharge, which is a general of the remedy,
is a white discharge.

The face of the infant is pale, and clay-colored. “Children have
small vesicles around the mouth, and on the forehead.” Nair. mur.
produces herpetic eruptions around the mouth in all of its febrile
states, and when the patient takes cold. Borax is sometimes for-
gotten, anti Natr. mur. is thought of because it is better known. When
the Natrum constitution is present, then it becomes a process of in-
dividualization to determine which one of the Natrums is indicated.

“Aphthae in mouth and oti tongue.“ "Aphilue on tongue and in-
side of cheek.” This alone ia' not an indication for Borax, although
Borax is one among many medicines when the mouth is so sore that
the child lets loose its hold of the nipple or bottle. Many prescribers
give Borax on that indication alone ; but the constitutional state
ought to be hunted up, so that there may be constitutional founda«
tion for the remedy. Sulph. ac\ is more frequently indicated. “Red
blisters on tongue.” “Vomiting after drinking.” This leads one
to expect that this aphthous state has traveled down the oesophagus
into the stomach. There are many stomach symptoms present that
are likely to be the result of some such condition. “Buccal mucous
membrane highly reddened.” The sore mouth, such as mothers
have and such as infants have, can be cured with Borax. “After'
every meal flatulent distension.” “Constant vomiting.” “Vomiting
of sour slime.” The Borax patient with stomach aphthae will gag
and retch and cough, and that is what is called a “stomach cough.”
Mothers say, “It is a stomach cough.” because the child gags and
retches with it. “Stomach cough with pain extending into region
of spleen,”

Little ones often get summer complaints when they need Borax.
All around about the anus you will see the aphthous appearances.
Great slimy stools are passed day and night ; the child keeps up a



228


BORAX


pitiful crying ; the mouth is aphthous, child is emaciating, and holds
its head back. '‘Stools ; frequent, soft, light yellow, slimy.” Quanti-
ties of fluid like boiled starch are emitted from the anus ; Borax has
that as well as Argentum nitricum. There are also conditions of the
rectum producing thickening of the mucous membrane, with strict-
ure, growing, smaller and smaller until finally a long thin stool is
passed, no larger than a pencil. This inflammatory stricture has
been cured l)y Borax,

In this over-sensitive child when the catarrhal state is general
the urine burns so when it passes that with the first urging (which
causes the child to realize it must soon urinate) it screams out ;
screams with the desire to urinate. That is what it means when it
says "Worse before urination.” It is not that the state of the urin-
ary organs is worse before urinating, but the child in realizing that
it must urinate screeches and screams. "Frequent urination preceded
by cries.” The urine bums and you may know that the child must
soon urinate because it commences to cry. "Orifice of urethra pains
as if sore, after urinating,” "Desire to urinate without being able
to pass a drop.”

This remedy has cured gonorrhoea. Wherever there is mucous
membrane you may expect to find the aphthous patches. There is
another feature like Natr, mur, and Nair, carb, ; in both male and
female it takes away sexual desire ; it benumbs the patient, and
hence the mind and sexual organs are in a state of indifference.

Then we come to the most striking feature of Borax in regard
to the female sexual organs ; in the menstrual flow will be found
membrane. Borax cures the most violent forms of membranous
dysmenorrhoea, when there are violent labor-like pains before and
during the flow and it seems as if the uterus would expel itself from
the vagina. The flow starts slightly, but the same violent pains keep
on, until the expulsion of the membrane. I have known Borax to
cure when the membrane was a cast of the uterus. Such patients
are easily startled from downward motion ; let that be your guide to
Borax in membranous dysmenorrhoea. She dreads downward mo-
tion, and motions like swinging and rocking. "During menses ;
throbbing in head and rushing in ears.” "Pinching and griping in
abdomen that word does not describe it exactly, for it is like the
pain in labor ; "pain extending from stomach.” Pain like the stab-
bing of a knife in the groin, and that may occur either before or dur-
ing menstruation. "Tired ; sweat after midnight.” But, remember,
with such things you must have the mental state, the nervous, ex-
citable state and then Borax will cure this dysmenorrhoea. Another
grand feature of Borax I read in the next sentence. Leucorrhoea
like the white of eggs.” It has albuminous leucorrhoea which feels



BORAX


229


^iike a hot fluid, and flows down the legs. “White albuminous or
starchy leucorrhoea.*' “Acrid Icucorrhoea appearing for two weeks.,“
“Lcucorrhoea white as mucus, without any other ailment,” Now
from this acrid leucorrhoea, from the menstrual state, tiiis false
membrane forming and being thrown off, it is no wonder that women
are sterile. All these women are sterile, all who have such symptoms
are sterile and Borax has cured sterility when this condition was the
cause. You will find routinists prescribe Borax for all women who
are sterile, regardless of the state. When a remedy is given for
sterility, the state must be looked into which is peculiar to the remedy
given such a state as that remedy can produce upon the healthy
woman.

Another feature. Many times I have used Borax when the mother
could not nurse the child ,* she talks about always having a little,
thick milk. “The milk is too thick and tastes badly.” This condition
of the milk prevents the mother from nursing her child. This is a
constitutional state, and Borax, if given in the beginning of pregnancy,
to a Borax patient will so change the milk as well as the rest of the
constitution that the mother will be able to nurse the child. 1 have
a number of times, when a mother has brought forth several children
that she was unable to nurse, given Borax and it has so affected the
case that she could nurse the next child. This remedy also has
loathing of the breast in infanfe, due to the fact that the milk tastes
bad and not due to any defect on the part of the child. You might
think of prescribing for the in^nt, but if you examine into the case
you will find that the child wiU not take the milk because it is loath-
some. The mother needs a dose of Borax, which will cure the child
of its diarrhoea and loathing of milk. “The infant becomes pale,
nearly earth-colored,” “The child throws up its hands when an at-
tempt is made to put it down.” If the mother was a Borax mother,
the child very likely is a Borax child ; it is not an uncommon thing
for the mother and baby to need the same remedy ; many times I
have medicated the child through the mother’s milk if both needed
the same remedy. Another peculiar feature is that when the child
is nursing, there is pain in the opposite breast. Borax is not necessarily
limited to the state of confinement ; there is a practical use for Borax
among nervous women in all states of life.

Borax has cured pleurisy that very much resembled Bryonia,
especially on the right side like Bryonia; stitching or darting pains
from without inward as if through the upper right lung posteriorly ;
the stitching pains might make you think of Bryonia.

“Wilted, wrinkled skin.” “Skin pale or livid.” Emaciated ; flabby
child becomes emaciated. Children become ^ marasmic along with
the aphthous condition ; they cannot digest. They vomit or have



230


BROMIUM


diarrhoea ; aphthous condition that extends the whole length of the
intestines ; involving all mucous membranes. Oversensitive child,
screams from downward motion. The aphthae involve a good many
other symptoms ; crying before urination, because the bladder is in-
volved. The aphthous condition and worse from downward motion ;
the oversensitiveness to noise, easily startled, anxious feeding, etc.,
are the most striking and characterizing features.

BROMIUM

Bromium is one of the routine medicines. It is one of the medi-
cines that the neophyte will make use of for every case of diphtheria
and croup, and laryngitis he comes across ; and when it docs not work
he will “try something else.’’ All who prescribe on the name use
Bromium as one of their routine medicines ; hut Bromium is so
seldom indicated that most homceopaths give it up as a perfectly useless
medicine. The reason is that they do not take the symptoms of the
case and prescribe in accordance with the individualizing method.
They do not prescribe for the patient, but for the disease. You may
see very few cases of diphtheria calling for Bromium ; but when you
see a Bromium case you want to know Bromium. There is one
underlying feature of the Bromium conditions, they are found
especially in those individuals that arc made sick from being heated.
Ii there is a diphtheria epidemic and the mother bundles up her baby
until she overheats it, and keeps it in a hot room, and it happens
to be a child that is sensitive to being wrapped up, and one whose
complaints are worse from being wrapped up, look out. You are going
to have a Bromium diphtheria. It is indicated also in complaints that
come on in the night after a veiy hot day in the summer.

Now, this is as near as you can come to being routine in croup
and diphtheria. If the mother has the baby out in a dreadfully
cold, dry day, and along towards midnight it wakens with spasmodic
croup, you know that it is more likely to call for Aconite than any
other medicine. But if the mother has had the baby out in a hot day
in the summer, and that baby has been overheated, with too much
clothing, and it is a plethoric child, and towards midnight you are
called up, and the child has a red face, and your examinations reveal
a membrane in the throat, w^e will see as we study the remedy that
this may be a Bromium case.

‘'Hoarseness coming on from getting overheated. Loss of voice
coming on from getting overheated.” A turmoil in the whole
economy ; with headaches, coming on from getting overheated. That
runs through Bromiun^ So it is in the hot weather, and being con-
fined to a hot room, and after going from the cold into the heat. But



BROMIUM


^3*

after the complaint comes on, no matter where it is, he is so sensitive
to cold that a draft of cool air freezes him ; l)ut he cannot be over-
heated without suffering.

Bromium has running through it a tendency to infiltrate the glands.
The glands become hard, but seldom suppurate. They generally re-
main hard. The glands of the neck, the parotid, the sublingual, the
submaxillary, are enormously enlarged and very hard. The pro-
cesses of inflammation arc slow ; they are not that rapid, violent kind
like we find in Bell, and Merc. “Pans that inflame infiltrate, becom-
ing hard.'' Inflammation w'ith hardness is the idea. It has been
very useful in ulcers with this infiltration ; very useful in enlarged
glands with great hardness, without any tendency to suppurate. Glands
take on tuberculosis, and tissues take on tuberculosis. Glands that
inflame for a while begin to take on a low^er form of degeneration, a
lower form of tissue making. It is very similar to these enlarged,
hard, scrofulous glands that we find in the neck ; enlargement of the
parotid and submaxillary. It has cured enlargement and great hard-
ness of the thyroid gland.

Again, we have emaciation, and when we sec the tendency to in-
filtration it is not strange that it has been a curative medicine in cancer
and tuberculosis. There is weakness in this remedy. The legs be-
come weak. Growing prostration, with tremulous limbs. Twitching :
tremulous weakness ; fainting. In the catarrhal affections there is a
formation, more or less, of m^nbrane. Membranous exudate is a
natural course of events. A natural feature of the mucous mem-
brane is infiltration, so that the mucous membrane appears to exude
little grayish-wdiite vegetations, and beneath them is induration. That
is true in ulcers, it is true in mucous membrane. And ulcer will form
upon the mucous membrane and eat in, and build beneath it a hard-
ened stratum of tissue. It has febrile conditions along with these
catarrhal states. Great nervous excitement. ‘Icy coldnees of the
limbs. “Heat of the head,'' “Dyspnoea, with great sweating.'*
Croupy manifestations.

Running through most of the complaints there is palpitation. Palpi-
tation with nausea, palpitation with headache, palpitation with various
kinds of nervous excitement. So weak is he gradually becoming that
he has an “aversion to every kind of work : to reading. Takes no
interest in household duties." Becomes indifferent. Very tired. “Great
depression of spirits. Low spirited. Sad and discouraged." Anxiety
with most complaints. Headaches from becoming overheated. “Noise
in the ears. Throbbing and burning in the ears." And then the
complaints of the glands that are so closely associated with the ears.
With ear troubles, enlargement of the glands ; the parotid becomes
enlarged and hard. Ear affections following scarlet fever, with discharges



BROMIUM


233

from the ears. Pains and aches ; inflammation ; abscess of the ear.
Suppuration of the patroid gland occasionally, but it is an exception.
‘‘Swelling and hardness of the left parotid gland.” The ovaries, testes,
etc., are all affected by Bromium.

Bleeding of the nose. Ulcerations in the nose. Catarrhal affections
of the nose. Much sneezing. Acute coryza, violent, with much
burning in the nose, and a sensation of coldness, as if the mucous
membrane of the nose were cold from inhaling cold air. It is use-
ful for June cold, with the first hot weather in June, or if the lirst
hot weather comes in July. Violent coiyza once a year, during the
hot season. Fluent coryza, with headaches. “The nose is sore and
the wings of the nose swell. Scurf forms on it, with pain and bleed-
ing on wiping it.” Rawness round about the nostrils. A Bromium
patient is one that is likely to have flushed face, especially those due
to acute Bromium conditions. “Flushed face.” He becomes heated
easily. But this is entirely the opposite of the chronic -constitutional
Bromium condition. That is true with a good many remedies, espe-
cially many of the antipsorics. The old sickly broken-down con-
stitutions, those needing Bromium for chronically enlarged glands,
for goitre, for cancerous affections, will have the “gray, earthy color
of the face. Oldish appearance.” It is a sickly face, an ash-colored
face. “Face ashy gray.” Then again we have children that are
plethoric, with red face, easily overheated. Of course, when the
acute condition is on and the breathing has been that of dyspnoea
for several hours or many days, then the patient becomes cyanotic,
gasping for breath, and choking, the face becomes ashy pale, as it
is in diphtheria, in croup, and in laryngeal affections.

“Stony, hard swelling of glands, especially of the lower jaw and
throat.” We find that repeated in many divisions of the subject.
Many of the throat complaints that arc laid down in Bromium begin
in the larynx and creep up into the throat. Some of them begin in
the throat and go down into the larynx ; but the two are so closely
associated in Bromium that both are likely to be affected ; so that
diphtheria spreads from one to the other. Diphtheria begins in the
throat and goes into the larynx. Bromium fits the most malignant
type of diphtheria. The membrane grows like a weed, shuts off
breathing, closes up the larynx, 80 severe are the cases, that though
he has been sick but two or three days ,and even when Bromium has
mastered the case, the patient is left with great prostration. All those
that belong to Bromium are of that type. Great violence ; great pros-
tration. Extremely sick, and with deathly weakness. A great many
of the cures that have been performed in the throat have been left-
sided diphtheria, yet it has cured both sides. You will very seldom
see Bromium develop in cold dry weather ; but in hot damp weather



BROMIUM


^33


Bromium cases come on ; affections in the spring, and in the fall and
summer.

The chronic cases that will need Bromium are such as have ulcers
of the stomach. Suspicious ulcers in the stomach, and suspicious
symptoms about the stomach. Vomiting like coffee grounds, and
vomiting with signs of ulceration. Aggravation after eating ; either
vomiting, or diarrhoea. Cannot take acids. Diarrhoea or cough
worse after eating, or after acids. "'After eating oysters, diarrhoea,
and a disordered stomach. Worse from the slightest inhalation of
tobacco smoke. Vomiting of bloody mucus. Eructations.” Foul
stomach. Pain in the stomach from warm things, from hot tea, hot
drinks. It is a common feature when there is ulcer in the stomach
or when the mucous membrane is about to ulcerate, that hot drinks
are intolerable. "Tains from taking hot foods.”

In studying the stool and rectum symptoms we find exudation.
Membranous formations pass in the stool. Diarrhoeic stool with mem-
brane. ""Black, faecal stool.” Diarrhoea ; must go to stool after eating.

We have running through the remedy enlarged veins. These are
found also in the rectum. Haemorrhoids protrude from the rectum,
burning. Smarting day and night. "‘Blind, intensely painful varices,
with black, diarrhoeic stools. Blind, painful haemorrhoids,” and
haemorrhoids that protrude. "®[aemorrhoids during and after stool.”
During the stool the rectum is ; painful from haemorrhoidal tumors.

Swelling and induration the left testicle. Notice the leftsided-
ness, the left side of the th^olit, and the left testicle. Then, again,
dull pain in the region of the left ovary. “Constant dull pain in the
ovary ; with swelling and hardness.” There is the same induration
of the left ovary. It docs seem strange that some medicines single
out more particularly the left organs and the left side of the body.
Like Lack, in many instances it picks out the left side of the body.
A great many remedies show a preference for one side of the body ;
the glands in this remedy are more affected upon the left side of the
body than the right. “Swelling of the ovarian region before and
during menses.” Suppression of the menses. Loud emission of flatus
from the vagina.

In the larynx it has produced more symptoms than in any other
part of the body. It produces a raw, sore feeling in the larynx froini
inhaled air. “Rawness in the larynx. Loss of voice. Hoarseness
from overheating,” From too much clothing on a warm day, or
from keeping on an overcoat in a room that is heated ; coming out
into the air he cools off. He has laryngitis. "Tickling in the larynx,”
keeping up a constant coughing. Scraping and rawness in the larynx.
Scraping mucus from the larynx, scraping and coughing. It is not
a hawk, because that noise clears the throat Every medical student
30



^34


BROMIUM


should go through all the noises he hears others make, and try and
observe as much as possible what feeling is accompanied with that
noise, so that he can put himself in the other’s place. Each one is
accompanied with its own sound, and the instant you hear it you
realize the exact place he is drawing mucus from and just where the
irritation is. If you allow the patient to describe it he always calls
it by the wrong name. The patient knows very little about this part
except that it is the throat, and if he is drawing mucus from the
throat, or scraping it from the larynx, he always calls it the throat.
But the physician must waive all that and observe as to sound. So
let each one go alone by himself and make all these noises that he hears
people make, and then realize for himself what part it is he is scrap-
ing. It may seem ludicrous, but how else will you learn about it ?
It is just as important to figure out these sounds as it is to figure out
what a child needs by its sounds and motions. It is impossible to
get the symptoms and wants of a child except by interpreting its
motions. Every motion it makes indicates something. An astute
observer, one who has been watching children for a number of years,
will understand the child, and will hardly have to ask the mother a
question. He will know at once where the child is sick by what it
does. The child is like the animal. You never have to ask a horse
or dog where he feels pain, because he will always tell by his motions.
So does the infant.

The hoarseness comes on after being overheated. Remember that.
‘‘Rough, dry cough ; pain in the larynx.” Jumping up for want of
breath. ‘‘Gasping and suffering for breath, with wheezing and
rattling in larynx. Sensation as if air passages were full of smoke.""
Now we have all these rough sounds ; rough breathing ; croupy
breathing ; rasping breathing — different ways of describing different
forms of croup. You cannot individualize a remedy by these because
one child will croup in one pitch, and another will croup in another;
but to get at the constitution of the child and the mother is the im-
portant point. “Voice hardly audible.” “Spasm in the glottis.” In
the croupy condition it is really a membranous formation upon the
inflamed surface, very often extending downward through the trachea
into the bronchial tubes, and producing a croupous pneumonia.
Bromium has that in its nature. But without any membranous form-
ation at all Bromium constricts the larynx. It has constriction of the
larynx, just like a clutching, a spasm. 'Tickling in the larynx, with
irritaticFn to cough. Scraping and rawness in the larynx. Sensa-r
tion of coldness in the larynx.” That is a very peculiar symptom
with Bromium. In laryngitis, where the patient says the feeling is
as if; it was covered with down. I have heard them describe it as if
it was covered with velvet, but it feels so cold. The air bfeathed



BRYONIA


*35

feds cold) just like it W3S the siir blown off from snow or ice# Sen*
sation of coldness in the larynx. ‘‘Constant sore pain in the larynx/'
This means that the larynx is painful to touch. Phos,, Bd/./and
Rumex have soreness in the larynx, sore to touch ; but the Bromium
soreness is commonly below the larynx and in the throat pit as well
“Sensation as if the air tubes were full of smoke.” Some patients
will describe that as sulphur fumes, or as of smoke from tar. After
the first few hours mucus begins to accumulate in the larynx and
trachea, and a constant expectoration keeps up, of a whitish thick
mucus, and he coughs and scrapes the larynx constantly, and there
is no peace. This is often present in laryngitis without any mem-
branous formation. Bromium is not given as often as it is indicated
in voicelessness, in irritation of the larynx, in rawness of the larynx,
because it is uncommon for persons to have laryngitis and hoarseness
in the larynx from being overheated. Many of those cases would be
cured promptly by Bromium. But where it is thought of by the
routine prescriber is where there is croup or diphtheria. That was
never taught by Hahnemann. “Much rattling of mucus in the larynx.
Inspiration very difficult, Lalrynx drawn down.” This would take
place in croup, after the formation of the membrane. “Cough hoarse,
crowing, suffocative ; breathing sawing, whistling. Spasms of the
larynx ; suffocative cough. Membranous formation in larynx and
trachea. Croupous inflammation formed by exuberant growth of

fungi.” “Asthma of sailors a 9 $oon as they go ashore ;” relieved again
as soon as they are at sea. Difficult breathing with rattling through*
out the chest. Bronchitis and pneumonia. Bromium is often the
remedy when whooping cough is prevailing in the spring, towards
the hot weather, and membr<mes form in the larynx. The cough gets
immeidately worse from dust. Handling old books from the shelf
aggravates. Sneezing, hoarseness, irritation in the respiratory tract
from picking up and handling dusty things. “Cough, with sudden
paroxysms of suffocation on swallowing.” Bromium is full of catar-
rhal conditions, especially of the breathing apparatus. It has hepatiza-
tion of the lungs ; infiltration is one of its most natural features.

BRYONIA

Every medicine has a sphere of action, a peculiar nature whereby
It differs from all other medicines, and hence it becomes suitable to
complaints of one class and not suitable to those of another. It is
like the nature of human beings, as they differ from each other, and
also like the nature of diseases, which differ from each other in
character. We study a remedy also in regard to its velocity and con-
tinuance, its remittence or intermittence. The symptoms of some



BRYONU


^36

remedies come on suddenly, with great violence, with great rapidity,
stay but a short time in their paroxysm, and go o£E as it nothing had
happened. Others come on slowly, are deep acting and continuous,
like the continued fevers. We notice the complaints of Ignatia, how
flitting and intermittent and unexpected everything is ; we notice in
Aconite how complaints come on with violence, and in Belladonna
with what suddenness they come on. When we come to the study of
Bryonia we find it is a most persistent remedy ; its complaints develop
slowly, i.e., slowly for acute conditions. Its complaints are continuous,
remittent, and only occasionally intermittent. They increase into
violence, but the violence is not the first flash as in Aconite or BelU
adonna, and hence it conforms to a type of disease with continued fever ;
to rheumatisms that come with gradually increasing severity, grad-
ually increasing and involving one joint after another, until all the
white fibrous tissues are in a state of inflammation, pain and distress.
It has inflammatory conditions anywhere about the body, but partic-
ularly of the fibrous tissues, serous membranes, ligaments of joints and
aponeuroses. It also affects the coating of nerves with its congestions,
and these gradually increase in severity.

From the beginning there are present the characteristic features,
and it may be seen that this patient is coming down with a Bryonia
sickness. The patient has scv'cral days of preparation. He does not
feel very well, is languid and tired, docs not want to be spoken to, does
not want to move, and this gradually increases ; pains begin to flit
over the body, they move around here and there over the fibres in one
place and another, and every time he moves the pain increase, until
they end in a steady and continuous pain. The parts become hot and
inflamed, and at last he is down with rheumatism. The complaints
come on after taking cold, not the first few hours, as in Aconite or
BelL, but the day after an exposure he begins to feel uneasy and he
sneezes and the nose discharges, there is rawness in the chest, and
in a day or so he has a chill and comes down with some inflammatory
trouble, pneumonia or pleurisy. Its inflammatory complaints include
inflammation of the membranes of the brain, sometimes extending
into the cord ; the pleural membranes, the peritoneum and the heart
covering, these are the most common ; it also has inflammation of
organs. When these conditions come on there is noticed, very early
in the case, even before the pains begin, an aversion to motion, and
the patient does not know why, but finally he observes that his
symptoms are made worse if he has to move, so that the slightest
inclination to move is resisted with a feeling of anger, and when he
does move he finds he is aroused to great suffering, and that all the
aches and pains of the body come on. Thus we have the well-known
Bryonia aggravation from motion. This runs all through the remedy.



BRYONIA


^37

This medicine is suitable in a great many diseases, diseases of a
typhoid nature, diseases that take on a symptomatic typhoid, diseases
that start out as remittents and run into a continued fever, as in
pneumonia, pleurisy, inflammation of the liver, of glands, of the
bowels, etc. It may be a gastro-entcritis or peritonitis, or inflamma-
tion of the bowels, with the sensitiveness, the aggravation from motion
and the desire to keep perfectly still. Inflammation of joints, whether
of rheumatic character or not, whether from cold, exposure or in-
jury. Bryonia is often indicated in injuries of joints where Arnica
would be a failure.

There is an extreme state of irritability in Bryonia ; every word
which compels him to answer a question or to think will aggravate
him. The effort to talk will be attended with horror. At the be-
ginning of complaints you go to the bedside of a patient v/ho has been
grumbling a few days ; something is evidently coming on ; the family
meet you at the door and say, “The patient is almost unconscious
you look at him, the face is puffed and purplish, he seems to be dazed,
there appears to be a short of venous stasis all over the body, but
especially about the face ; his countenance is almost that of an imbecile,
yet he is perfectly capable of talking, although he has an aversion to
it and appears to outsiders to ignore everything that is said. This
sometimes comes on apparently in a short time ; the patient awakens
in the morning with a dull, congestive headache and a stupid feeling
in the head ; dulness of mind tp that he cannot work, and this feeling
gradually increases; such a state is sometimes the forerunner of a
serious illness. We find, wh6ri a pneumonia or inflammation of the
liver, or some slow insidious inflammation is coming on somewhere
in the body, but not yet located, that this state will begin in the morn-
ing. This is peculiar about the aggravation of Bryonia — its troubles
commence many times early in the morning. On waking, with the
first move, he realizes that things are not all right, there is a state of
stupidity bordering on unconsciousness. Those who have been
grumbling for a week or ten days wake up in the morning feeling
miserable, some time that night or the next day they have to send for
the doctor. If this is watched for a few days, a continued fever is
observed. Or at night a chill will come on, with much pain in the
chest, rusty expectoration, short, dry cough and other symptoms that
will be spoken of under Bryonia later, showing that the trouble is
going towards the chest ; or the condition may gradually increase as
a congestive, dull headache. This will be seen when congestion of
the brain is coming on. Bryonia sickness often picks out plethoric
subjects, those who are venous in their make up, those who, when
suffering with cold, come down with catarrhal congestions. Catarrhal
fever may be covered by Bryonia. This sluggish state of the mind



BRTOm


^438

then is the state of Bryonia, not an excitable state, as in Co'ffea, Ntix
vomica, Ignatia, but sluggish, aggravated from motion, aggravated
from being talked to, wants to lie still in bed ; very great irritability,
which is as extreme as that found in Nux or Chamomilla, It also has
acute complaints aggravated from anger, from being aroused, from
being disturbed, from controversy. Following the early sluggishness,
there is later a state of complete stupefaction in Bryonia, in which he
becomes quite unconscious, as in typhoid. He goes from a state of
partial unconsciousness to one of complete unconsciousness, as in
hydrocephalic children.

In rheumatic complaints, in pneumonia, and in typhoid conditions,
when he is aroused from this stage of stupefaction he is confused,
sees images, thinks he is away from home and wants to be taken home^
Sometimes he will lie and say nothing but that he “wants to go home.”
The delirium is of a low type ; it is not the flashing wild excitement of
Bell or Stram. ; it is the very opposite ; he talks and wanders and does
not say much unless he is disturbed. You disturb him and he says,
“Go away and let me go home,” and if you let him alone he will re-
lapse into a perfectly quiet state and seldom speak. “Irrational talk
or prattle of his business, aggravated after 3 p. m.” Usually you will
find the delirium commencing about 9 p. m., and keeping up all night
like the fever. The acute mental state you will find manifesting its
symptoms on rising in the morning, but as the febrile state advances
and takes possession of him the symptoms will take on a 9 p. m. ag-
gravation ; those who have chill will have it at 9 p. m. ; in those who
have a fever, the fe\er will come at 9 p. m. If mental symptoms are
uppermost they increase and spread over the night. It has a 3 p. m.
aggravation. Bell, will begin at 3 and run on towards midnight, but
Bryonia will begin at 9 p. m. and run on through the night. The ag-
gravation of the Chamomilla patients, who are also extremely irritable,
is at 9 A. M. Sometimes we go to the bedside and can hardly distin-
guish between Bryonia and Cham, because they are both so spunky,
but the Cham, baby is worse at 9 a. m. and the Bryonia baby is worse
at 9 p. M.

In Bryonia there is a key-note which really applies to a dozen or
more remedies, “he wants something and he knows not what.’' It is
a very important symptom of Bryonia. It is a symptom that calls
for Bryonia only when the rest of the symptoms agree. You go to a
child who is being carried in the arms of the nurse and wants one toy
after another ; you get the toy he wants and he does not want it and
will throw it back at you. Wien that case is looked into thoroughly
it may be covered by Kreosote ; another is never satisfied with any-
thing and rejects everything he asks for ; you look into that case and
it may be covered by Chamomilla.



BRYONU


239


“Desire for things that cannot be had which arc refused, or not
wanted when offered.” “Apprehensiveness ; fearfulness.” “Anxiety
in whole body compelled him to do something constantly.” There is
a feature worthy of consideration because it sometimes makes a case
appear inconsistent. It is due to his anxiety that pervades the whole
body. In Bryonia as in Arsenic there comes an anxious and uneasy
feeling which compels him to move, but he is worse from motion, yet
so uneasy and anxious that he must move. There are pains so violent
that he cannot keep still, and yet when he moves he screeches from the
pain. So it is really not an inconsistency but simply due to the great
violence of the pain. Even though he knows that the motion is going
to make him worse, he cannot keep still, for the pain is so violent.
Early in the case he was able to keep still, and found that he was
better from keeping still, and that the mental state was better from,
keeping still, and that the anxious restlessness increased the more he
amoved, until finally a reaction comes and he is obliged to move. You
would think, looking at the case superficially, that that patient is better
from motion as in Rhus tox., but in Rhus you find that the patient
moves and in moving he gets feeble, and when he sits down the pains
begin to come on again, 'fherc is the distinction between the two,
and yet they look alike if not examined into carefully. It is common for
Bryonia to be ameliorated from cool air, and from cool applications.
Now, if he moves, he gets warned up, the pains are worse, but there
are rheumatic complaints of Brypnia which arc better from heat, and
under these circumstances he is f better from continued motion. It is
another form of relief, and another of the modalities. I sometimes
wonder whether Bryonia has a greater element of relief from heat,
or greater element of relief from cold. Most of the head complaints
that are of a congestive character arc better from cool applications,
from cold air, etc. Yet there are some of the Bryonia head com-
plaints that are relieved by hot applications, and these seem to have
no accompanying cerebral congestion. So that Bryonia has op-
posite modalities, but in all its opposite states there is still a grand
nature running all through, sufficient to detect it.

In a damp climate Bryonia is one of the most frequently indicated
remedies, but in the clear climates, where the thermometer runs low.
Aconite will be indicated more than Bryonia. Still further South, the
complaints assume more of the constitutional state of Gelsemium in
inflammatory conditions. We know in the far North the sudden,
violent cold brings on violent colds like Aconite, while here the com-
plaints are more insidious, like Bryonia, and further South. These
atmospheric changes should be thoroughly considered in relation to
our Materia Medica.

The mental state of Bryonia is usually relieved from cool air, he



240


BRYONIA


wants the windows open. Anxiety, confusion of mind, fear, etc., are
ameliorated from being cool. Sometimes the delirium, and the
congestive fulness of the head affecting the mind, will increase if the
room becomes very warm, or from the heat of the stove, from becom-
ing heated, or from warm covers. In children this will be noticed,
whereas if the window be thrown up to relieve the stuffiness of the
room the child will sleep quietly. Such remedies as Bryonia,
Pulsatilla, and many others, come in here. If you go into a room
and find the child raging with delirium, turning and tossing, and the
mother is trying to keep the room warm because she is chilly, and you
say, **Why, how stuffy it is in here !” and you open the window and
then notice that the child goes off to sleep, do not overlook that ; be-
cause that relief was caused by something. There should be nothing
that can possibly occur to a patient, but that you should solve the
meaning of before you leave the room. Settle in your mind as to
what it was that caused it.

‘Tear of death.’’ Full of fear, anxiety, despair of recovery, great
despondency. Both mental and bodily quietness is required, that is,
he wants to keep still. Often he wants the room dark. It has com-
plaints from getting excited. Bryonia patients are nearly always
worse from visitors. “Morose.” Do not cross a Bryonia patient for
it makes him worse. “Bad effects from mortification.” “Ailments
arising from chagrin these are headaches usually. Violent, con-
gestive headaches that come on a few hours after altercation or con-
troversy, or little misunderstandings with somebody that he cannot
talk back to, will be covered by Staph., but Bryonia also has that.
Staph, is suited to irritable, violent, nervous, excitable people, that
get into violent altercation or dispute. If a headache comes on, such
a patient may need Bryonia. If in a chronic state a patient says,
“Doctor, if I ever have a dispute with a man over anything I come
down with nervous excitement, sleeplessness, headaches you do
not have to work long upon that case, because more than likely Staph.
will be suitable.

Bryonia has dizziness ; the dizziness is worse in a warm room. You
will notice, as I go through, that in everything of a nervous nature,
nervous excitement, and commonly the bodily state, the patient is
worse from a warm room, worse from too much clothing, worse from
the warmth of the bed, wants the windows open, wants to breathe
fresh, cool air. He suffers more than ordinary persons, from a stuffy
room. Persons who arc subject to Bryonia conditions suffer in
church, at the opera, in close warm rooms, like Lycopodium. Girls
jthat faint every time they go to church are relieved by Ignatia.

We commence now with the study of the head. The head com-
plaints may be looked upon as striking features of the remedy, because



BRYONU


241


there is pain in the head with almost every acute complaint. Head^
aches are associated with inflammatory and congestive complaints.
The mental dullness and confusion of the mind is spoken of with the
congestive headache, and bursting headache. The head feels so full
she wants to press it with the hand, or tic it up ; tight pressure, over
the whole skull, is grateful. The headaches arc worse in a warm
room and commonly worse from heat. Sometimes superficial
neuralgias have relief from local heat, but a warm room or a close
room is very distressing to the Bryonia headache. Headaches as if
the skull would split open ; the pains are worse from every motion,
even the winking motion of the eyes, the motion necessary to talking,
and the effort ol thinking, so that all exertion of lx)dy or mind be-
comes impossible with a sc\ere headache. Must keep perfectly
(juiet. Sometimes lying down and keeping perfectly quiet in a dark
room will give some relief. Light aggravates ; if you think a moment
you will sec that the accommodation to light and shadow of a room
involves motion ; it is said that the light aggravates, but even here it
is the motion that is carried on by the muscles of accommodation.
The headaches of Bryonia arc very commonly the forerunner of other
complaints, congestion of the lungs, bronchitis, or congestion of some
other part of the body ; he wakes up in the morning with headache ;
if it be coryza that is coming, he has the headache in the morning and
through the day he commences to sneeze ; or if the trouble is in some
other part of tlic body, before the symptoms develop, he w^akes up in
the morning with this congestive headache over the eyes or in the
back of the head, or both ; it s^ms as if the head would burst ; better
from pressure, worse from the warmth of the room, and worse from
every motion. Headache over the eyes, sometimes like the stabbing
of a knife, worse from the first motion. He realizes it on waking
upon moving the eyes, with soreness in the eyeballs, with bruised feel-
ings all over. The motion of the arms, doing work with the arms, as
in various kinds of business that are carried on with the use of the
arms and hands, is geiicriilly accompanied by complaints of the upper
part of the body and especially the head, so that one of the old key-
notes in the time of Hering was ‘‘complaints from ironing,” You
know that ironing is commonly carried on in a warm room, it involves
the motion of the arms, and thus brings in two most striking features
of Bryonia, so that this key-note is no longer an abstract statement ;
it is not to be considered apart from the general nature, but only serves
to bring it out. Splitting, violent congestive headaches; headaches as
if everything would hurst out of the forehead. Pressure pain in the
forehead, fulness and heaviness in the forehead as if the brain were
pressed out. This fulness or congestion of the head is accompanied
by what was described as sluggishness of the mind, and it will often

31



242


BRYONIA


be noticed that the countenance is somewhat besotted. The patient
looks as if he were an imbecile. The face is mottled, and purple,
with congestion in a marked Bryonia state. The eyes are red and
congested ; he is listless, does not want to move, to speak, or to do any-
thing, because all these things are motion, are clforts, and they make
him worse. You will see this is also true in Bell. ; it has all of this
congestion and pressure ; but remember Bryonia is slow, sluggish,
passive and insidious in its approach and progress, while in Bell, the
mental symptoms and everything in connection arc marked by activity.
With the headaches there is more or less burning, and sometimes
throbbing. The throbbing is seldom felt until he moves. After any
movement, like going up stairs, walking, or turning over in bed dur-
ing the headache, he feels the violent throbbing ; on keeping still a
moment it settles down into a bursting, pressing pain as if the skull
would be pressed open. There are many other pains in connection
with the Bryonia headache ; in the text it is described “tearing and
stitching pains.’' “Shooting pains,” sharp pains. Some of the press-
ing pains are described as if a great weight were on the head, but the
same idea prevails ; it is an internal pressure ; a sluggishness of the
circulation in the brain, a stasis as if all the blood in the body were
surging in the head. “Stitches in the head.’* “Splitting headache.”
“Rush of blood to head.’ Threatened apoplexy. “Headache after
washing himself with cold water w^hen face was sweating.” That is,
taking cold from suppression of perspiration. “Always on cough-
ing, motion in head like pressure,’’ The headache is so bad in many
cases of pneumonia or bronchitis, in fact in any of the inflammatory
or congestive conditions, that very often you will sec the patient grasp
the head when he know^s he is going to cough. He holds his head
because it hurts so from the action of coughing. Many remedies
have this, but it is in keeping with the general aggravation of Bryonia
from motion, from jar, from any effort. “The headache is expand-
ing, aggravated by the slightc\st motion ; after eating.” The aggrava-
tion after eating is in keeping with the Bryonia stale in general. The
patient himself, in all complaints, feels worse after eating. It hardly
matters what the trouble is, it is worse after eating ; the cough is
worse aftci eating, the gouty state is increased by eating. The Bry-
onia patient will finally sum up the whole subject and say, “I am
always worse after eating so that it becomes a general. The head-
aches are often accompanied by nose-bleed. “Obstinate headache with
constipation.” Bryonia is particularly suitable in venous, sluggish
constitutions, with sluggish heart, poor circulation, yet apparently
plethoric, apparently rugged, but subject to gouty exacerbations from
change of weather.

Dandruff is common ; sensitiveness and great soreness of the scalp ;



BRYONIA


243

worse from the slightest touch of the scalp, feels as it the hair were
pulled ; women must always have the hair hanging down. In the
Bryonia headaches, as well as rheumatic attacks, if he can perspire
freely, he will get relief. Bryonia is ameliorated in all its complaints
as soon as the perspiration becomes free and general.

Catarrhal conditions of the eyes are found in Bryonia ; it is not so
often thought of as an inflammatory remedy for the eyes when there
are no other symptoms, but eye symptoms will be found, redness, in-
flammation, congestion, heat, enlargement of the veins, burning and
smarting, associated with headaches, witlt coryza, with troubles in
the air passages, bronchitis, etc. Sore aching in the eyes, the eyeballs
can hardly be touched, so tender to touch, as if bruised, increased from
coughing or pressure. Such conditions come with chest complaints,
with colds and headaches. “Soreness and aching of eyes when mov-
ing them.*’ “Pressing, crushing pains in eyes.'' “Inflammation in
eyes and lips, especially in new-born infants." Think of Bryonia
when gouty conditions have left certain parts and all at once the eyes
are affected, tumefaction of the lids, the conjunctiva looks like raw
beef, so highly inflamed is it, red and oozing blood. You find out
that a few days before the patient, an old gouty subject, had rheu-
matic attacks of the joint, and now he has sore and inflamed eyes.
“Rheumatic iritis, caused by cold." Rheumatic inflammation of the
eyes, /. e., in inflammatory conditions and congestion with redness,
associated more or less with gouty affections. In olden times it was
described as “arthritic sore eyeis," which means sore eyes in a gouty
constitution.

Many of the complaints of Bryonia commence in the nose ; sneez-
ing, coryza, running at the nose, red eyes, lachrymation, aching
through the nose, eyes and head the first day ; then the trouble goes
down into the posterior nares, the throat, the larynx, with hoarseness,
and then a bronchitis comes on, and if not checked it goes into pneu-
monia and pleurisy, so that the trouble has traveled from the begin-
ning of the respiratory tract, the nose, to the lung tissue. This is a
field for the complaints of Bryonia. Al! are worse from motion, all
parts are subject to a good deal of burning and congestion ; more or
less fever, sometimes intense fever . the patient himself worse fronii
the slightest motion and wants to keep still ; dullness of mind, pres-
sive, congestive headaches ; sore, lame and bruised all over, often
worse at 9 o'clock in the evening ; increased dullness of the mind after
sleep or on waking in the morning. The cough comes on with great
violence, racking the whole body and increasing the headache, and
with copious discharge of mucus from the respiratory tract.

^Trequent sneezing." “Sneezing between coughs." “Loss of
smell." Bleeding from the nose in these congestions, or with coryzas.



244


BRYONIA


During menstruation there is epistaxis. Congestion of the head is
present at the menstrual period. Epistaxis appears as a vicarious flow
in cases of mcnorrhoea. If the menstrual flow should be checked
suddenly from cold, nosebleed comes on. Dryness in the nose.

The aspect of the face is important ; the besotted, purple, bloated
countenance is not dropsically bloated, although it has the oedematous
face sometimes, but puffed from vascular stasis, not pitting upon
pressure ; swollen and puffed, purple, with a doltish state of the mind,
as if he were drunk. He will look at you and wonder what you were
doing, and what you said ; a stupefaction of the intellect ; the eyes do
not look at you intelligently. When a patient is about to come down
with some Bryonia complaint, with a remittent, or with head conges-
tions, or pneumonia, or some other respiratory disease, the family will
notice w^hen he awakes in the morning that he has that besotted ex-
pression, and he says he has to make such an effort to think or do any-
thing, and his head aches hard, and is worse from motion. Or the
face is red and burning, “red spots on the face and neck “hot,
bloated, red face.*'

In children, as well as adults, there is gradually increasing cerebral
trouble, dilated pupils, besotted countenance, and continual lateral
motion of the lower jaw. This motion of the jaw in a congestive
attack is a strong feature of Bryonia. It is not the grinding of the
teeth so much that I refer to now, although that is found in Bryonia,
but a lateral movement of the jaw as if chewing, but the teeth do not
come in contact and they keep it up night and day. A great many
remedies have grinding of the teeth. When intermittent fever comes
on with marked congestion, stupefaction of the intellect, violent rig-
ors, even to a congestive chill, the patient lying in stupefaction or a
semi-conscious state, without grinding the teeth, yet wagging the jaw
back and forth by the hour, Bryonia is often suitable. Constant
motion of the mouth as if the patient were chewing, in brain affections
of children ; it occurs in little ones when there are no teeth ; but they
keep up a chewing motion.

In regard to the lips and lower part of the face, that bloated, swol-
len condition, the sluggish circulation, a venous congestion or stasis
will be found in Bryonia, making the aspect as of one long intoxicated ;
it is not so marked as in Baptisia and is not accompanied by so low a
state, so advanced a stupor, as in Baptisia. Great dryness of the lips ;
the lips parched and dry. “Children pick the lips.“ “Lips cracked
and bleeding.” Lips parched, dry and bleeding, such as will be seen
in typhoid states, where the whole mouth is dry and brown, cracked,
parched and bleeding ; dry, brown tongue. Sordes on fhe teeth. In
Arum triph. there is marked picking of the nose and lips ; they pick
and pick and bore the finger into the nose.



BRVONIA


HS


Bryonia has toothache, worse from warmth. "Tearing, stitching
toothache while eating from warm drinks, from warm foods, worse
in a warm room, wants cold foods in the mouth, wants to be in cold
air, but worse from motion. ‘Toothache > by cold water or lying
on painful side.’’ Pressing hard upon the painful tooth ameliorates
it. ‘Toothache < from smoking. ’ You see how the relief from
cold and aggravation from heat go along with us : vve shall keep reit-
erating these modalities that affect the patient as a general state, and
we shall see as we go through that nearly all his symptoms are worse
from motion, worse from heat, etc. He keeps on telling us they are
better from pressure in each region we go over, until liiially we come
to the conclusion that they are general. We may have in tw(^ reme*
dies the same set of symptoms, and yet they arc all made worse from
the opposite things. Thus you see modalities indicate and contra-
indicate remedies. This is the studying of remedies by their modali-
ties, for modalities sometimes constitute strong generals.

You will not be surprised to know that Bryonia loses his sense oL
taste, so that if he has a coryza nothing tastes natural. Not only is
there mental sluggishness, but there is a slowing down of his sensa-
tions, his whole state is benumbed, "laste flat, insipid, pasty ’’ His
intelligence is so affected that he does not know where he is even,
thinks he is away from home* and even Ins tongue is no longer in-
telligent ; so that something that is sour tastes as though bitter ; lus
senses deceive him. ‘Tongue; thickly coated white." In typhoid,
in cerebral congestion, in sore throat, in pneumonia, in all diseases of
the respiratory apparatus, in rheumatic affections, the tongue is
thickly coated. "Dry and bleeding and covered with crusts." Such
a tongue is found in typhoid fever, a dry, brown, cracked, bleeding
tongue. When he takes a cold the mouth becomes dry. It is very
common for the Bryonia patient to have great thirst ; he is apt
to drink large quantities of water, at wide intervals. With this
dry, brown tongue, however, he loses his taste for water and does
not want it ; dry mouth and thirstless like Nvx moschata. "Aphthae.”
"Bad odor from mouth.”

Bryonia has nondescript sore throats, with stitching pains, with
dryness, with parched appearance of the throat, and thirst for large
quantities of water at long intervals. "Constitutional tendency to
aphthous formations in the throat,” little white spots in the throat.

Then we come to the desires and aversions that relate to the
stomach, and they are greatly perverted. He is worse from eating.
The stomach has lost its ability to digest, and hence he has an
aversion to all food. "Desires things immediately, and when offered
they are refused.” He is changeable, docs not know what he wants.
He craves in the mind the things he has an aversion to in the



246


IIRYONIA


Stomach. When l>e secs it he docs not want it. His intelligence is
in a state of confusion. He craves acids. “Great thirst day and
night he wants cold w^ater. ‘Thirst for large quantities at long
intervals.*’ Many remedies want to sip water all the time. In

Bryonia the large quantities relieve the thirst immediately, In
Arsenic the drink does not relieve, he wants a little and wants it
often.

The stomach complaints of Bryonia are relieved from warm drinks ;
that becomes a particular liecause his desire is for cold drinks, but
his stomach is better from warm drinks. In his fever and head com-
plaints and febrile states he wants cold things, which often bring on
and increase the cough and pains, but the hot drink, which he does
not crave, relieves the stomach and lx>wel complaints. In the chill,
Bryonia often has desire for ice-cold water, which chills him dread-
fully ; and hot water relieves. “Desire for cold and acid drinks.”
Aversion to rich fat food ; all gieasy things. “Desire for things

which are not to be had.”

When patients are under constitutional remedies, they need cau-
tion about certain kinds of foods that are known to disagree with
their constitutional remedy. A Bryonia patient is often made sick

from eating saner kraut, from vegetable salads, chicken salad, etc.,

so that you need not be surprised, after administering a dose of
Bryonia for a constitutional state, to have your patient come in and
say she has been made very ill from eating some one of these things.
Jt is well to caution persons who arc under the influence of Ptds, to*
avoid the use of fat foods, because very often they will upset the
action of the remedy. It is well to say to patients who are under
Lyc\, “See that you do not eat oysters while taking this medicine.”
These medicines arc known to produce states in the stomach inimi-
cal to certain kinds of foods ; certain remedies have violently inimi-
cal relation to acids, lemons, etc. If you do not particularly mention
the fact, and say, “You must not touch vinegar or lemons ; nor take^
lemon juice while taking this medicine,” you will have the remedy
spoiled, and then wonder why it is. The medicine often stops acting
and the patient gets a disordered condition of the stomach and bowels ;
a medicine that should act for a long time ceases action and you do
not know what the trouble is. Homoeopathy will rule out such things
as are inimical to the remedies and inimical to patients in general,
or do not agree with a particular constitution. To have an iron-clad
rule is not correct practice : the only iron-clad rule is to be sure that
the remedy is similar to the patient when you administer it. and the
things that he is to have are to be in agreement with that remedy.
It is not an uncommon thing for a patient who has been under the
influence of Rhus tox., and has been doing well up to a certain time,



BRYONIA 247

after he has taken a bath, to have his symptoms return in the form ol
a Rhus state ; the action of the remedy stops right there. He must
of course take a bath, and yet it is true that some constitutional
cases under Rhus must stop taking their ordinary bath in order to
keep themselves under the influence of Rhus. It is the same with
Calcarea — a bath will often stop the action. 1 only speak of these
things to impress upon you the importance of feeding and treating
yoUr patient in accordance with the remedy ; in accordance with a
principle and not by rule ; do not have one list of foods for your pa-
tients ; do nor liave a list of things for everybody. There is no such
thing in Homoeopathy.

The patient himself in all the strange and peculiar things is worse
from eating ; the cough is worse from eating, the complaints of the
head, the headaches, are worse from eating, and the respiration is
worse from eating. Tht stomach is distended with wind after eat-
ing, but especially after oysters. Oysters are not, as a rule, a danger-
ous article of diet, yet some are poisoned by oysters. “Worse after
eating or drinking.'' When the case is one of whooping cough, the
cough is worse, the paroxysms are more violent and all the symptoms
are worse a little while after eating, but later, when digestion is
finished and the stomach is empty, he is much relieved. The Bryonia
patient is ordinarily relieved fron^ drinking, but if, when overheated,
he drinks cold water, all of his rheumatic symptoms arc worse, the
cough is worse, and the headache is worse. He will have a violent
lieadachc after drinking cold water when heated. In Rhus patients
complaints are worse from drinking cold water when heated. The
headache increases into a throbbing and l)ursring pain tenfold greater
than it was before drinking.

Tlie Bryonia patient is vsubject to hiccough, to belching, to nausea
and vomiting, so that disordered stomach is the general term. Bitter
eructations, bitter nauseous taste. He vomits bile. After eating
all these things are increased. In the stomach and abdomen we
have a great many symptoms resulting from disordered stomach, or
from taking cold, or from Ixjcoming overheated, or from drinking
ice water when overheated. Disordered stomach ; irritation of the
stomach so that he cannot eat without extreme pain, and this in-
creases until the inflammatory condition involves tlie whole stomach
and abdomen, and there is sensitiveness to pressure, and it can be
diagnosed as a gastro-cntcritis, with the soreness and tenderness,
stitching, burning pains, all worse from motion ; nausea and v omiting,
diarrhoea, tympanitic abdomen ; unable to move because it so in-
creases the pain.

With the exception of the abdominal and stomach pains, the
Bryonia pains are better from pressure. The Bryonia patient with



248 BRYONU

these inflammatory conditions will often be seen lying perfectly quiet
in bed with the knees drawn up ; lying with the limbs flexed in
order to relax the abdominal muscles ; he docs not want to be talked
to, docs not want to think ; every moment is painful, and increases
the fever and often causes alternation of chilliness with heat ; high
fever.

I'he Bryonia patient, when lying perfectly quiet, is sometimes
(jiiite free from nausea, but the instant the head is raised from the
pillow the dreadful sickness returns, so that he cannot sit up. He
('annot ht raised up in bed l)ecause of the nausea, and if he persists
ill rising up the nausea comes on more than ever, wdth burning in
the stomach. With every motion lie gulps up a little mucus and
slime, which is putrid.

All sorts of pains are felt in the stomach and howxls, but most
particularly stitching and burning pains; feels as if the slomacli
would burst, as if the abdomen would burst. Peritoneal exudations.
Awful soreness. Sensitiveness of the pit of the stomach, and sensi-
tiveness over the wdiole abdomen. This is commonly relieved by
heat, althoLigli the patient himself w^anis to lie in a cool room. The
heat of the room is oppressive, yet heat applied is agreeable. Every
inspiration, every motion of the chest greatly aggravates these pains,
so that you wdll find a Bryonia patient shortening up his breathing
instead of breathing deep. He keeps that up until he cannot stand it
any longer, and then he takes a long breath that causes groaning.
Gastric inflammatory affections and disordered stomach, gastric
affections in young girls from suppression of the menstrual flow^
gastritis, gastroenreritis.

Bryonia has inflammation of the liver and many other liver symp-
toms. The liver, especially the right lobe, lies in the hypochondrium
like a load, with soreness and tenderness to pressure, and he cannot
move. Every motion, every touch, every deep breath causes pain
in this organ, as in the abdominal viscera. The breathing is short,
quick, land when followed by taking a deep breath it causes pain
through the liver ; it burns and stitches. With this, he has the dis-
ordered stomach, nausea and retching worse from motion ; spitting
up of bile. Stitching pains, sticking pains and burning in the liver.
‘'Transient stitches in right hypochondrium these are in the liver.
When he coughs it feels as if the liver or right hypochondrium would
burst. Severe pains when coughing.

Bryonia furnishes many symptoms in connection with the stool
and rectum. It has constipation, and it has dysentery. The patho-
genesis is full of these conditions as well as many symptoms re-
lating to the parts themselves. In the constipation the stool is dry
and hard, as if burnt. No desire for stool, but after going many days



BRYONIA 249

there are passages of little hard pieces as if they had been burned.
No moisture about the parts, no mucus to often the hard stools.
Any mucus that may be present will be discharged separately. Some-
times the stool is composed of little hard particles looking as if burned,
at times scanty, again quite a lot, and then will follow the passage
of mucus, as if lying about the mass of faeces was quite a lot of
mucus. In most inveterate constipations Bryonia is sometimes suit-
able. It has also diarrha^a that drives the patient out of bed in the
morning ; i.e., on first beginning to move in bed he begins to feel
nauseated, he is bloated and distended with colic, and he has urging
to go to stool ; or a little while after getting up and moving about
the bowel is distended causing colic, and he must hurry to stool.
The purgation is sometimes enormous, frequent, and no sooner does
the patient finish than he is perfectly exhausted, lies down like one
almost dead, covered with sweat ; so tremendously fatigued he can
hardly reach the vessel the next time, and then it comes a gushing,
copious, bilious stool. If, while lying, he makes the least motion, he
must hurry to stool. Bryonia cures dysentery with all the tormina
and tenesmus possible to imagine, with pain in the abdomen : with
bloody and mucous discharges. In the constipation the straining is
often ineffectual. He has urging to stool and goes several times
before there is any result. The stool seems to remain in the rectum,
although he seems to be compelled to strain ; there is inactivity and
inability to strain. Ordinarily he has plenty of power and is quite
likely to have a passage, but itds so dry. Bryonia has another kind
of diarrhoea. It is like the yellow corn meal mush. Just such a stool
as this you will find in the typhoid patient, a yellow, mushy stool.
This is sometimes intermingled with mucus and slime, sometimes
with blood. It may be useful to the physician to know whether this
is in the typhoid state or in the form of chronic diarrhoea. Bryonia
has cured many cases of chronic diarrhera where this yellow, mushy
discharge w^as present, and frequent : several times a day, but more
frequent in the morning. Sometimes he has several stools in the
morning that will satisfy for the whole twenty-four hours, or only one
or two in the afternoon and five or six in the morning ; during the
night no stools at all, because when he keeps cjuiet in bed and com-
fortable he has not very much urging to stool ; every motion or keep-
ing upon the feet increases the urging to stool. So that some w^ould
think of it as a diarrhoea only in the day-time, and would associate it
with Petroleum ; but with Petroleum, no matter how much he moves
about in the night, he will not have a stool, but will have all of the
stools in the day-time. It says here: “Diarrhoea putrid ; smelling like
old cheese,” “Very offensive.” “Brown, thin, faecal stools.” Some-
times chronic Bryonia patients will diet themselves, eating only thin

3 ^



250


BRYONIA


liquids, avoiding solids, etc., and yet the food will come right through
the next morning almost undigested ; lienteric stools. “Urging fol-
lowed by copious pasty evacuations.'* “Involuntary stools while
asleep.’’ ‘‘Burning of the anus with every passage.” This is
especially at night if he moves, but motion is more common in the
day-time, and every motion will bring on urging to stool.

There are plenty of urinary symptoms in this remedy ; inflam-
matory condition of the kidneys ; pinkish urinary deposits, uric acid
crystals ; urine profuse. Whenever he strains himself in lifting, or
any unusual motion, there is pain in the kidneys, a rousing up of con-
gesting and long-lasting pain. It is a gouty constitution with kidney
troubles, so that after overheating or overexertion he gets pain in the
back. “Pressure to urinate and involuntary discharge of urine.”
“Burning in urethra, when not urinating ;” relieved by passing urine.

There are many symptoms of the female sexual organs of great
interest. Painful menstruation, dysmenorrhoea ; pain in the ovaries
at the menstrual period. Every menstrual period is associated with
marked congestion of the ovaries, wdth sensitiveness to touch. The
sensitiveness at the approach of every menstrual period, in both
groins, will be spoken of by the patient, increasing as the menstrual
period comes on, until the soreness proceeds across the abdomen and
meets, and then the whole abdomen is painful during the menstrual
period. The uterus is sore, the hypogastrium is tender. Inflamma-
tion of the uterus. Burning pain mostly in the body or fundus of
the uterus. The Bryonia patient is subject to amcnorrhoea, or the
flow is suppressed upon the slightest provocation. If she becomes
overheated from exertion, such as from ironing or washing a few
days before the menstrual period, it will be suppressed, and the next
time she will have a harder time than ever. In young plethoric
women, after violent exertion, these complaints come on in that way.
Violent exertion then scanty urine. Soreness of the abdomen, but the
flow does not come, or is postponed a good many days after violent
exertion ; scanty urine and suppression of menses in plethoric girls.

From overexertion and becoming overheated, threatened abor-
tion. In inflammation of the breasts and stopping of the milk flow in
the lying in period. Bryonia must be consulted. In milk fever and
pains and swelling of the breast Bryonia must be studied. During
confinement a woman becomes overheated *and naturally perspires ;
just at the close of it as the delivery takes place, if the nurse and tho
doctor do not observe and throw more clothing over her, or at least
keep the room warm enough, there will be sudden suppression of the
sweat, and this will bring on milk fever and other febrile symptoms
which will need Bryonia. Threatened peritonitis, from such causes,
gonorrhoeal troubles, old rheumatic troubles, pains or aches, if mad^



BRYONU


^ 5 *


worse from the slightest motion. If due to septicaemia rather than
to suppression of the sweat, very commonly a deeper acting remedy
is required. In inflammatory conditions of the breast one of the
most striking things is the stony hardness of the breasts, hardness
and heaviness. Bryonia is often suitable for inflammation of thq
breasts at other times ; heaviness and hardness of the breast prior
to menstruation.

Then we come to the respiratory tract again, w^hich we have only
hinted at, and here we have a tremendous study before us. Very
commonly the Bryonia conditions commence with a cold ; it may be
at first loss of voice, with rawness in the trachea and great soreness
in the chest; dry, hacking cough, as if the chest would burst from
coughing. The Bryonia patient sits up and holds the head, or holds
the chest ; presses both hands upon the chest when coughing, feels
as if the chest would fly to pieces when coughing ; pains in the chest
on both sides, but mostly the right side. Bryonia prefers the right
side when the condition is pneumonia. We see a patient who had
first a cold, and the cold has travelled down the air passages, with
hoarseness and rawness in the chest and cough ; the cough shakes
the whole body, then comes a hard chill. He is now down in bed,
and when the physician sees him he sees the state of inflammation and
knows the meaning of it, and listening confirms the diagnosis of
pneumonia. The patient cannot move hand or foot ; the pain is mostly
in the right lung, and he is conipelled to lie on the right side or back
and dreads motion. Sometimes the pleura is involved and we have
the sharp pains ; every respiration causes intense pain, whether it be
plcuro-pneumonia or a simple pneumonia. But we see the Bryonia
patient lying upon the side that is affected, upon the painful side, in
order to diminish the motion that respiration causes ; and every often
he will have a hand under it to sec if he cannot hold it still. With
Bryonia the expectoration is of a reddish tinge, is rusty, and if you
have this symptom and the right side affected it is all the more
strongly Bryonia. There are a few medicines that look somewhat ,
like Bryonia ; take, for instance, a case with high fever, intense heat,
great excitment, and consider the rapidity with which the trouble
has come on, involving the left side and in the pan you see the
sputum consists of bright red blood. Aconite will be the remedy. If
the liver is involved, there is fulness in the side, stitching pain over
the liver, and the face is yellow, it is not impossible for Bryonia to
be indicated, for it has such things, but with pain very severe, con-
tinually going from the front to the back through the right shoulder-
blade, Chelidonium is more likely to cure than Bryonia. These com-
parisons may be carried out indefinitely, but the study of Bryonia as
to the respiratory apparatus is a wonderful one. With these colds



2J2


BUFO


that end in loss of voice, it has bringing and tickling in the larynx,
constant cough. Hoarseness and loss of voice in singers. Great
soreness in the trachea ; rawness and tightness in the trachea, even
sufiEocation, like Phosphorus, I'he Bryonia breathing is panting and
very rapid, little short rapid breaths, due to the fact that deep breath-
ing increases the pain, the Bryonia patient desires to breathe deep,
wants deep breathing, needs deep breathing, but it hurts him so.
^‘Constant disposition to sigh,'* but cannot because it hurts him so.
Shortness of breath, suffocation, asthma. Asthmatic attacks from
becoming overheated. Asthma worse in a warm room, wants cool
air to breathe. “Dry, spasmodic cough, whooping cough, shaking
the whole body.” Cough compels him to spring up in bed invol-
untarily, painful cough witli difficult breathing, cough that shakes
the whole body. Tougli. difficult expectoration. “Cough evening
and night, dry cough.”

A great deal of the rest of Bryonia, as we go over it, is repeti-
tion. If you will only read the text carefully and make application
of wliat has been said, you sec the general character and idea of the
remedy, you see its image and you will fill it out for yourselves, if
you have a full text-book.


BUFO

The little glands along the back of the toad's neck, when squeezed
with forceps, ooze a secretion which is soluble in alcohol and has
been proved, this is the subject wc will now consider. Buio

satyhicnis is the one 1 use in practice. Bufo is a wonderful medi-
cine, it profoundly affects the mind and especially the intellectual
faculties, including (unfusion of mind and loss of memory until the
patient gradually goes towards a state of imbecility. The greatest
use of this medicine will be found in nervous conditions, throbbings,
jerking and spasmodic condition of muscles, ulceration of the skin

and mucous membranes, and all this in such patients as are tending
towards a state of imbecility, a state of confusion or weakness of

mind. The imbecility is more frequent in Bufo than the active

states of insanity or mania, yet these appear occasionally through
the remedy.

The first symptom in the text reads, “Desire for solitude in order
to practice masturbation." This alone throws a flood of light upon
the nature of the remedy ; the lack of government, the lack of con-
trol over the sexual longing, and the low-mindedness whereby he is
willing to abandon himself to the lower things that are in the human
race, to perverted practices and vices. It tells a great story. “Whim-
pered, then cried, until he fell into a state of coma." These states,



BUFO


^53


' as brought out clinically, are manifested in adult people who act as if
they were children. An aspect of child-like simplicity is present and
the mind returns to a state of child-like innocence. An adult takes
on the w^ays of a child, as a state of imbecility. This mental state is
especially found under Baryta carb. in adults who have never de-
veloped beyond childhood, who have always remained children. A
person reasons like a child, talks like a child, whimpers like a child,
cries like a child, wants to be petted like a child ; so it is in Baryta
carb. We find this state of mind in children who have developed
epilepsy, but we do not prescribe this remedy on account of the epi-
lepsy ; the child has not developed properly, and the epilepsy is only
one of the manifestations. The cause is far back, and is really the
psoric condition. Thereby the mental state has not developed, the
child has not grown into a man or woman in intellectual attain-
ments or wisdom, and remains as a whimpering, screaming child.
This lack of development is found in Bufo and in Baryta carh. ; they
are related to each other in that the child-like state remains while
the body grows. Wc see in these medicines the fear and simplicity
that belongs to the child ; always sickly, deficient, never reaching
adult fulness or growth, always a child. “How much like a child
that woman appears, or ‘How much like a child that man is.‘‘ Wc
say that of some old people, they are so childish. Ihe old routinists
have said of those people who arc prematurely old or have taken on
senility, that they need Baryta curb. This medicine also stands out in
bold type for those prematurely senile ; the man at fifty acts like an
old broken-down man of eighty ; he has lost all he had live or six
years ago, and has taken on a child-likc simplicity and innocence, an
appearance of imbecility. Then it is that we think of this medicine.
Baryta curb, has hitherto been the leading one, but Bufo is also very
important. '*Lefi his bed after apathy and ran like mad through the
house.’' There it branches olt from the condition of imbecility to
that of excitement of mind. Most of the Bufo patients will be
passive, placid, not in a state of excitement or mania, but passive in
everything. Feeble-minded, simple, child-like. “Weak memory and
idiotic.'' “Longs for solitude, yet dreads being alone." “Angry, bites
at surrounding objects." “Easily laughs or cries." It has been
used in delirium tremens, during the stages of excitement and mental
prostration, biting and grasping things. “Titters," now that is more
expressive than to say she laughs, she titters at every little thing that
is said. Titters and says foolish things ; titters over things that are
not laughable; everything said seems to be funny to this simple,
child-like woman. You know a child laughs and is merry, but we
do not expect such things in adults except when what is said is
particularly ludicrous. These symptoms are sometimes met in epilep-



^54


BUFO


tics. “Easily laughs or cries easily affected, and extremely sensitive,
nervous nature. Again, the most extreme anxiety, night and day,
wringing the hands and talking about something awful that is going
to happen wdien there is nothing to happen ; some awful event, some
terrible thing in the future, it is all darkness and despair, walks the
floor and wrings the hands and says over and over the same awful
things that are going to take place, when in reality the future is safe
and there is nothing to be anxious about. This occurs in cases of
insanity. Such as are approaching imbecility are passive, they have a
lack of comprehension of things around ; but those that are going into
insanity have an increased imagination of the things that surround
them. Where these symptoms have been induced by secret vice.

“Become angry if misunderstood.’' This is approaching insanity.
It is well known to medical men and to the courts that these condi-
tions of insanity intermingle in the human race with epilepsy, and.
that an epileptic is not always held responsible for murder, because
it is so well known that the epileptic state of the body is not con-
fined merely to the spasms of the muscles, the sudden falling, foaming
at the mouth, clonic spasms, biting of the tongue, etc. These alone
do not constitute all of epilepsy. The epileptic suffers from an under-
lying psoric state, which in one is a state of imbecility and in another
a state of epileptic manifestation, and in another a state of insanity.
Those who inherit this peculiar constitution, even in one family, ex-
hibit it in different ways ; one will be insane, another an imbecile,
another will die of cancer and another will be an epileptic. Bufo*
underlies such a constitution ; it is an antipsoric, it is a deep-seated,
vital remedy ; it goes to the very heart and interior of man's physical
nature, and from this mental state it may manifest itself in his ulti-
mates, the fingers and toes, eyes, ears, etc., so that even the touch is
disordered. There are patches upon the skin that have loss of sensa-
tion and others with increased sensations. Spasms of various
muscles, sometimes local spasm and sometimes complete epileptic
spasms with bleeding at the mouth, unconsciousness, falling down.
Besides such grave state, it has milder states that may be called mere
dizziness or vertigo. The milder conditions of dizziness have gone
on to sudden falling and collapse, a sudden state of unconsciousness
with spasms and biting of the tongue. In the proving we find at-
tacks of apathy and partial coma ; numbness of the brain. So we see
in the text that we have conditions ranging from mere dizziness to
a complete and profound epilepsy. The study of this remedy may re-
veal to you something of the nature of epilepsy. From the allopathic
treatises on epilepsy you will only get the appearance of the fit, and
the fit is treated as epilepsy. They hunt for remedies to subdue and
control the fit, thinking when they have done that they have cured



BUFO


255


the patient. They feed these patients Bromides in large doses and
now and then they branch off into some side issue, but go back to
the Bromides and stupefy and make imbeciles of their patients. Pre-
scribing for the fit has never cured the patient.

''Congestive headaches.” Again, its action on the circular fibres
of the abdominal aorta furnishes a key-note in epilepsy. An awful
sensation of anxiety is felt in the abdomen and then there is a
sudden loss of consciousness ; the aura or warning is first felt in the
abdomen. Some writers have described it as in the solar plexus.
The awful sensation occurs as an anxiety and then he falls.

'"Cannot bear the sight of briliant objects.” “Amaurosis,” etc.
“Pupils largely dilated and unaffected by light before attack.” "More
acute vision,”

It has spasmodic conditions of the eye, but increased vision and
diminished sensation, and lastly a tendency to profound trophic dis-
turbance. Little blisters form upon the eye. These little blisters also
form upon the skin, and the integument is thrown off and there is.
no healing. Ulcers wdll form upon the cornea. "Eyes become highly
injected.” Paralytic conditions of the lids and muscles of the eye.
There is disturbance of all the senses. "Music is unbearable.” One
who is in a natural state is expected to enjoy beautiful music, whereas
in this remedy music brings about a state of anxiety. The sense
of hearing is so violently exaggerated that every little noise is dis-
tressing. "Purulent otorrhoea.^^ "Swelling of the ears ; of the
parotids.” "Phlegmonous ery^p^las about the face.” "Falling out
of the teeth* in the peculiar disease knowm as Rigg’s disease.

"Stuttering and stammering ; gets angry when incoherent speech
is not understood.” "Biting the tongue.” "l^ongue cracked, bluish
black.*’ "Mouth wide open before an attack,** showing that the
spasm is coming on ; and this condition increases so that when the

attack is not on, he drops the jaw and looks stupid as if he had for-

gotten everything. Bufo often corresponds to lesser attacks re-
sembling vertigo. In this state people do not fall, and for a few

«^econds everything is blank, or sometimes they do things auto-
matically in these moments. A person, in this mild form of epileptic
vertigo, will hardly show anything, but he will sometimes come to
a perfect standstill and then go on as if nothing had happened. What
occurred during that attack he knows nothing of. Sometimes he

will continue right on doing what he was doing, and nobody will
know of the spell. Sometimes when driving he will turn his horses
around, and when he comes to himself he will know by this that he
has had one of his attacks. Quite a number of medicines have pro-
duced that condition of the mind, a ^tate in which he goes on doing
things automatically.



BUFO


256


‘‘Vomiting after drinking/' “Yellow fluid in vomit. “Vomit-
ing of bile or blood.’* “Spasms end by convulsive movements in ab-
domen.” It says in the text, “The attack originates in abdomen
that is, he has a feeling of anxiety in the abdomen previous to the
attack.

“Haemorrhoidal tumors.” “Urine passes involuntarily." The
urine passes involuntarily in such as are becoming imbeciles from
the epileptic attacks, in approaching softening of the brain, which is
really w^hat is taking place, a form of softening, a lowered form of
integrity.

As you might suppose, there is great disturbance of the sexual
organs, this is usually the case in insane people. Sometimes the
sexual organs are in a state of excitement and sometimes in a stated
of impotency, but the patient is low-minded, inclination to carry
the hand constantly to the genital organs. “Semen is discharged too
quickly without pleasurable sensation.” Spasms or epilepsy comes on
during coition. It has also inflammation of glands, especially about
the groins, such as are found in syphilis.

In the female sexual organs burning is the most striking feature ;
burning in the ovaries and uterus. It is one of the most troublesome
symptoms you will have to contend with, when a case of dysmenor-
rhoea has burning in the ovaries and in the pelvis, at the coming on
of or during menses. Burning in the genital organs, in the ovaries,
and rending, tearing pains that extend down the thighs. This
forms a troublesome kind of dysmenorrhoea, especially when there
arc cysts and hydatids al)out the ovaries. Some will tell you that
these cannot be cured. All these conditions arc curable ! “Burning
heat and stitches in ovaries.” “Distending, burning pains or cramps
in uterus.” This remedy has been a great palliative for these awful
burning pains that occur in carcinoma of the uterus ; stitching, rend-
ing, tearing pains in carcinoma of the uterus, when the pains run out-
wards into the legs, with ulceration of the uterus and cervix ; tearing,
stinging pains and bloody, offensive leucorrhcca. Bufo is full of of-
fensive discharges ; bloody, offensive Icucorrhoca. You would think
you had the odor of gangrene or gangrenous erysipelas in the room
from smelling these discharges. “Enormous blisters upon tumefied
uterus, discharging a thin,, serous, yellow fluid.” This occurs in
epileptic states.

“Menstruation suppressed,” “too early with headache,” “burning in
uterus and vagina.” “Spasms occur just before menses.” That is, girls
who are subject to epilepsy have increase of spasm at the time of
menses, sometimes before, sometimes during. “Attacks worse at time
of menses.” “During menses contractive pain in liver.” “Yellow fluid
leucorrhoea.” When the girl lies in an unconscious condition during



BUFO


257


the menstrual period and has several epileptic spasms which she has
no realization of until told and then she is too much dazed to under-
stand it she needs Bufo.

Bufo has been a great palliative in cancer of the mammae, for the
burning pains and for the blisters that form roundabout ; large, yellow
blisters ; blisters that fill with yellow, serous discharge ; it has been
especially useful when the milk is mixed with blood. It corresponds
to the low form of inflammation of the blood vessels, like milk leg,
when the veins feel like whipcords in the thighs.

‘‘Burning, excoriation in larynx.” You see how burning runs all
through the remedy; it occurs w^heiever there are inflammatory condi-
tions or where nerves are sensitive and painful, and the nerve sheath
becomes painful and sensitive to touch along its course ; hence its
use in sciatica and other inflammatory conditions of large nerves.

“Violent cough with vomiting.” Cough with gJtgging and retch-
ing. Expectoration is bloody or formed of pure blood. Sensation
of coldness in chest. “Burning like fire in lungs.” Burning extending
up into the larynx ; gangrene of the lungs. “Laryngitis, haemoptysis.”
Burning in the chest with all these affections, such as have been de-
scribed. It has the phthisical constitution when the epilepsy has been
turned aside by strong drugs. It has the phthisical constitution when
discharges have been suppressed by closing fistulous openings, or by
stimulating ointments. It has those low forms of disease which must
develop when outward manifcfiftations have been suppressed. The
constitution that belongs to th^ very nature of the individual will
come out in epilepsy, in insanit^y in imbecility, in cancer, in some one
of the low forms of disease. This medicine corrcwsponds to a low
type and constitution. The nature of the Bufo constitution is such
that it is capable of giving out symptoms similar to those produced
by low forms of disease. He is not likely to live to be old, he is likely
to break down at forty. She comes to her end by cancer of uterus or
breast, or by imbecility. He comes to his end with low forms of
disease, malignant manifestations. This medicine, therefore, goes
into the very life. Children develop an unusual tendency to low*
forms of chronic disease ; they do not possess a good healthy nature,
a good sound brain ; but they are feeble, they break out with erup-
tions, they go into consumption. Persons of twenty-five have a tend-
ency to break down, and when the symptams look like those of Bufo
this medicine will, in a wonderful way, make that constitution all
over. Such cases as these only get wdl by a violent turmoil and by
tremendous aggravations. When wc approach these diseases by easy
stages the patient does not get so much disorder dr excitement, bur
is not cured so radically. Old diseases would re-appear, old gonor-
rhoeas would be brought back, and old syphilitic states come up,

33



CACTUS GRANDIFLORUS


258

ulcers .attack the mucous membranes, etc. Such turmoil is likely to
occur when you get a deep acting remedy, such as brings all the disease
out that was lurking within.

‘‘Attacks ushered in by a jerk in the nape of neck.*' “Swelling of
bone size of fist.’* “Arms became stiffened before an attack.** “Numb-
ness of left arm.** “Blister in hand, which recurred annually.”
“Panaritium.” A great many troubles occur in the extremities,
paralytic affections, etc.

A warm room is unbearable ; headaches and flushes of the face
are made worse in a warm room or when near the stove, better from
bathing or in cold air. Complaints better from putting the feet in
hot water.

Trembling. Some of the epileptic attacks occur with regular peri-
odicity, others occur irregularly. We have no remedy for epilepsy.
Does that mean we must leave the human race to go on and suffer
with epilepsy? We do have plenty of remedies for people who have
epilepsy. A large percentage of the cases are curable.

After what has been said concerning the nature of this remedy I
am sure you will read the symptoms with great interest. When you
read the symptoms, they will cling around the constitution and nature
of such individuals and such states as have been described. This is
one of the remedies that you will need to use for the development of
feeble-minded children whether there are spasms or not.

CACTUS GRANDIFLORUS

Constrictions, contractions and congestions run through Cactus.
Determination of blood to the head, and coldness of the extremities.
Or determination of blood to an organ, the chest, or the heart. There
is never an equal circulation of blood in the body ; it is spasmodic and
irregular. Disturbed by contractions of circular fibres everywhere.
When this comes in places where it can be felt, and realized by the
senses, it is felt as contractions, as if caged in wires, and this gives
us the key to Cactus. Where contractions cannot be felt, where there
is no sense of feeling, we know that it goes on as a spasmodic condi-
tion of circular fibres ; but these contractions that are felt arc more
upon the surface of the body, and in organs having circular fibers —
tubes and canals. They constrict, and this constriction is felt like a
spasm. It has a sensation of tightness and constriction about the
head, about the chest, about the attachments of the diaphragm, all
over the abdomen. Contractions about the heart that are tonic in
dharacter, like a tight clutching ; constriction, “Constriction felt
about the heart.** These constrictions are fdt about the throat, in
the m^phagus, causing a spasm ; in the vagina, causing vi^iniaiipiS



eACrUS ORANDlFLDiltJS


^ 5 <)

atid preventing coition. In the uterus it produces the most violent
cramps. Clutching and constrictions, as it the uterus were grasped
and held tightly, like a spasm. But at these times, when these con-
strictions take place, there are congestions. “Rush of blood to the
part, with constriction.” “Violent congestion of the uterus, with
constrictions. Rush of blood to the chest, as if the chest was filled
with hot gushes of blood, with constrictions, and constriction of die
heart.” Ihese peculiarities run through Cactus more markedly than
any other remedy. Many remedies have similar things now and then,
but in Cactus it is common ; it is the nature of Cactus to constrict, to
cause constriction in places where it has never been felt, and never
been thought of. Constrictions of the whole body, as if the body
was held in a wire cage. Constrictions of the scalp, of the skin,
growing tighter and tighter. Violent congestions that come on sud-
denly, Congestion of the brain, with hot head, flushed face. At the
beginning of complaints, at the beginning of pneumonia ; congestive
chill with hot head and cold body (like Arn.) with violent constric-
tions and tightness, as if the head were pressed, as if the membrane
of the brain were too tight, as if the brain were covered with a tight
cloth, and were being screwed tighter and tighter. Uniform tight-
ness of an organ, as if it were being bound tighter and tighter. But
in tubes and canals it is a co^istriction of a particular part, many
times like as if tied with a string. Constriction, like hour-glass con-
traction, in the uterus. It ha$ inflammations, congestions, rush of
blood to the part, gradually progressing to inflammation, and infiltra-
tion, Inflammation of various parts.

It has rheumatism. It is a remedy very useful in gouty constitu-
tions ; very useful in acute inflammatory rheumatism ; and in this in-
stance the congestion is in the joints that happen to be affected. And
then again the constriction, as if tied with a tape, or as if bandaged.
Tightness, tension, pressure, are involved in that thought. It has
such a prolonged determination of blood to the heart that the heart
finally becomes disturbed in its function, disturbed in its tissues ; and
it has a profound curative action upon the heart and even cures organic
heart diseases, such as are produced from this cause, conditions com-
ing on from congestion, or coming on through congestion in rheu-
matic constrictions, where the rheumatism has left the joints partially
and the heart has become involved, and there is constriction of tha
heart. Various efforts have been made by provers, and by patients,
to describe the constriction jof the heart. It is sometimes described
“as if grasped with an iron hand.’' It is only to illustrate the tenacity
of the constriction. In these rheumatic troubles when the joints
have ceased, to be affected and the heart becomes affected with this
chronic congestion and enlargement, we have enlargement, of the



2$0


CACTUS CRANDIFLORUS


valves so that there are murmurs, the head is hot, and the patient
gradually emaciates. Kidney troubles will come on ; the heart grows
weaker, and then dropsical conditions set in, that is the course of
Cactus. Towards the la^^t, cardiac affections, along with kidney
affections, with emacidtion, and then swelling of the hands and feet.
That is the very nature of Cactus, and you will not find any medi-
cine in the whole Materia Medica that reads like it. There is nothing
to compare with it in the intensity of these symptoms. All these
things that I have described seem to turn upon these words, congestion,
constriction and contraction.

The pains in Cactus arc violent, no matter where they occur. They
compel the patient to cry out, and the pains are clutching pains,
constricting pains ; they often feel like tearing pains ; but there is
always that idea of clutching. Suppose you should tie a tape round
a violently congested organ, and tie it tighter and tighter. It seems
to me that is about the kind of suffering the patient has with that
constriction of a congested organ. Pains in congested parts ; pains
in sore parts. Tearing ; constricting, cramping, when pains occur
in the intestines they are constricting, but when the pains arc in
the long muscles they are not the constricting pains, for it is not the
circular fibres then but the long fibres that contract, and we call them
cramps. Cactus produces some spasmodic conditions in long muscles,
but not to any great extent. In Bell, especially, and also in many of
those medicines that have this nature of cramping, and constricting
and contracting of circular fibres, there is convulsive tendency. The
violent congestion of the brain in Bell, will commonly be attended with
cramps in the extremities and convulsions of the muscles all over;,
or in parts. Not so with Cactus. Violent congestion, and he grows
stupid under it. Congestion of the brain, first with very red face, then
darker from the venous stasis, and then stupor. He grows sluggish
under the cerebral congestion.

The mental state is that of fear and distress, because of the intensity
of the suffering. The patient has never felt such suffering, and he
does not see what it can all mean. So much suffering, such violent
suffering, such sudden suffering, such cramps, such tearing, such con-
striction. When this constriction comes in the heart, and about the
chest, it makes the patient think he is going to die, and he is at once
struck with fear, and it is depicted upon the face. He fears death,
and it seems he is going to die, his pain is so intense. But with this
intense pain he has nothing of the anxiety we find in Aconite, which
has a similar constriction of the chest and constriction of the neck.
The violent choking in Aconite makes him fear he is going to choke
to death, and the anxiety is awful. It is not so intense in Cactus.
Screaming with pains is a common thing in Cactus. *‘Tacituni, uii-



CACTUS GRANDIFLOHUS


961

willing to speak a word or to answer/’ That often accompanies the
Cactus state, which is the opposite of most of the medicines that have
such violent pains. “Sadness, taciturnity, and irresistible inclination
to weep. Fear of death that is, he thinks he is going to die from the
severity of the pain. “He believes his disease is incurable;’' it seems
to him that such suffering must end in death. That violent, irregular
action of the heart is followed out through all the blood vessels, be-
cause the circulation is so irregular, is so spasmodic. He is not here,
and cold there. Heat in the head, or heat m the chest. The circula-
tion is that of determination to some particular part. With all the
cardiac remedies we have violent dreams, great excitement of the
brain during sleep, waking up startled and frightened, very commonly
with a feeling of failing. Dreams of falling. Dreams lull of excite-
ment. These features run through Cactus, especially with the cardiac
symptoms.

“Vertigo from congestion ; face red, bloated ; pulsation in brain.
Feels as it he would go mad. Vertigo, worse from physical exertion."
With most of the cardiac remedies, or remedies where tlie circula-
tion and heart are much involved, wc have marked vertigo. “Vcriigo ;
worse from physical exertion, turning in bed, stooping, rising from a
recumbent position, and deep inspiration." Many of the complaints
of Cactus are disturbed by irregularities of breathing. Here we sec
vertigo coming on from deep breathing. If he holds his breath, it
seems as it his heart would % to pieces, it would go so fast. In-
creased pulsation all over the b0dy when holding the breath.

The headaches are constricting, pressing. They are all violent,
with intense heat of the head, for they are congestive. A pressing
in the top of the head as if the top of the head would be forced in ;
but this is ameliorated by pressing hard upon the pain, “Heavy pain
like a weight on vertex, better by pressure." Oftentimes the patient
may be wrong in the idea of pressure that is felt in the head. They
often describe it in the most marked congestions as if the head would
be crushed in, when the congestion in the brain can be seen to be most
violent, causing pressure from within out, and we would think they
would be better from some sort of support externally, and yet they
feel great soreness and feel as if the head is being crushed in. Others
with headaches feci as if the head is being pressed out. “Heavy pain
like a weight on vertex; better by pressure, but worse from sounds,
hearing, talking, or strong light.” This runs through the headaches.
Greatly aggravated from hearing voices. The sound goes through
the head. The brain seems to be sensitive, as if the sound were a
material substance hurled at the brain. Right-sided headaches.
Pulsating headaches. Heavy, pulsating pain in the head. Tensive
pain in the head, tensive pain in the vertex. A tightness across the



262


CACTUS CRANDIFtORUS


vertex, as if the scalp was being drawn tighter and tighter upon the
skull. There can be no doubt about there being a marked cerebral
congestion with all these symptoms. The eyes show it ; the face
shows it ; the heat of the head shows it. It has been recommended for
threatened apoplexy, when the congestion is so violent, and the face
is flushed and purple, or very red, and the pulsation is felt in the
brain and all over.

This remedy has the violent congestion of the head found in Bell,,
but with Bell, we have the intense heat of the body, fever heat which
is not found in Cactus. In Cactus it is only a moderate fever. The
heat is in the upper part of the body, in the head and neck. Full-
ness of the neck ; bloating of the neck. Feels as if the head would
expand from the pressure of blood in the head, but without any great
rise of temperature. It has fever, but it has these without fever. But
with Bell, when you have these pulsations the patient is intensely hot,
and he burns all over. There is some burning in Cactus, but not to
be compared with Bell Heat in the head from mental exertion is
a strong symptom of Cactus. This symptom is found in persons who
are trying to break off from coffee and Cactus is often the remedy.

The patient has choking about the neck, as from a tight collar,
Constriction ; tension of the skin and muscles everywhere. Chok-
ing about the neck with constriction of the heart. Choking about
the neck in hysteria ; globus hystericus ; a lump or ball coming up
into the throat, and she constantly swallows and chokes, and she
goes into cramps with great numbness of the left arm.

Cramping especially of the left arm. Complete numbness of the
left arm along with cardiac conditions in the history of rheumatism
and in hysteria. The history of rheumatism goes well to fill up the
Cactus case. The face is flushed bright red, becoming blue. With
weakness of the heart it is blue ; blue lips. We need Cactus for a
patient that has constriction about the neck, wdth congested head, blue
face, and lips mottled, numbness of the left hand, constriction of the
heart. The left hand mysteriously weak, or is numb, tingling and
crawling, like a formication.

Another thing running all through the remedy is its haemorrhages.
That is not surprising. Any medicine that has such cardiac conditions
and such vascular conditions will at timCwS have more or less relaxation
of blood vessels, and it would be quite in the nature of it to bleed. It
has haemorrhages of two kinds. Haemorrhage from vascular relaxa-
tion accompanying cardiac and vascular conditions, and haemorrhage
from violent congestion of a part. The rush of blood to the head is
of such violence in the moderately plethoric patient that he bleeds
from the nose, and hawks blood from the throat. Congestion of the
chest so violent that he expectorates blood from the chest. Bleeding



CACTUvS GRANDIFLORUS


263


from ^congestion, rather than from tuberculosis. Congestion of the
uterus with bleeding. Congestion of the bladder and kidneys, with
blood in the urine, with discharges of blood from violent congestion.
In old cardiac conditions, where relaxation is present in most marked
degree, haemorrhage from relaxation.

Strong pulsations felt in strange places, in the stomach, and in the
bowels ; sometimes in the extremities, the feet and hands, as well as
in the head. Throbbing all over. Around the attachment of the
diaphragm feeling as if a cord was tied tighter and tighter ; round the
lower part of the chest. This is a strange symptom ; it clutches him so
tightly around the waist line that it takes his breath away, and he
struggles for breath, and wants to do something. It clutches him
tighter and tighter. Cactus produces congestion of the bowels ; inflamma-
tion of the uterus. Gastric inflammation and with it the clutching.

It is a remedy for the cure of haemorrhoids ; the relaxation of the
great portal system, and the lower veins in the rectum, the haemor-
rhodial veins. The veins are in such a state of relaxation that
tumors will form, and bleed copiously. Bleeding haemorrhoids. Con-
striction of the anus. It has a very troublesome constipation ; constipa-
tion in connection with haemorrhoids. It has a paralytic weakness of
the bladder. It has retention of urine. Such a constriction of the
neck of the bladder that the urine cannot be passed for a long time,
and there is retention. In the kidneys such a congestion as favors
suppression of the urine. Bloody urine ; blood in clots. It is a remedy
that favors the formation of clots speedily. The blood that flows
clots so rapidly and so densely that it blocks up the way. Bleeding
into the bladder blocks up the way. Bleeding into the vagina causes
a dot difficult to expel, and pressing upon the urethra of the female
that it is impossible for her to pass urine. It is like an immense tam-
pon. And hence it reads, ‘urination prevented by clots,*' clots in the
vagina, as well as clots in the bladder. Inflammation of the ovaries ;
inflammation of the uterus It is a medicine that you will need to
know when a young, plethoric, vigorous woman comes down violently
with congestion of the uterus at the menstrual period, and she screams
because of the violent clutching and cramping of the uterus. Before
the flow starts, or just at the beginning, there is violent spasm. The
circular fibres clutch ; and she describes it accurately as if a tape were
tied around that sore and congested uterus. The uterus fills with
blood clots, and the spasm to expel that blood is like a labor-pain, and
she screams again, and it is some time before the flow becomes free
enough to give relief. If this condition is met with in rheumatic
diathesis, where there is more or less rheumatism of the joints,
clutching pains and constriction in other places, we have a remedy
in Cactus* The excitement and the sharp scream can be heard by tho



264


CACTUS GRAKDIFLORUS


neighbors. Suffocative attacks with these pains, because the heart
suffers, and constriction of the heart will commonly go along with
the constriction of the uterus. In cardiac conditions it seems as if he
will die for want of bteath. Constrictions of the chest. Oppression
as if a great load was on his chest, crushing the life out of him, so
great is the constriction, and the congestion. A sudden congestion,
and it comes on and ends without inflammation in many instances.
A violent rush of blood to the chest, with awful dyspnoea and con-
striction of the heart — and it passes away without inflammation. At
other times Cactus has conditions like pneumonia, inflammation of
the lungs, and congestion ending in inflammation, with the usual
expectoration, bloody or blood streaked. Cactus is also a remedy for
hypostatic congestion of the lungs. He cannot lie down, must sit up
in bed, and there is a dullness of the lower part of each lung, grad-
ually growing higher and higher from an effusion of scrum into the
lower portion of the lungs. This hypostatic congestion is due to a
cardiac weakness. Cactus will often relieve this a few times when it
occurs in old broken down cases towards the end of Bright’s disease,
and at the end of dropsical conditions and heart troubles. It will
postpone death. “Could only breathe with shoulders elevated and ly-
ing on back.” Lies leaning back or sitting quite upright. “Periodical
attacks of suffocation, with fainting; cold sweat,”

“Feeling as if heart was compressed or squeezed by a hand. Cardiac-
rheumatism. Heart seemed to be held by an iron hand for many
hours. Pain in the cardiac region. Great pressure at heart, going
round under left axilla to back.” Often tbis pain shoots down the
left hand, is attended with numbness, and sometimes with swelling.
Numbness, tingling, swelling. ‘‘Dull pain in the heart. Heavy pain
in the heart, aggravated from pressure. Contractive pain in the
region of the heart going down to left abdomen. At times felt as if
some one was grasping the heart firmly. Paroxysms of pain in the
heart,” that is, this kind of constriction comes in periods of violent
paroxysms. “Acute inflammation of the heart. Chronic inflamma-
tion of the heart. Palpitation of the heart, continued day and night ;
when walking, and at night when lying on the left side.”

Another thing running through the remedy is, that chest com-
plaints often come on or are exaggerated at ii o’clock. Eleven
o’clock in the morning, or eleven at night. Its intermittent fever will
bring on a chill with violent congestion to the head at 11 o’clock.
Regular paroxysms at ii a. m. and ii p. m., or sometimes at ii
A. M. and sometimes at 1 1 p. m. A daily chill at 1 1 a. M. It hsis
cured intermittent fever of iht cemgestive type, when the congestions
are here and there, but paffkularly of head, with cotistrictions, con-
gestions and contractions. -



CADMIUM SULPHURICUM


265


CADMIUM SULPHURICUM

Cadmium sulph. has been only partially proved, so that only a limited
amount of information can be given concerning it. A medicine may
be said to be thoroughly proved when it has left its impress upon all
elements of man ; when it has affected his memory and his intellect,
when it has affected his organs and all their functions, u e., when
healthy man has taken a medicine until all these things are affected
and the results are known as the effects of that medicine. Every
medicine affects in some way all these elements of man, and no
medicine is well proved until it is known how all these elements
are affected. There is a dread of work ; aversion to doing everything,
mental and physical. Anxiety has been brought out more by cures than
by the pathogenesis, so that it w^ell enough known to be classed along
with Arsenicum for its anxiety ; it may well be classed with Arsenicum
for its prostration also ; it has great w^eakness ; it might also be classed
with Arsenicum, because of the organs that are affected, especially be-
cause of its action upon the stomach, which is somewhat like Arseni-
cum, great exhaustion, irritable stomach and vomiting. It has such
vomiting as is found in the lowest forms of fever, such irritable
stomach as is found in yellow fever, with black vomiting, and just at
this point is the place where tfce likeness to Arsenicum comes out in
the low forms of the fever. But unlike Arsenicum^ running all through
the remedy, he wants to be perfectly quiet ; part of it is a state of in-
dolence, part of it is an aversion to motion. He is worse from motion,
which makes it like Bryonia, So we will see running all through the
remedy the exhaustion of Arsenicum and aversion to motion, like
Bryonia,

Running through it w^e find it is spasmodic and nervous ; it affects
the muscles like Zinc, It is found in its crude state associated with
Zinc, Hering made several observations whereby he tried to prove
that substances found together had a relationship and illustrated it by
Tellurium which occurs as the telluride of gold. It may be a fact that
substances so associated are in some respects similar, but this is only
a side thought, as each substance must be studied on its merits. There
must be no guesswork in the study of provings. Every remedy must
be used for its own symptoms, and for these there is no substitute. If
a remedy does not work, the homoeopath can only examine the case
anew and seek new symptoms and another remedy.

Vertigo in the room ; the bed spins round. The head symptoms,
anxiety and vertigo are such as occur in low types of gastro-intestinal
irritation, as in continued fevers, deep-seated, slow and sluggish ; in
yellow fever, with prostration, vomiting of blood, black vomit. Lanci-
nating in the head, pulsating in the temples. It is not so often called

34



265


CADMIUM SULPirUUlCUM


for in ordinary headaches, but in headaches occurring in the low forms
of fever, with great rush of blood to the head. Cutting like knives as
occurs in yellow fever.

The eye symptoms are numerous. Inflammation of a local character;
conjunctivitis with discharge, long continued, a chronic conjunctivitis.
Old “sore eyes,*' rousing up with every cold and change of weather.
Thickening of the conjunctiva. Scrofulous sore eyes. Ulcer spots ;
old scars which break and heal up. It does wonderful work in curing
old eye troubles ; opacities with slow' inflammation. Pressure above the
eyes. Paralysis of the lids ; ptosis. It commonly affects one side of
the face and one eye. It has paralytic conditions like Caustkum ;
paralysis of one part or of one side of the body. After an apoplectic
attack when the patient recovers, but Aveakness of one arm and leg
remains, it competes with Phos,

Changes in sensation here and there. Formication of the skin and
deeper tissues. “Asleep” sensation, or like ants crawling in the ex-
tremities, deep in the muscles and the skin. Hyperaesthesia or anaes-
thesia. Numbness of parts ; the nose, one hand ; numbness in spots.
In this it is similar to Caust. Paralyzed parts are sometimes painful.
Crawling in paralyzed parts.

Old nasal catarrh which has progressed rill the nasal bones are being
destroyed by caries. Ulceration. Pains in the bones. Sneezing :
coryza, boils, abscesses.

Disturbances of the taste. It is suitable to low forms of continued
fever ; it has sordes, dark tongue, bleeding tongue and dry mouth, as
in typhus, typhoid and yellow fever. Sluggish tongue ; difficulty in
moving it. Difficult swallowing. The muscles of the throat are af-
fected causing dysphagia. Constriction of the fcsophagiis. Violent
thirst. p]very lime he takes cold w^atcr, which lie craves, goose-flesh
comes out, a creeping or horripilation like Caps.

The stomach gives us the strongest and most important symptoms.
7'hc stomach quits business ; no digestion. erything sours ; fluids
and the simplest tilings taken are changed and come up sour, mixed
with blood or bile ; rancid eructations ; with great exhaustion. The
nausea is distressing. Nauseated all the way down to the abdomen
like Ipec., Ant. t., and Asr., extensive nausea. Cold sweat. Vomiting
of yellow-green mucus. Touching the lips brings on nausea. Looking
over the symptoms narrated here an experienced practitioner would
think of gastritis — vomiting of the simplest things. Irritation of the
stomach after tedious sickness, like cerebro-spinal-meningitis, typhoid,
yellow fever. The stomach gives out ; there is no dige.stion, and every-
thing is vomited. He is convalescing, but his stomach is irritable. He
wants to keep still. The Arsenic prostration and irritable stomach
occuf at the beginning of the fever, with heat and restlessness. This



CALADIUM


267


medicine comes in after the fever, and with his anxiety he wants to
keep still Arsenic has anxiety and wants to move from bed to bed,
and from chair to chair, and he fears deatli. In this medicine he
seems to say: “Don’t speak to me; don’t bother me ; let me die in
peace.” He wants to be perfectly quiet, and the state occurs at the
close of a febrile disease. Many of these patients die because they can-
not eat, but this remedy will save them. When you have a case of
cancer, with burning, prostration, and vomiting. Cadmium sulph.
will relieve these symptoms for weeks. 1 have seen them where the
pains have been relieved by anodynes until nothing would stay on the
stomach, and this medicine would relieve. It is a great remedy in the
gastric irritation of carcinoma^ a great palliative ; coffee ground vomiting.

Burning and cutting pains in the stomach. Gastric symptoms, such
as occur in pregnancy, m old drunkards. Burning in the stomach ex-
tending up into the oesophagus ; fluids burn all the way up into the
mouth and throat ; sour, acid fluids. Cold sensation in the stomach.
Cholera infantum with irritation of the stomach.

Pain in the abdomen with vomiting. Lancinating in the abdomen,
from these pains wc sec it is a medicine which profoundly affects the
liver, spleen, stomach and other abdominal viscera. Gangrene threatens.
The main remedy in the hands of good prescribers.

Relapses in lever, with vomiting, diarrhoea, and great prostration.
At times a case of yellow^ fever gets along fairly well, but a draft
causes a slight cold and on come sudden prostration, black vomit,
death. In that state it competes with Carbo veg,, which used to bo
the main remedy in the hands of good prescribers.

CALADIUM

Caladium is a wonderful remedy ; perhaps some of you have read
It endeavoring to understand it ; it is a difficult medicine to under-
stand, because it is quite evident from the provings that the prover
3id not understand how to describe and report symptoms ; did not know
how to tell his sensations because they were so strange ; he could not
relate his mental state.

An individual puts his mind to bear upon something which seems
10 have taken place during the day, but he is not quire sure whether
it took place or not ; he thinks the matter over, and yet he cannot be
really sure whether it took place or not, until he actually goes ^nd
puts his hands upon the object thought about : proves to himself by
actual contact and observation that his vague impression was so, that
it was true, then he goes away and again he is undecided as to whether
it was so or not. This relates to things that actually happened. “Very
forgetful, he cannot remember,” etc. This led to the use of Caladium



268


caladium


for a good many different kinds of mental affections, loss of memory
where there is that vague state of mind. It might be bordering upon
imbecility, it might be the borderland of insanity. All day long he
finds himself looking into the things that should have been done ; they
have simply escaped his mind ; he has forgotten them. So the mind
is worn through in places. A state of absent-mindedness. It may
come on in an acute state, with unconsciousness. There is a good deal
of congestion of the brain, more or less excitement, but more import-
tant is prostration of the mind, weakness of the mind ; feeble-minded ;
inability to perform intellectual work, it is impossible. He cannot
think ; the more thought he puts upon, a thing the more fatigue he has
and the further away that thing seems to be ; the more he attempts it
the less concentrated is the mind upon a subject. It is not strange,
then, that the provers themselves were unable to put these ideas into
speech so as to give us an intelligent idea of proving. It is only
by reading between the lines, using the remedy and studying it that
we can straighten out this tangled skein. “Very thoughtful, absent-
minded.'* There is in acute states delirium, excitement of mind, un-
consciousness, stupefaction. As the febrile state is continued, we have
this mental state. This remedy is useful in fevers that arc continued.

One of the most important things to decide when we are going
into the mental state of a remedy is whether v/e shall use this remedy
in hysteria, in the delirium of the various phases of fever, or in insan-
ity, and to ascertain this we turn to that part of the proving which
gives us the pace of the remedy. If we want to understand the deli-
rium of Belladonna and Bryonia to see which one would be suitable
in a certain case, we turn to the fabrile action of the remedy and see
what the nature of that is ; the pace tells us largely what kind of
delirium, if we do not know from the delirium itself. So we will
see that in Belladonna there is no continued fever, and as a remedy
must, in its very nature, be adapted to the very nature of the disease, it
would be useless to follow the many injunctions that are written in
our books telling us to give Belladonna in the acute fonn of delirium
in typhoid fever ; but Bryonia has just that condition ; hence we will
see that Bryonia is useful in such cases which present symptoms sim-
ilar to it, because the pace of the disease is similar to the pace of
Bryonia, which has continued fever. Belladonna has intermittent
and remittent fever, particularly remittent, and hence the acute deli-
rium of Belladonna is similar to the acute delirium of remittent fever.
Now to bring this point to bear ; this remedy's fever is a continued
fever ; it has not great amount of fever in it, but it is a continued
fever ; we shall see that there is coma and stupor from fever ; ''de-
lirium, unintelligible murmuring mental prostration. This remedy
is suitable in low, murmuring, exhaustive cases of typhoid fever, cases



CALADIUM


269


that are running a very sluggish course; not a \ery active delirium;
but muttering ; a low torm o£ semi-consciousness, very often coma or
stupefaction like Phos. ac,, a dazed mind.

Forgetfulness in persons who are mentally and physically prostrated
from sexual excesses or from tobacco poisoning. It is indicated in
old debauches who are unable to perform the marital act. He has
the most tantalizing craving for the opposite sex with no ability to
perform coitus. Lascivious ideas. Such men stand on the street
corner and feast upon the forms of passing girls, and their semen
dribbles away ; a state also found in Picric acid and Selenium, You
can only cure these patients if they desire to reform, and if you can
inspire them to live a better life. Without this you cannot save them,
and those who take delight in such things arc not worth saving, and
medicine will not take hold of them. To cure, the patient must use
his will to help the remedy.

Extremely nervous ; afraid of his own shadow ; awake all night
with lascivious thoughts, apprehensions, especially before going to
sleep ; afraid of the future. Fear of catching diseases when they are
not around. This alternates with an opposite condition. At times he
is wholly incapable of appreciating danger. He will go into any sort
of danger without thought. Foolish boldness. We may sum up the
mental symptoms by saying he is extremely excitable.

Vertigo on closing the eyes. He cannot stand or walk with the eyes
shut, but it is not otherwise sufficiently related to locomotor ataxia to
be of use in that disease. Rocking, dizzy sensation after lying down
and closing the eyes, as if in a rocking chair. Vertigo and nausea in
the morning with stitch in pit of stomach. He opens his eyes and
asks: ‘‘Where am I? What do you want around me?”

The text is long with many vague symptoms. The mental symptoms
are the most important.

The whole nervous system is in a state of excitement. He is full
of fear ; startled by the slamming of a door, or the rattling of a news-
paper. Cannot sleep if there is the least noise. Things are done in
great haste. Nervous excitement.

The patient in general is aggravated by warmth and the warm
room, and ameliorated by cool open air. Yet he wants warm drinks
in the stomach. Longs for beer without a decided thirst. Eats with-
out hunger and drinks without thirst. Nervous fantastic things run
through the remedy showing its relation to neurasthenic and hysterical
patients. Eructations.

There is a sensitiveness of the skin. Crawling : creeping. He has
the spider-web sensation. Sensation of a fly crawling on the face-.
The perspiration is sweetish, and if he is in a room with others, while
perspiring, the flies will all light on him. Sweetish odor to the pex>



270


CALCAREA CARBONICA


spiration which attracts the flies.

Tobacco heart. The nervous symptoms of tobacco arc similar to
those of Caladium, and Caladiuin is useful in all sorts of nervous con-
ditions, the effect of tobacco and cigarette smoking. It has a number
of time turned the patient entirely away from his cigar, and removes
the overwhelming craving that prevents smokers breaking off their
habit. Headaches and mental states in smokers.

Itching is violent, especially about the genitals. It is useful in ex-
tremely nervous women who suffer from pruritus vulvae, keeping them
awake at night, attended with abnormal excitement.

Stools soft, yellow, pasty, mushy, as in typhoid. Stiches as from
knives in the rectum. There are many urinary symptoms. Urine
offensive, putrid, scanty.

Pulsating in tlie stomach after walking ; empty feeling, fluttering
in the stomach.

Violent sexual desire with relaxed penis. Impotency. Erections
when half asleep in the morning, ceasing when fully awake. When
the desire is most marked he has no ability. Automatic erections
without desire, strong and painful. During an embrace no emission.
It has urethral discharge and is useful in gonorrhoea. In vigorous per-
sons after the gonorrhmal discharge has been improperly suppressed,
sometimes impotency is the result of the suppression. Caladium has
cured as frequently as Thuja, Itching eruption on the scrotum.

The most striking symptom of the female sexual organs is the
pruritus ; she is compelled to scratch, and the torment reduces her in
body and mind.

Ibere are some strange sleep symptoms. Kept awake by crawling.
Sleeplessness from pruritus, especially in the genitals. Groans and
moans anxiously in sleep so that he wakens the neighbors. Restless
sleep ; anxious, vivid dreams which he remembers better than the
things of the day. Falls asleep and continues to dream of the same
subject where he left off.

CALCAREA CARBONICA

If you were about to produce a Calcarea subject to order you could
do so by feeding him lime or lime water until the digestive organ.s
were so debilitated that they could no longer digest lime ; and then the
tissues would be increasingly deprived of what they need, and give
us the lime subject, the “bone salt inanition*' case, for that is really
what it is. Infants that are fed lime water in the milk will in a little
while be lime subjects. They will soon get in such a state that they
oannot take the lime from their natural food, and the result will be
a Chkarca subject, such as we are about to describe. But the natural



CALCAREA CARBONICA


27


lime cascw^ arc those that have a natural sickness, are horn so, born
with an inability to digest the lime that is in their natural fotKl. and
they grow fat and flabby, and produce deficient l)oncs. There is a
greater proportion of cartilaginous material in the hones than lime,
and the bones bend, and take on diseases and destructive troubles.
Deficient teeth, or no teeth at all. The lx)nes simply stop growing,
and the patient goes into marasmus. What a foolish notion it is to
feed that infant lime water because he cannot digest lime! Is it not
just as reasonable as anything else in allopathy ? And yet our homoeo-
paths use allopathic medicines. They use the lowest potencies they
can get and it would seem strange if those substances cured any bet-
ter in the hands of the homceopath than in the hands of the allopath.
Now, it is astonishing that one single dose of the potency suitable to
meet the state of disorder will make that infant commence to digest
its food, and appropriate from its food the lime substance that it
needs in its bones, and wherever else it needs it. All at once the
teeth begin to grow ; the bones begin to grow, and the legs get stiff
enough for him to begin to walk, and they will hold him up. It is
astonishing what changes will take place under the various medicines
that are suitable for the disturbances of the hair, and the bones and
nails. The remedy must be sufficiently potentized to correspond
with the wrong. It certainly must not be crude because the
child is already stunted by the crude material. You will see within
a month or six weeks after giving; a solitary dose of the sufficiently
potentized remedy the nails that vwere corrugated and uneven and
spotted and irregular will form a liiargin and will grow out smooth.
You will see the ugly little crowns upon the teeth, distorted, and black
things as they come up out of the gums : but when they have been
under the suitable homoeopathic remedy you will see them fonn a mar-
gin line, and from there on the teeth look healthy, and from there on
the little body of the tooth is smooth and round : just as if that child
had had an impulse to grow^ better teeth. That same thing probably
takes place where the bones exist. The periosteum takes on healthy
work. This is the Calcarea stale when the patient needs lime and he
cannot get it l^ccausc he has been cloyed ; or, because he lias an indi-
gestion, he is unable to assimilate the lime that is in his food,
and it goes through him and does not aflPect him. So it is with
much of the sickness we have, an inability to extract from the food
and assimilate such things as the body needs. Would not anyone be
a simpleton to suppose that he had l^ecn the cause of the building of a
tooth ? You do not build mole hills out of our high potencies ; they
simply establish a state of order, so that digestion and assimilation go
on, order is established and the tissues are improved. Health comes,
beauty, a growth of hair, better skin, better nails.



272 CALCAREA CARBONICA

The Calcarea constitution is what we want to know. We do not
need to know that the individual has been poisoned by lime ; it is not
worth much to know it, because that is not the index to the remedy.
If indigestion of lime has been brought about by lime, it may need
one of ten other remedies to overcome that indigestion for lime. It
is not always Calcarea that covers the symptoms. The medicine that
covers the symptoms is the one that will change the economy from an
abnormal to a normal state, and digestion will become orderly, and we
will have growth and prosperity in the economy. The Calcarea case
is to be known by the symptoms, and not by the fact that the patient
has been poisoned by lime ; the chances are that those we have to
treat have never had any lime. Many of them have never been poi-
soned by lime but have been unable to assimilate lime from birth.

Calcarea is full of congestions, determination of blood to the head :
cold feet ; hot head ; congestion of the chest. Calcarea corresponds
in a very high degree to the chlorotic and anaemic, pale and waxy,
and in spite of this plump. It has both fat, flabby and pale patients,
and it has emaciated states, too. Muscles emaciate. Emaciated about
the neck ; emaciated about the neck and from there downwards.
Anaemic conditions ; pale, waxy, sickly ; pale lips ; pale ears ; pale fin-
gers ; pale and yellowish. Chlorosis is a word especially relating to the
anaemia of girls. A large number of remedies is indicated in those
conditions, but Calcarea produces the kind of anaemia known as chlo-
rosis. It produces most pernicious anjemia. Great relaxation in the
tissues everywhere ; relaxation of muscles ; relaxation of, veins ; relax-
ation of the walls of blood-vessels to such a great extent, especially
in the lower limbs and anus, that there are marked haemorrhoidal
manifestations or marked varicose veins in the legs. Distended veins,
burning in these varicose veins. Burning and smarting. Bleeding and
oozing. Inflammation and painful sw^elling of joints.

Another marked feature running through the remedy is its tendency
to attack glands, the glands of the neck, all of the glands of the body,
especially the lymphatic glands. The lymphatic glands in the abdo-
men become hard, inflamed and sore, like great nodules, like hickory
nuts ; tubercular. Calcarea is useful in tubercular formations. Cal-
careous degenerations, calcareous glands, induration of glands. It is
useful in indurations in ulcers, and the base of ulcers, and round
about ulcers, hence its wonderful use in palliating and restaining the
growth of malignant ulcers, as malignant ulcers always have an indu-
rated base. Old cancerous ulcers arc greatly restrained in their growth,
that is, the constitutional state is much improved, the patient himself
has more endurance and the ulcers will take on healing. In cancel ous
affections that would kill in sixteen months the patient will live five
years with Calcarea, if Calcarea is indicated* That is something, and



CALCAREA CARBONICA


273


many times that is all that can be expected in a cancerous growth.
In glandular affections where the glands round about are infiltrated
and hard, where there is much burning and stinging pain, where the
growth has invaded and appropriated the surrounding tissues so that
there are adhesions, matters are serious. There is malignancy in almost
all these cases. They differ entirely from glands that are loose from
the skin, glands that roll under the skin, and have no fibrous attach-
ment. Cancerous affections burn and sting. Cialcarea cures many
tumors, fatty, cystic, if the symptoms agree, so strongly is it 1 elated
to this building up process in glands. It builds up glands and bone.

Another thing running through the remedy is a pyxmic state, in
which there are abscesses in deep muscles. Abscesses deep in the
neck, deep in the thigh, in the abdomen. You will be astonished to
learn that Calcarea will take care of the abscess (when the symptoms
agree), and it will not break. I have many times seen an abscess dis-
appear when fluctuation was most positive. I have seen those ab-
scesses disappear when pus was shown to be present by the needle ; I
have not only seen the abscesses go aw^ay, but also the pyacmic state
which was prior to it. We have but a few medicines that will do that.
There is something singular about this. Why does Calcarea favor the
resorption of that fluid and encourage the part to become calcareous?
It is more than I am able to explain, but it does it — when the symptoms
agree. But Sulph, and SiL, when their symptoms agree hasten sup-
puration. But Calcarea has that |)eculiar action of concentrating and
contracting. One may be indicated in one case, the other may be indi-
cated in the other. There are times when SiL is indicated and the
abscess is in such a dangerous place than if SiL is given the result
that naturally belongs to the spreading of that abscess is dangerous ;
in such an instance the surgeon must be called to drain the abscess
in a safe manner, even when we know that if that abscess were located
in a safe place, it w^ould be far better for that patient to have the rem-
edy he needs. Sometimes the periosteum is injured by a hammer
striking it through muscles, injuring or contusing the periosteum.
Inflammation will set in, pus will form rapidly, and if Calcarea is indi-
cated by the constitution of the patient the surgeon’s knife is entirely
useless, and a most detrimental thing. But in thinking from the old
standpoint, the physician who knows nothing about Homooeopathy, and
the wonders of our homoeopathic remedies, would hold up his hands
in horror. “Why, if you produce a resorption of that pus into the
system you will have blood poisoning and death.” But under Calcarea
this resorption does take place in some manner, and the patient im-
proves every moment, he stops his sweating, his rigor has disappeared,
he becomes perfectly comfortable, his appetite improves, he is stronger
by the time it is over, and remains well. Judging from the old stand-

35



374


CALCAREA CARBONICA


point, we cannot conclude anything about the problems that will come
up under Homoeopathy. We can only judge from our standpoint, and
from what we know. And if you hear that somebody has tried this
and tried that without success, remember that somebody has only de-
monstrated his own failure. Homoeopathy is capable of demonstrating
itself in all iiitelligeni hands ; wherever the physician has intelligence
and makes use of the law and applies the remedy in accordance with
the symptoms he will sec the case turn out as described.

Another grand feature running through this remedy is its ability
to grow polypi. Those Avho need Calcarea will grow polypi in the
nose and cars, in the vagina, in the bladder, and here and there.
Cystic growths also and strange little papillomata.

Another strange thing that it does is to cause exostoses. 'Fhis state
of disorder comes from the irregularity in the distribution of the lime.
You would think that nature would try to distribute it around evenly
where it can do the most good. But when this bone salt inanition has
commenced the lime may be piled up hi one place, and almost absent
in another. One hone will be cartilaginous and another will ha\e
bony growths on it. Softening of the bone. Defectite formation of

bone. A keynote has grown out of this, vi/ : “Late learning to walk/'

because the legs are so weak, Jt is not late learning to walk, but it is
late walking. It know-s how^ to walk, hut it can’t walk. Natnim miir.
has brain troulde, in which the child is late Icarnitig to do things,
“Tardy development (h' bone tissues. Curvatures.” Muscles flabby.
Joint affections, like hip-joint disease, it is full of rheumatism. Rheu-
matic and gouty conditions of the joints.

The Calcarea paiiciit is a ehilly patient. Sensitive to the cold air.
Sensitive to the raw' winds. Sensitive to the coming of a storm ; sen-
sitive to the coming of cold weather, and when the weather clianges
from warm to cold it seems impossible for him to keep warm ; he wants
the body kept warm. The head is sometimes congested : and it is hot

to the touch ; but it often feels cold to him. His scalp feels avS if it

were cold. But the body is neatly always cold to the touch and he
feels cold, and he wants plenty of clothing. The feet arc cold. He
sweats in various places, sweats in spots. Sweats upon the forehead,
or upon the face, or upon the back of the neck, or the front of the
chest, or his feet. Sensitiveness to cold and weakness run through
the remedy. Weakness in the legs. Inability to endure. Worse from
every kind of exertion. Out of breath. Fat, flabby anaemic subjects,
sometimes they look plump, often flushed in the face, but they have
no endurance, and if such a patient undertakes a little exertion he
is down sick with a fever, or a headache. Calcarea is full of com-
plaints brought on from lifting, from exertion, from walking, from
walking ^enough to get into a sweat; and these come very suddenly,



CALCAREA CARBOMCA


because he cannot stop that perspiration by keeping still without get-
ting sick. If he gets into a sweat, and stops long enough to be com-
fortable, the prespiration will stop so suddenly that he will have a
chill, or he will have a headache. Weak, tired, anxious. Ditliculties
of breathing. Weak heart. Weak all over. No ability of the mus-
cles to sustain prolonged effort, and it is the same way with the mind.
No ability of the mind to sustain prolonged mental effort. Calcarea is
a tired patkmt. He is suffering from want of lime. He has been
unable to digest lime, and he goes into a stale with enlarged glands,
emaciation of the neck and of the limbs, while the fat and the glands
of the belly increase. Especially is this noticed in children, A big-
bellied child, with emaciated limbs and emaciated neck. Enlarged
glands. Pale, and flabby, and sickly. Those that rake on flesh wffihout
any increase of strength. They take on flesh and grow flabby. Remain
feeble. Those that get up from sickness take on flabby flesh, and in
a little wdiilc they become dropsical. The Calcarea patient can’t go
upstairs ; he is so lircd in his legs, raid so tired in the chest; he pants
and suffocates from going upstairs. He has every evidence of muscu-
lar weakness and flabbiness. Nutrition is impaired every wheie. This
is the kind of patient that used to be called scrofulous ; now W'e call
the condition psora : and Calcanea is one of our deepest anti-psorics.
It is a medicine that goes deep into the life, and takes a deep hold of
every part of the economy.

Now wc Avill take up the nw%tal symptoms. All the mind symptoms
represent Calcarea as in a state of great zerakness ; in ability to prolong
mental operation. Becomes very tired from mental work. Full of
anxiety. He is tired mentally, and tired physically, from mental work
and breaks down in a sweat, and becomes excited and irritable and
disturbed. Great disturbance of the emotions : complaints lasting for
days and weeks from excitement of the emotions ; from worrying,
from vexation, or a general emotional disturbance is prostrated. “In-
ability to apply himself.’' Inability to do good thinking for some
time after such excitement, disturbance or worry. It is very useful
in complaints from prolonged worry, from prolonged application to
business, from excitement. It is full of a peculiar kind of mental
feeling, differing quite considerably from most remedies ; he feels his
exhaustion of mind, and it seems to him that this weakness, and this
inability to do and to think connectedly, must be going towards insan-
ity, he broods over it, he is convinced that he is insane, or about
to become insane, that he is getting weak-minded, and he looks it, too,
because what he has in his mind is this : that he is becoming insane or
weak-minded, and he thinks people will obsene it. He thinks people
look at him suspiciously, and he looks at them suspiciously, and he
wonders why they do not say something to him about it. He thinks



276


CALtAkKA CARBdNICA


that he is going insane, and that other people are observing his state
ot mind, and he keeps that in his mind most of the time, fie thinks
of it day-times, and he gets greatly roused up over it ; he thinks of
it nights, and it keeps him awake. He lies awake late at night think-
ing. (Jalcarea leads to little ideas, that is, it compels the mind to lit-
tleness, to little ideas, or to dwell on little things, but his mind, as it
were, is forced to dwell upon things that he cannot put aside. When
the Calcarea patient begins to relate to his friends how he feels they
all naturally say to him, “Why don’t you put that aside ; that doesn’t
amount to anything,’’ but to him it is a big thing, and he cannot put
it aside ; all these little things combine to convince him that he is going
crazy. He cannot calculate, he cannot do deep thinking, he cannot
dwell upon deep things ; he may have been a philosopher, and he has
lost his ability to think out things in philosophy. He has lost his men-
tal depth. He forms conclusions out of his emotions rather than from
his intelligence. He forms conclusions about things as he wants them
to be. You would almost think he wants to grow crazy, he keeps
talking about it so much, fie is unable to accept any sort of argument,
and this grows worse and worse. He is unable to accept the assurance
of his physician, in whom he has always had confidence. It is no use,
it seems, to try to reason with him ; yet he is not so far gone but he
can reason about other things except his own mental state. He imag-
ines things ; and the things he imagines you will really wonder at his
dwelling upon them so, because they are such little things. And so
it is when he goes into insanity, or imbecility, or a general breakdown.
It is a passive stare, in which he sits and thinks about his little affairs,
and his little things that amount to nothing at all, and he sits and sits
— the text says, “Sits and breaks sticks, or bends pins all day long,
with his fingers.” Does little things, and in this way he keeps himself
busy, wears himself out more and more. Any amount of thinking be-
comes impossible. It is almost impossible for him to come to a con-
clusion, for he never figures it twice alike. He cannot add and sub-
tract even in the simplest forms. Now, he thinks about this matter
so much and thinks everybody else is watching him, until finally the
instant he closes his eyes he has visions. Just as soon as he gets down
quiet and thinks “Now I will go to sleep, I will get rid of all this,”
and he closes his eyes to sleep, then he must get them open as quick
as possible, he is in a state of excitement, for he sees horrid little
spooks ; he cannot keep his mind clear. He cannot go to sleep because
his thoughts trouble him, and he sees all sorts of things. There is no
congruity in his mind. We know that strong intelligence puts aside
such follies, but these are just the things that Calcarea patients dwell
upon. Talking to himself. He lies in bed, or sits, when he is alone,
and carries on a general conversation with every conceivable individ-



CALCAREA carbonica


^77


ual he has had to do with, on every conceivable subject ; and it mul-
tiplies and it grows, and he imagines it is all real. We sec how far
that is removed from the healthy mind, and yet he is not lit for the
insane asylum, with all of these strange things, for when he is roused
he does carry on a conversation, and he docs as ordinary people do.
When he is alone, when he has nobody to talk with him, he does
these strange things. He is controlled and dominated when he is in
company, to a great extent, and hence these things are not brought
•out. He carries out that same idea when he becomes delirious or in-
sane. Picks his fingers, and does all sorts of peculiar little things.
Sees visions and faces of persons when eyes are closed. ‘Imagines
some one is walking beside her.’’ In the proving of Sth that was
observed very strongly. It has been observed in Petroleum, and in
Calcarea. In a perfect state of health, with a strong, vigorous intelli-
gence, it is not likely to be felt, but in nervous people, and especially
in women, it is common. “Mental aberration with horrid visions.
Secs dogs crowding around him, fights them off.” Here is a sensa-
tion, occurring in nervous women, “Feels as if she would like to run
up and down, and scream.” Feels as if she could not help it, she must
scream. That occurs in persons overwrought, dreadfully excited from
a loss in the household by death. The mother loses her child, or hus-
band ; or a young girl loses her itutended. She is broken-hearted, and
greatly excited. It is a hysterical fixate. And yet I have seen the same
in men. I remember one. It came upon him from business cares.
He had that same feeling ; he would walk up and down the house,
he said he felt as if he must fly or jump out of a window, or do some-
thing. That is analogous to the mental state found in hysteria, or a
great state of nervous excitement. “She thinks and talks of nothing
but murder, fire, rats, etc.” That is that same idea of talking about
little things and foolish things. Things that are not interesting to
anybody. And yet I have seen these things in patients and I would
ask them why they did it. It is generally said, “I tried a good while
to stop it, and when I could not I just kept right on at it, for it seemed
to do me good.” “She thinks and talks of murder, fire, rats, etc.”
Your patient may talk about other foolish things, but it is only to il-
lustrate the idea that she sits and talks about foolish things, and can-
not control herself ; thinking, thinking, or expressing it, talking, talk-
ing, talking. Violent screaming spells. And then the Calcarea patient
will refuse to talk, will say nothing. She may talk to herself when
alone, but will decline to enter into conversation, and will sit perfect-
ly silent. A Calcarea patient sometimes takes an aversion to work,
and quits work. He will quit a most thriving business, and go home
and do nothing, after being fatigued in carrying on the business until
it reaches a most thriving condition. He says business is not good for



CALCAUEA CARBOMCA


278

him. He is tired of business, and when he goes to his business again
it seems as if it would drive him crazy. He does not want to see it,
he does not want to know anything about it. Of course, you can read-
ily see that it is not so much in the Calcarea patient that he is driven to
weakness and fatigue from distress in business, although it has that,
but that which I am speaking about is that he has overworked until he
has given out, and right in the midst of his success he quits his busi-
ness and goes home, and leaves all — it looks just as if he were lazy.

If you look at him you come to the conclusion that he is lazy. Yet

it is an insanity ; not the laziness that belongs to tramp nature, though
that also might be cured many limes. He has been industrious, and all at
once takes a turn. A great change occurs in the mind, and he takes
on symptoms. It is not such persons as were born that way, born lazy,
never would work ; but those that become lazy. It is like the symptom
in a pious upright man, whose walk and conversation has been upright,
but all at once he turns and commences to swear. Of course we know
that individual is insane. On the other hand, we have patients that
have been only ordinarily imUistrious that develop an insanity for work,
and it seems they have ability m that insane industry to work almost
night and day ; they are up early and late. It is a sick state. vSo w^hen

wc see in the Repertory “Industry’’ ii docs not mean an ordinarily

industrious state but one that is exaggerated into a symptom. He has
become so industrious that he has a mania for work.

“Whimpering. Low-spirited and melancholy.” It is a strange
thing to sec a bright little girl of 8 or 9 years old taking on sadness,
melancholy, and commencing to talk about die future world, and the
angels, and that she wants to die and go dicrc, and she is sad, and
wants to read the Bible all day. I'hat is a strange thing ; and yet
Calcarea has cured that. Ars, has cured that state, and also Lack-
esis. They arc a little inclined to be precocious, and they have at-
tended the Sunday-school, and they have taken too seriously the
things they have learned. Children sad and unhappy, and old people
who take on a loathing of life, become weary of life. That is a good
deal like Aimnn. In going over Aimirn I explained that, and dwelt
upon it, that the highest love is the love of life ; and when an individual
ceases to love his own life, and is weary of it, and loathes it, and
wants to die, he is on the border line of insanity. In fact, that is an
insanity of the will. You have only to look with an observing eye to
see that one may be insane in the affections, or insane in the intelli-
gence. One may remain quite intact, and the other one be destroyed.
We find in Calcarea both equally disturbed. One patient may be in-
sane in his voluntary system, so that all of his loves are perverted ;
he has no affection that is like what it used to be, like it was when he
was well. Antipathy to his family or some member of his family.



CALCAREA CARBOXICA


279

Or, he may have the affection fairly intact, but no intelligence, and
does all sorts of strange things.

He is full ol fear. Weary of life : hopelessness, anxiety. The world
is black. 'Tear that something sad or terrible will happen. Fears that
she will lose her reason, or that people will observe her confusion of
mind.*’ “Fear of death ; of consumption ; of misfortune : of being
alone.” Fear abounds, especially when the voluntary system is dis-
turbed. She is startled at every noise. He can’t sleep so that the
body rests or the mind rests. He is disturbed in his sleep with hor-
rible dreams, Ilis sleep is a restless one “Great anxiety and oppres-
sion. Restlessness and palpitation. Despairing : hopeless.” These
symptoms have to be coupled and connected with that leucophlegmatic,
pale, flabby, sickly individual. “Child cross and fretful. Easily fright-
ened.” Many complaints after exertion of the mind. Many complaints
after excitement, chagrin or fright.

He is so weak in his circulation, so much disturbed in the heart, it
[talpitates from e\ery excitement. He is out of breath from every
physical exertion ; and these take part so much in the circulation of
l)lood in the body, have so much to do with circulation of blood in
the brain, liave so much to do with the intellect, with the sensorium,
that we see at once vertigo on almost all occasions, intermingled with
all sorts of symptoms. Fear, anxiety, and vertigo. If his emotions
stir him up he becomes dizzy. Frc^ tipstairs the l)lood mounts

to the head, and he Ijccoincs dizjljy. ConfiKsion of mind and vertigo
from mental exertion. If he heco^ies shocked, or has had news, or
has any mental excitement or chagrin, this \eriigo will come out. Con-
fusion of mind, determination of blood to the licad, cold extremities,
covered with sweat, with \ertigo. “Vertigo, when climbing into high
places tluit is the effort of going up The blood rushes to the head
and he becomes dizzy. “On going upstairs or up a hill. On suddenly
rising, or turning the head, even when at rest.”

One of the most striking symptoms of thv head of the Calcarca
patient is the sweat, the sweat of the head upon ihe slightest exertion.
He will sweat on the face when he sweats nowhere else, and liis liead
is covered with cold swx*at when he is comfortable in other places
about the body. The same thing is true about tlic feet. When his feet
become very cold they will sw^eat. When they arc warm they will
sweat. You would naturally think that a person going into a cold
room would stop his sweating, but sometimes the Calcarea patient
will break out in a sweat, upon the head, and upon the feet, in a cold
room. He sweats upon the forehead, so that every draft of air makes
him chilly, and this brings on headache. Coldness of the whole scalp,
so he has to wrap up the head. Yet during congestions, the head is
hot. So it has at times great heat in the head. The Calcarea head-



zSo


CAlXJAREA CARBONICA


aches are stupefying, they are benumbing ; they bring on confusion of
mind. The Calcarea patient has a catarrh in the nose, with more or
less discharge ; at his best he has considerable discharge. But he goes
into a cold place, the discharge is slacked up, and he gets a head-
ache. Headache over the eyes. Congestion of the head ; back of the
head. ‘Tearing headache above the eyes down to nose,” is a strong
symptom of Calcarea. It seems sometimes as if a great wedge were
in there. This is relieved by very hot applications. It is relieved in
the dark ; it is aggravated in the daylight. He must go into dark
room and lie down for relief. Sometimes this headache is ameliorated
by lying down in the dark. This headache continues to grow worse
during the day, until in the evening it becomes so severe that it is at-
tended with nausea and vomiting. It is one of the forms of con-
stitutional headache, is a headache that sometimes occurs once in
two weeks. Headache every seven days, or headache once in two
weeks. Periodical headaches. Sick-headache, the old-fashioned Am-
ican sick-headache. There is commonly a periodicity belonging to it,
of seven to fourteen days, but again, it comes on whenever he is ex-
posed, by riding in the wind, for he is a very chilly patient, if he be-
comes really chilled or very cold, he gets a headache, a sick-headache.
Then, again, it has pain in the left side of the head. One-sided head-
ache. Headache worse from noise, from talking, but ameliorated in
the evening, from lying in the dark It has headache in the temples,
and this headache seems to draw through to the root of the nose. The
headaches from the supraorbital region draw through to the nose.
Headaches in the temples seem to produce a feeling of tightness, a
feeling of great tension in the forehead. Headaches worse from mo-
tion, from walking, from talking. Most of the Calcarea headaches,
as soon as they become severe, arc attended with pulsation. The pul-
sation is so strong that the patient Is not satisfied by merely saying it is
a pulsation, he describes it as hammering. Most of the pains are press-
ive, or tearing. “C/oncussive headaches.” Stitching, pulsating pains
in the head, as if it would split. Headaches worse from walking, and
from a jar. Sometimes he feels a coldness in the head, it seems as if
the cold head is numb, cold as if made of wood. He sometimes feels
this numbness, and describes it as if he had a cap, sometimes as if there
were a helmet, on the head. Now, all of these sensations are difficult
to describe, but sometimes they are one and the same thing. All the
headaches of Calcarea, are more or less congestive. It is a peculiar
feature of Calcarea, that the more marked the congestion of internal
parts, the colder the surface becomes. With chest troubles, and stom-
ach troubles, and bowel troubles, the feet and hands become like ice,
and covered with sweat; and he lies in bed sometimes with a fever
in the rest of his body, and the scalp covered with cold sweat. That



CALCAREA CARBONICA


281


is Strange. You cannot account for that by any process of reasoning
in pathology, and when a thing is so strange that it cannot be accounted
for, it becomes very valuable as descriptive of the remedy, and is
one that cannot generally be left out when prescribing for a patient.
That is almost a general state, it is so marked. It has burning in the
vertex, and this is often present coldness of the forehead, or the
whole head may feel cold except a burning spot on the vertex. Cal-
carea will again have cold head and icy cold feet when walking in cold
air or in very cold weather ; but as soon as the feet get warm, they go
to the other extreme, and burn so that he puts them out of bed. This
has often led inexperienced prescribers to (prescribe Sulpha, because
that is a keynote of Sulph. All keynote prescribers give Sulph, when-
ever the patient puts the feet out of bed, but a number of remedies
have burning feet, hot feet, so we are not limited to Sulph, Calcarea
has affections of the bones of the skull, the outer part of the head.
Slow formation of bone. The fontanelles remain open a long time.
It has hydrocephalic conditions, effusion in the membranes, and the
bones do not grow and keep pace with the growth of the head, and
hence the sutures commence to separate and the head grows wider
and larger all the time with hydrocephalus In hydrocephalic children
this sweating head is a common feature. The child lies at night upon
the pillow, and the sweat pours from the head and wets the pillow
all around; especially sweating at i night. In persons suffering from
softening of the brain, the pillow Is wet all around the head. Children
going through difficult dentition have dreadful times in their dreams,
they screech out in the night, and the pillow is wet all around their
head. Old plethoric patients, broken down constitutions, fat, flabby,
lymphatic patients, with enlarged glands, with sweating of the head,
cold sweating of the head. The hair falls out, not in the regular way
such as occurs in old age, but in patches here and there. You see a
bald spot on the side of the head, or the back of the head ; a tuft of hair
has come out, or in two or three places. Then it has eruptions upon
the head and face ,* eczema that we find in children and infants. “Thick
scabs on the head, with yellow pus.” Offensive eruptions.

The eye comes in for a share of troubles, and Calcarea is one of the
best friends the oculist has. if he knows how to use it. It is not
especially suitable for every inflammation, but in those fat, flabby con-
stitutions, where every cold settles in the eyes, and produces an inflam-
mation, and this goes on for a few days, and ulceration begins, then
study Calcarea. Vesicles are formed and break and spread into an
ulcer. From exposure of the feet in water, from riding in the wind,
from cold, damp weather he gets eye troubles. Ulceration of the cor-
nea. In all of the complaints of the eyes and of the head the pho-
tophobia is so marked that the Calcarea subject when he is at all dis-

36



CALCAREA GARBOmCA


282

turbed cannot even stand ordinary light, and to be out in the sunlight
is extremely painful, and many times inflammations are started from
merely going into a bright sunlight, from steady looking, and from
straining the eyes. All kinds of exertions bring on headaches and
eye troubles. Tension, because one muscle is weak. There is a dis-
turbance of accommodation. Worse from every exertion of the eyes ;
you see that is like its generals, that is, aggravated from exertion. He
<:annot endure any prolonged exertion ; you see that is just as true of
his parts as the whole. You know that reading, writing and look-
ing . at one thing all are marked exertions. With Calcarea, the part
itself is worse from exertion, and the whole body is worse from ex-
ertion. Calcarea has cured cataract. Calcarea has other disturbances
of the eyes, in connection with head troubles, in connection with fevers,
and when he is out of sorts from great exertion ; he so easily gets into
a fidgety state, confusion of mind that is almost a delirium, and on
closing the eyes he sees the most horrible visions, spectres, ghosts.
Long before any disturbance can be observed in the tissues, or in the
retina, or any disturbance of the eye by looking into it with the ophthal-
moscope he will complain of seeing smoke, or steam in the air before
his field of vision, as if looking through a veil, as if looking through a
cloud, all meaning the same thing. '‘Dim vision.*' His vision is weak.
The muscles are weak. He suffers from dim vision, which is going
on gradually to blindness as he grows increasingly weak. All of his
eye symptoms, and his headaches, and his nervous symptoms are ag-
gravated from reading, from writing, from looking steadily at one
thing. He is very much exhausted after such an exertion and will
have tearing pains over the eyes, behind the eyes in the head. That
is a peculiar kind of a headache, such as he is in the habit of having.
It may be in any part of head. Called eye-strain. It is a wonder-
ful remedy for eye-strain {Onosmodium). Calcarea has cured many
cases of opacity of the cornea {Bar, iod). In an old case a cure can
never be promised. It is one of the results of disease, and we never
know when we are going to remove the results of disease, because the
intelligent homoeopath never prescribes for the results of disease. He
prescribes for the patient. An opacity itself, when it is present, is not
a symptom, but a result of disease. Often when a patient is pre-
scribed for on his general symptoms, such a state of opacity of the
cornea will, after a while, begin to pass away. The patient grows
better, feels better himself. His symptoms commence to subside, and
after the symptoms have subsided pathological conditions will com-
mence to subside. Do not be discouraged in prescribing if the patho-
logical conditions do not go away; but if all the symptoms of the
patient have gone away, and the patient is eating well, and is sleeping
well, and doing well, do not feel that it is impossible for that opacity



CALCAREA CARBONICA


ja83

of the cornea to go away, for sometimes it will. I have known pa-
tients to come back, years later, even after I had given them up as
cured, as their symptoms had all disappeared, and I was foolish
enough to say to the patient, “Well. I do not suppose this condition
will ever go away, but you are all well, there is nothing to prescribe
on, there is not much use of your taking any more medicine,'' but in
six months from that time the patient would come back to me and say
“Doctor, do you suppose the treatment you gave me had anything
to do with this trouble going away? It has nearly all disappeared."
I only tell you this to give you an idea how long it takes to restore
order, for nature herself to replace the bad tissue and put healthy tissue
in that same place, to restore an organ. It takes time, and it is best that
we should not be surprised. It may be that the medicine has done all it
can do. Here is another thing I have seen : even when there were no
symptoms left, and after waiting a considerable time and there were no
symptoms, I have seen another dose of the same medicine that was
given on the last symptoms give the patient a great lift, and pathologi-
cal conditions commence to go way. So Calcarea is a great friend to
the oculist, and every physician ought to be just as good a prescriber
as the oculist can be, for he prescribes for the patient. So must the
oculist. In prescribing I am in doubt whether there can be any such
thing as a specialty, because the ^homoeopathic physician prescribes for
the patient. He prescribes for the patient, whether he has eye disease,
or ear disease, or throat disease,! or lung disease, or liver disease, etc.

In the ear we have a great deid of trouble. It produces thick yellow
discharge from the ears. Gold, chilly weather brings on ear trouble ;
quite likely from becoming cold or chilled, from an exposure, or from
a sudden change of cold damp weather he has additional complaints in
the ears. While he is at his best the idea holds good here as in other
catarrhal conditions, there is copious discharge. But from exposure
and cold this slacks up a little, and when it does there is a little inflam-
mation, and like enough throbbing, and headache. That occurs every
time from exposure. Whether the catarrh is in the nose, the eyes, or
the ears, there will be headache. The Calcarea patient is so easily dis-
turbed from cold weather and exposure, he is so sensitive to the cold,
that it is next to impossible for him to dress and protect himself. He
is flabby and soft, easily disturbed, sensitive to his surroundings* If it
is an ear trouble, he may have difficult hearing, abscess of the middle
ear, catarrh of the Eustachin tubes, etc., but all of these bring on
headaches ; and around about the ear the glands are all affected.

The catarrh of the nose is extremely troublesome. Old lingering
stubborn catarrhs, with thick yellow discharge ; great crusts from the
nose. In the morning he blows out enormous blackish, bloody chunks.
He breathes part of the night through the nose, and then his nose clogs



284


CALCAREA CARBONICA


up SO that he breathes through the mouth. It has cured a great many
times polypi of the nose. The homoeopathic physician, trusting so much
to his symptoms, knows so well the remedy alter studying the case, that
he very likely will prescribe for the patient on the symptoms alone.
He says: This patient needs Calcarea, there is no doubt about it. He
prescribes for him and sends him away. After three or four weeks
the patient comes back with a gelatinous looking tough thing on a
.handkerchief, and says; “Doctor, look there at what came out of my
nose. Do you suppose your medicine had anything to do with that
Perhaps you did not know he had polypus, it does not make any differ-
ence, your prescription cannot be any different if he has polypi in the
nose, and you do not know it is there ; you cannot by any process of tor-
sion remove it before you prescribe, so you will have to leave that
torsion to those that do not know about Homoeopathy ; and hence the
examination is not so important as it is to those who prescribe for the
polypi, and forget about the patient. Affections of the bones of the
nose. That is, the catarrhs go on so long, and they are so deep-seated,
that the bones of the nose and the cartilage of the nose are infiltrated,
any they break down. Then operators cut out bones, remove cartilage,
and perform operations too numerous to mention ; and every one must
have the same operation ; but in order for him to be cured, he must even
after that go to an homoeopathic physician. He should first be cured
and then if there is anything to be removed let him be operated on.

The face is sickly, cold, covered with sweat. Sweats on the slightest
exertion, and sometimes it sweats in the night, on the forehead. “Cold
sweat on the face. Face pale and cachetic,"’ such as we see in advanced
cases of cancer, and consumption. Face sallow, pale, sickly, dropsical.
Eruptions on the face. Eruptions about the lips ; and the lips are chap-
ped and the mouth is raw. The lips are cracked and bleeding. Pain-
ful swelling on the parotid glands ; painful swelling of the sub-lingual
and sub-maxillary glands. The glands all take part in the Calcarea
troubles.

Calcarea is a medicine for chronic sore throats. The throat appear-
ance itself is not always sufficient to prescribe on, but the complaints in
the throat are those that come on in persons taking cold so frequently
that the patient has not time to get over one before he goes into another,
and this engrafts upon him a chronic sore throat. It may in the begin-
ning be a Bell, throat, which is quite likely, but before he gets over it
he has taken another cold. Remember that this is a part of the Cal-
carea patient, that he takes cold so easily ; he takes cold from every
draft, from very exposure, and from damp weather. When getting
over a Bell, sore throat — about the time he thinks he is over it he takes
a new cold. Perhaps it has been relieved two or three times with Bell,
and then it settles down into a chronic state, and there are little red



CALCAIUeA CAft&OMICA


285

patches, perhaps little tdcers, in the throat, this extends all over. It
extends to the roof of the mouth, with a sore tongue, and a constant
dry, choking feeling in the pha^nx, covering the tonsils and extending
up into the posterior nares, filling with thick, yellow mucus. Chronic
inflammation. The uvula may be puffed ; swollen. “Parts swollen, red,
tumid,” but it patches. The throat very painful on swallowing; dry,
choking feeling.

The stomach in Calcarea is slow in its action. “Food taken into the
stomach remains.” It does not digest. It turns sour. “Sour vomit-
ing.” Milk sours. Milk disagrees ; the digestion is also slow, feeble.
He has a feeling of tumefaction and fullness ; enlargement after eat-
ing ; and everything sours in the stomach ; everything disorders the
stomach. Weak digestion. The Calcarea patient has a very strong
longing for eggs. Little children crave eggs ; at every meal they will
eat eggs, and eggs will digest better than anything else. It is very
seldom that little children naturally long for eggs ; children with cold
feet, emaciated extremities, large heads, enlarged abdomen ; stomach
distended like an inverted saucer, rounded out; bloated abdomen, and
slender extremities ; cold and sensitive to cold ; pale skin ; pale, waxy
surface. Then, there is complete loss of appetite ; no desire for any
kind of food. If any desire at alL it is for eggs. Aversion to meat ;
aversion to warm food. This with enlarged glands, with goitre.
Flatulency. Sour vomiting ; sour ifiarrhoea ; that is, it has a pungent,
sour odor, especially in cliildren. In infants living on milk, the milk
passes in an undigested form; the stool is so sour that it is pungent.
It excoriates the parts, and keep# the nates raw in infants where the
diaper comes in contact with the parts. There are times when the
abdomen is emaciated ; the gases go out and the abdomen sometimes
Becomes flabby ; but most of the time it is distended with flatulence.
When it is flabby it can be observed that there are nodules in the abdo-
men, The lymphatic glands are hard, and sometimes can be felt
through the emaciated abdomen. There is a tubercular tendency, and
tabes mesenterica is one of the natural endings of the lime constitution,
with this we get the glandular affections of the bowels. Tubercular
deposits in the mesenteric glands. Diarrhoea comes on, sour, watery
diarrhoea ; gradual emaciation, especially of the extremities. Every
cold brings on more indigestion, and more sour vomiting. Diarrhoea
that can’t be stopped, because every time he gets a cold it renews the
•diarrhoea. When it is an acute attacl^ Dulc. often relieves it, but
when it has recurred several times Dulc. can no longer relieve it, and
Calcarea then becomes one of the remedies.

Again, it is one of the most useful medicines in old, lingering, stub-
born cases of constipation. When there is only a moderate diarrhoea
the stool is white ; and when this constipation is present, the stool is



286


CAIX^ARSA CAKBONICA


white, or like chalk. In infants taking milk you can account for the
white or pale stool, because of the milk ; but when the patient does
not live on milk, and lives on ordinary substances, the stool becomes
bileless and is very light colored ; is yellow or white ; and in the
constipation, often the stool is very light colored and hard,

Calcarea has a kind of indigestion, a fermentation that favors the
formation of worms, so that Calcarea babies arc sometimes wormy.
Pass worms in the stool, and vomit worms. Calcarea so corrects this
indigestion, when the symptoms agree, that worms no longer hatch
out. The symptoms disappear, and we really wonder what becomes
of the worms. The idea with the homoeopathic physician is not to give
vermifuges, but to so correct the digestion that worms will not thrive ;
and it is true that worms will not thrive in the healthy stomach and
intestines. Whether they leave by expulsion or whether they are de-
stroyed, or what becomes of them, I do not know. To remove them
by physicking them out, and by vermifuges, only makes a bad matter
worse, because it increases the indigestion, it increases the turmoil.
So it is with all worms in the stomach and rectum ; all those worms
will come if they are favored with just exactly the right kind of fluids
to hatch out in. They come, and they grow. I suppose at least
twenty-five times in the last twenty years have I known Calcarea to
bring away tape worm, and in most instances I did not know it was
present ; but 1 simply prescribed for the patient. I was not aware of
its existence. It is so with many remedies, but this more than others.

The Calcarea patient is weak sexually, with general relaxation and
weakness. Sometimes an inordinate carving, sometimes an overwhelm-
ing desire keeps him awake at nights. But weak ; weak in this way,
that any indulgence is followed by weak back, sweating, weakness in
general, so that he is compelled to abstain because of the sufferings.

The woman is affected in a similar way. You need not be surprised,
when you hear all of the constitutional weakness, that it is a com-
mon thing for Calcarea women to be sterile. So tired, so relaxed ;
wholly unfit for reproduction. And the same as in the male, she suf-
fers from lassitude, swelling, wakefulness, and weakness in general
after every coition. The parts feel relaxed. The uterus drags down.
Sensation as if parts would be forced out. State of general weakness
and general relaxation of the sexual organs of both male and female.
Calcarea has a tendency to grow warts and polypoid growths, pedunc-
ulated growths, that bleed easily, that are soft and spongy.

The woman flows too much at the menstrual period ; too long, and,
of course, this naturally brings her around too soon. Often every
three weeks, lasting a week, with a copious flow. Menstrual period
too soon, lasting too long, and profuse, Calcarea is not always indi-
cated ; not unless all of the symptoms go together to make up the



CALCAREA CARBONICA 187

Calcared patient. Sametimes it may occur to your mind to say, that
with five or six key-notes, certainly you would give Calcarea ; but sup-
pose you did have five or six key-notes of Calcarea, and the patient
should be a Puls, patient, would you expect to cure her with Calcarea ?
Suppose the patient always avoided warm things and much clothing,
and wanted the cold open air, and still had a dozen key-notes, you
would find every time that Calcarea would fail. Unless you combine
the particulars with the things that are general, and the generals with
the particulars, unless the remedy fits the patient from wihin out,
generally and particularly, a cure need not be expected. That is why
I say, do not prescribe on key-notes, but upon the symptoms of the
patient.

This great state of relaxation which we always have in every Cal-
carea patient is also manifested in leucorrheea. Copious, thick, con-
stant leucorrhoea, discharging day and night. Leucorrhoea that is
acrid, keeping up an itching, and smarting, and burning. “Leucorrhoea
thick and yellow,’' from one menstrual period to another, and some-
times it intermingles with the menstrual flow. “Vaginal polypi. Burn-
ing soreness in the genitals” from leucorrhoea. “Itching and rawness”
from leucorrhoea. Haemorrhage of the uterus from over-lifting ,* from
excitement ; from shocks ; from anything that greatly disturbs ,* front
fear, from any great emotion, or from straining the muscles. Such
are the conditions of relaxation smdl weakness. Inability to strain the
muscles, or to exert himself mentallj^ or physically.

The complaints of pregnancy generally those of great relaxation
and weakness. Threatened abortion. After delivery, weakness and
prostration ; sweating. Weakness from nursing.

The Calcarea voice is that of painless hoarseness. The vocal cords
are tired, and cannot endure strain ; almost a paralytic weakness.
Sometimes a copious flow of mucus from the larynx. Much irritation
in the larynx, but weakness. Not that burning and rawness that we
find in Bell, and Phos.. but painless hoarseness. In Phos. it is painful,
in Bell, it is very painful. He cannot speak without pain. But in
Calcarea he wonders why he has so much trouble in the larynx, be-
cause he has no feeling in it. This goes on from bad to worse, and
with the tubercular tendency, look out for tubercular laryngitis. Given
early it may keep off such a tubercular tendency. It has cured tuber-
cular laryngitis. Much rattling of mucus ; rattling breathing ; coarse
rattling ; that is, much mucus in the trachea, in the larynx, in the
bronchial tubes, in the chest. Great dyspnoea. The dyspnoea comes on
front going up stairs, from walking against the wind. Anything that
has any exertion in it will bring on the dyspnoea. We find this in
asthma, weak ’heart, weak chest and in threatening phthisis. That
state of the lungs you will know very often by the kind of breathing ;



288


CALCAREA CARBONICA


because all that are going into phthisis, are tired and weak. He is
too tired to make any effort at breathing, and he tires very easily,
so that he has difficulty in going up stairs, climbing a hill, walking
against the wind.

The chest troubles furnishes one of our best fields for Calcarea. We
having spitting of blood ; prolonged cough ; copious expectoration of
thick yellow mucus, or even pus ; ulceration, or abscess. Tickling
cough. We have, in threatening chest trouble, the beginning ema-
ciation, the pallor, the sensitiveness to cold^ changes, and to the cold
air, and to wet weather and to winds. He takes colds, and they all
settle in the chest ; gradual emaciation in the limbs ; always so tired.
It corresponds to just such constitutional weakness as precedes, or is
present in the first stages of phthisis. It stops the patient taking
cold, which is the very beginning of it. The patient will begin to feel
better after taking Calcarea, and it improves his general state, and
it will even encyst tubercular deposits. It turns them from a caseous
into a calcareous form, and cysts have been found in the chest long
afterwards. Patients have lived a long time and improved, and gone
into a general state of health, when quite well advanced with tuber-
cular deposits. Of course, when any person is well into a tubercular
condition, it may be expected that he will go. Do not believe or
think favorably of cures for consumption. Every little while we have
some one coming out with something or Other that cures consumption,
a new cure. Every one who knows much about the real nature of
phthisical conditions, cannot have much confidence in such things, and
I certainly lose respect for an individual who has a consumption cure.
He must either be crazy or something worse. Generally he is after
the money that may be in it. Hardly anyone who knows anything
about it can conscientiously present a consumption cure to the world.
To prevent those things is what we want to do, and this is the great
sphere of Calcarea. The expectoration is sweetish very often, like
Phos. and Stannum, White, yellow, thick. We might go over all the
general symptoms here, the soreness, the tenderness, the kind of pains,
the lassitude, and a great many symptoms of that sort, they are too
numerous to mention, but they are not descriptive, for the reason that
after you get these pains and study them carefully, you are no better
off. You must study the constitution of Calcarea, the nature of Cal-
carea, its character.

There are spine symptoms ; plenty of them. Weak ; all degrees of
weakness. The Calcarea patient is so weak in the back that he slides
down in the chair while sitting ; cannot sit upright in his chair. Rests
on the back of his head. The back of his chair and the back of his
head come in contact. A weak spine, a sensitive spine, and the glands
of the neck arc swollen. Again, a marked condition of the spine is



CALCAREA ARSENICOSA


289


where the lime element is deficient, and we soon get deformity ; cur-
vature. It may be surprising to you to hear that Calcarea is a great
help, and has sometimes cured that without any brace or support
whatever, when taken early. You take infants manifesting a weakness
of the spine, let them lie flat on their back in bed, put them on the
indicated remedy — it is sometimes Calcarea— and in a little while tliat
knuckling will cease, and the little one will sit up straight. Such wonder-
ful things occur under the use of Calcarea, when the symptoms agree.

In the extremities we have all the rheumatic conditions that it is
possible to describe. Gouty affections of the joints, with enlarged
joints ; gouty conditions, especially of the small joints, of the toe and
finger. Rlieumatic complaints of the joints from every exposure,
from every change of the weather to cold, especially if it is cold and
damp. The feet are always cold, or cold and damp, except at night
in bed after piling clothing upon the feet more than any other part
of the body, then the feet begin to get warm, and then they often go
to the other extreme and burn ; and so they burn at night in bed. But
the feet are so cold that the patient has to put more clothing on the
feet than the body will endure. Cold, damp feet. Late walking.
Clumsiness ; awkwardness ; stiffness. Rheumatic conditions. Stiff
ness belongs to Calcarea all over. Stiff on beginning to move ; stiff
at night on rising from a seat. Stiffness in all joints on beginning
to move ; and if it turns cold or there is a cold rain, the Calcarea
patient always suffers ; suffers front coldness, stiffness, rheumatism ;
has rheumatism in every cold change in the weather.

The sleep is greatly disturbed. Late going to sleep, sometimes not
till 2, 3 or 4 o’clock. Full of ideas ; when closing the eyes horrible
visions. Grinding the teeth. A child in sleep, chews and swallows
and grinds the teeth. Sleeplessness a good part of the night. Cold
feet at night in bed.


CALCAREA ARSENICOSA

As this remedy is a chemical union of two w^ell proved deep acting
remedies it would most likely appear at once to the mind as a long
acting remedy, well suited to many chronic diseases. In fact, it is deep
acting enough to cure some of our most stubborn cases of epilepsy.
It has made its record in this class of cases. Great mental and physical
weakness. Tremulous and paralytic weakness. Sense of lightness of
the body as if floating in the air. Fainting spells. Epileptic convul-
sions where the aura is felt in the region of the heart. Marked lassi-
tude. Pain and sinking in the region of the heart followed by spasms.
Weakness, or vertigo, or momentary blindness. Convulsions with
valvular disease of the heart. Evening and night aggravations are

37



290


CALCAREA ARSENICOSA


common. The patient is sensitive to cold — a lack of vital heat. Aver-
sion to the open air. General physical anxiety. Many symptoms from
ascending stairs. It has many burning pains like Arsenicum. It has
cured many cases of albuminuria in the early stages. It is a useful
remedy in chlorosis. Dropsy is a strong feature, as it is in Arsenicum
and Calcarea. Complaints are u>orse from slight exertion; faintness,
palpitation, dyspnoea and weakness come on. The left side of the body
is most affected.

The following mental symptoms are often a guide to its use. Anger
and complaints from, anger and vexation. Anxiety in evening, at
night, in bed, and during a chill, and on waking. Apprehensiveness ;
about the future, about his salvation, at night. Inclined to criticise.
Desire for company. Confusion of mind on waking. Inability to con-
centrate the mind. Delusions. Sees dead people, phantoms, images.
Illusions of fancy. Sees visions of fire, worse at night, and on closing
the eyes. Despair of recovery, of salvation. Discontented. Excita-
ble. Fear of death at night, of solitude, of insanity. Becomes indif-
ferent to pleasure. Insanity. Irresolution. Irritable. Lamenting.
Loathing of life ; weary of life. Weakness of meomry. Mischievous.
Obstinate. Sensitive — easily offended. Extreme restlessness, espe-
cially at night, tossing about in bed ; during heat ; and during menses.
Extreme sadness in evening, and during fever. Easily startled. Tim-
idity. Weeping, at night.

There is violent rush blood to the head with vertigo and general
spasm. It has caused and cured many chronic headaches. A very
peculiar feature of the pain in the head is that it moves from the side
lain on and goes to the side not Iain on, and continues to change about
by changing position. Not all of its headaches do this way. It has
many peculiar little symptoms. Pain in the head ameliorated during
mental exertion, but much worse afterwards. CEdema of face, lids,
temples and ears. Eczema of face and scalp. Coldness of head. Pale,
sickly, bloated face. Fluent coryza. Sneezing. Loss of all desire
for food, but thirst for cold water. Eructations and vomiting after
food. Stomach easily disordered, especially after milk and cold food.
Pain in stomach after drinking cold water. Load in stomach after
eating. Pain in groin after drinking wine. Waterbrash and sour
stomach. Anxiety and burning in stomach. Stitching pain in
stomach. Gnawing pain in stomach. Distension of stomach and ab-
domen. It has cured gastric ulcer.

Much soreness in region of kidneys. Soanty, burning urine, con-
tains albumin and casts. Pain in the spermatic cords, after exertion,
and after drinking wine.

Excoriating yellow Icucorrhoea. Offensive, bloody Icucorrhoea. For
offensive Icucorrhoea it compares with Kali ars. and Kali phos. It



CALCARfiA FLUORlCA


^91


is useful in cancer of the uterus when there is burning and acrid of-
fensive bloody flow. It restores the menstrual flow, when the symp-
toms agree. Copious menstrual flow, or scanty flow, too freequent and
protracted. Pain at the approach of the menses. Metorrhagia. Burn-
ing pain in uterus and vagina.

Drawing as with a thread from larynx backward. Dryness in
larynx. Loses the voice before an epileptic convulsion. Suffocation
and palpitation at night in bed. Burning heat in chest and pain in
region of heart before an epileptic convulsion. Orgasm of blood in re-
gion of heart. Throbbing in the blood vessels, especially in head and
back ; it drives him out of bed. Pain in heart with palpitation. An-
gina pectoris. Grasping pain in heart. Palpitation, with heat of face.
Palpitation from least excitement or exertion ; worse evening and
night. Every fourth beat of pulse omits. Rapid pulse.

Violent headache between scapulae and sacrum. Pain in back ex-
tends to arms. Pain in chest extends to arms. (Edema of the hands
and feet. Weakness of lower limbs.

The sleep is disturbed by violent dreams. Palpitation and suffoca-
tion, Latter part of night wakeful, and much sweat.

If this wonderful remedy is studied with the mind on Arsenicum
and Calcarea, a broader knowledge will be gained. It needs further
proving in potencies.


CALCAREi^ FLUORlCA

This chemical union of lime atid fluoric acid gives us a remedy with
a new nature and properties. However conversant one may be with
either or both of these elements, he could not predict the curative powers
held in this double remedy. I refer to its ability to cure indurated
infiltrations of glands, cellular tissues and bony formations. A nodule
in the course of a tendon, and exostosis, a stony hard gland, bony infil-
tration in the periosteum, rice bodies in cartilages have been cured by
this remedy wonderful to tell, when there was a paucity of symptoms.
It will cure of course when symptoms agree, but it needs proving in
order that individualization may be oftener possible.

A recurrent fibroid in the hallow of the knee was removed once by
the knife, but returned, and grew to the size of a fist. The leg was
drawn upto forty-five degrees, and the knee became immovable. This
wonderful remedy was prescribed on the symptoms of the case and
the hardness of the tumor. The tumor gradually dwindled, the limb
became normal and as good as ever ; this patient has since born a
healthy child — is still perfectly free from the trouble. It is now ten
years since she was cured.

The patient is sensitive to cold, to drafts, to changes in the weather.



2g2 CA'LCAREA PH66PH0RICA

' . ! ! !

and to damp weather. The symptoms are ameliorated by heat and by
warm applications. The symptoms are worse during rest.

This is a useful remedy in gout, with copious pale urine and diar-
rhoea. The patient is sad and miserable. This remedy has cured a fluc-
tuating tumor on the cranium of infants known as Cephalaematoma.
Blur before the eyes after exerting the vision. Cataract. It cures
ulceration of the cornea if the edges are hard ; also hard, small spots
and conjunctivitis. It has cured adenoids and thick, yellowish green
discharge from the nose. Offensive catarrh of long standing. Scanty
enamel of the teeth.

Pain, ulceration and granulation of the throat, worse from cold, and
better from warm drinks. Pain worse at night. Large indurated
tonsils will be cured after Baryta carh, has failed.

Pain in the liver at night, worse lying on the painful side, better
from motion. Cutting pains in the liver, better w^alking.

Diarrhoea in gouty subjects. Itching of anus and haemorrhoids,
painful and hard bleeding. Fissure of anus. Constipation.

Copious watery urine. Strong smelling urine, Urine causes smart-
ing when passing.

Indurated testes. Nodular testes. Varicose veins of the vulva. Uter-
ine fibroid.

Hard nodules in the mammae.

Dryness and tickling in the larynx. Desire to clear the vocal cords.
Hoarseness after reading aloud. Hacking cough after eating, and
in cold air, from tickling in the larynx. Spasmodic cough.

It cured an exostosis at the angle of the eighth rib.

It cured a lumbago, worse during rest, and better from heat, after
Rhus had failed. Pain in back, extending to the sacrum.

Indurated cervical glands.

Vivid dreams, and unrefreshing sleep. Jumps out of bed in a dream.

It is similar to Silica in suppuration.

CALCAREA PHOSPHORICA

During the growing period many children need this remedy. If
the head bones are slov/ in forming, or do not keep pace with the
growth of the child, this remedy is often called for. Where the child
is losing flesh, slow learning to do things, slow learning to walk, or
the legs are not strong enough to support the body, or it is behind in
mental development, this remedy is one to be examined (like Baryta
carb,, Borax, Ph, ac,, Nat, m,, Calc,), Flabby, shrunken, emaciated
children. Non-union of fractured bones, swollen condyles, are symp-
toms accepted by all text-books as strong symptoms of this remedy.
It has cured polypi of nose, rectum and uterus. It has cured enlarged



CALCAREA PHOSPHORICA


m


glands of the neck, groin and abdomen. Rachitis, with fontanelles
open, and diarrhoea, in emaciating children. Rheumatic pains in the
joints and limbs, worse from cold weather, or in every cold change
of weather. Pale, waxy skin ; anaemia. Growing pains nights in fast
growing children. Phthisical subjects. Diseases of bone. Easy ulceration.
Itching, burning, eruptions. Sensitive to cold. Sensitive to a jar.

The pains are shooting, drawing, aching, burning, pressing. It
has a shaking chill that spreads downward. Dry heat in evening.
Copious night sweats.

The complaints of this remedy arc generally better during rest,
come on during motion, and are greatly aggravated by exertion. Stiff-
ness on moving in bed. General bodily weakness. Numbness of
many parts. Trembling. Fear brings on complaints ; palpitation.

Electric shock, so severe tliat the patient could not remain standing.
Epileptic spasms. Convulsions of children ; but the remedy must be
given when not in the convulsion to secure the best elFect. The mind
shows above all a tired and weak brain. Feeble memory, and inability
TO sustain mental effort. Suffering in the head from mental exertion.
Dreads mental exertion. Sluggish mind. Imbecility. Feeble minded
children. The child grasps the head with the hands and screams.
Thinking of complaints causes them to appear or increase. Extremely
fretful. Ailments from bad news, grief, unrequited affections, vex-
ation. She seeks solitude to commune with her thoughts and to shun
the exertion of society. Discontented with his own surroundings and
goes from place to place.

Vertigo in cold wind, from mental and physical exertion, when
rising from sitting, when walking in cold air.

The head symptoms arc still more striking. The dull headaches of
school jchildren— always come home from schqoLjyith headac^^ The
head is sensitive to a jar, to pressure, to the hat ; wants it washed in
cold water ; wants to be quite and alone. Tbro})bing and burning in
the head. Rheum atic headache, seerns to be in the, whole head^ in cold
weath er, being^ouTtr worse from walking, wor?e from

exertion, worse at njg^. It has many times prevented hydrocephalus.
FrontaI""*hea3aches, and forehead and eyes worse from pressure of the
hat. Perspiration of scalp ; forehead cold to touch. Tearing pain in
bones of head. Cold occiput. Eczema of scalp. Ulcers of scalp.

In children when coming out of brain congestion if there is stra-
bimus, diarrhoea, and losing flesh. Glittering fiery circles before the
eyes. Pain in eyes from reading in artificial light. Eyes blurred.
Soreness in eyeballs. Pains worse thinking about them. Ulceration
of cornea. Eyes feel hot. Easy lachrymation.

Rheumatic tearing in the ears when the weather changes to cold.
Ears very cold. Aching deep in car. Enlarged, painful parotid glands.



CALCAREA PHOSPHORICA


194

Eruption about the cars. Noises in ears after stool. Dry catarrh
of the middle ear.

This remedy is useful in chronic catarrh of the nose when the gen-
eral symptoms agree Polypi in the nose. Icy cold nose. Fluent
coryza in a cold room, stopped in a warm room. Epistaxis.

Pale, waxy face, dirty skin. Rheumatic faceache in every cold
spell of weather. Cold perspiration on face. Neuralgia of face at
night, in cold air ; worse from exertion, ameliorated by heat ; sensitive
to pressure {Mag. p. is better by heat and pressure). Dark blotches
and pustules on the face. Swollen upper lip, painlul, hard and burning.

Teeth late coming in or decay soon. Teeth sensitive to touch,
pressure, or when masticating. Complaints of teething chiidren. Jboul
taste in mouth. Bitter taste in the morning. Tongue coated in the
morning. Tongue swollen, numb and stiff.

Growing children suffer from chronic throat troubles. Enlarged
tonsils, cold settles in the tonsils Alumen). Much

mucus in throat. Dryness in throat at night.

Craves salt bacon and smoked meats. Strong appetite. Infants
want to nurse all the time. Easily disordered stomach. Cold drinks,
ice cream, fruits disorder the stomach, causing pain or diarrheea. Pain
in stomach after food. Eructations and nausea. Soreness in the
stomach. Sour eructations, nausea and vomiting. Burning in the
stomach. Nausea from scraping the larynx or throat. Vomiting in
infants, in children, and in pregnancy. Violent pain in the stomach ;
diarrhoea aggravated by the least food. Gnawing, empty feeling in
the stomach.

After becoming chilled, pain in the liver, soreness, aggravated after
eating and by motion ; wants to keep quiet. Stitching pains in the
liver from deep breathing or sudden motion. Pulsating in the liver.
Cutting pains in the spleen. Sinking sensation in abdomen. Burning
in the abdomen, rising up into the chest. Pain in the abdomen ameli-
orated by passing flatus. Colic, followed by diarrhoea. Ulceration of
naval in infants. Motion in abdomen from flatus as from something
alive. Abdomen large and flabby.

Tabes mesenterica with diarrhoea.

Green mucus and hot watery stools ; white, mushy stools, copious,
offensive flatus. Diarrhoea from fruit, ice cream, cold drinks or vex-
ation. Diarrhoea in the morning in phthisical patients. Very offensive
stools.

Constipation, with difficult, hard stool. Bleeding from the rectum
and anus during stool. Protruding piles so painful that he is kept
in bed for weeks ; the pain is intense standing, walking, from touch ;
ameliorated by heat ; with general sufferings, every sudden cold change
of the weather. Piles itch and bum and discharge yellow pus. Itch-



CALCAREA PHOSPHORICA


*95


ing of the anus in the evening. Stitching pain in the anus, with or
without haemorrhoids. Boils and abscesses about and near the anus,
discharging blood and pus. Fistula in tuberculous subjects. Fissured
anus, with burning stitching pains.

Weak and irritable bladder. Catarrh of the bladder. Frequent
urging to urinate. Copious flow of urine. Pain in the neck of the
bladder before and after urinating. Aching in the empty blad-
der. This remedy has cured diabetes mellitus. Violent pain in the
region of the kidneys.

Sexual desire increased. Painful erections. It has cured many
cases of chronic gonorrhoea when the discharge is glecty and there are
sharp pains in the urethra and prostate gland. Gonorrhoeal rheumatism
when of long standing and worse in every cold change in the weather
(Med.),

The woman has no better friend than Calc. p. Her sufferings at
puberty when she is slow in maturing are often met by iliis medicine.
Front t aking cold a t first men strual period often comes a . painfu.1, men-
st ruation that lasts during me nst rual Jife, unless cured by this remedy.
Violent cramping in uterus and groin several hours before the flow
starts, relieved after the flow has been fully established. The pains
make her cry out. Intense sexual excitement (like Platina, Graiiola,
Origanum). Weak, sinking sensation in the pelvis. Prolapsus of
uterus during stool and micturition. Uterine polypus. Labor-like
pains at the beginning of menstruatios. Copious menstrual flo w, with
very dark clots and membranes. Leucorrhoea like white of egg day
and night. Throbbing, titillating in external genitalia. Burning in the
vagina and uterus during menses. Child refuses mother’s milk. It
may be given to a woman who has brought forth one or two children
that may be considered Calc. p. babies. The next child will be stronger
and have a better constitution.

It is often observed that this patient scrapes mucus from the larynx
before he can talk or sing. Hoarseness, dry hacking cough day and
night. Tubercular laryngitis.

Suffocation on slight exertion, or on ascending stairs. In thin, pale ,
sickly people with dry, hacking cough w orse in cold, damp weather in
rhciTmatic constitutions. Yellow expectoration.

Sfildsing pains in the chest. Emaciation of the chest. Difficult ex-
pectoration. I is a very useful remedy in phthisis and bloodspitting.
Much sweat on the chest. Rattling in the chest with difficult expecto-
ration, like Caust. Soreness of the cheiit to touch. Palpitation, with
trembling of the limbs.

The back pains are worse in cold, stormy weather, attended with
stiffness, and worse in the morning. The back is sensitive to draft.
Pain in the back from lifting or straining. Curvature of spine. Tear-



296


CALCAREA SULPHURICA


ing, shooting ; tenderness and aching in the spine. Soreness in sacro-
iliac symphysis. Pain in lumbar region and sacrum at the menstrual
period.

Rheumatic pains in the limbs in cold weather, worse from motion,
better during rest and from heat. Trembling in all the limbs. Stij9[ness
after resting, and in the morning. Aching in the bones, like growing
pains. Gouty fingers and toes that become painful in cold weather.
Ulcerative pains in the roots of the nails.

The most severe tearing, shooting pains are in the lower limbs. The
probable reason for this is that the lower limbs are always cold to the
knees, and the cold parts arc always the suffering parts in this remedy.
Sharf) pains in tendons of the lower limbs. Intense aching boring
pains in the knees, and long bones. Pains in the tibia with soreness.
Drawing pain in the til)ia. Cramp in the calves. Ulcers on the legs ;
weak, chronic ; no granulation. Rheumatism of the ankles. Caries
of the os calcis. Stringing and shooting in the toes.

Sleepy daytime and evening. Sleepless after going to bed until
midnight or later. Very sleepy in tlie morning. Vivid dreams. Chil-
dren cry out in sleep. Frightful dreams cause him to awaken with a
start.


CALCAREA SULPHURICA

Many years ago Schiiessler introduced this remedy, and it has been
used extensively upon the bio-chemic theory. Many excellent cures
have been made in this way that most of us are able to recognize as
homoeopathic cures, though it is a sort of crude homoeopathy. By
studying these cures many symptoms may be obtained not supposed
to be of importance by these reporters. These symptoms often furnish
a basis for further consideration or further clinical observation. Many
fragmentary provings have also been made, furnishing many of the
symptoms recorded in this article. The author frequently made use
of Schiiessler’s 12th potency, later the 30th and 200th ; at present much
higher potencies. From all of these many valuable symptoms have
been obtained. Some of these symptoms have come out upon the sick
while under the influence of this remedy, and have been since confirm-
ed, so that the following symptoms must now furnish the best basis
that we have to prescribe on. The best consideration that this remedy
has ever received will be found in Boericke and Dewey's Materia Mcdica
of the Tissue Remedies.

The tendency to the formation of abscesses in the body in any place
is a strong feature of this remedy, and is quite similar to Pyrogen, An
abscess that has ruptured and is slow to heal with a continuous dis-
charge of yellow pus, is a strong indication for this remedy. The



CALCAREA SULPHURICA


297


patient desires the open air ; is sensitive to drafts ; takes cold easily.
It is very useful in the management of malignant growths after ulcer*
ation has set in. It is under such circumstances an excellent palliative.
It is a deep acting constitutional remedy, and anti-psoric, and if given
early enough will prevent a malignant growth terminating in its usual
way. It is useful in the affections of bone, caries of bone. While the
patient is cold in general, he often requires to be uncovered because
of particular conditions. For instance, in croup and in headaches he
feels the heat too much, but the pains of the body are often relieved by
heat. He is sensitive to both cold and heat. After becoming cold,
complaints come on. Tendency to take cold in drafts, or on slight
occasions. He is sensitive to cold, wet weather. It cures the underly-
ing basis of epilepsy, epileptiform and hysteric convulsions. The pa-
tient is aggravated from exertion. His muscles are flabby ; he is dis-
posed to haemorrhages. When well selected remedies act only a short
time, and the symptoms agree, this remedy is one that should be
thought of along with Sulphur, Psorinum and Tuberculinum, Com-
plaints from straining muscles and tendons, from overlifting, etc.
Lame back from such causes. Throughout the chest and head, and
sometimes extending into the limbs, there is a violent orgasm of blood,
flushes of heat and pulsations. Onanism and sexual excesses reduce
the economy to a state whereby they feel their constitutional disturb-
ance, and this is one of the remedies that elevate the body to a better
state of order in such conditions,, ?Pain in the bones day and night.
Pulsating all over the body. Staitding aggravates many complaints,
but especially the joints. Swollen and indurated glands. Twitching
of the muscles all over the body. Many of the symptoms arc aggra-
vated on waking. Many symptoms are aggravated walking and espe-
cially walking fast and becoming heated. Aggravation from being over-
heated. Wants to uncover. Aggravation from the warmth of the bed.
A warm room aggravates. Warm wraps aggravate. Great bodily
weakness. Thick yellow discharges from the mucous membranes. Thick
bloody discharges. Purulent exudations in serous sacs. Bloody pus
from abscesses, ulcers and mucous membranes. Prolonged suppura-
tion, Wants to keep still.

Now, it will be found that the above general symptoms prevail
throughout the particulars in many instances, and it will appear that
the bodily state is more or less penetrated with these symptoms.

The patient is absent minded ; irritable ; easily angered. He becomes
weak after anger and vexation. Aversion to answering questions. He
is easily made anxious, especially in the evening in bed, during the
night and when lying. Anxiety with fear during fever. Anxiety about
th6 future. Anxious about his heart and his health in general. His
anxiety is ameliorated in the open ait. He has anxiety about his ssal-

38



298


CALCAREA SULPHURICA


vation. He has anxiety in the morning on waking. Many changeable
moods and capriciousness. Aversion to company. Confusion of mind
in the morning on waking and again in the evening. This is also
ameliorated in the open air. Confusion of mind from mental exertion.
Contrary and contradictory moods. He has many little delusions,
whims and strange fancies. Frightful images in the night when trying
to sleep. Has visions. Great despair of recovery during heat. Craves
stimulants to overcome his tremulous weakness. He is discontented
at all times. Great sluggishness of mind. Continuously in a state of
apprehension. Fear of death. Fear that some evil will befall him.
Fear of insanity and fear of misfortune, and this comes on at night.
Forgetful. Full of hatred of people who do not agree with him.
Always in a hurry. Hysterical. Impatient. Feeble minded, even to
imbecility. Indifferent as to his surroundings. Irresolution. Extreme
irritability in the evening. Irritable after coition. Lamenting because
he is not duly appreciated. Loathing of life. Malicious. This remedy
is especially useful in broken-down constitutions from drunk-
enness. Weakness of mind, of memory and of body. Some of the
mental states that are aggravated in the morning with sadness, on
waking become mirthful in the evening, even to hilarity. He stumbles
in speaking and misplaces words. Changeable moods. Morose. Ob-
stinate. Easily offended or insulted. Prostration of mind. Quarrel-
some. Restlessness. Mental depression in the morning, with mirthful-
ness in the evening. Sadness during perspiration. Dullness of the
senses. Sits and meditates over imaginary misfortune. Does not
want to be talked to. Easily startled. Stupefaction. Suspicion. Sus-
picious. Indisposed to talk. Tormenting, persistent thought. While
busily engaged thinking, his thoughts vanish. Becomes timid# bashful
and apprehensive, and in his conversation is extremely wearisome.
Weeping during perspiration. An aversion to mental and physical
work. Real indolence.

Vertigo is a common feature with this patient. In the morning on
getting up, or again in the evening ; but this is ameliorated in the open
air. Vertigo with nausea. Vertigo with a tendency to fall. Epileptic
vertigo. Vertigo on moving the head quickly, on stooping and on
walking fast. Coldness of the head, especially of the vertex. Hyper-
semia of the brain, aggravated in the evening and at night. Aggravated
after stimulants ; especially on coughing ; during menses ; with sup-
pressed menses, and in a warm room. Ameliorated in the open
air. The head feels constricted, especially the forehead and occiput.
Much dandruff forms upon the scalp. Eruptions upon the scalp
with thick yellow crusts. Eczema, also pimples. Coldness in
the head, especially forehead. Formication of the scalp. The
hair falls Out. Heat of the head morning and evening. Flushes



CALCAREA SULPHURICA


m


of heat. Heat in the forehead and in the vertex. Heaviness in
the forehead and occiput. Itching, burning, of the scalp. Many
inveterate chronic headaches and periodical headaches have been
cured with this remedy. Headaches in the morning on waking. Head-
ache coming on in the afternoon, lasting through the evening and at
night, ameliorated in the open air. Catarrhal headaches. Pain in the
head on coughing, after eating or disordering the stomach. Headache
from becoming heated, and the pain is aggravated from jarring. Com-
pels him to lie down. Aggravated looking upwards. Headaches in
women before and during menses. The headaches are aggravated
from mental exertion, from moving the head, from motion, from noise.
Periodical sick headaches with nausea and vomiting. Pressure amelior-
ates. Pulsating with nearly all the headaches. Reading aggravates.
Rising from lying causes pulsating and increases the pain. Shaking
the head aggravates. He wakes up out of sleep with the headache.
The headache is aggravated from spirituous liquors, from standing,
from stooping, from the heat of the sun, from talking, from walking,
from washing. Aggravated in cold weather. The headache comes
on from becoming cold, and yet the headache when on is ameliorated
in the cool air. Many of the headaches are in the forehead in the
morning on waking, or come on iti the evening after dinner. These are
aggravated on stooping and walking. Severe pain above the eyes. It
has occipital headaches ; pain in the vertex and sides of the head. Many
of these headaches are pressing and are aggravated from mental exer-
tion, Stitching pains on coughii^i Stitching pains in the forehead
and temples. Tearing pain throughout the head. Tearing pain around
the head, ameliorated from lying. Pulsation in the head and temples.
Sensation as if he had his hat on at 4 p. M.

There are numerous eye symptoms, catarrhal and psoric. The lids
stick together in the morning. This remedy has partly cured several
cases of cataract. It has produced and cured double vision. Chronic
inflammation of the eyes, with thick yellow pus. Ulceration of the
cornea. Itching and burning, aggravated in the morning. Pressing
pain in the eyes in the evening. Soreness to touch. Photophobia.
Redness of the eyes, like raw beef. Redness of the canthi. Fissures
of the canthi. Twitching of the lids. Dim, often foggy, vision. Flick-
ering before the eyes

Discharge from the ears, offensive and purulent. Cases dating back
to scarlet fever, with thick and bloody pus, soreness and enlargement
of the right parotid. Eruptions behind the ear. Itching in the ear
and behind the car. Buzzing, humming, ringing, roaring and singing
in the ear* Aching pain in the ear. Stitching, pulsating, stopped sen-
sation. It cures catarrh of the Eustachian tube when the symptoms
agree. Swollen parotid gland and swelling behind the ear.



300


CALCAREA SULPHURICA


Most inveterate catarrh of the nose has been cured by this remedy.
Coryza, with discharge, ameliorated in the open air. Dry coryza. The
discharge from the nose is bloody, excoriating, offensive, purulent,
thick, yellow and greenish yellow. Clinically it has cured the one-sided
cases best. Crusts form in the nose. Crusts form upon the margins
of the nose. A sensation of great dryness in the nose. Epistaxis in
the morning. Offensive odors from the nose. Itching in the nose and
of the end of the nose. Obstruction of the nose, so that it is impossible
for him to breathe through it. Keeps the mouth open. Caries of the
bones of the nose. Loss of smell. Sneezing, ameliorated in the open
air. Swelling of the nose.

Cracked lips and flushes of heat of the face. Pale, sickly, face.
Many eruptions upon the face, boils, eczema, herpes ; itching ; pimples ;
pustules ; scurfy eruptions ; vesicles. Itching of the face. Pain in the
face from becoming cold. Cutting pain. Cold sweat on the face.
Swelling of the glands. Swollen sub-maxillary.

Dryness of the mouth and tongue. Hot mouth. Inflammation of the
mucous membranes of the mouth. Inflammation of the tongue, with
swelling. Much mucus in the mouth in the morning. Offensive odor
in the mouth. Rawness and burning inside of the lips. Burning of the
tongue. Flow of saliva from the mouth. The speech is difficult on ac-
count of the stiffness and swelling of the tongue. Swelling of the
mucous membranes of the mouth. Gums swollen. Taste bad,
bitter, metallic, sour, sweetish. Ulceration of the mouth, tongue and
throat. Vesicles in the mouth. Thick yellow coating at the base of the
tongue.

Choking is a characteristic of this remedy as it is of Hepar. Redness
and swelling of the throat. Dryness and inflammation of the mucous
membranes of the throat and of the tonsils. A sensation of a plug in
the throat. Mucus in the throat. Mucus drawn from the posterior
nares, thick and yellow. Pain in the throat on swallowing. Pressing
pain. Rawness in the throat. Soreness of the throat. Stitching pains
in the throat. Scraping mucus from the throat. Swallowing is diffi-
cult. Swelling of the tonsils, with suppuration. — Ulcers in the throat.
The external throat is swollen ; the glands are enlarged and painful.

Increased appetite. Ravenous appetite. Or, appetite entirely want-
ing. Aversion to coffee, to meat and to milk. Desires, fruit, cold
drinks, acids, salt things ; sweets. Thirst extreme. Distension after
eating.

Emptiness in the stomach. Eructations after eating. Empty eructa-
tions, Eructations acrid, bitter, foul, sour. Eructations of food.
Waterbrash. Fullness of the stomach after eating. Heartburn. Heav-
iness in the stomach, as of a load. Subject to indigestion on the
slightest provocation. Nausea in the evening. Nausea with headache



CALCAREA SULPHURICA


301


and with vertigo. Pain the stomach in the evening. Pain in the
stomach after eating. Burning pain, cramping, cutting, gnawing,
pressing, after eating. Tenderness to pressure. Stitching pains. Throb-
bing in the stomach. Sensation of a stone in the stomach. Vomiting
at night after eating, with headache. Bile, bitter, blood, food, mucus ;
sour vomiting.

In the abdomen there is great coldness, with distension, after eating.
Fullness after eating. Heaviness. Many of the pains in the abdomen
are like colic and come on at night. Burning pain. Cramping, cutting,
dragging, drawing. Soreness. Stitching. There is pain in the liver,
pressing, soreness, stitching. There is pulsating, rumbling and disten-
sion of the abdomen.

Inveterate constipation. Difficult stool. Insufficient stool. Fistula
in ano. Painless abscesses of the anus. Like Sulphur^ it has cured
morning diarrhoea, but has also an evening diarrhoea, and is very use-
ful for diarrhoea in children. Aggravated after eating ever so little. It
has a painless diarrhoea. In the rectum there is formication and intense
itching. Haemorrhage from the rectum and anus. External piles. In-
activity of the rectum. Involuntary stool. Moisture about anus, caus-
ing smarting and itching. Pain during and after stool. Burning pain
during stool. Pressing, stitching and soreness in the anus. Tenesmus
at stool. Prolapsus of the rectum. Ineffectual urging to stool. The
stool is bloody, dry, hard, knotting, large ; lienteric, soft, white, yellow
and purulent.

This is a valuable remedy for catarrh of the bladder, with copious
yellow pus. It has cured chronic hiflammation of the kidney. It is a
valuable remedy in urethral discharges, when the discharge is yellow,
bloody, and often gleety. Burning in the urethra during urination. It
is an excellent remedy for impotency, when other symptoms agree.
In women who have had several abortions, when the symptoms agree.
Excoriation of the labia. Inflammation of the labia, with suppuration.
Itching of the genitals from leucorrhoea. Thick, yellow, bloody, leucor-
rhoea. Itching of the labias during menses. Itching after menses.
Itching high up in the vagina. The leucorrhoea is excoriating, bloody,
burning, copious, thick and yellow. Leucorrhoea before and after
menses. Absent menses. The menstrual flow is copious, dark, too fre-
quent or too late. Irregular. Sometimes pale, protracted, scanty, sup-
pressed. Delayed first menses in girls. Haemorrhage from the uterus.
Pain in the uterus during menses. Dragging down in the pelvis during
menses, as if there were prolapsus. Burning in the genitals. Pro-
lapsus of the uterus. Swelling of the labia. Fibroid tumors of the
uterus. Ulceration of the genitals and os uteri.

Catarrh of the larynx and trachea. Dryness and inflammation.
Copious expectoration of mticus, which is yellow and sometimes bloody.



302


CALCAREA SULPHXJRICA


Rawness and soreness. Patients threatening to go into phthisis.
Much scraping of the larynx. Obstinate hoarseness. It has now long
been a valued croup remedy. Croupy cough, where there is much
choking, when an experienced practitioner might well think of Hepa ^ —
but it will be remembered that in Hepar^ uncovering a hand or throw-
ing off the covers from the chest will increase the croupy tendency
and aggravate the croupy cough, and that the patient in Hepar is very
sensitive to a draft and to the air. In this patient uncovering is grate-
ful. The patient throws off the covers and wants the air and seems to
breathe better and croups less. It may seem strange that such a great
difference should come between the sulphide and the sulphate of lime.

Respiration is difficult in the evening and night ; aggravated on
ascending, lying and walking. The respiration is rattling, is short.
There is suffocation, and even wheezing. This is an excellent asthmatic
remedy, when the symptoms agree.

The cough is aggravated in the evening and night. Ameliorated in
the cool air — unlike Hepar, Asthmatic cough, croupy in morning on
waking and after siesta. Dry cough at night. Hacking cough. Hoarse
cough. Loose, rattling cough. The cough racks the whole body.
Short dry cough. Spasmodic cough and cough coming in paroxysms.
The expectoration is copious in the morning. The expectoration is
bloody, greenish, purulent, thick, viscid and yellow.

Abscess in the axilla. Anxiety in the region of the heart. Catarrh of
the trachea and bronchial tubes. Hasmorrhage from the lungs. Badly
treated pneumonia or results of pneumonia. Hepatization of the lungs.
Oppression of the chest. Rawness in the chest. Soreness in the chest
on coughing, or inspiration. Burning pain in the chest. Cutting in
the chest. Palpitation at night ; anxious ; aggravated ascending, in
persons going into phthisis. Suppuration in the chest. Weakness in
the chest. Itching, burning of the external chest. Sensation of cold-
ness in the back. This has been a valuable remedy in the treatment of
curvature of the spine in the lumbar region, making it difficult for him
to sit up.

The symptoms of the extremities make a gouty constitution. Gouty
joints. Awkward, clumsy fingers, from gouty finger joints. Coldness
of the extremities, of the hands, legs and feet. Cramps in the calves.
Eruptions, pimples and vesicles. Heat of the hands. Heaviness of the
lower limbs. This remedy has been of great service in many casc^
of hip joint disease. Itching of the skin of the extremities. Often
itching and burning. Burning of hands and feet ; burning palms and
soles. Numbness of bands and also of the lower limbs and of the feet.
Pain in the extremities during chill ; rheumatic pain. Pain in the
joints, gouty and rheumatic. Pain in upper limbs at night. Pain in
the shoulder, elbow, wrist and fingers. Pain in the lower limbs ; sci-



CAMPHOR


303


atica; rheumatic pains. Pains in the hip, thigh and knee. Burning
pains in the feet. Pains in the lower limbs ; drawing, siiching and
tearing. Paralysis of the limbs, upper and lower. Perspiration of the
hands and feet. The perspiration of the feet is cold and offensive.
Stiffness of the arms. Stretching out the lower limbs aggravates the
pain. Rheumatic swelling of the knees and legs. (Edematous swelling,
of the feet and legs. Tingling in the fingers, as if asleep. Trembling
of the hands and of the lower limbs. Ulcers on the legs. Burning,
itching scales. Varicose veins. Weakness of the upper limbs. Weak-
ness of the lower limbs, knees, legs and ankles.

Sleep restless. Dreams anxious and frightful. Sleepiness in the
evening. Sleepless before midnight and after 3 p. M. Sleepless from
thoughts. This remedy has cured many cases of chronic intermittent
fever with evening chill. Chill beginning in the feet. Shaking chill.
Fever evening and night. Evening fever intermingled with chilliness
followed by fever, but no sweat follows fever, with pain in lower limbs,
better by walking. Flushes of heat. Hectic fever. Perspiration at
night. Cold. Slight exertion brings on the perspiration. The perspi-
ration is profuse and sour.

There are numerous skin symptoms, as might be expected from a
study of Sulphur and Calcarea. Burning and itching. Desquamation.
Cracked skin. The skin is cracked after washing in winter, espe-
cially of the hands, like we find in salt rheum. Liver spots ; pale skin
and yellow skin, even to marked c^scs of jaundice. Dryness of the
skin. The eruptions are boils, burning moist or dry eczema, herpetic
pustules, scabby scaly Nxsicles. Itching, burning eruptions. This remedy
cures psoriasis when ihe symptoms agree. Rash. Suppurating erup-
tions. Tubercles. Urticaria. Excoriation and intertrigo. Formica-
tion. Itching in bed ; itching, burning ; itching, crawling. Itching,
ameliorated by scratching. Sensitive skin. Ulceration of the skin.
Wounds heal slowly. Unhealthy skin. Ulcers bleed, burn ; arc scaly,
crusty and deep.

Ulcers discharge bloody pus, offensive, thick, yellow. Fistulous ul-
cers. Foul indolent ulcers. Indurated ulcers. Pulsating ulcers. Pain-
ful ulcers. Warts.


CAMPHOR

The camphor bottle is a great mischief in the bouse, as camphor
antidotes most of our remedies. Camphor in potentized form will
cure many complaints. It is suitable in some acute complaints at-
tended with nervous excitement, even to frenzy, with spasms and con-
vulsions and finally exhaustion, 'fhe Camphor state is one of con-
vulsions or coldness. In the most acute period of the Camphor ex-



204


CAMPHOR


citement, the excitability and frenzy of the patient are extreme, or
he goes into the other extreme, in which the irritability is lost and
there is loss of sensation, unconsciousness and coldness. The two
extremes may be seen in one patient, one earlier and the other later.
He may go from the extreme of mental excitement and violence to
one of prostration and exhaustion, in which the body is blue and cold
and yet must Be uncovered. In the mental state there is anxiety and
extreme fear ; fear of persons, of strange spheres, of the dark ; the
dark is filled with imaginary spectres ; he dare not get out of bed in
the dark ; everything that moves is a spectre and the inanimate things
of the room become alive and terrify him. Frenzy. Coupled with this,
there is kidney and urinary trouble, like that of Cantharis, and because
of this similarity, the two remedies are both complementary and anti-
dotal to each other. If a woman has poisoned herself with Cantharis,
and there is present the frenzy and excitement, Camphor will act as an
antidote.

The details of the mental symptoms are worthy of much considera-
tion. The patient goes into a state not unlike imbecility, and the ap-
pearance is as if it had come on slowly. The mind and memory arc
gone. He closes the eyes, seemingly asleep, and answers no questions.
Delirious with the heat, rage and mania, wants to jump out of bed or
out of the window. Screams and calls for help. Tosses anxiously in
bed. Anxiety and almost loss of consciousness. These symptoms will
indicate Camphor in pucrpeial fever, in congestion of the brain, or in
shock from violent inflammation of organs. Confusion comes from
the shock and comes with violence. The more violently the patient
suffers, the sooner he is cold, and when he is cold, he must uncover
even in a cold room. This is somewhat like Secale, In Seealc the pa-
tient, when cold, wants to uncover and to be in a cold room, and it
also has frenzy, and so there is nothing in what we have yet seem to dis-
tinguish Secale from Camph. But there is another thing that runs
through Camph., by which a distinction can be made. The coldness,
frenzy and heat very often intermingle. When the Camphor patient
is becoming cold, he has spells of heat which come over him ; flashes
of heat intermingle with rending, tearing, burning pains, either in the
inflamed organ or along the nerves. The patient is a most trouble-
some patient to nurse ; nobody and nothing suits. If an inflammation
of the bladder comes on, there is intense pain and tenderness, and from
the shock of the suffering the mind is in a state of frenzy. Coldness
then comes on and the patient wants to be uncovered, wants cold air,
wants the windows open, but before all this can be done, a flash of
heat comes on and then he wants the covers on, and the register turned
on, and wants a hot iron and hot hottles ; but this stage now passes erff,
and while the nurse is bringing the hot irons he wants her to open the



CAMPHOR


305


windows and have everything cool. You will see at once that these are
serious cases. This occurs with opisthotonos, convulsions, inflamma-
tion of the brain, liver, kidney, bladder, coming on from violent shock
and cold with great exhaustion. You will see this in one who has
worked for hours for his life, and when the excitement is over reaction
sets in and it is like a whirlwind ; he has worked until he is exhausted
and now he is prostrated, cold and blue ; here is the sphere w^here the
old woman with her Camphor bottle has established a reputation, but
potentized Camphor will do more for him than the Camphor bottle,
it will put him into a refreshing sleep.

It is useful in the climacteric period with flushes of heat and sweat
in a warm room ; the limbs and abdomen are very cold and she suffers
from cold when uncovered and sweats copiously when covered. She
cannot endure covering to warm her limbs though she suffers from
cold.

The head is full of pain ; throbbing pain. Contractive feeling as if
laced together in the cerebellum. The whole back of the head and
neck throb like hammers ; worse from bending head forward ; burning
and stinging. Frontal headaches.

We have heard about Camphor in cholera, which is a disease that
brings the patient down quickly. The face is cold, blue and shrivelled,
without much sweat, in the cases that would make one think of Cam-
phor. There is not much discharge from the bowels, not much vomit-
ing and not much sweat ; but suddenly he becomes cold, blue and col-
lapsed, as it were paralyzed and goes* into a stupor.

Convulsions with frothing at the mouth. Blue lips, lock-jaw, tetanus.
Cold sweat on the face with vomiting. Erysipelatous appearance of
face.

There is a desire to drink without thirst. There is also insatiable)
thirst ; he is not satisfied with incredible quantities of cold water. Can-
not get it cold enough, and cannot get enough, but he soon vomits it up.

The gastric irritation is marked. Everything is vomited. The
tongue is blue and cold and the breath is cold. Everything coming out
of the body is cold. The air as it leaves the chest feels like that from
a cellar, like Carbo v, and Verat, The tongue is cold and trembling.
Such states are found in cholera. All through the cold stage there is
burning. The inside of the body seems to bum, or there is a sense
of internal smarting like a rawness or a sence of burning without heat.

The pain in the stomach in gastritis is so violent that the anguish
on the face is equal to that in Arsenic ; a deathly anguish is felt in his
stomach and he feels that he must die. Burning, rending, tearing pain
in the stomach with retching and vomiting. Cramps in stomach and
bowels and spreading to other parts of the body until there are con-
vulsions and opisthotonos. Anguish at the pit of the stomach drives

39



3o6


CAMPHOR


him to despair- Heat in the stomach. Cold feeling in the stomach.
Abdomen is full of colic and burning. Cold feeling in the abdomen.

Cholera stools ; rice water discharges, with anxiety, restlessness,
spasms of the muscles, cramps of the chest, prostration, increasing
coldness and blueness ; wants to be uncovered and he is going into
collapse. The old Camphor, Cuprum and Veratrum still hold together
for Asiatic cholera. In Camphor there is prostration, blueness, cold-
ness and yet he wants to be uncovered and the body is cold and dry.

The other two remedies have all there is in cholera, but in Cuprum
there is not so much coldness, more cramping, more convulsive tendency
and not so much prostration. The more cramping there is the more it
is Cuprum, The more copious the discharge from the bowels and the
more profuse the vomiting and sweat, the more we would think of
Veratrum, Cold and dry — Camphor. Cold and copious discharge —
Veratrum,

After taking cold there is cutting, with involuntary discharge of
dark brown faeces like coffee grounds. Tenesmus. At times the
cholera patient, with the coldness and blueness, is retching and strain-
ing to vomit and suffering with horrible tenesmus to get rid of a
little stool and has convulsions here and there. These bowels symp-
toms gradually increase until there is no ability to strain at stool, a
paralytic condition. Rectum seems contracted and painful.

There is suffering in the urinary and sexual organs. Burning urina-
tion. Strangury. Frequent urination. Frequent desire, with difficulty.
The same state arises in the bladder as in the rectum, and there is re-
tention with horrible torture. The patient sits on the commode and
strains to pass the urine, but there is a paralytic condition of the bladder.
The urine is red, bloody, and comes by drops like Canth, Tenesmus
of the neck of the bladder.

Camphor increases the sexual erethism to an unbearable degree.
In some cases from large doses this is seen in the extreme, and in
other cases the reverse takes place. It has both sexual erethism and
impotency in its provings. I once knew a French woman who had
ait insane desire to keep her boys always at home with her, and she
thought she could accomplish this if she could only keep them away
from the girls ; and to destroy their sexual desire she kept a bag of
camphor under their pillows. All of them were made impotent. But
in some provers it establishes sexual erethism. It has this like Canth,
Camphor produces a coryza, with a profuse discharge from the nose
and from the air passages, from the nose to the bronchi. Bronchitis of
children and old people. Old withered up people take cold at every
exposure to weather and become cold and chilly. Ant. crud,, Am. carb,
and Camph. are wonderful remedies in octogenarians. Every cold
seems threatening. Old people don't come down with cold the same as



CanKabis indict


^7


young people ; they are prostrated, sinking, have rattling in the chest
and the family think it is the death rattle and that it is grandpa’s last
spell. These three remedies fit the case, they are like the advanced
stage of pneumonia. Ant. t., Ant. c., Am. c. and Camph. cover these
cases in which the hot stage is omitted. Camph. has very little heat ;
it has the sensation of heat ; but not a marked hot stage. There are
other symptoms in this medicine such as you will find in old people.

Jerking of the muscles, trembling and jerking. Spasm^ic condi-
tions with trembling. Trembling of the tongue.

The general constitutional state of a Camphor patient is coldness
and extreme sensitiveness to cold. In acute inflammatory conditions
he is cold and wants the covers off. In acute complaints there is
violent thirst, in chronic complaints thirstlcssness. It is the same in
Arsenic, in the acute thirsty, bur in the chronic thirstlcss.

In Camphor an important thing to recall in the acute is that during
the heat and when the pains are on he wants to be covered up. The
coldness is relieved by cold, he wants more cold.

CANNABIS INDICA

A strange ecstatic sensation pervades the body and senses. The
limbs and parts seem enlarged. A thrill of beatitude passes over the
limbs. The limbs tremble. Great weakness spreads over the body.
The symptoms resemble catalepsy, (Anesthesia and loss of muscular
sense. Complaints ameliorated by test. Exaltation of spirits with
mirthfulness. Wonderful imaginaticsis and hallucinations. Wonder-
ful exaggerations of time and space. He seems to be transported
through space. He seems to have two existences, or to be conscious
of two stales, or to exist in two spheres. Delusions. Incoherent
speech. Laughs at serious remarks. Laughs and weeps. Spasmodic
laughter. Jesting. Moaning and weeping. Fear of death ; of in-
sanity ; of the dark. Anguish and sadness. Mental symptoms amelior-
ated by walking in the open air. An opposite phase prevails with his
weakness. He loses his sense and falls. Passes from the rational to
the irrational in rapid succession, back and forth. Forgets words and
ideas. Unable to finish his sentences. Thoughts crowding upon each
other in such confusion prevent rational speech. His mind is full of
unfinished ideas, and phantoms. Wonderful theories constantly form
in the mind. Loquacity. He cannot control the mind to reason ration-
ally upon any subject. Any effort to reason is interrupted by flights
of wild imagination and theory. Vision upon vision passes before the
perception. Hears voices, bells, music, in ecstatic confusion.

Feels as if the calvarium were opening and shutting, or being lifted
and lowered into place. Pulsating pain through the head. Weight



3o8


cannabis sativa


in occiput, with pulsation. Shocks in the brain on regaining con-
sciousness, and on waking from sleep. Stitching pains in temples.
Tension of scalp. Tenderness of scalp. Dimness of vision. Visual
clairvoyance. I^etters run together. Hearing acute. Singing and
buzzing in ears ; pulsating. Face pale and sunken. Insane look.
Stupid look. Sickly, expressionless look. Grinding teeth during sleep.
Stammering. Metallic taste. Desire for, and dread of water.

Flatulence, distending abdomen, ameliorated by eructations.

The urinary symptoms are numerous. Inflammation in the kidneys,
with burning pain. Soreness in the kidneys, and dull aching. Stitch-
ing pains in the kidneys. Constant or frequent urination. Urine burns
on passing. Burning, stinging in urethra, before, during and after
urination. This remedy has cured many cases of gonorrhoea. It is
useful in the first stage, and cures the symptoms set for Cannabis
sativa. Must wait for urine to start. Urine dribbles after urination,
Much mucus in the urine. It is useful in chordee during gonorrhoea.
The discharge in gonorrhoea is yellow.

Sexual desire increased in both sexes. Erections mechanical and
painful. Menstruation profuse and fluid ; painful ; paroxysmal pains,
like labor pains. Uterine spasms. Threatened abortion, threatened
with gonorrhoea. Menses come every two weeks.

Spasmodic oppression of the chest with suffocation.

Palpitation during sleep. Pressing pain in the heart with suffoca-
tion during the whole night. Stitching pains in the heart. Pulse, slow
or rapid and irregular ; fluttering ; a nervous pulse.

Pain in the back at the menstrual period. Pain across the dorsal
region preventing walking erect.

Paralytic weakness of the limbs with trembling and thrilling. Numb-
ness of limbs and soles. Pricking of soles. Rest ameliorates, and
motion aggravates. Violent pains through the lower limbs on walking.

Sleepy, but cannot sleep. Starting of limbs during sleep. Dreams
of dead bodies. Dreams prophetic. Nightmare.

Prickling of the skin. Formication and itching all over. The skin
feels drawn tight over the body. Anaesthesia.

CANNABIS SATIVA

The resemblance of this remedy to Cannabis Indica is remarkable
and has led to a belief that they are identical. The one has often been
substituted for the other, and has cured symptoms produced by the
other. Their mental and urinary symptoms are very similar. The
sensation of opening and shutting has been cured by both remedies.

Things seem strange and unreal. He seems as though in a dream.
Confusion as to his personal identity. Makes mistakes in writing and



CANNIBIS SAllVA


309


speaking, and misunderstands what he reads and hears said. Sounds
in the room seem to come from a distance. When he speaks it seems
as though some one else were speaking (Alum). Seems as though
her senses would vanish. Despondent in forenoon, lively in the after-
noon. Fear of going to bed. Hysterical feeling in the throat. Anxiety
in the stomach. Confusion of mind and vertigo.

Rush of blood to the head, as though it came from the stomach.
Opening and shutting of the vortex begins on waking, lasts all day,
and is worse from noise. Sensation of drops of cold water on scalp.
Formication.

Inflammation of the conjunctiva and varicose veins. Sensation of
sand in the eyes.

Noises in the ears.

Sensation of enlargement of the nose. Epistaxis. Pressure on the
root of the nose. Dryness in the nose. One cheek red, the other pale.
Nasty taste. Difficult speech. Dry mouth and throat. Aversion to
meat. Eructations, bitter, sour, empty.

Inflammation of the kidneys. Ulcerative pains m the kindneys.
CEdema of the prepuce with gonorrhoea. Thick yellow gonorrhoeal
discharge. Burning in the urethra during and after urination. Stitch-
ing in the urethra while the urine flows. Urethra sensitive, swollen.
Chordee. Burning at starting and closing of urination. Stitching in
urethra when not urinating. Most difficult and painful urination. Pain
that extends from meatus back along the urethra while urine flows.
Pressing out feeling at the orifice ot the urethra after urination in a
woman. Violent urging to urinate. Constant or frequent rnging to
urinate. Involuntary urination. Violent pain at the close of urina-
tion. Bloody urine. Spasmodic closure of the neck of the bladder
at the close of urination. Inflammation of the urethra Inflammation
and much swelling of the orifice of the urethra with burning pain
during urination in the female.

Intense sexual excitement in both sexes. Much dropsical swelling
of the prepuce. To the female it has a reputation for sterility. Menses
profuse. Lcucorrhoea in the little girls (S-epia). Gonorrhoea. Uterine
haemorrhage after labor. Threatened abortion.

Catarrh of the chest. Bronchitis with wheezing. Asthma ; must
have window open. Green viscid expectoration. Salty sputum. Cough,
with blood spitting. Stitching pains in the pleura. Asthma with
bladder troubles. Palpitation.

Pressure as with a sharp point in the coccyx. Drawing pains in
tendo-Achillis. Stitching in the skin all over while perspiring. Numb-
ness of finger tips.



310


CANTHARlS


CANTHARIS

The most important feature of this medicine is the inflammatory
condition, and the most important characteristic in the inflammation is
the rapidity with which it develops into a gangrenous state. Inflamma-
tory conditions usually follow a definite course for days, but when this
medicine is put upon a part or taken internally the inflammatory state
terminates in death of the part with great rapidity. When taken in-
ternally it proceeds almost immediately to attack the urinary tract
and establish a urfemic state which brings about the mental symptoms ;
the local inflammatory condition comes on with great rapidity, and
this brings the patient down violently sick in a great hurry. h>om strong
doses in the poisonous effect we get startling and alarming symptoms ;
the whole economy is in disorder : grievous symptoms commonly of the
urinary tract. The pans become gangrenous at an early stage.

The mental symptoms are striking. Among those that are guiding
are sudden loss of consciousness with red face. Suddenly goes into
stupor. Confusion of mind. Overwhelmed with strange ideas.
Thoughts run riot, and go whatever way they will, as if possessed by
outside influence.

Head hot, frenzy, delirium, with great excitement and rage, par-
oxysms renewed by dazzling or bright objects, by touching the larynx
or by trying to drink water as in rabies, bear and confusion of ideas.
The mind often runs towards subjects that the inflamed parts would
suggest. The bladdei and genitals are inflamed aiid the excitement and
congestion of the parts often arouse the sexual instinct, so that there
are sexual thoughts and sexual frenzy. Violent amorous frenzy, an
excitement such as accompanies inflammation attended with thoughts
that correspond. The sexual instinct has gone mad. The elections
in the male are painful and violent. The penis is inflamed and sore
and it would be painful to have coitus, yet there is this frenzy. In-
solence. Blasphemy. Restlessness ending in rage. Restlessness caus-
ing him to move constantly, a rage and delirium intermingled with
amorous frenzy. This kind of mental conduct in Cantharis is similar
to what will take place in Hyos., Phos., and Secale ; a violent delirious
state intermingled with sexual ideas and talk. In some instances he
deliriously sings lewd songs and prattles on the subject of human
genitals, urine and faeces, a wild raving on subjects not talked about
in health except among the depraved. But in disease, chaste and mod-
est persons, virgins, will speak so that it is surprising where they have
picked up such language. In such cases it is well to exclude every-
body from the room except the nurse and doctor. I have seen a dear
old mother weep and wring her hands and say : ‘Where did my
daughter learn such language?” The daughter is not to blame. It is



CANIHARIS


311


simply a condition of the urinary tract or the menstrual function,
brought on from cold or exposure, or through the mother’s neglect to
tell her daughter what she should know in regard to her menstrual
function, and how there is inflammation of the ovaries or uterus, or
outside parts, and the urine burns and causes an inflammatory condi-
tion of the outer parts, or the urine is retained and there is frenzy.
Such in Cantharis.

Violent, bursting, lancinating headaches as if stabbed with a knife ;
an inflammatory condition that takes hold of the mind violently.

Running all through the remedy there is burning. In the head
burning, throbbing and stabbing. Unconsciousness and delirium in
the mental state. Burning in the side of the head. Stitches in the
side of the head and occiput. Lancinating pains deep in the brain.
Hair falls out.

It is seldom indicated in eye troubles alone, except such as come
with head and mind symptoms. Erysipelas of the face with large
blisters. Burning in the eyes and the whole atmosphere looks yellow.
Burning and smarting in the eyes. Erysipelas of the eyes, with
gangrenous tendency. Eyes hot, scalding tears. Erysipelas of the
face, dorsum of the nose, involving the lids. Rhus is more commonly
used in this condition, but when it is violent Canth. will often be in-
dicated and preferable to Rhus. Rhui has the blisters and the burning,
but in Canth. between your two visits the erysipelas has grown black,
it is dusky, a rapid change has taken place, and it looks as if gangrene
would set in. Burning in the crys^clatous area and the skin around
burns from the touch. In Rhus this is not so. In Cantharis the little
blisters even if touched burn like fire. Eruptions burn when touched,
ever so lightly, i.e., those eruptions such as the remedy could produce.

This patient enters into a state of prostration, is pallid, has hippo-
cratic countenance and dies. Ir corresponds to the lowest forms of
disease, even gangrene and violent inflammation of the bowels,
bladder, brain, spine and lungs ; sinking and hippocratic countenance.
Inflammation of the lungs, gangrenous type, prostration and the lung
that is affected burns like fire, and immediately he expectorates cadaver-
ous smelling expectoration, thin, bloody, watery : it has come on in an
astonishingly rapid manner, and in a little while he will die ; the nose
is contracted, there is the hippocratic countenance, and the urine is
suppressed. I remember one patient who had just come out of a pro-
longed drunk. I left the patient in the evening in just such a state
as I have described. He was drooling a bloody saliva from his mouth
and he was dying. He had had this condition come on in one night
from being nearly frozen in a drunk. It would be Cantharis or death
before monring, but by morning he was expectorating a rusty sputum
and went on to good recovery. Arsenic has the burning in the lungs



312


CANTHARIS


and he spits up black sputum, pneumonia signs are present, with the
restlessness and anxiety, and other symptoms of Arsenic^ and Arsenic
will stop it at once. These violent remedies are needed in those cases
that will die.

Burning in the throat. Great thirst, with burning in the throat and
stomach. Thirst, with aversion to all fluids, that is, the craving of the
mouth and throat are antagonized by the mental state. Thirst in the
throat and an aversion to water in the mind. Violent burning in the
stomach, pylorus, abdomen. The abdomen is swollen and tympanitic ;
lancinating pains cutting and stabbing. Wherever there is a rapid
inflammation in the bowels there is diarrhoea of bloody mucus or
serum, watery, bloody fluids from the bowels and stomach. The same
watery bloody fluid from the eyes. And wherever this watery fluid
comes in contact with the skin it burns and excoriates. Bloody urine.

Desire for stool while urinating. The patient will sit on the com-
mode with violent tenesmus to pass urine and stool, feels that if he
could only pass a few more drops of urine or a little more bloody
stool he would get relief, but no relief comes. All the parts are in-
flamed and on fire. Tenesmus and urging not only when the bladder is
empty, but often when the bladder is full. Retention of urine. Passes
none or only a drop or two. Violent tenesmus of the bladder. Cutting
pains with tenesmus. Lancinating, stabbing like knives, in neck of
bladder. Pains shoot off in different directions. Violent pains with
frequent urging. Constant tenesmus. An anxious state and frenzy
come on ; most violent suffering and he has urging to pass urine and
stool with sexual erethism tantalizing in the extreme. The whole
urinary organs and genitalia are in a state of inflammation and gan-
grene. Burning when urinating. This bloody urine burns like fire
in the bladder and about the genitals. Retention or suppression of
urine. It is rare that one suffering from gonorrhoea has this violent
inflammation, with burning and tenesmus of the bladder and rectum,
but in such a case this remedy is indicated. The intensity and rapidity
are the features of this remedy. It biings on pain and excitement found
in no other remedy. Next to it comes Merc, cor.

In the female there is oversensitiveness of all parts. Inflammation
of the ovaries and uterus. Burning in the vagina. Membranous
dysmenorrhoea. Menses too early, profuse, black.

Puerperal convulsions. Retained placenta. Burning pains. When
there have been no expulsive pains present to expel the afterbirth, with
the symptoms running all through this remedy, after it has been given,
normal contractions of the uterus have come on with expulsion of the
membranes.

Violent lancinating pains through the kidneys and back. Pains in
the loins, kidneys and abdomen. Pain on urinating, so that he moaned



CAPSICUM


3*3


and screamed on passing a drop.

CAPSICUM

Most of the substances that are used on the table as seasoning in
foods will in the course of a generation or two be very useful medi-
cines because people poison themselves with these substances, tea,
coffee, pepper, and these poisonous effects in the parents cause in the
children a predisposition to disease, which is similar to the disease pro-
duced by these substances.

In the fat, flabby, red-raced children of beer drinkers and pepper
eaters, with poor reaction, a relaxed and flabby constitution, red face
and varicose condition, those that have been overstimulated, children
of overstimulated men, we find the sphere of Capsicum very often.
In those constitutions in which the face looks rosy, but it is cold or not
warm, and upon close examination the face is seen to be studded with
a fine system of capillaries. Plump and round, with no endurance, a
false plethora like Cal, The end of the nose is red, the cheeks are
red, redness over the checks, red eyes, easily relaxed individuals. These
constitutions react slowly after diseases and do not respond to reme«
dies, a sluggish state, a tired, lazy constitution. In school girls who
cannot study or work, who get honae-sick and want to go home. In
gouty constitutions, with cracking of the joints and gouty deposits in
the joints, stiff joints, ciuinsy, weak, give out soon. There is sluggish-
ness of the whole economy. They are chilly patients, are sensitive to
air, and what to be in a warm room. Even in the ordinary weather
the open air causes chilliness. They are sensitive to cold and to bathing.

In the mental state there is no more striking thing than this symp-
tom — homesickness, A sickness like homesickness runs through the
remedy and is accompanied by red cheeks and sleeplessness, hot feel-
ing in the fauces, fcarfulness. They are oversensitive to impressions,
are always looking for an offence or slight ; always suspicious and look-
ing for an insult. Obstinate to the extreme ; it is a devilishness. Even
if she wants a certain thing she will oppose it if is proposed by some
one else. After emotions red cheeks, yet with the red cheeks lack of
heat, even with increased temperature ; or one cheek pale and the other
red, or the cheeks alternately red and pale. Children are clumsy and
awkward.

The Capsicum mind is almost overwhelmed by persistent thoughts
of suicide. He does not want to kill himself, he resists the thoughts
and yet they persist, and he is tormented by these thoughts. There ard
persistent thoughts in many remedies, and it is necessary to distinguish
between impuLses and desires. If he desires to have a rope or a knife
to commit suicide, that is altogether different from an impulse to com-

40



CAPSICUM


314

mit suicide. An impulse is sometimes overwhelming and overbalances
the mind, and he commits suicide. You should always find out from a
patient whether he loathes life and wants to die, or if he has impulses
which he wishes to put aside. Some persons lie awake at night and
long for death, and there is no reason for it. That is a state of the
will, insanity of the will. In another patient the thoughts jump into
his mind and he cannot put them aside, and the thoughts arc torment-
ing. The distinguishing feature of the remedy is often found by dif-
ferentiating between the two. Desires are of the will ; impulses come
into the thoughts.

Headaches as if the skull would split when moving the head, when
walking or coughing. Feeling as if the head would fly to pieces ; holds
the head with the hand. Feeling as if the head were large, aggravated
by coughing and stepping, ameliorated by lying with the head high.
Bursting pain and throbbing. Headache with pulsation in the fore-
head and temples. Headache as if the brain would be pressed through
the forehead. On stooping, feeling as if the brain would be pressed
out, as if the red eyes would be pressed out on stooping.

The senses are disturbed and are ovcracute ; oversensitiveness to
noise, smells, taste and touch, to impressions, to insults. The patient
is exicited.

Pains in the cars ; itching pain : aching, pressing pain with cough,
as if an abscess would burst. It has a peculiar action on the bones
of the internal car and mastoid process. Abscesses round about and
below the ear and caries : petrous portion of temporal bone necrosed.
It has been a frequently indicated remedy in mastoid abscess.

Old catarrhs. The patient takes cold in the nose and throat and this
is followed by a collection of mucus. Very often in stupid patients
it is difficult to get symptoms, and you must depend on what you see,
the character of the discharge and a few other things, and you will
find that some of these cases will be cured and all the other symptoms
will go away ; but in some of these old catarrhs no reaction seems to
come after the most carefully chosen remedies, and all at once the doc-
tor observes that the patient has a red face and it is cold and the end
of the nose is red and cold, and the patient is fat and flabby and yet
has not much endurance, never could learn at school, and if she exerts
breaks out into a sweat and freezes in the cold air. He has a key to
the patient and examines the patient by the key, that is, by the drug,
a mad practice and never to be resorted to except as a dernier resort
and in stupid patients. When he gives Capsicum to that patient it
arouses her, it may not cure ; but after it the Silicea or Kali bich. or
other remedy which was perhaps given before and did not act takes
hold and cures.

In the text it says, “Nose red and hot.” The skin all over is red



CAPSICUM


3^5

and burning, a capillary congestion. The cheeks are red and hot, and
this alternates with paleness. Red dots on the face. Pains in the face
like bone pains, from external touch. Pains arc worse from touch.
Pain in the zygoma, or the zygoma is sensitive. Sensitive to pressure
over the mastoid. Swelling in the region of the mastoid.

Taste foul like putrid water. When coughing the air from the lungs
causes a pungent offensive taste in the mouth. A hot pungent air
comes up from the throaty tasting foul when coughing.

On the tongue and lips, flat, sensitive, spreading ulcers with larda-
ceous base. The mucous membrane of the lips and various parts of the
body if pinched up with the fingers remain in the raised position, show-
ing a sluggish circulation. This is the flabbiness of Capsicum. It
wrinkles on pressure. It is a feeble circulation. The parts you touch
are loose and flabby, red. fat and cold. That child will not react well
if it has mea.sles, until it gets Capsicum. The skin is moist and colei,
and there is a fine measly condition of the skin due to capillary conges-
tion. If the child is old enough it will complain of feeling cold. There*
is slow reaction after eruptive diseases, after glandular diseases, after
bowel complaints. The child was fat and flabby, but now does not
take on flesh.

He takes cold in the throat and nose, and the throat looks as if it
would bleed, it is so red, a fine rash-like appearance — it is puffed, dis-
colored, purple, mottled, flabby and ' spongy-looking ; dark red. Burn-
ing soreness with ulceration in the fauces. Uvula elongated. Stitch-
ing in tliroat. Enlarged tonsils, inflamed, large and spongy. The
throat remains sore a long time after a cold or sore throat. Burning,
pressing pain in the throat, the throat dark red ; relaxed sore throat ;
pain on swallowing, dysphagia. Throat sluggish for weeks, a do-noth-
ing state, does not get very bad, but gets no better, a lack of reaction.

When the chill begins there is thirst. Thirst after every dysenteric
stool, a sudden carving for ice-cold water, which causes chilliness.
Craving for water before the chill and when taken it hastens the chill :
it feels cold in the stomach. He desires something warm, something
stimulating, craves pungent things. This is seen in whisky drinkers ;
they crave pepper, and the pepper, on the other hand, turns round and
craves whisky. These diffusable stimulants crave some stimulating
thing, crave support. Dipsomania.

Let me give you a hint in Arsenic. In dipsomania the sinners who
have been drinking a great many drinks in a day sometimes get to that
state in which they must get up during the night for a drink or they will
not be able to get up in the morning. In the morning the first three
or four drinks will be thrown up, but the next one will stay down ;
they must take a number until one sticks. They have got to that state
in which they must keep on taking it. If they sleep too long the first



3i6 capsicum

few drinks will come up, and so they must get up in the night or the
whisky will not stay down in the morning until they have taken a num-
ber of drinks. You will see this in lawyers who do a great amount of
wDik on stimulants. Nux, Ars,, and Caps, will do something for them
if they will co-operate with you. I remember saying to one old toper,
who had kept up altogether on champagne, that he would have to
stop it. He whined, ‘1 don’t think it is worth while.” If he could not
get his champagne he didn’t think life worth living. If these people
want to get tenefit they must co-operate.

Dysentery. After stool, tenesmus and thirst, and drinking causes
shuddering. Smarting and burning in anus and rectum. Violent
tenesmus in rectum and bladder at the same time. Haemorrhoids ; pro-
truding, smarting, burning ; smarting like pepper ; they sting and burn
as if pepper had been sprinkled on them. Tenesmus of the bladder ;
strangury. Burning, biting pain after urination. In old cases of gon-
orrhoea, in which there no reaction. The discharge is creamy. You
take a picture of his face, you notice the plethora, but also that he has
no endurance, plump, flabby, sensitive to cold, red face. He does not
react after cold. He has the last drop or a creamy discharge with
burning on urination. Capsicum will sometimes stop it suddenly.
Coldness of scrotum. Prepuce swollen, axlematoiis. Pain in the pros-
tate gland after gonorrhoea.

Coldness of the affected part. Coldness in patches. Coldness of
the whole body.

It is useful in perplexing and troublesome chronic hoarseness. He
had had a cold and remedies for the acute condition have been given,
perhaps two or three remedies, ricor/., Bry., Hep., Phos,, but all at
once you wake up to the fact of his chronic constitutional state of
hoarseness. He is rotund, chilly, red faced, and the hoarseness dis-
appears under Capsicum. It is the same with the cough. After mak-
ing several blunders you wake up and see it is a Capsicum case and
that you have never yet gotten at the root of the trouble. This shows
the importance of getting at the things general first. If there is much
acute suffering of course you must give an acute remedy, but if the
patient has delayed recovery and convalesence is slow the next remedy
should be the remedy for the patient. Sometimes it is Sulph., Phos.,
Lyc., and sometimes it is Caps. If the patient has a good constitutional
state he will get over the cold on the acute remedy, but the old gouty,
rheumatic, flabby patients need a constitutional remedy.

Cough in sudden paroxysms convulsing the whole body. Cries
after the cough from the headache. Stitches in the suffering part with
the cough. Every cough jars the affected joint. The constitutional
state comes first and the particulars must agree i. e., prescribe accord-
ing to the totality.



GARBO ANIMAUS


3*7


CARBO ANIMALIS

Carbo animalis is one of the deep-acting, long-acting medicines.
Suitable in complaints that come on insidiously, that develop slowly,
that become chronic and often malignant in character. Complaints
in anaemic, broken down constitutions. Vascular conditions. The
Carbons affect the veins more or less, relaxing, paralyzing. This one
has its own peculiar feature of infiltrating little veins. Just as sure
as an organ in the Carbo animalis patient becomes congested it
becomes hard and purple from infiltration, and has a tendency to re-
main so. In an inflammation of a gland the veins become weak and
infiltrated, the gland itself becomes hard and sore, the tissues around
it indurate, and the skin over it becomes purple. The glands of the
throat and axilla^ grow purple and indurated with no tendency to
soften. Some of these medicines, after infiltrating a gland, will hurry
up the inflammatory action, produce sloughing, rapid breaking down,
with pus — ^like Hepar Mercurius and Sulphur, But this medicine para-
lyzes and infiltrates the little veins in the inflamed part, and there
seems to be no tendency to suppuration.

We see that the economy of this patient is in a sluggish stale ; there
are no rapid changes ; but everything is slowed down. Even the in-
flammatory process is a passive onCf Very often a slow qiiasi-eiysipe-
latous inflammation comes on, the part becomes purple and will pit
upon pressure. Just think what a <^ntrast this to Bellado?ina. Bella--
donna will inflame all the glands, they will swell, become hot and so
sensitive that they can hardly be touched ; at first bright red, then pur-
ple, with a tendency to resolution if let alone. But the Carbo animalis
inflammation comes on slowly, its progress is slow, and there is no
tendency to repair. Enlargement of veins here and there over the
body, vericose veins. There is intense burning in the part inflamed,
which is indurated and purple. The glands of the throat burn. Slug-
gish buboes in old broken down constitutions, in early stages of syphi-
lis, inflame, become enlarged, purple, hard and burn. Lumps in the
mammary glands. A purple lump the size of a hen's egg will formi
in the mammary gland. It does not go on to suppuration, as you
would expect it to, it just stays there. It does not enlarge much, but
it is hard.

The woman has so much burning in the vagina that she persuades
the physician to make a more careful examination than he has done.
He will probobly find the whole cervix inflamed, purple and somewhat
enlarged. She says it burns like coals of fire.

Carbo animalis eventually produces ulceration of the tissues in va-
rious parts, especially in glands. After a while — but not early in the
case — an ulcer forms, and perhaps after ulcerating for a time it comes



3^8


GARBO AKIMAUS


to a standstill ; it has become a sluggish ulcer. ludurated ulcers. A
bubo breaks down and forms an ulcer. All at once it stops suppurat-
ing and around about the tissues become hard and purple. The lauda-
ble discharge ceases, a bloody, ichorous discharge takes its place, and
the surrounding parts burn. Now in ulcers and fistulous openings,
where the walls become hard and burn, and the discharge becomes
acrid, Carbo animalis is frequently the remedy.

It is not surprising that this remedy has been one of the most suit-
able for old, stubborn cancerous affections ; for cancerous ulcers. They
all burn, they are all surrounded by infiltrated, hardened, dark-colored
tissue, and they all ooze an acrid ichorous fluid. It has cured these
troubles in old feeble constitutions with night-sweats and much bleed-
ing. It has relieved in incurable cases, and has apparently removed
the cancerous condition for years, even though it comes back after-
ward and kills. This remedy is often a great palliative for the pains
that occur in cancer, the indurations and the stinging, burning pains.
Of course we do not want to teach, nor do wc wish to have you
infer, that a patient with a well-advanced cancerous affection, such as
scirrhus, may be restored to perfect health and the cancerous affection
removed. We may comfort that patient, and restore order at least
temporarily, so that there is freedom from suffering in these malignant
affections. Most patients that have cancer are really in such a state
of disorder that only a temporary cessation of “hostilities’" can be ex-
pected ; and anyone who goes around boasting of the cancer cases he
has cured ought to be regarded with suspicion. Do not dwell upon the
cancer, for it is not the cancer but the patient that you are treating.
It is the patient that is sick, and whenever a patient is sick enough to
have a cancer his state of order is too much disturbed to be cured.

The proving of Carbo animalis presents the appearance of a broken
down constitution. It brought out in the provers just such symptoms
as occur in old, feeble constitutions, with poor repair and lack of re-
action. Hence the medicine has been a great palliative for patients
suffering from malignant infiltrations and indurations ; suspicious in-
durations round about and under the bases of ulcers ; suspicious in-
durations in glands. A gland becomes inflamed, hard and remains so.
Carbo animalis stands at the head of the list of remedies that have
that condition.

All through the remedy there is hypertrophy. Tissues pile up here
and there into hard nodules ; tissues pile up in glands and in organs.
The economy has lost its balance, and the result is a disorderly distri-
bution of material. Great prostration, want of energy, associated with
palpitation, anxiety and disorders of the pulse. Weak pulse, rapid
pulse, irregular pulse. Beating in blood vessels. There is turmoil
in the economy, sometimes described as heat. A rushing of heat as



CARBO VEGETABIUS


319


though the body was full of steam. Awful sensation through the chest
and in the head, like some great earthquake taking place. These arc
due to abnormal conditions of the venous side of the heart. Flushes
of heat ; pulsations here and there. Haemorrhages. And of
course the woman is more likely to bleed than the man ; hence we have
menses too early, too long, too copious. Prostration with every men-
strual flow. The Carbo animalis woman sinks down at every menstrual
period as if she would die. Such striking weakness is not at all ac-
counted for by the quantity of the flow. Chronic induration, with en-
largement of the uterus, which gradually grows from year to year
(Aur. m. w.). Induration of the cervix and the whole uterus. Copious
flow of the leucorrhoea. Offensive uterine discharges. Ulceration of
the uterus, going gradually toward the malignant state. The menses
are black and offensive. Finally this poor, feeble woman, who has
been plodding along for years with this condition, goes into malignant
ulceration of the cervix, which burns, bleeds constantly and oozes a
foetid watery flow. The burning pains in the uterus extend down to
the thighs.

Whenever this patient puts the child to the breast she has a sensa-
tion of emptiness in the stomach, sinking in the pit of the stomach, and
she must take the child away.

There are many uterine troubles^ with burning, stinging, smarting,
a yellow brown saddle over the bridge of the nose, something like the
mottled yellow saddle of Sepia. Afl sorts of disordered conditions of
the uterus.

Surging of blood upward to the head, rousing up in sleep, with hor-
rible dreams. This poor mortal is suffering from troubles in the base
of the brain, has tearing pains in the head, and especially of the occiput,
growing increasingly sensitive to cold, increasingly chilly, increasingly
waxy, until we have phthisis or cancer, with varicose veins and all the
conditions that I have described,

CARBO VEGETABIUS

We will take up the study of Vegetable Charcoal — Carbo veg. It is
a comparatively inert substance made medicinal and powerful, and con-
verted into a great healing agent, by grinding it fine enough. By divid-
ing it sufficiently, it becomes similar to the nature of sickness and
cures folks. The Old School use it in tablespoonful doses to correct
acidity of the stomach. But it is a great monument to Hahnemann.
It is quite inert in crude form and the true healing powers are not
brought out until it is sufficiently potentized. It is one of those deep-
acting, long-acting antipsoric medicines. It enters deeply into the life,
In its proving it develops symptoms that last a long time, ^nd it cures



320


CARBO VEGETABILIS


conditions that are of long standing — those that cojne on slowly and in-
sidiously. It affects the vascular system especially ; more particularly
the venous side of the economy — the heart, and the whole venous sys-
tem. Sluggishness is a good word to think of when examining the
pathogenesis of Carbo veg. Sluggishness, laziness, turgescence, these
are words that will come into your mind frequently, because these
states occur so frequently in the symptomatology. Everything about
the economy is sluggish, turgid, distended and swollen. The hands
are puffed ; the veins arc puffed ; the body feels full and turgid ; the
head feels full, as if full of blood. The limbs feel dull, so that the
patient wants to elevate the feet to let the blood run out. The veins
are lazy, relaxed and paralyzed. Vaso-moior paralysis. The veins of
the body are enlarged ; the extremities have varicose veins.

The whole mental state, like the physical, is slow. The mental opera-
tions are slow. Slow to think ; sluggish ; stupid ; lazy. Cannot whip
himself into activity, or rouse a desire to do anything. Wants to lie
down and doze. The limbs are clumsy ; they feel enlarged. The skin
is dusky. The capillary circulation is engorged. The face is purple.
Any little stimulating food or drink will bring a flush to that dusky
face. When you see people gather round a table where wine is served
you can pick out the Carbo veg. patients, because their faces will be
flushed ; in a little while it passes off and they get purple again
Dusky — almost a dirty duskiness. The skin is lazy ; sluggish.

Running ihrough the remedy there is burning. Burning in the veins,
burning ih the capillaries, burning in the head, itching and burning of
the skin. Burning in inflamed parts. Internal burning and external
coldness. Coldness, with feeble circulation, with feeble heart. Icy
coldness. Hands and feet cold and dry. or cold and moist. Knees
cold ; nose cold ; ears cold ; tongue cold. Coldness in the stomach with
burning. Fainting. Covered all over with a cold sweat, as in collapse.
Collapse zviih cold breath, cold tongue, cold face. Looks like a
cadaver. In all these conditions of coldness the patient wants to be
fanned.

Bleeding runs all through the remedy. Oozing of blood from in-
flamed surfaces. Black bleeding from ulcers. Bleeding from the
lungs ; from the uterus ; from the bladder. Vomiting of blood. Pas-
sive haemorrhage. On account of the feeble circulation a capillary ooz-
ing will start up and continue. The remedy hardly ever has what may
be called an active gushing flow, such as belongs to Belladonna, Ipecac,
Aconite, Secale, and such remedies, where the flow comes with vio-
lence ; but it is a passive capillary oozing. The women suffer from this
kind of bleeding ; a little blood oozing all the time, so that the men-
strual period is prolonged. Oozing of blood after confinement, that
ought to be stopped immediately by contractions. There are no con-



CARBO VEGETABILIS


321


tractions of the blood vessels ; they are relaxed. Black venous oozing.
After a surgical operation there is no contraction and retraction of the
blood vessels. An injury to the skin bleeds easily. The arteries have
all been tied and closed, but the little veins do not seem to have any
contractility in their walls. An inflamed part may bleed. Feeble heart :
relaxed veins.

, Again, ulceration. If you have a case, such as I have described, with
relaxation of the blood vessels and feebleness of the tissues, you need
not be surprised if there is no repair, no tissue making. So, when a
part is injured, it will slough. If an ulcer is once established, it will not
heal. The tissues arc indolent. Hence we have indolent ulcers ; body,
ichorous, acrid, thin discharges from ulcers. The skin ulcerates ; the
mucous membranes ulcerate. Ulcers in the mouth and in the throat.
Ulceration everywhere because of that relaxed and feeble condition.
Poor tissue making, or none at all. '‘The blood stagnates in the capil-
laries,*’ is the way it reads in the text.

You can see how easy it would be for these feeble parts to develop
gangrene. Any little inflammation or congestion becomes black or
purple and sloughs easily- — that is all that is necessary to make gan-
grene. It is a wonderful remedy in septic conditions — blood poison-
ing — especially after surgical operations and after shock. It is a useful
remedy in septic conditions ; in scarlet fever ; in any disease which takes
on a sluggish form, with purplish and, mottled appearance of the skin.
In Garbo veg. the sleep is so full of anxiety that it may be said to be
awful. On going to sleep there is anxiety, suffering, jerking, twitch-
ing, and he has the horrors. Everything is horrible. Horrible visions ;
sees ghosts. A peculiar sluggish, death-like sleep, with visions. The
Garbo veg. patient wakens in anxiety and covered with cold sweat.
Exhaustion. Unrefreshed after sleep. And thus the whole patient is
prostrated by his sleep. So anxious that he does not want to go toi
sleep. Anxiety in the dark. Anxiety with dyspnoea as if he would
suffocate. Anxiety so great that he can not lie down.

In Garbo veg. indifference is a very prominent symptom. Inability
to perceive or to feel the impressions that circumstances ought to
arouse. His affections are practically blotted out, so that nothing that
is told him seems to arouse or disturb him. '‘Heard everything with-
out feeling pleasantly or unpleasantly, and without thinking about it.”
Horrible things do not seem to* affect him much ; pleasant things do not
affect him. He does not quite know whether he loves his wife and
children or not. This is a part of the sluggishness, the inability to
think or meditate, all of which is due to the turgescence. Sluggishness
of the veins. Head feels full ; distended. His mind is in confusion and
he cannot think. He cannot bring himself to realize whether a thing
be so or not, or whether he loves bis family or not, or whether he hates
4 ^



322


CARBO VEGETABIUS


his enemies or not. Benumbed ; stupid. There is another state —
anxiety and nightly fear of ghosts ; anxiety as if possessed ; anxiety on
dosing the eyes ; anxiety lying down in the evening ; anxiety again on
waking. He is easily frightened. Starting and twitching on going to*
sleep.

The headaches arc mostly occipital. His whole head is turgid, full,
distended. He feels as if the scalp was too tight. Everything is bound
up in the head. Awful occipital headaches. Cannot move, cannot
turn over, cannot lie on the side, cannot be jarred, because it seems as
if the head would burst, as if something was grasping the occiput.
Dull headache in the occiput. Violent pressive pain in the lower por-
tion of the occiput. Head feels heavy. When the pain is in the occi-
put the head feels drawn l)ack to the pillow, or as if it could not be
lifted from the pillow. Like Opium; he cannot lift the head from the
pillow. Painful throbbing in the head during inspiration. The Carbo
veg. patient takes short breaths, quietly, keeping just as still as possible,
until finally he is compelled to take a deep breath, and it comes out
with a sharp moan. Headache as from contraction of the scalp. Pain-
ful stitches through the whole head when coughing ; the whole head
burns. Intense heat of the head ; burning pain. Rush of the blood to the
head followed by nose-bleed. Congestion to the head with spasmodic
constriction, nausea, and pressure over the eyes. A feeling as of an
oncoming coryza from an overheated room. Many of these head-
aches come on from taking cold, from coryza, from slacking up of an
old catarrh. The Carbo veg. patient suffers from chronic catarrh. He
is at his best when he has a free discharge from the nose, but if he
takes cold and the discharge sto])s congestion to the head comes. He
cannot stand suppression of discharges. Headaches come on every
time he takes cold ; from cold damp weather ; from going into a cold
damp place and becoming chilled. Awful occipital headache, or head-
ache over the eyes, or headache involving the whole head, with pound-
ing like hammers. These states are like Kali bichromicum, Kali
iodatum and Sepia. Many of these headaches are due to stopped
catarrhal conditions.

The hair falls out by the handful. Eruptions come out upon the
head. School girls and boys, too, who are sluggish, slow to learn, and
suffer from night terrors ; they will not sleep alone, or go into a dark
room without someone with them. They have headaches, worse from
pressure of the hat. A long time after taking off the hat they still feel
the pressure. Sweat, cold sweat ; particularly sweat of the head and
of the forehead. The Carbo veg. patient breaks out into a copious
sweat, appearing first on the forhead, and the sweat is cold. The
forehead feels cold to the hand, and any wind blowing upon it will
produce pain ; he wants it covered up. Head sensitive to cold. If he



CABBO VEGETABiLtS


m

becomes overheated and his head perspires, and then a draft strikes
that sweating head, his catarrh will stop at once and headaches will
come on. His knees and hands and feet get cold, and he sweats without
relief.

The eye symptoms are troublesome, and they often occur along with
the headache. Burning pain in the eyes. The eyes become lustreless,
deep-set, and the pupils do not react to light. He feels sluggish men-
tally, and does not want to think, lie wants to sit or lie around, for
every exertion gives him a headache. Whenever this state is present
the eyes show it. You know he is sick because the bright, sparkling
look has gone out of his eyes. If he could only get somewhere by
himself and lie down — provided it was not dark — he would be com-
fortable. He wants to be let alone ; he is tired ; his day's work wears
him out. He comes home with a purple face, lustreless eyes, sunken
countenance, tired head and mind. Any mental exertion causes fatigue.
Weight in the head, distress and fulness in the head, wdth cold ex-
tremities. The blood mounts upward. Ilicmorrhagcs from the eyes ;
burning, itching and pressing in the eyes. The eyes become wx'ak from
overwork or from fine work.

Carbo veg. is one of the medicines for discharges from the ears.
Offensive, watery, ichorous, acrid and excoriating discharges, espe-
cially those dating back to malaria, measles or scarlet fever — particu-
larly to scarlet fever. A sluggish condition of the venous system. The
veins seem to be most affected in all old complaints, especially when-
ever a patient says of himself, or a mother says of her child, that he
has never been quite well since ati attack of malarial fever. The
daughter has never been quite well since she had the measles, or
typhoid fever, or scarlet fever Carbo veg. is one of the medi-
cines to be thought of when symptoms are in confusion, and the pa-
tient has been so much doctored that there is no congruity left in the
symptoms. Old car discharges, or old headaches, when all the symp-
toms have been suppressed. It is then Carbo veg. often becomes
one of the routine remedies to bring symptoms into order and to estab-
lish a more wholesome discharge from that ear. It brings about reac-
tion, establishes a better circulation and partially cures the case, after
which a better remedy may be selected.

Inflammation of the parotid glands, or mumps. When mumps
change their abode, from being chilled, and go in the girl to the mam-
mary glands, and in the hoy to the testes, Carbo veg. is one of the
medicines to restore order ; very often it will bring the trouble back to
its original place, and conduct it on through in safety. Pains in the
ear. Passive, badly-smelling discharges from the ear. Loss of hear-
ing. Ulceration of the internal ear. Something heavy seems to lie be-
fore the ears ; they seem stopped ; the hearing is diminished, especially



324


CAABO VEGETABtLIS


in those cases that date back to some old trouble.

The Garbo veg, patient is always suffering from coryza. He goes
into a warm room, and, thinking he is going out in a minute, he keeps
his overcoat on. Pretty soon he begins to get heated up, but he thinks
he will go in a minute and he does not take off his coat. A procedure
like that is sure to bring on a coryza. It will commence in the nose,
with watery discharge, and he will sneeze, day and night. He suffers
from the heat and is chilled by the cold ; every draft chills him ; and a
warm room makes him sweat, and thus he suffers from both. He can
find no comfortable place, and he goes on sneezing and blowing his
nose. Perhaps he has bleeding from the nose. At night he is purplish.
The coryza extends into the throat and brings on rawness and dryness
in the mouth and throat. A copious watery discharge, filling the
posterior nares and the throat. Then he begins to get hoarse, and in
the evening he has a hoarse voice, with rawness in the larynx and
throat. Rawness in the larynx on coughing ; soreness to the toucli.
The more he coughs the worse the rawness becomes. This condition
extends into the chest. Secretion of much thin mucus, finally becoming
thick yellowish-green, and bad-tasting. Such is the coryza. Now,
with it there comes a stomach disturbance that is commonly associated
with Garbo veg. complaints. Great distension of the abdomen with
gas. With this coryza he has belching, and sour, disordered stomach,
Eveiy time he disorders his stomach he is likely to get a coryza.
Every time he goes into an overheated room he is likely to get a
coryza, with sneezing, chest complaints, and catarrh.

This catarrhal state in the nose is only a fair example of what may
occur anywhere where there is a mucous membrane. Catarrhal conditions
with a flow of watery mucus and bleeding. Garbo veg. has catarrhs of
the throat, nose, eyes, chest, and vagina. Old catarrhal conditions of
the bladder ; catarrh of the bowels and stomach. It is pre-eminently a
catarrhal remedy. The woman feels best when she has more or less of
a Icucorrhoea — it seems a sort of protection. These discharges that we
meet every day are dried up and controlled by local treatments, by
washes, and by local applications of every kind — and the patient put
into the hands of the undertaker, or made a miserable wreck. If these
catarrhal patients are not healed from within out, the discharges had
better be allowed to go on. While these discharges exist the patient
is comfortable. It is quite common for the Garbo veg. patient to be
feverish with the coryza, but with many other complaints he is cold ;
cold limbs ; cold face ; cold body ; cold skin ; cold sweat. It is not so
common for the earlier stages of the coryza, and the catarrhal con-
ditions to have these cold symptoms. He is feverish in the evening
and at night. But after he passes into the second stage, when the
mucus is more copious, then come the cold knees, cold nose, cold feet,



CARBO VEGETABILIS


325


and cold sweat.

The face of Carbo veg. is a great study. In the countenance and
in the expression we see much that is general. The patient shows his
general state in his expression, especially in the eyes. He tells you how
sick he is ; he tells you the threatening points. In Carbo veg. there
is great pallor and coldness, with lips pinched and nose pointed and
drawn in. Lips puckered, blue, livid, sickly, deathly. Face cold, pale,
and covered with sweat. As the tongue is protruded for examination
it is pale and cold, and the breath is cold, yet he wants to be fanned.
This is true whether it be cholera, diarrhoea, exhaustive sweats, or
complaints after fevers. Sometimes, after a coryza has run its course
and ended in the chest, there is great dyspnoea, copious expectoration,
exhaustive sweat, great coldness — and the patient must be fanned.
Cough followed by dyspnoea, exhaustion, profuse sweats, with choking
and rawness — and he wants to be fanned. Cold face ; pinched face.
So the sufferings are expressed in the face. The pains and aches, and
anxiety and sorrow are all expressed in the face. The study of the
face is a delightful and profitable one. The study of the faces of
remedies is very profitable. It is profitable to study the faces of
healthy people that you may be able to judge their intentions from
their facial expressions. A man shows his business of life in his face ;
he shows his method of thinking, his hatreds, his longings, and his
loves. How easy it is to pick out ^ man who has never loved to do
anything but to eat — the Epicurean face. How easy it is to pick out
a man who has never loved anything but money — the miserly face.
You can see the love in many of the professional faces ; you can single
out the student's face. These arc only manifestations of the love of
the life which they live. Some manifest hatred ; hatred of the life
in which they have been forced to live ; hatred of mankind ; hatred of
life. In those who have been disappointed in everything they have
undertaken to do we see hatred stamped upon the face. We see these
things in remedies just as we see them in people. The study of the
face is a most delightful one. A busy, thoughtful and observing phy-
sician has a head full of things that he can never tell — things he knows
about the face. So the face expresses the remedy. In Carbo veg,
the face flushes to the roots of the hair after a little wine. This is a
strong characteristic. All over the body the skin will become flushed.
Sometimes a flush appears in islands, which grow together and become
one solid flush, creeping up into the hair. So great is the action of this
remedy upon the capillary circulation that sometimes a tablespoonful
of wine is sufficient to cause this flushing of the skin.

The old books talk about “scorbutic gums now we call it Rigg's
disease— a separation of the gums from the teeth. Bleeding of the
gums ; sensitiveness of the gums. Separation of the gums from the



CARBO VEGETABIIiS


326

teeth. The teeth get loose. We hear about '‘the teeth rattling in his
mouth.'' The Qarbons produce just such a state, a settling away and
absorbing of the gums. They get spongy and bleed easily, and hence
looseness of the teeth with bleeding of the gums, which are very sensi-
tive. Teeth decay rapidly. Bleeding of the gums when cleaning the
teeth. Teeth and gum affections from abuse of Mercury, Teeth feel
too long and are sore. Drawing and tearing in the teeth. Tearing in
the teeth from hot, cold or salt food : pain from both heat and cold.
This is in keeping with the general venous condition of the whole
system.

Sensitiveness of the tongue. Inflammation of the tongue. In certain
low forms of fever, like typhus and typhoid fevers, the gums turn
black — that is, they throw out a blackish, bloody, offensive, putrid
exudate. Jf disturbed or touched they bleed ; and the tongue piles up
that blackish exudate — that oozing of black blood from the veins.
This is present in })utrid forms of fevers like the typhoid — in zymotic
states. This remedy is rich in those zymotic symptoms, such as are
described in common speech as “blood-poisoning.” Carbo vcg. is a
sheet-anchor in low types of typhoid ; in scarlet fever where a typhoid
condition is coming upon the case, and in the last stages of collapse ;
in cholera, and in yellow fever at the time of collapse, where there
is coldness, cold sweat, great prostration, dyspnoea — wants to be fanned.
Great prostration with cold tongue.

The mouth and throat are lilled with little purple aphthous ulcers,
which were little white spots to begin with, but they have grown pur-
plish and now ooze black blood. These aphthous patches bleed easily,
burn and sting. Blisters form. Smarting, dryness of the mouth with
bleeding aphthous ulcers. These are common features of Carbo veg.
in any of the mouth and throat conditions. Tough mucus in the
throat ; bloody mucus in the throat. These little ulcers run together,
spread, and become one solid mass, A large surface will become
ulcerated, denuded of its mucous membrane, and then it will bleed.
Little black spots come upon it. Food cannot be swallowed because
the throat is so sore. Generally the throat feels puffed.

The Cargo veg. patient has a longing for coffee, acids, sweet and
salt things. Aversion to the most digestible things and the best of
food. For instance, aversion to meat, and to milk which causes
flatulence. Now, if I were going to manufacture a Carbo veg. con-
stitution I would commence with his stomach. If I wanted to produce
these varicose veins and the weak venous side of the heart, this fulness
and congestion, and flatulence, this disordered stomach and bowels,
and head and mind troubles — sluggishness of the economy — would
begin and stuff him. I would feed him with fats, with sweets, pud-
dings, pics and sauce, and all such undigestible trash, and give him



CARBO VEGETABILIS


3^7


plenty of wine — then I would have the Carbo veg. patient. Do we
ever have any such people to treat? Just as soon as they tell their
story, you will know enough about their lives to know that they are
mince pie fiends ; they have lived on it for years, and now they come
saying, “Oh, doctor, my stomach ; just my stomach ; if you will simply
fix up my stomach.'’ But what are you going to do with him ? He
has made himself into a Carbo veg. patient for you, and it may be
quite a while before you can bring him down to a sensible diet. Now
he must begin at the foot of the ladder. I only brought this up to
show how a Carbo veg. patient is produced and what kind of a stomach
he has, and what he has been living on. He has burning in the
stomach, distension of the stomach, constant eructations, flatulence,
passing offensive flatus. In reality he is in a foetid condition, a putrid
condition. His sweat is offensive. He has hearbuni ; eructations :
the stomach regurgitates the food that he takes.

Carbo veg. has much vomiting at the end of the chill. Vomiting
and diarrhoea. Vomiting and blood ; with the vomiting of blood the
body is icy cold ; breath cold. The pulse is thready and intermittent.
Fainting ; hippocratic face ; oozing of thick black blood. Vomiting of
sour, bloody, bilious masses.

There is an accumulation of flatus in the stomach, so that the
stomach feels distended. All food taken into the scomach seems to
turn into flatus ; he is always belching and is slightly relieved for a
while by belching. Carl)o veg. has ctamps in the bowels and stomach ;
burning pain : anxiety ; distension. , All these symptoms arc ameli-
orated by belching or passing flatus. Amelioration from belching
seems quite a natural event ; but when we study China, you will see
that the patient appears to be aggravated from belching. The idea is
that the patient gets relief from belching from eructation, but under
Lycopodium and China it seems that no relief comes. They belch
copiously and yet seem just as full of wind as ever, and sometimes
even seem to be worse. The Carbo veg. patient experiences a decided
relief from eructation. This is a particular symptom, but it becomes
almost general, and sometimes quite general. Headaches arc relieved
by belching ; rheumatic pains are relieved by belching ; sufferings and
distensions of various kinds are relieved by eructations.

This abdominal fulness aggravates all the complaints of the body.
The fulness, which is described as if in the veins, is sometimes in the
tissues, under the skin, so that it will crepitate. Tliis is a feature of
Carbo veg., and, in rheumatic conditions, part of the swelling is some-
times of this character. Food remains a long time in the stomach,
becomes sour and putrid. It passes into the bowels and ferments
further, finally passing off in the form of putrid flatus. There is colic,
burning pains, distension, fulness, constricting and cramping pains



CARBO VEGETABIUS


3^^

from this distension. The patient complains of feeling as if the
stomach were raw. This is described as a smarting, sometimes from
taking food ; sometimes from taking cold water. Carbo veg. has cured
ulceration of the stomach. It is a deep-acting medicine, and is capable
of curing all dirordered conditions of the stomach ; such as disorders
from eating indigestible things, mince pie, too hearty food.

In Carbo veg. the liver, like all the other organs, takes on a state of
torpidity and sluggishness. It becomes enlarged. The portal systemi
is engorged, and hence haemorrhoids develop. Pain and distension in
the region of the liver ; sensitiveness and burning in the liver, accom-
panied by a bloated condition of the stomach and bowels. A feeling
of tension in the region of the liver ; the part feels drawn, as if too

tight. There are pressing pains in the liver, and it is sensitive to touch.

Much that I have said regarding the flatulence and fulness of the
stomach applies also to the abdomen. Carbo veg. may be indicated in
low forms of fever, as in septic fever, when there is a marked tym-
panitic condition, with diarrhoea, bloody discharges, distension and
flatulence. Extremely putrid flatus escapes making the patient very
offensive. A striking abdominal symptom of Carbo veg. is that the

flatus collects here and there in the intestine as if it were in a lump ;

incarcerated flatus : a constriction of the intestine will hold it in one
place so that it feels like a lump or tumor, that finally disappears.
Colic here and there in the abdomen from flatus. There Ls burning
in the abdomen. No matter what the trouble is, in Carbo veg. there
is always burning. The part burns ; it feels full ; it becomes engorged
and turgid with blood. Diarrhoea, dysentery, cholera, when there is a
bloody, watery stool. Cholera infantum ; stool mixed with mucus ;
watery mucus mixed with blood. The child sinks from exhaustion,
with coldness, pallor and cold sweat. The nose, face and lips arc
pinched and hippocratic. With all diarrhocic troubles the prostration
will indicate Carbo veg. as much as, if not more than, the stool. In
the diarrhoea of Carbo veg. all the stools, no matter what kind, are
putrid, with putrid flatulence. The more thin, dark bloody mucus
there is, the better is the remedy indicated. Itching, burning and raw-
ness of the anus and round about, arc strong features of Carbo veg.
Soreness — in all diarrhoeic conditions — soreness to pressure over thq
abdomen. Round about the anus, in children, there is excoriation.
The parts are red, raw and bleeding, and they itch. Itching of the
anus in adults. Ulceration of the bowels. This tendency to ulceration
of mucous membranes is in keeping with the character of the remedy.
Whenever there are mucous membranes there may be ulceration.
Aphthous appearance. Ulceration of Peyer’s glands. The patient
lies in bed and oozes involuntarily a thin bloody fluid, like bloody
serum.



CARBO VECETABILIS


3^9

Old chronic catarrhal conditions of the bladder, when the urine
contains mucus, especially in old people, with cold face, cold extremi-
ties and cold sweat. There is suppression of urine.

In both the male and the female organs there is a weakness and re-
laxation. The male organs hang down. Relaxation of the genitalia ;
cold and sweating genitals. The fluids escape involuntarily.

In the woman the relaxation is manifested by a dragging down
sensation ; dragging down of the uterus, as if the internal parts would
escape. The uterus drags down so that she cannot stand on her feet.
All the internal organs feel heavy and hang down.

Another strong feature of Carbo veg. is dark, oozing haemorrhage
from the uterus. It is not so often a copious gushing haemorrhage —
the remedy has that also — but it is an oozing. The menstrual flow
will ooze from one period almost to another. The blood is putrid and
dark, even black, with small clots, and considerable serum escapes with
it. It says in the text: ‘"Metrorrhagia from uterine agony.'' Atony
is a good name for the condition ; lack of tone ; relaxation ; weakness
of the tissue. Atony is everywhere present in the Carbo veg, con-
stitution. The muscles are tired, the limbs are tired, the whole being
is tired and relaxed. This is in contradistinction to the gushing found
in Belladonmi, Ipecac, Secale and Hamamelis, where the blood escapes
in great gushes, followed quite naturally by a contraction of the uterus,
for there is more or less tonicity in connection with it. In Carbo veg.,
either in connection with couliiicment or menstruation, or in an inci-
dental haemorrhage, the uterus does Hot contract. Subinvolution from
mere atony ; no contraction ; no tonicity ; weakness and relaxation.
After menstruation, confinement and the various complaints that
woman is subject to, there is a period of weakness that Carbo veg.
often fits. When there is a retained placenta, with scanty haemorrhage
— ^^just an oozing, with no tendency to a gush of blood — the physician
remembers that throughout the whole pregnancy and confinement
there has been sluggishness and slowness of pains, and he says: ‘"Why
did I not think of Carbo veg. before? '' The woman has needed Carbo
veg. for a month. He administers a dose, and before he has time to
think about it, the uterus will expel that placenta and fix up matters
so nicely that he will not need the mechanical interference that might
otherwise have been necessary.

Now-a-days we hear so much about this meddlesome mid-wifery,
this curetting, and doing this and that and the other thing, that it makes
a homoeopathic physician disgusted. Just as if those parts were not
made by Nature, and could not take care of themselves ; as if they
must be swabbed out and syringed out. These injections and and bichlor-
ides, etc., to keep the germs out of a woman are all nonsense. If a
state of order is maintained there will be no germs, A homoeopathic

42



GARBO VEGETABIUS


330

physician can manage hundreds of these cases, and have no trouble.
If he sees clearly beforehand what remedy the woman needs there will
be no bad cases ; they will all take care of themselves. Irregular con-
tractions that bring on abnormal conditions are all avoided if the
woman is turned into order before she goes into confinement. Carbo
vcg. is one of the medicines that prepares a woman well for confine-
ment, that is, the symptoms calling for Carbo Veg. are often present
in such conditions. She is often run down, relaxed and tired. Preg-
nancy brings about a great many unusual conditions. There is the
nausea in pregnancy ; the flatulence ; the offensiveness ; the weakness ;
the enlarged veins. They will tell you that the enlargement of the
veins of the lower limbs is from pressure, but it is generally not from
pressure, but from weakness of the veins themselves.

Suppression of milk ; prostration or great debility from nursing. It
is not natural for a woman in a healthy state to become prostrated
when nursing her child. She becomes so because she is sick. She
was in a state of debility before she began nursing, and the weakness
should be corrected by an appropriate remedy. Then she can make
milk and feed her child without feeling the loss of it. Such is the
state of order. Carbo veg. is a friend to the woman, and a friend to
her offsprings. You will be astonished, after ten years of real homoeo-
pathic practice, that you have so few deformed babies : that they have
all groivn up and prospered ; that their little defects and deformities
have been outgrown, and that they are more beautiful than most chil-
dren, because they have been kept orderly. The doctor watches and
studies him, and feeds him a little medicine now and then, that the
mother suspects is sugar, to keep on the good side of the baby. She
need not know that it is medicine, or that anything is the matter with
the baby. So he watches the develomcpt of that little one, and grows
him out of all his unhealthy tendencies. The children that grow up
under the care of the homoeopathic physician will never have con-
sumption, or Bright’s disease ; they are all turned into order, and they
will die of old age, or be worn out properly by business cares ; they will
not rust out. It is the duty of the physician to watch the little ones.
To save them from their inheritances and their downward tendencies
is the greatest work of bis life. That is worth living for. When we
see these tendencies cropping out in the little ones we should never
intimate that they are due to the father or mother. It is only offensive
and does no good. The physician’s knowledge as to what he is doing
is his own, and the greatest comfort he can get out of it is his own.
He need never expect that anyone will appreciate what he has done,
or what he has avoided. The physician who desires praise and sym-
pathy for what he has done generally has no conscience. The noble,
upright, truthful physician works in the night ; he works in the dark ;



CARBO VRO&tABILlS


3SI

he works quietly ; he is not seeking for praise. He does this when
called to the house, and when members of the family bring little ones
to the office. In this manner children can be studied and their symp*
toms observed and enquired into. Whenever the mother brings the
child, expecting medicine, she may know that he is receiving medicine,
blit when she does not ask for medicine let her suspect that Johnnie
is getting sugar so the doctor can get on the good side of him. That
is sufficient.

In Carbo veg. the voice manifests a great many symptoms. I de-
scribed a part of them when going over the coryza. I explained how
it began in the nose, and traveled to the throat, the larynx, and the
chest. Now many of the complaints of the larynx begin with a cold
in the nose, which finally locates permanently in the larynx — and in
that way we bring out the Carbo veg. cases. It is only now and then
that the Carbo veg. cold settles in the larynx first ; it usually travels
through the nose. Most remedies have a favorite place for beginning
a cold. For instance, the majority of Phosphorus colds begin in the
chest or larynx. Not so with Carbo veg. ; its cold generally begins in
the nose, with a coryza, and the larynx is simply one of the stopping
places. If the Garbo veg. cold goes down into the chest it may have
its ending in the bronchial tubes or the lungs. There is a favorite place
for it to settle, and it seems as if it were going to remain there. Weak-
ness in the larynx from talking. ' Tired larynx of speakers and
singers, and feeble, relaxed persons. ^The hoarseness comes on in the
evening. The larynx may be fairly well in the morning, but as soon
as it becomes evening his voice becomes husky. In more serious forms
he may be speechless in the morning, but hoarseness and huskincss in
the evening are more characteristic. Huskiness and rawness in the
evening. Rawness in the larynx when coughing. Some will say there
is burning, some will say rawness. Rawness in the larynx and trachea
when coughing. A continual formation of mucus in the larynx, which
he has to scrape and cough out. We see the same tendency to weak-
ness in the mucous membranes. No tendency to repair ; no tendency
to recover. He goes on from bad to worse, with a catarrhal condition
of the larynx and trachea. Hoarseness and rawness from talking,
worse afternoon and evening. He is obliged to clear his throat so
many times in the evening that the larynx becomes raw and sore. Let
me tell you another thing about the Materia Medica. Most of the
provers were laymen, and hence there is some confusion of terms in
the provings. This the physicians must see. Irritation in the throat
from coughing nearly always means irritation in the larynx, though
the prover said “throat.’' Now here is an expression, “obliged to clear
his throat so often in the evening that the larynx becomes raw and
sore.” Clearing the throat would not make the larynx sore. Scraping



332


CARBO VEGETABIUS


the throat does not scrape the larynx ; but he is obliged to clear his
larynx so often that the part feels raw. Ulcerative pain, scraping and
titilation in the larynx. Irritation in the larynx causing sneezing.
Laryngeal phthisis. This catarrhal condition and lack of repair in the
larynx goes on so long that tuberculosis begins.

Garbo veg. is one of the greatest medicines we have in the beginning
of whooping cough. Its cough has all the gagging, vomiting and red-
ness of the face found in whooping cough. It is one of our best
medicines when the case is confused ; when the cough indicates no
remedy or when it remains in a partially developed state. A dose of
Garbo veg. in such cases will improve matters very much, and minor
cases of whooping cough may be wiped out in a few days. When the
remedy does not cure permanently, it brings out more clearly the
symptoms calling for another remedy. Most cases of whooping cough,
in the care of a homoeopathic physician, will get well in a week or ten
days under a carefully selected remedy. When allowed to run, they
continue a long time, gradually increasing for six weeks, and then de-
clining according to the weather. If it is in the fall, the cough will
sometimes keep up all winter ; so whooping cough furnishes an oppor-
tunity for the homoepathic physician to demonstrate that there is
something in Homoeopathy.

The Garbo veg. patient suffers very much from difficulties of breath-
ing. Suffocation ; cannot lie down. A feeling of weakness in the
chest, as if he could not get another breath. Sometimes it is due to
cardiac weakness, and sometimes to stuffing up of the chest. The
latter is most common. Sometimes the difficulty is asthmatic. Th.e
remedy cures asthma. We will see the patient propped up in a chair
by an open window, or some members of the family may be fanning
him as fast as possible. The face is cold, the nose pinched, the ex-
tremities cold and he is as pale as death. Put the hand in front of the
mouth, and the breath feels cold. The breath is offensive ; putrid.
The extremities are cold clear to the body ; not only the hands, but the
whole upper extremities ; and not only the feet, but the limbs clear to
the body, are cold. The body only feels warm ; even the skin is cold.

Garbo veg. has a rattling cough with retching and vomiting. A
morning cough, with much rattling in the chest ; the chest fills with
mucus, and on endeavouring to expectorate he coughs and gags, or
coughs and vomits. At any time during the day a peculiar choking,
gagging, retching cough may develop from the mucus in the chest.
He cannot get it up ; it is tough, purulent, yellow and thick. Greatly
reduced vitality ; great relaxation ; worn out persons, old people. Per-
sons worn out from coughing or from prolonged exertion. Prostra-
tion. Catarrh of the chest, with copious expectoration.

At times there will be a hard, dry hacking cough, but finally, after



CARBO VEGETABIUS


333


prolonged coughing, it commences to loosen and he throws up great
quantities of mucus. A dry, hacking cough, yet there is rattling in the
chest, and the cough does not seem to do any good. He seems to
cough and become exhausted, sweats and strangles. It seems as if
he would suffocate with the cough. Finally he succeeds in getting up
some mucus, and the follows mouthful after mouthful of thick puru-
lent expectoration. Frequent attacks of spasmodic cough in violent
paroxysms lasting for many minutes, sometimes an hour. Cold sweat,
coldness and pinched appearance of the face. This increases as he
goes into the paroxysm of coughing. His face looks haggard, so dis-
tressed does he become while in a paroxysm of coughing. This state
is present in old phthisical cases, in the advanced stage, when they are
incurable. Under such circumstances Carbo veg. furnishes an ex-
cellent palliative. It seems to strengthen the muscles of the chest so
that the patient can expectorate better. It mitigates the cough ; the
gagging and retching and dyspnoea arc relieved, and he is temporarily
improved. It is a wonderful palliative in many incurable conditions
with dyspnoea and weakness of the chest. In Bright’s Disease, in
phthisis, and in cancerous affections Carbo veg. stops the violent
symptoms and mitigates greatly.

This remedy is one to begin whooping cough with. It simplifies the
case greatly, and sometimes cures it in a few days. The patient coughs
until the chest is sore, as if he had bpen beaten all over the chest. All
night he has paroxysms of coughing. He sleeps into a paroxysm of
coughing, like Lachesis. He rouses ; up from sleep with coughing,
gagging, sweating and suffocation. He will go two or three hours
without a paroxysm, and then on comes one that will last an hour.
He has two or three hard paroxysms of coughing during the night.
He commences to fill up, he hears the rattling breathing and he knows
that before long he will have a hard time of it.

This goes on, and on, to the end of his life in asthmatic cases — what
is called "humid asthma”. Real humid asthma comes on in persons
who suffer from contractions of the small bronchial tubes, so that even
at the best there are little whistlings in the chest. Every time such
patients take cold their whistling increases. They expectorate mucus,
at first copious, then tough and finally purulent. During all this there
is great asthmatic dyspnoea. Carbo veg. is an excellent remedy in all
those cases of asthma where the shortness of breath is so marked that
there is only a partial oxidation, as a result of which he suffers much
from occipital headache and wants to be fanned. Old cases of re-
current asthma. Every time there comes a warm wet spell his asthma
comes on. It is common for Carbo veg. asthma to come on in the
night. He goes to bed without warning of an oncoming attack, only
he says, “I don’t like the weather and he wakes up with asthma.



334


Carso VEGEtABiiia


He w^es up suffocating, springs out of bed and goes to the window
or wants to be fanned.

Carbo veg. required in old, badly-treated cases of pneumonia, with
a remaining bronchitis ; in cases where there has bwn hepatization
that was not cleared up, and there are bad places in the lungs and
bronchial tubes, with weakness of the chest. Weakness of the chest
when coughing. He feels that there is not enough force in the muscle
of the chest to get up a good cough, or to help him carry on the breath-
ing. Pneumonia, third stage, with foetid expectoration, cold breath,
cold sweat, desire to be fanned. Threatened paralysis of the lungs
This is a combination of clinical states that the remedy covers well.
Sometimes these asthmatic cases go on for a while, and then comes
an infiltration of tubercle. If Carbo veg. can be given early it will
prevent infiltration.

There is pain in the chest, and burning. Burning in the lungs ; burn-
ing in the sides of the chest ; burning with the cough ; burning behind
the sternum — the whole length of the trachea ; burning aggravated
when coughing ; a sense of rawness even when breathing. He feels
a load upon the chest, an oppression, a great weight. These are the
various words that he uses, all descriptive of the same thing.

The heart comes in for a great deal of trouble. It appears to be
struggling. Of course it is the venous side of the heart that is in dis-
tress. The veins are engorged. It is a venous condition of the whole
patient ; the veins are performing their labor with great difficulty. A
state of relaxation, struggling, and there are orgasms of blood — de-
scribed by some of the authors as an orgasm, by others as a tumultu-
ous action of the hean felt throughout the body. Pulsation felt all
over the body. Flushes of heat mounting upwards, ending in a sweat.
Suitable sometimes for women at the turn of life. Especially suitable
to persons in advanced years.

Carbo veg. complaints come on in a weakly state in young people ;
as if it were a premature old age in the middle-aged people; or in the
breaking down that naturally belongs to old age. It is a great com-
forter for aged people with enlarged veins, or fulness of the veins and
coldness of the extremities. Oozing of blood, with palpitation-
tumultuous action of the heart. The pounding goes on like a great
machine, shaking the whole body.

'fhe pulse is almost imperceptible. It seems as though the volume
of blood ought to be tremendous, but it is not. Weakness of the whole
vascular system. Pulse irregular, intermittent, frequent. Blood stag-
nates in the capillaries. Complete torper ; impending paralysis of the
heart. Burning in the region of the heart. With this there is an
awful feeling of anxiety in the chest — in the re^on of the heart — as
if he were going to die, or as if something were going to happen. He



CARBO VEGETABIUS


335


feels that tumultuous action and tires out under it.

In going over the remedy I have said so much about the limbs, their
coldness and the cold sweat, that I have practically covered most of
the symptoms that belong to the extremities. Car bo vcg. is an ex-
cellent remedy for the general constitutional disorder where there arc
indolent varicose ulcers upon the lower limbs — the legs above the
ankles. There is no activity in these ulcers ; thin watery discharge or
it is thick, bloody and ichorous. Burning indolent ulcers ; varicose
ulcers ; swelling of the limbs. A gangrenous state from the extremely
feeble circulation. Gangrenous condition such as old people have,
senile gangrene. The limbs wither ; the toes and lower parts wither
and look dusky. There are blisters upon them and they ooze a bloody,
watery fluid. Burning like fire. Loss of sensation. Stiffness in the
joints. Excoriating sweat between the toes, and numbness. Numb-
ness in the limb lain on. If he lies on the right side, the right hand
gets numb. It he turns over on the left side, the left arm gets numb.
The circulation in the part is so feeble that if there is any pressure the
part becomes numb. The surface is cold. The extremities arc cold.
He is indolent, weak and always tired, with an aversion to mental and
physical work. Every little exertion brings on a feeling as if he would
faint and collapse.

The sleep is full of dreams. Hfc wakes up with dyspnoea, wakes
with cold limbs, especially cold kneefe. Legs drawn up during sleep
Unrefreshed after sleep. The dreams he has arc the kind that most
of these patients have where the reijaedy acts so violently upon the
veins, upon the basilar portion of the brain, and upon the voluntary
system. They are awful. He dreams of fire, burglars, fearful and
horrible things. Anxiety, restlessness and congestion of the head pre-
vent his going to sleep. Rush of blood to the head. His head feels
hot, but to the hand the skin feels cold. The inner chest feels as if
burning, but the outer chest feels cold to the hand. So it is in the
abdomen. The feeling of internal heat and burning, with external
coldness, is a common feature of Garbo veg.

The fever is violent ; it has a violent rigor or chill. Of course during
the chill he is cold, but there is one strange feature, he wants cold water
during the chill, and when the fever comes on he has no thirst. That
is strange ; it is uncommon. It is common for patients to be thirsty
when they- are hot with fever, and when cold not to «isk for water. It
is common not to ask for water during sweat. But in this patient you
observe coldness, rigor, cold breath, and even in the chill sometimes a
cold sweat, and you say that it is peculiar that he drinks so much cold
water. It is strange ; it is uncommon ; rare. Hence it is one of the
strong features of Garbo veg. febrile conditions.

With the chill of this remedy one side of the body frequently feels



336


CARBONEUM SULPHURATOM


in its natural state of heat, that is, naturally warm, while the other side
is cold. One-sided chill. Chill with icy coldness of the body. Chill
with great thirst. Sweats easily, especially about the head and face
Exhausting night or morning sweats. Sweat profuse, putrid or sour.

Low forms of fever like yellow fever, and a very low type of typhus-
and typhoid fevers. After the fever has somewhat subsided he has
prolonged cold spells with lack of reaction. He does not seem to rally,
but he is cold, his knees are cold, his breath is cold, cold sweat, a sort
of paralytic weakness. Cadavaric aspect of the face. Cyanotic face
Coldness of the limbs. Yellow fever in the last stage, the stage of
haemorrhage, with great paleness of the face. Violent headache,
trembling of the body, collapvse with cold breath, cold sweat, cold nose.
Nose and face pinched. Vital powers very low, tells a great deal of
the story of Carbo veg. Lack of reaction after some violent attack,
some violent shock, some violent suffering. In weakly persons who
give right out, with dyspnoea, coldness, copious sweat, exhaustion,
collapse and cadaveric aspect, Carbo veg. must be given.

Carbo veg. is indicated after surgical shock, when the patient goes
into collapse, and is in danger of dying from the shock of the opera-
tion. This is before inflammation sets in, for there is not vitality
enough to arouse an inflammation. The heart is too weak to estab-
lish reaction enough for an inflammation. Inflammation comes after
a reaction. But if reaction does not take place, Carbo veg. is one of
our most important remedies.

CARBONEUM SULPHURATUM

The complaints and symptoms, of Carbon bisulphide are worse in
the MORNING, forenoon, afternoon, evening, night, before midnight.
It is a remedy of great depth of action, frequently indicated and long
neglected. Strong desire for open air and the open window ; better
in the open air but worse from a draft. It is our most useful remedy
in patients broken down from the long use of alcoholic stimulants.
Weakness and suffocation from ascending stairs. Bathing brings on
many symptoms. Many symptoms are worse after breakfast. It is a
most useful remedy to restrain the growth of cancer (like Graphites)
and it has cured lupus. He is extremely sensitive to every change of
weather, especially to warm damp weather, A condition not unlike
chlorosis is produced by this drug. It is very useful in chronic rheu-
matism, especially of the joints. Extremely sensitive to the clothing.
He is sensitive to both cold and heat Cold in general aggravates or
brings on many symptoms. Worse from becoming cold ; from cold air ;
after becoming cold ; takes cold easily ; takes cold from exposure to
cold air when overheated. Like Carbo veg. it is a most useful remedy



CARBONfiUM SULPHURATUM


337


m collapse. Marked venous stasis in organs and parts. Constriction
of any parts. Constriction like a band around parts. Constriction of
the heart. It is suitable in clonic and epileptic spasms. Dwarfishness
of body and mind. Distension of the blood vessels and varicose veins,
CEdema of the extremities. It is both better and worse after eating.
Gradual shinking of all the muscles, even to marked emaciation. The
lymphatic glands are enlarged. Fainting followed by stupefaction and
loss of memory. Symptoms arc worse from cold feet ; fat food ; milk ;
warm foods ; warm drinks ameliorate. Full feeling internally and gen-
eral venous engorgement. Gouty condition of joints. Passive haemor-
rhage, Lack of vital heat. Internal and external heaviness. Indura-
tion of glands. Marked lassitude and constant desire to lie down.

Many conditions are worse from a jar and from stepping. Anaes-
thesia of the skin and mucous membranes.

Weakness follows straining of muscles. Lying ameliorates except
respiration and head symptoms. Feels belter while lying. Complaints
worse before, durjnc and ajlcr menses. Motion increases all symp-
toms and he dreads motion. Mucous secretions copious, thick and
viscid. Numbness of single parts and parts lain on. Orgasm of blood
in the body. Pain in bones and glands. Pains of many kinds in all
parts of the body. Short and cpiick attacks and at regular intervals.
Paroxysmal pains. Sore bruised pains in body and limbs. Burning
pains internal and external. Cutting, jerking and shooting pains.
Pressing pains are very common in all parts. Stitching pains and itch-
ing stitching pains in all parts. Violent tearing pains ; extending down-
wards. Wandering pains ; wandering, jerking, stitching pains. Par-
alysis one sided ; of organs : painless. Pressure helps most symptoms.
Pulsation all over the body. Pulse spasmodic and rapid ; pulse slow ;
^2. Rheumatic conditions with or without fever. Chronic rheumatic
states. Extreme sensitiveness to pain. He is worse after pain and
from standing. Stiffness in body and limbs. Complaints from sum-
mer heat. Dropsical swelling and swollen glands. Trembling all over ;
tubercular tendency ; lungs and bow^els. Twitching of muscles. Wine
increases all his sufferings and brings on many complaints. Walking
increases sufferings ; walking in open air aggravates many symptoms.
He is worse from the heat of summer and from the cold of winter.
Worse from warm wraps, warm room, warm bed and warmth in
general, yet he is sensitive to cold. Extreme weakness in the morn-
ing ; in old drunkards ; in the heat of summer ; during menses ; after
stool. Painful weariness in the morning.

Very absent minded and so irascible that he breaks things that hap-
pen to be in his hands : when spoken to. Anxiety in the morning;
evening in bed; night; before midnight: of conscience, with fear;
about the future ; before menses. Biting things in delirium. Ca-

43


CARBONEUM SULPHURATUM


pricious at times. Cheerful in the morning after passing much flatus.
Aversion to company. Concentration difficult when reading. Con-
fusion of mind in the morning on waking ; from mental exertion ; from
pain in the head ; as if intoxicated. Very conscientious about small
matters. Fantastic delirium at night, raving and tries to bite. Sees
visions ; excitement at night. Illusions of fancy. There is despair,
discontentment, discouragement and distraciion. Dullness of mind,
in the morning ; thinking is very difficult. Very excitable. Exhilara-
tion — bordering on drunkenness. Fear ; morning ; night ; of death ;
of insanity ; of misfortune ; of people ; of walking in the dark. Forget-
ful ; forgets what she was to do with the things and held them in her
hand. Frightened easily. Hilarity and extravagant gaiety. Hurried
feeling. Hysterical conduct. Irresolution, indifference and mental
sluggishness. Indolence, Worse in the morning. Imbecility and insan-
ity. Ideas abundant at first, later confusion and stupefaction. Irri-
tability in the morning. Weak memory ; cannot find the right word ;
misplaces words when writing. His mood is constantly changing ;
morose ; easily offended ; rage ; mental prostration. Religious affec-
tions. Very restless during the night ; worse before midnight. Sad^
ness in the evening ; during chill ; during fever ; during perspiration.
He sings and whistles. Inclination to sit in silence. Averse to being
spoken to. Maniacal conduct. Jumps out of the window. Stares at
her hands with a vacant look. Starting during sleep. Suspicious.
Talkative at first, later indisposed to talk. Talking in sleep. Persistent
tormenting thoughts. Timidity. Unconscious. Violent actions.
Weeping much ; alternating with laughing ; in sleep. Vertigo, in the
morning on rising ; afternoon ; evening ; better in open air ; as if intox-
icated ; during menses ; while silting ; when stooping ; a tendency lo
fall forward ; when walking ; when walking in open air.

Coldness of the forehead. Constriction like a band ; of forehead ;
of the occiput. Dandruff on the scalp. A sensation of emptiness in
the head. Eruptions ; crusts ; eczema ; itching ; moist ; scaly ,
pimples, sore and painful. Erysipelas of the scalp. The head
falls forward when walking. A sensation of fluctuation in the
head on moving the head. Fullness in the head ; in the forehead.
The hair falls out. Heat in the afternoon ; in forehead ; in
THE VERTEX. Heaviness in the head ; after breakfast. Hyper-
aemia of the brain. The scalp itches violently. Movements felt
in the head. Nodules in the scalp sore to touch. Numbness of the
vertex. Pain in the head in the morning in bed ; on waking ; at 9
A, M. ; in the afternoon ; in the evening ; at night ; 10 p. m. ; better in
the open air : worse ascending steps, binding up the hair ; after break-
fast ; after dinner : after eating ; from becoming heated ; from a jar ;
from heavy stepping ; from mental exertion ; from motion ; from shak-



CARBONEUM SULPHURATUM


339


ing the head ; after sleep ; after stool ; in a warm room. Headache
comes on from cold ; during chill ; during fever. Rheumatic
headaches. Catarrhal headaches. Headache with pain in back of the
neck. Pulsating pain on motion of the head and when thinking or
reading. Violent headache, increased until the mind is affected. Pain
in the forehead in the morning on waking, lasting all day, violent in
the forenoon. Pain in occiput evening and night. Pain in sides of
head. One sided headache, worse left. Pain in temples in the after-
noon, worse shaking head and on stooping. Pulsating pain in temples
in the morning on waking 6 a. m. Pain in vertex. Boring pain in
forehead and temples. Burning pain in vertex. Culling in temples,
worse after dinner. Drawing pain in forehead lo p. m. in occiput ; in
temples. Dull pain in head toward evening. Jerking pain in forehead.
Pressing pain in the head in forenoon. Pressing pain in forehead with
sleepiness, worse reading and stooping ; over eyes ; extending to eyes
and temples. Pressing pain in occiput ; in temples, extending to ver-
tex ; in VER’i'EX ali. day. Sore bruised pain in head. Stitching pain in
temples worse on left side, extending to occiput. Tearing pains better
in open air and during rest ; in forehead ; occiput ; sides ; temples ;
worse on left side. Cold perspiration on forehead. The scalp is sen-
sitive to the brush. Pulsation in occiput and temples. Electric shock
in the head.

The eyelids stick together during the night. The discharges arc
acrid, bloody, purulent and yellow. ; Dulness of the eyes. Eruptions
about the eyes ; on the lids, pustules on upper lids that itch and burn.
Falling lids. Granular lids. The ^cs feel hot. Heaviness of the lids
and they are sore on moving them. Catarrhal inflammation of eyes
and lids. Conjunctiva full of dark veins. Insensibility of the cornea.
Itching of the eyes and lids, Lachrymation in the open air and when
reading. Pain in eyes on moving them ; aching ; burning pain with
headache, morning ; when reading ; evening ; margin of lids when read-
ing ; in canthi. The pains are cutting, pressing ; as from sand ; sore,
itching and tearing. Drawing backwards. Pressing in the evening
with great heat in the eyes. Itching while reading and after stool.
Pupils contracted, also dilated. Photophobia. Quivering in lids. Red-
ness of eyes ; of lids ; edges of lids. Recurrent styes. Staring and
sunken eyes. Swollen lids. Thick lids. Twitching Jids. Ulceration
of the cornea ; of the lids. Weak eyes. Vision dim ; objects seem too
far off. Diplopia. Flickering. Loss of vision. Vanishing of sight.
Myopia,

Discharge from ear ; bloody, foetid, offensive, purulent. Redness of
the ears. Eruption behind ears. Sensation of flapping in cars. The
ears are red and hot. Inflammation in middle ear and auditory canal.
Itching in ears. Noises in ears ; morning ; evening ; night ; buzzing ;



340


CARBONEUiM SULPHURATUM


cracking : chirping ; fluttering ; huiiiniing ; reverberations ; ringing ;
ROARING ; rushing sounds. Pain in cars afternoon and evening ; when
swallowing. Pressing, stitching and tearing pains. Stitching after
stool worse in right car. Pulsation in car. Stopped sensation in ear.
Hearing at first acute, later impaired and finally lost. It has cured
ear cough.

It is a most useful remedy for chronic catarrh of the nose. The nose
is cold. Coryza in open air ; with chill : constant ; with cough ; fluent ;
dry in evening. Discharges from nose of all kinds and consistency,
Clear; copious ; crusis and scabs ; excoriating ; greenish ; hard chunks ;
offensive ; purulent ; thick ; viscid ; water ; thick yellow pus. Redness
and burning of the tip of the nose. Dryness in nose. Epistaxis morn-
ing and evening, dark blood ; on blowing nose. Itching. in nose. Ob-
struction OF NOSE. Foetid odor from nose. Ozscyia. Pain and sore-
ness in nose. Burning in root of nose. It has cured polypus in nose.
Smell acute for odors, later smell is wanting. Frequent sneezing. The
nose is swollen. Ulcers high up in nose.

The face is bloated and chlorotic. Sensation of tension in the face.
The face is cold and the lips are cracked. The face is divscolored ;
bluish ; dark ; pale ; sickly ; yellow. Dry burning lips. Eruptions on
chin ; lips ; around mouth ; on nose. Acne rosacea on face and fore-
head. Acne of drunkards. Comedones. Ousty eruptions on face and
nose. Herpes on face with tearing pains in limbs. Moist itching erup-
tions. Pimples, pustules, rash. Red eruptions on checks and nose.
Scurfy scaly eruptions. Tetter on left cheek. Vesicles on face. Phleg-
monous erysipelas. Expression is anxious ; bewildered ; sickly ; suf-
fering ; vacant. Heat of face evening ; during chill flashes. Itching
of face. Pain in face in cold air ; while lying. Burning face and lips.
Drawing, sore, bruised, stitching and tearing pain in face. Cold sweat
on face. Stiffness of jawL Sunken look. Swelling of face ; cedema-
tous ; glands ; parotid ; sub-maxillary. Tension in muscles of lower
jaw. Ulceration of lips.

Anaesthesia of mouth and tongue. Aphtha* of mouth and tongue.
Bleeding of mouth and gums. The tongue feels cold. The tongue is
cracked. The gums arc detached from the teeth. The tongue is coated
white ; dryness of mouth and tongue in the morning with unquench-
able thirst. Odor from mouth offensive : putrid. Burning mouth and
tongue. Saliva is bloody. Copious flow of saliva. Speech difficult
and stammering. Gums swollen. Taste is bad ; biti'er in the morning ;
foul, metallic ; nauseous ; pasty ; saltish ; sour ; sweetish. Tickling of
soft palate after lying down. Ulcers in the mouth. The teeth are on
edge and loose. Pain in teeth evening and night ; in cold air ; from
cold water ; during and after eating ; when masticating ; from touch ;
from warm food and drink ; from external warmth ; from both warm



CARBONEUM SULPilURATUM


34 ‘


and cold things. The pains are drawing ; jerking ; jerkin g-stit clung ;
pulsating; stitching; tearing; jerking-stitching at 9 a. m, ; pulsating
evening and night. Tearing in afternoon and in cold air.

Catarrh of the throat in cold weather with choking dryness, redness
and sensation of fulness. Constant desire to hawk. Inflainination of
the throat with gangrenous tendency. Sensation of a lump in throat.
Mucus in throat in morning ; viscid ; tasting salty. Pain in throat on
coughing ; on swallowing ; on empty swallowing. Burning in throat
extending to stomach. Burning in oesophagus. Rawness and sore-
ness. Stitching on swallowing ; in oesophagus as if bone had lodged
in throat. Scraping the throat ; spasms of the oesophagus. Constant
disposition to swallow. Difficult swallowing. Swelling of throat and*
tonsils. Ulceration of throat. Induration of glands of the external
throat. The glands of neck are swollen. Enlarged thyroid gland.

Appetite diminished or wanting with easy satiety. Appetite is rave-
nous without relish of food ; with aversion to food. Aversion to fats ;
fish ; food ; meat ; milk. Cold sensation in stomach. Sensation of con-
striction. Desire for beer. Cold drinks ; sour things ; distension after
eating. Sensation of emptiness. Eructations empty ; after eating ; in-
effectual ; after milk ; while walking. Eructations ameliorate. Eruc-
tations acrid ; bitter ; empty ; of food ; foul ; loud : nauseous : rancid,
sour ; waterbrash. Fulness in stomach after eating. Gnawing in stom-
ach. Heartburn after eating. Flushi^s of heat in stomach. Heaviness,
hiccough and loathing of food. Nau^ka in morning ; afternoon ; night ;
after eating ; with fainting ; better after eructations ; during headache ;
on entering a room or going into open air. Pain in stomach in the
morning ; in night ; after breakfast ; after cold drinks ; after eating ;
during menses. Burning after stool. Cramping and pinching. Press-
ing pain in stomach after eating and after stool. Soreness in stomach.
Stabbing extending to back. Stitching pains. Pulsation. Retching
with the cough. ‘*A tied together feeling.'" Thirst in the morning ;
burning thirst ; during chill ; extreme thirst ; during heat ; drinks large
quantities of water. Vomiting in the morning ; on coughing ; after
eating ; with headache ; during menses ; vomiting bile ; bitter water ;
blood ; food ; green mucus ; sour ; watery.

Sensation in abdomen as if diarrhoea would come on. Distension
after eating ; tympanitic. Abdominal effusion. Flatulence in abdo-
men ; obstructed ; in caecal region. Fulness after breakfast. Heaviness
and gurgling. Hardness of the abdomen ; of the liver. Liver affec-
tions with dropsical swelling of feet. Pain morning ; afternoon ; eve-
ning ; night ; as if diarrhoea would set in ; after eating ; on in-
spiration ; before and during menses ; on motion ; on pressure ; in
caecal region ; in hypochondria after sitting ; in hypogastrium ; in the
inguinal region ; in, the liver ; in the left lobe of liver ; in umbilicus-



342


CARBONEUM SULPHURATUM


Burning pain in abdomen ; in hypochondria ; in liver. Cramping in
abdomen; in the morning; lo a. m ; afternoon; night; before stool;
after stool ; in umbilicus ; in hypogastrium. Cutting in abdomen ; be-
fore stool ; in hypogastrium. Drawing pain in abdomen ; in navel.
Dragging in abdomen. Jerking pain in abdomen ; in left hypo-
chondrium. Pressing pain in abdomen ; in hypogastrium ; in liver.
Sore bruised pain in abdomen ; in liver. Stitching pains in abdomen ;
in hypochondria ; in hypogastrium ; in inguinal region ; sides of ab-
domen ; liver. Tearing in abdomen ; in umbilical region extending
to bladder. Retraction of navel {Plumbum), Rumbling in abdo-
men ; before stool. Tension, Trembling after stool. Weak feel-
ing after stool. Constipation with much belching ; difficult stool ;
ineffectual urging, insufficient stool. Diarrhoea in the morning ; 5
A. M. ; after breakfast ; night ; noon ; after eating ; after dinner ; pain-
less ; with much rumbling ; chronic ; pain in region of umbilicus with
thin, yellow, frothy stools ; stool offensive ; sour ; pasty ; thin ;
WATERY. Some workers in carbon bisulphide suffer from constipation
and some from diarrhoea. Dysentery with bloody mucous stools. Erup-
tions about the anus. Excoriations at anus and between the nates. Fistula
in ano. Flatus copious, offensive ; while walking ; ameliorates.
Formication in the anus. Haemorrhage of bright red blood. Hemor-
rhoids ; bluish ; chronic ; external ; large ; during menses ; very sore ;
inactivity of the rectum. Involuntary stool during urination. Moisture
at the anus, itching and burning. Itching in the morning. Pain in
the rectum after stool ; during stool. Burning and itching. Burning
during stool ; after stool. Cramping stitching in anus and neck of
bladder during urination. Cutting and pressing outward. Soreness
in anus ; after stool. Stitching pain in anus ; evening ; during stool ;
stitching in anus and neck of bladder to urethra during urination.
Tearing in anus. Tenesmus during stool. Constant prolapsus of
rectum. Urging to stool in the morning ; after breakfast ; 8 A. m. ;
10 A. M. ; during stool. Worms. Ascarides ; lumbricoides ; taeniae.
The stool is acrid, black, bloody, brown, hard, knotty, lienteric, light
colored, like sheep dung.

Catarrh of the bladder with mucous sediment in the urine ; pain in
the bladder ; aching ; cramping in the neck of the bladder ; pressing
pain ; stitching in the anus and neck of the bladder to the urethra
during urination. Paralysis of the bladder. Retention of urine. Ten-
esmus of the bladder. Urging to urinate ; at night ; constant ; ineffect-
ual ; painful. Urination ; dribbling ; dysuria ; feeble stream ; frequent,
especially at night ; involuntary at night, in sleep. Suppression of urine.
Gleety discharge from urethra. Bleeding from urethra. Itching in
the urethra with a sensation of drops of urine. Burning in the urethra
during urination and during stool. Cutting during urination. Urine ;



CARBONEUM SULPIIURAITJM


343


acrid, albuminous ; bloody ; burning ; cloudy on standing ; dark ; red ;
copious ; offensive ; scanty. Sediment purulent ; mucous ; white.
Atrophy of testes. Erections violent. Erections absent. Complete im-
potency. Hydrocele. Inflammation o£ glans penis. Itching of the
genitals ; scrotum. Pain in testes ; during rest. Burning in spermatic
cords. Drawing in testes. Stitching pain in testes ; in spermatic cords.
Perspiration on genitals in evening ; on scrotum. Relaxed genitals.
Seminal discharge too soon during coition. Seminal emissions at night ;
shrunken organs. Sexual desire wanting. Swelling of the prepuce ;
of testes ; of epididymis. Tuberculosis of testes.

Atrophy of the ovaries. Cancer of the uterus. Aversion to coition.
Eruption and excoriation. Inflammation of the uterus. Itching of
the vulva. Leucorrhcfa ; acrid ; bloody ; burning ; copious ; before
and after menses ; milky ; thin ; white ; watery. Menses absent ; ex-
coriating ; black ; dark ; delayed first menses ; irregular ; i.ate or too
soon ; offensive ; painless ; copious at first, later scanty, short ; sup-
pressed ; slow passive haemorrhage from uterus. Pain in uterus ;
burning ; soreness ; weak labor pains. Women who work in carbon
bisulphide are often sterile. Encysted tumor on vulva.

Catarrh of air passages. Constriction of larynx causing cough.
Heat in larynx. Inflammation of larynx. Irritation of larynx and
trachea. Mucus in larynx. Pain in larynx. Burning in larynx. Raw-
ness in larynx and trachea. Soreness in larynx and trachea. Laryn
geal phthisis. Rattling in the trachea. lie constantly clears the
larynx. The larynx very sensitive* y Tickling in larynx and trachea.
Hoarseness morning and evening ; with coryza ; in damp weather.
Voice is lost.

Fast breathing. It has served w^ell in asthma. Asphyxia from
alcohol and from coal gas. Difficult breathing ; evening ; night as-
cending ; in a close room ; when coughing ; after eating ; after slight
exertion ; while lying ; must have windows open, on falling asleep ; on
waking. Respiration rattling ; short ; sighing. Suffocation at night
and in a warm room ; wheezing ; whistling.

Cough in morning ; evening ; night ; before midnight ; in cold air ;
asthmatic ; on becoming cold : from constriction of larynx, dry ; hack-
ing hoarse, from irritation in larynx, bronchial tubes and trachea ;
loose morning cough ; lying down in evening ; paroxysmal ; from raw-
ness in larynx ; from scraping larynx ; short ; waking one from sleep ;
spasmodic ; suffocative ; from talking ; from tickling in larynx and
trachea ; whooping cough. Expectoration : in daytime ; morning ; even-
ing ; night ; bloody ; copious : greenish ; mucous ; offensive ; purulent *
tasting putrid and salty ; viscid ; yellow. It has cured paroxysmal ear
cough.

Anxiety in chest ; in the heart. It has been of great service in



344


CARBONEUM SULPHURATUM


cancer of mammae. Very stubborn catarrh of chest. A sensation of
coldness in chest. Constriction of chest in evening; pleural dropsy.
Emphysema. Eruptions on the chest ; vesicles. Erysipelas of the
mamm<e. Feeling of fulness in the chest. Heat in chest and bleeding
from lungs. The mammae are indurated. Inflammation of bronchial
tubes ; heart ; lungs ; pleurae ; mammae. Itching all over chest but
especially in axillae and mammae. Violeni' oppression of chest.
Pain in chest on coughing ; on motion ; in sides of chest ; in heart ;
aching ; burning ; burning in middle of chest and in left side. Cutting
pain in chest ; in left lower chest to back in breathing ; pressing pain in
chest ; in mammic ; in left side. Rawness in chest with cough. Sore-
ness in chest from coughing. Stitching pains on deep breathing, in
left side of chest through to back ; in the sternum extending upwards ;
in heart ; flying burning stitches in chest. Tearing pains in chest.
Palpitation of heart in evening ; in anaemic patients ; with anxiety ;
from slight exertion ; from motion ; visible ; tumultuous. Perspira-
tion in axilla. A very useful remedy in phthisis. A continuous sensa-
tion of weakness in chest.

Coldness of the back ; lumbar region. Eruptions on the back. A
heavy load between the scapulae. Itching of the back. Pain in the
back ; night ; on breathing ; during chill ; during menses : on motion,
while sitting. Pain in cervical region ; between scapula?. Pain in
lumbar region morning on waking : during menses ; while sitting.
Pain in lumbar sacral region in morning on waking. Pain in sacrum
in morning on waking ; during menses. Pain in coccyx. Aching in
back ; in lumbar region ; in sacrum. Bruised feeling in lumbar region.
Burning in back : between scapulae. Drawing in the cervical region ; in
lumbar region. Pressing pains in the back ; in lumbar region. Stitch-
ing pains in back ; in cervical region ; in scapulae ; in lumbar region.
Tearing pain in cervical region ; in lumbar region. Stiffness in cervi-
cal region. Tension in back ; in cervical region : in lumbar region on
ascending : in sacrum worse on ascending. Weakness in back ; in
lumbar region.

Anaesthesia of arms and hands. Coldness of limbs ; with headache.
Upper arms ; hands ; fingers ; lower limbs % knees : legs ; feet in even-
ing in bed. Constriction of lower limbs. Contractions of muscles and
tendons ; upper limbs ; hands ; fingers. Cracked skin of hands. Crack-
ing in the joints ; in the right shoulder. Cramps in the limbs ; upper
limbs ; thighs ; legs ; calf in bed ; foot ; soles ; toes. Blueness of
nails ; during chill. Emaciation of limbs. Eruptions on limbs ; herpes
on back of hands ; pimples ; impetigo ; vesicles between fingers. Ex-
coriations between nates ; between thighs. Formication of limbs ;
upper limbs ; forearms ; hands ; legs ; feet. Heat of hands ; palms ;
feet ; soles. Heaviness of limbs ; upper limbs ; lower limbs ; legs ; feet.



CARBONEUM SULPHURATUM


345


Hip joint disease. Itching of the limbs ; upper limbs ; upper arm ;
forearm ; hands ; lower limbs ; thighs. Milk leg has been cured by this
remedy. Convulsive motion of limbs like chorea. Numbness of
UPPER LIMBS ; lower limbs. Pain in limbs ; during chill ; paroxysmal ;
rheumatic ; in joints ; gouty. Pain in upper limbs ; during the night ;
paralytic in left arm ; rheumatic in shoulder ; in elbow on motion ;
rheumatism in elbow, in hand ; gouty in hand. Pain in lower limbs ;
rheumatic ; worse on motion ; sciatica from taking cold ; in thighs after
dinner ; neuralgia in thighs ; in knees ; in hips ; in hollow of knee.
Pain in leg ; rheumatic ; in ankles in morning ; in os-calsis on ascending
steps ; in feet after dinner and while walking. Aching in forearm.
Burning pain in limbs ; in shoulder ; upper arm ; forearm ; hand palm ;
thighs ; feet ; soles ; joints of feet. Drawing pains in limbs ; shoulder ;
upper arm ; elbow ; forearm ; wrist ; hands ; fingers ; lower limbs ; hips
thighs while walking ; hollow of knees ; legs ; calf ; feet. Itching,
stitching pains deltoid muscle. Jerking pains in hip and ankles on
ascending. Jerking-stitching in all the limbs ; in biceps ; in fingers ;
in thumb ; in thighs ; in legs ; in toes. Pressing pains in left forearm,
worse learning on it ; in left heel. Sore, bruised limbs ; joints ; upper
limbs ; lower limbs ; thighs ; legs ; soles when walking. Stitching pains
in limbs from every change of weather ; in joints ; in upper limbs ; in
right shoulder ; in cold, damp weather, extending down arm ; in upper
arm ; forearm ; elbow ; wrist ; hand ; firigers ; lower limbs ; hips ; thighs ;
ankles ; feet ; toes while walking. Teeing in all the limbs, wandering
about, sudden pains ; in joints ; uppeS" limbs ; shoulder ; upper arm ;
elbow ; forearm ; wrist ; hands ; finger Joints ; lower limbs ; knee : calf ;
ankles ; feet ; toes ; first toe. Paral^is of extensors of wrist ; of lower
limbs. Perspiration of hands ; of feet ; cold ; offensive ; profuse
Restless legs and feet. Stiffness of Kmbs ; fingers ; of lower limbs, of
knees. Swelling of hands ; lower limbs : legs ; ankles ; feet. Dropsical
swelling of limbs with liver affections. Tension in hollow of knee and
legs. Tingling of limbs ; upper and lower hands and feet. Trembling
of limbs ; upper limbs ; forearm : hands ; lower limbs. Twitching of
the limbs ; upper limbs ; hands ; lower limbs ; thighs ; legs ; feet. Ulcers
on lower limbs ; legs ; feet ; about the nails. Varicose veins, lower
limbs ; thighs ; knees ; legs.

Deep morning sleep. Dreams : amorous ; anxious ; of danger ; of
death ; distressing ; of previous events ; fantastic ; frightful ; of ghosts :
horrible ; unpleasant ; vexations ; vivid. Late falling asleep. Rest-
less all night. Sleepiness in morning ; afternoon ; after 3 p. m. ;
evening ; after dinner ; after eating ; while reading ; sleepless before
midnight ; with sleepiness ; from thinking ; after waking. He is not
refreshed after sleep. Waking difficult ; early or late ; frequent.

Coldness in morning in bed ; in afternoon ; evening ; 7 p. m. ; 8 P. M.

44



346


CARDUUS MARIANXJS


Icy coldness. Chilliness during menses. Chill after eating ; in even*
ing ; then sweat ; during sleep. Fever in the evening and during
the night. Nighti.y fever ; with chilliness ; burning heat at night.
Fever without chill. Dry heat at night. Extreme heat. Flashes of
heat. Fever without perspiration. Septic fevers. Fever with shiver-
ing, Perspiration in daytime ; morning ; evening ; night ; during
anxiety. Cold ; on coughing ; while eating ; after eating ; on slight
exertion or motion. Profuse sweat during the night. Sweat during
and after sleep ; offensive ; sour at night. Complaints come on if
exposed while sweating.

Anaesthesia of the skin. Biting after scratching. Burning of the
skin after scratching. Coldness of skin. Chapping and cracks in
winter. Discoloration. Blueness, liver spots ; red spots : yellow. Dry-
ness with burning. Eruptions. Biting ; blisters ; boils ; burning ; dis-
charges, corrosive, glutinous, yellow fluid ; dry ; eczema. Herpetic
eruptions ; scabby ; scaly ; tearing pain ; zoster. Eruptions ; itching ;
like measles ; phagedenic ; pimples ; pustules ; rash after scratching.
Scabby eruptions, moist, worse after scratching. Scabies. Smarting
eruptions. Eruptions worse after scratching. Suppurative emptions ;
tubercles ; urticaria, nodular worse after scratching. Vesicles filled
with yellow fluid. Erysipelas with much swelling and covered with
vesicles. Excoriation ; after scratching. Excrescences. Formication
all over body. Indurations in skin. Itching-jerking all over body.
Itching at night; in a warm bed. Itching-pricking here and there
all over. Sticking in the skin ; after scratching. Ulcerative pains in
skin. Ulcers ; black ; bleeding ; burning ; cancerous ; deep , discharg-
ing ; bloody ; copious ; ichorous ; offensive, yellow pus ; fistulous , in-
dolent ; indurated ; painful ; phagedenic ; fungous ; sensitive , spongy
stinging ; suppurating. Unhealthy skin : small wounds fester.

CARDUUS MARIANUS

This is one of the most important liver remedies, if a homoeopathic
author can be excused for the expression. There are many pains,
pressing, dragging, drawing, burning ; worse from motion. The pa-
tient is very sensitive to cold, and is subject to attacks of bilious vomit-
ing at regular or irregular intervals. The author has cured many
violent sick headaches ending in vomiting bile, and cases in the habit
of taking calomal, with this remedy (Sang.), Dropsical effusions with
liver diseases. It is useful in haemorrhages and jaundice, when symp-
toms agree.

Sadness, irritability and weeping. Congestive headaches ; pressing
pains coming periodically. Fulness and heaviness in the head. Sensi-
tiveness of the scalp to cold air. Pressing outward of the eyeballs.



CAUSTICUM


347


Yellow sdcrotics. Burning in margins of lids. Burning inside ot
the nose. Epistaxis.

Taste bitter, insipid, or wanting. Foul tongue. No desire for food.
Nausea, and vomiting mucus, then bile. Painful retching, and then
vomiting sour greenish fluid. Drawing pains from left to right in the
stomach. Burning in the stomach. Vomiting blood, very black.

The most important of all the liver symptoms. Dragging pain
in right hypochondrium when lying on left side ; like Arn,, Mag, m,,
Nat, 5 , and PteL Pressing, drawing, stitching in right lobe of liver.
This remedy establishes a healthy flow of bile, and thereby cures the
condition that favors the formation of gall stones. It has many times
broken up the tendency to gall stone colic. Portal congestion and
haemorrhoids. Sore, bruised, hard liver ; sometimes the left lobe, but
oftener the right. When complicated with lung and heart symptoms ;
with expectoration of blood.

Drawing, stitching or burning pains in the abdomen. Distended
abdomen. Cutting pains.

The stool is black. Stool hard and knotty. Clay-like, bilcless stool.
Burning in rectum and anus. Itching piles. Bleeding piles. Inveter-
ate constipation.

Burning in the urethra. Copious high-colored urine, with copious
sediment. Turbid urine. Retention of urine.

Menses copious. Menses suppressed. Uterine haemorrhage with
portal congestion. Drawing in vagina, and leucorrhoea.

Liver cough, when lower portiem of right lung is affected, with
chronic congestion of the liver.

Pains in the chest with liver pains. Stitching pains. Drawing
pains, aggravated by motion.

Pain in the back under the right scapula (much like Chel, and
AEsc,), Drawing pains in the back. Sensitive spine.

Cramping, drawing, pressing, rheumatic pains in the limbs. Violent
pain in the right deltoid. Pain in the hip joints, aggravated from
rising, stooping, and motion. Neuralgic pains in the lower limbs,
worse from motion. CEdema of the feet. Varicose veins. Ulcers.
Rheumatism, and jerking of the muscles. Cramps in the calves and
feet. Walking almost impossible.

Gastric and bilious fevers.

CAUSTICUM

Causticum is a very searching medicine, suitable in old, broken
down constitutions, suffering from chronic diseases. Only occasion-
ally is it indicated in acute diseases. Its complaints are such as are
progressive, slow, and accompanying a declining state of the economy.



348 CAUStlGUM

Gradual decrease of. musculai* power, a paralysis. Paralysis of the
oesophagus, paralysis of the throat, such as occurs after diphtheria;
paralysis of the upper eyelids ; paralysis of the bladder ; paralysis of
the limbs, of the lower limbs ; great lassitude, muscular relaxation, in-
describable fatigue and heaviness of the body. And there is a tremu-
lousness, a quivering, jerking, twitching of the muscles, twitching in
sleep.

The next most striking feature is found in the tendons, which be-
come shortened, resulting in a temporary or permanent contracture,
and the limb is drawn up. Tendons of the forearms contract, and there
is gradually increasing flexion. Sometimes a whole muscle will
harden and shorten, so that it can be felt by the hand as a hard ridge.
Contractures of muscles and tendons.

Closely related to this is a rheumatic state of the tendons and liga-
ments about the joints, sometimes with swelling, but always with pain
and ending in a shrivelling of the joint, a tightening up of the joint so
that it becomes ankylosed. Great stiffness of the joints, and while this
is going on the patient is growing weaker, is running into a state of
melancholy, of hopelessness, anxiety and fear. Constantly present in
his mind is the hopelessness and a feeling that something is hanging
over him, that something is going to happen. These are general fea-
tures of Causticum. They all go to make up one picture, they are in-
separable.

Another kind of progressive trouble in Causticum is hysteria, Gradu-
ally increasing hysteria. Hysterical cramping. The woman loses all
control of herself and says foolish things. Her nervous system be-
comes extremely sensitive to noise, touch, excitement or anything
unusual. Starting from the slightest noise ; starting in sleep ; twitching
and jerking ; the child is easily startled, or acts as if startled without
cause.

The paralytic weakness is associated with the rheumatic diathesis.
The rheumatic states arc peculiar. The patient himself can endure
neither heat nor cold. They both aggravate his rheumatic conditions,
his nervous conditions and himself in general. His pains are ameli-
orated by heat, but they are aggravated in dry weather. Great de-
formity of the joints ; they are enlarged, soft and infiltrated, ‘always
worse in dry weather ; more pains and aches during dry weather.
Rheumatism that affects both the muscles and the joints. This pa-
tient is also aggravated by exposure to cold, dry winds. Many an in-
dividual who has gone from the low lands of the East up into Ciolorada
will come down with rheumatism from the cold, dry winds. Let such
a patient as I have described take a ride in the cold lake wind and he
will have paralysis of the side of tht face exposed to the wind. A
long drive with the east wind coming against the face. The next day



CAUSTICUM


349


that side of the face will be paralyzed. Such a paralysis will almost
always recover under Causticum.

Rending, tearing, paralytic pains; pains tliat benumb; pains that
fairly take the life out of him, they are so severe. And they are
likely to remain in one place for a long time. Causticum lias often
greatly mitigated the lightning-like pains of locomotor ataxia.

Now, with all these sufferings the patient is slowly growing weaker,
till at length he can no longer walk, he can no longer sit up, he is so
tired and weak that he must lie down. He is tired in body and mind.
It is a paralytic fatigue.

Convulsive symptoms. Cramps, now here, now there. If fright-
ened he is almost sure to have some form of convulsive condition.
The woman with tendency to hysteria will have hysterics from fright ;
nervous girls that are more inclined to chorea, will start witli jerking
of muscles and will keep it up day and night. Chorea even at night.
Localized chorea, jerking of single parts, chorea of the tongue or of
one side of the face.

Epilepsy in young persons at tlie age of puberty, from fright, from
being chilled or exposed to some great change in the weather. Epilepsy,
chorea, paralysis, hysteria worse during menses. We see that Causti-
cum is a deep medicine. Worse from exposure to cold, dry
wind. It also has rheumatic complaints aggravated in .the warm, damp
days, in wet weather, but this is not do striking.

Any one of the complaints that I jbave mentioned may be brought on
by bathing in cold water. A long^ iiry, cold spell will aggravate the
rheumatic troubles, getting wet or becoming chilled by batliing will
start them.

Causticum has cured insanity ; not acute mania with violent delirium,
but mental aberration of the passive kind, where the brain has become
tired. The constitution has been broken down with long suffering and
much trouble, and finally the mind is in confusion. At first the pa-
tient recognizes his inability to do anything and then comes this fore-
boding that something is going to happen. He is unable to think, and
consequently unable to carry on his business. He is going into im-
becility. Full of timorous fancies. ‘Timorous anxiety,'’ overwhelmed
with fearful fancies. At every turn there is fear that something is go-
ing to happen. Fear of death, fear that something will happen to his
family. Always anticipating some dreadful event. That is a striking
feature of the Causticum mental state. It is found in old, broken
down mental cases, after prolonged anxiety ; after a prolonged struggle
of some sort, Anxiety before falling asleep. In addition to this, the
Causticum patient lacks balance. Everything excites him. The more
he thinks about his complaints the worse they become. Mental and
other ailments from long-lasting grief and sorrow. The injurious



CAtlSnCUM


350

effects of fear and prolonged vexation. Tired from vexations of
business.

The suppression of eruptions is apt to bring out mental symptoms.
Mental exhaustion, hopelessness, despair, appearing after the sup-
pression of an eruption with zinc ointment. He was fairly well while
he had the eruption, but when it disappeared his mind gave out.
Eruptions on the side of the head and face, and extending over the
whole head. Thick, crusty eruptions covering the whole occiput.
When these eruptions are suppressed in children, chorea is apt to
follow. In the adult there will be trembling, paralytic weakness and
the mental state, sometimes pains in the nerves. The driving in of a
facial eruption will frequently result in facial paralysis. The healing
of an old ulcer with stimulating lotions and ointments will have a
similar result. Then he also suffers from violent headaches, con-
gestive, pulsating headaches ; violent stitches in the head, worse in the
evening. But the headaches are, as a rule, nondescript ; only occasion-
do we find a Causticum headache standing out by itself. It will
usually be associated with rheumatic and gouty conditions which also
affect the scalp. The scalp contracts and tightens up in places like the
contractures in other parts. Rheumatic headaches ; sometimes the
pain is so severe as to cause nausea, and vomiting. Blinding headaches
followed by paralysis.

Torticollis. The head is sometimes drawn to one side by the short-
ening of the muscles of the neck. Causticum is a curative remedy in
this shortening of the tendons and muscles.

Causticum is rich in eye symptoms. Very often the patient says that
the eyelids feel so heavy that he can hardly hold them up. This gradu-
ally increases until it becomes an actual paralysis. Sometimes there
is the appearance of a veil before the eyes ; foggy vision. Flickering
before the eyes. Air seems full of little black insects. Then, again,
large black or green spots are seen. After looking at the light a green
spot appears and remains in the field of vision for a long time.
Diplopia. And the vision gradually grows weaker until it is lost.
Paralysis of the optic nerve. Lachrymation, tears acrid, burning;
ulceration, copious discharges from the eyes, agglutination of the lids,
paralysis of the eye muscles. Causticum cures scrofulous ophthalmia
with ulceration of the cornea ; chronic, purulent ophthalmia of psoric
origin. The cornea is covered with little veins.

Another very strong feature of this medicine is its tendency to grow
warts. Warts on the face, on the tip of the hose, on the ends of the
fingers, on the hands. Hard, dry, horny warts come out on various
parts of the body.

It is natural feature of this remedy to produce copious, thick,
tough, gluey discharges from mucous membranes. The catarrhal



GAU81TCUM


35 *


troubles creep up the Eustachian tube, from the nose and throat into
the ear, resulting in roarings, cracking noises and reverberations in the
ear. There is great accumulation of ear wax ; deafness of catarrhal
origin and deafness from paralysis of the auditory nerve. Severe,
dragging pains in the ear.

The nasal catarrh is very troublesome. Old, atrophic catarrh with
accumulation of crusts throughout the whole nasal cavity ; post-nasal
catarrh with ulcerations, granulations and copious, thick, yellow or
yellowish-green discharge ; nose-bled ; frequent attacks of acrid,
watery coryza. Much itching of the nose. A wart grows upon the tip
of the nose.

The pains in the face are violent. Neuralgic pains from exposme
to cold. These pains often accompany the facial paralysis. Tearing
pains in the face, stitching pains, pains of a rheumatic character.

Ulcerations about the ntouth and nose. Fissures about the lips, the
wings of the nose and the corners of the eyes. Fissures seem to form
upon the least provocation. Fissures of the anus, of the skin about the
joints. Old cases of salt rheum with fissures in the bends of the joints.
Fistulous openings with indurated walls.

The gums become scorbutic and settle away from the teeth ; bleed-
ing and ulceration of the gums. Violent, tearing pains in the roots of
the teeth from riding in the wind. Old rheumatic subjects suffer all
through every dry spell with toothache. Stitching, tearing, pulsating
pains in the teeth ; even in the sound teeth on drawing in cold air.
Frequently recurring abscesses of th^ gums. Putrid sour or bitter
taste in the mouth.

When the paralytic condition affects the tongue then we have stam-
mering. There is also the condition of complete paralysis of both the
pharynx and oesophagus. Hence Causticum is useful in the results of
diphtheria when it has been maltreated or when the remedy has not
been sufficient to cure the disease. The food goes down the wrong
way or enters the larynx or the post-nares. Paralysis of the organs of
speech, paralysis of the tongue, awkward at talking, awkward at chew^-
ing ; bites the tongue and cheeks while chewing. Po.st-diphtheritic pa-
ralysis is a serious condition and only a few remedies can cure it.
Causticum is one of them. Lachesis and Cocculus are also important.
Dryness of the mouth and throat ; rawness of the throat ; must swallow
constantly on account of a sensation of fulness in the throat, a nervous
feeling in the throat. This is often a forerunner of paralysis. The
Staphisagria patient when excited will keep up a constant swallowing
and this goes on until it becomes a source of great annoyance. Burn-
ing in the throat ; jerking in the throat ; constantly scraping thick,
tough mucus from the larynx. Study the sounds that patients make in
order to ascertain where the mucus comes from. The presence of



35«


CAUStICUM


hoarseness shows that the trouble is in the larynx.

The Causticum patient sits down to the tabic hungry, but on seeing
the food his appetite vanishes. The thought, sight or smell of food
takes away the appetite. This is a common symptom in the pregnant
woman. Although hungry, on sitting down at the table, she cannot
cat. Kali carbonicum has an empty, all-gone feeling in the stomach,
with aversion to food. China has canine hunger, but loathes the sight
of food.

Thirst after eating ; thirst for cool drinks with aversion to water ;
desire for beer, smoked meats, pungent things, aversion to sweet things
and delicacies. Most remedies that have loss of appetite have desire
for sweet things, pastry, etc. The symptoms of thirst with aversion
to drinking is very much like Lachesis, The two run very closely to-
gether in the paralytic condition of the throat.

There is a queer sensation in the stomach as if lime were slaking
there. Trembling in the stomach ; burning. Bread causes a sensation
of heaviness and pressure ; coffee seems to aggravate all the symptoms
of the stomach, but a swallow of cold water relieves. Many symptoms
in this remedy are made better by a swallow of water. The
violent, spasmodic cough may be stopped at once by a drink of cold
water. Cold water seems to tone up the paralytic condition. Warm
water applied to the hands brings on pains in these old sensitive spinal
conditions. Cold washing is their only relief,

Causticum has belching, nausea, vomiting, distension and violent
pains in the stomach. Pinching colic. In the rectum there is the same
tendency to paralytic weakness that is found in other parts of the
body. It is inactive and fills up with hard faeces, which pass invol-
untarily and unnoticed. Aloe has involuntary dropping of little, hard
balls, especially in children. Even when old enough to understand
about such things, they will pass little balls unnoticed.

On account of the paralytic condition the stool passes with less
straining while the patient is standing. Retention of urine except
when standing ; unable to pass it in any other position is Sarsaparilla,
Constipation, frequent, unsuccessful urging to stool. The stool is
shining, and is passed with great difficulty and exertion.

Fissures in the anus ; itching and stitching in the rectum, excessive
itching day and night ; haemorrhoids ; pulsating in the perineum ;
fissures and haemorrhoids pulsate and burn like fire. The ha&morrhoids
become infiltrated and hardened.

This remedy has two kinds of paralysis of the bladder, one affecting
the muscles of expulsion and the urine is retained, and the other cen-
tering upon the sphincter vesicae, and then the urine is passed involun-
tarily. '‘He urinates so easily that he is not sensible of the stream and
scarcely believes, in the dark, that he is urinating, until he makes sure



CAUSTICUM


353


by sense of touch. Causticum is unconscious of the stream as it
passes. It is a very useful remedy in children that wet the bed. Espe-
cially is it a wonderful remedy in the woman. The urine escapes in^
voluntarily when coughing. Retention of urine in the woman, Reten-
tion after labor. Paralysis of the bladder. A woman who is too
greatly embarrssed to pass through a crowd of observing men to the
closet at the end of a railroad car, at the end of the journey finds that
she is unable to pass the urine. Retention of urine from straining the
muscles of the bladder. If the patient is chilled at the time the
remedy may be Rhus. Rhus and Causticum are the two great reme-
dies for paralytic weakness of muscles from being overstrained, or
from being overstrained and chilled.

Great weakness at the time of the menses. Anxiouns dreams before
menstruation : melancholy ; cramp-like spasms ; pains in the back. The
woman suffers from many annoyances during menstruation. Just
about the time for the flow to start violent cramp-like pains come on.
In a woman who is nursing a child the milk almost disappears in con-
sequence of fatigue, night watching and anxiety. The nipples get sore
and crack, another instance of the tendency to form fissures.

The Causticum patient has trouble with the voice. You remember,
when we were going over the symptoms of Carbo vegetabilis, I told
you that the hoarseness was worse in the evening. Now observe that
the hoarseness of Causticum is worse in the morning. He gets up in
the morning wiih a hoarse voice ; if it is an ordinary case, after mov-
ing about and expectorating a little m^cus, it is better. Sudden loss of
voice from paralysis of the vocal cord. It sometimes begins with tho
morning aggravation, gradually increasing until it lasts all day and all
night.

The Causticum cough is a hard cough and racks the whole body.
The chest seems full of mucus and he feels if only he could cough a
little deeper he could get it up, and he struggles and coughs until ex-
hausted or until he finds out that a drink of cold water will relieve.
But it must be ice cold. The cough is hollow, it sounds as if he were
coughing into a barrel. It is relieved by expectoration if it can only
get deep enough to reach the mucus. Sometimes such a cough pre-
cedes quick consumption. It is a deep-acting medicine ; it cures phthi-
sis, especially mucous phthisis or quick consumption. “Cough with a
sensation as if the patient could not cough deep enough to start the
mucus ; produced by tickling, accompanied by rawness. Cough wakens
her from sleep in the evening and morning. Cough relieved by a swallow
of cold water. Cough worse by bending forward. Continual, annoy-
ing cough ; with each cough escape of urine,'’ Influenza with tired
aching of the limbs as if they had been beaten, “Whooping cough
in the catarrhal stage,”

4J



354


CIIAMOMILLA


Great soreness and tightness of the chest, oppression of the chest ;
it feels as if a load were upon it. It seems to be filling up with mucus,
and the patient coughs until he raises a mouthful and then he feels a
little better for a time. Pale as death, covered with sweat.

There are many symptoms in the back. Pain and stiffness ; stiffness
on rising from a seat. Stiffness in the limbs, through the hips and in
the back, so that he rises up from sitting or the recumbent posture with
great difficulty. In most cases the pains and aches arc ameliorated by
the warmth of the bed and by applied heat. Only the pains in the
fingers arc sometimes brought on by heat.

CHAMOMBLLA

The general constitutional state of Chamomilla is great sensitive-
ness ; sensitive to every impression ; sensitive to surroundings ; sensi-
tive to persons ; and, above all, sensitive to pain. The constitutional
irritability is so great that a little pain brings forth manifestations as
if the patient were in very great suffering. It naturally belongs to the
woman’s nervous system, when she is wrought up and extremely sensi-
tive and in pain.

The mental state goes along with this. Sensitiveness of the mind.
Great irritability. These two run through Chamomilla so closely that
they are inseparable. Sensitiveness to pain. Easily affected by morti-
fication, by chagrin, so that the nerves become extremely sensitive from
these causes, and pains, convulsions, colic, headaches and other kinds
of nervous symptoms set in. The nervous child when punished will
go into convulsions. The oversensitive nervous woman will suffer
from chagrin. Jerking and twitching of muscles from mortification
and excitement. Excessive sensibility of the nerves, so excessive that
only a few remedies equal it, such as Coffea, Niix vom. and Opium.
Of course, without hearing a lecture on Opium you naturally think of
Opiuni as capable of producing stupor. Those of you who have seen
the awful state of mind and distress that follow the administration of
the crude Opium will understand what I mean by the Chamomilla
sensitivity. Convulsions of children. It is not an uncommon thing,
even now-a-days, and especially when practicing in the country, for
the young mothers and the nurses to give the baby Camomile tea for
colic, and the baby goes into convulsions. No one attributes it to
Camomile tea, but the doctor will see at once, if he knows Chamomilla,
that these convulsions are due to Camomile. Then you see the jerk-
ings, the convulsions, the hot head, the great sensitivity ; sensitiveness
to noise, and to persons, and the great irritability between the convul-
sions, convulsions of children ; they become stiff ; roll the eyes ; dis-
tort the face ; twitchings of muscles ; throw the limbs about ; clinch the



CllAMOMILLA


555

thumbs ; bend the body backwards. Such is the natural appearance ol
the Chamomilla convulsions ; those convulsions that come on in over-
sensitive children, when they have suffered a good deal of pain from
teething. Teething ought to be a perfectly healthy process, but it is
really looked upon as a disease, and many doctors carry medicines for
‘'teething children,'' and administer them ; first one and then another.
Chamomilla has fallen into that bad use of being given “for teething',’
It is true that many children suffer from irritability of the brain, con-
vulsions, stomach disorders and vomiting about the time of dentition,
but I say dentition should not be a diseased state, it should be normal.
If they were in healthy they would cut teeth without sufferings. Bin
slow teething we have to contend with, and that irritable state, that
oversensitiveness, so that he child does not sleep Wakes up as if it
had awful dreams. Wakes up in excitement, vomits, has diarrhex^a with
teething. These symptoms come at this time when the child has not
been properly looked after. Or perhaps the mother has not been prop-
erly qualified for parturition. “Tetanic convulsions. Twitching in
the eyelids. Pain in the limbs. General prostration, faintness. ‘
Neuralgic pains all over the body with numbness. Twitching, darting,
tingling pains. The pains are mostly ameliorated by heat, with the ex-
ception of the teeth and jaws. Toothache, pain in the teth ameliorat-
ed by cold, and made worse by heat. But the earaches and pains in the
extremities are made better by heat.

You will see in the text under ‘^Temperature and Weather” the
symptom “Pains are worse from heaf,'^ with two black bars as if it
were the most important symptom in it, and then below, without any
bar. “Sensitive to cold. Chilly," and “Better from heat but the fact
is the pains that are w'orsc from heat are about the teeth and jaws, and
it is decidedly a particular symptom relating only to a part ; whereas
it is true that the patient in the general state, entirely contrary to
Avhat this says, is better by heat. The pains in general are better by
heat. The patient himself is better by heat. Consequently, this being
a particular, it should state that the pains that are so commonly worse
by heat arc of the teeth.

The most important part of Chamomilla is the mental state. It per^
vades the whole economy and you will see that every region that is
taken up, every part that is studied, brings into it the mental state of
the patient. This remedy has more mental symptoms than symptoms
in any other part. Crying. “Piteous moaning. Irritable." The irri-
tability is so great that it manifests itself sometimes in a very singular
way. The patient seems to be driven to frenzy by the pains, and she
forgets all about her prudence and her diplomacy. Loss of generosity ;
she has no consideration for the feelings of others. She will simply
enter into a quarrel or dispute regardless of the feelings of anybody.



356 CHAMOMtlXA

So, when you go into practice, do not be surprised when you go to
the bedside of a patient in labor, who is full of pains and sufferings,
if she says: ‘'Doctor, I don’t want you, get out.” Just such an one
will pass under other circumstances as a lady. The awful pains that
she is having drive her to frenzy, and this frenzy, this oversensitive-
ness to pain, is coupled with the mental state. Inability to control her
temper, and the temper is aroused to white heat. Now, in the child, the
child whines and cries and sputters about everything. It wants some-
thing new every minute. It refuses everything that it has asked for.
If it is for something to eai, for something to play with, for its toys,
when these are handed to the child it throws them away ; slings them
clear across the room. Strikes the nurse in the face for presuming to
get something or other that the little one did not want, yet had asked
for. Capriciousness. It seems that the pains and sufferings are some-
times ameliorated by passive motion, this very particularly in children.
The pains seem to be better when the child is carried, so the child wants
to be carried all the time. This is true in the colic and in the bowel
troubles. It is true with earache ; it is true w'ith the evening fevers,
and the general sufferings from cold and conditions while teething.
Children must be carried. The nurse is compelled to carry the child all
the time. And then there is the restlessness and capriciousness about
the members of the family. The child goes two or three times up and
down the room with the nurse, and then reaches out for its mother ;
goes two or three times up and dowm the room with her and then
wants to go to its father. And so it is changing about. Never satisfied.
It seems to have no peace. When it has earache the sharp shooting
pains cause the child to screech out. C!arrics the hand to the ear. The
pains often cause that sharp, piercing tone of the voice. Adults in
pain cannot keep still the pains are so severe ; it is not always that
they are decidedly ameliorated by moving, but they seem to be. But
they move because they cannot keep still. So the Chamomilla patient
is tossing in bed, if in bed ; not an instant quiet. And along with all of
these the same irritability ; becomes violently excited at the pain ;
angry at the pain ; irritable about the pain ; will scold about the pain ;
the pain is so torturesomc. Aversion to talk, and snappish. The
patient is constantly sitting and looking within herself when pains are
absent.

Chamomilla has melancholy, and has suffering of the mind, without
pain. Then the Chamomilla patient sits and thinks within herself —
a sort of introspectioh. Cannot be induced to say a word. Sadness.
The Chamomilla child cannot be touched. Wants to do as he pleases.
Wants to change ; wants to do something new. The answer from both
the adult and the child are snappish. Complaints come on from con-
tradiction ; from anger. Convulsions come on from anger. If the



chamomilla


357


child is suffering from whooping cough it will have a coughing spell, a
spasmodic cough from being irritated. Goes into a spunky state, gets
red in the face, and then gets to coughing. Peevishness. “Quarrel-
some. Easily chagrined or excited to anger. Bad effects of having the
feelings wounded.’* Such is the mental state, and, as I have remarked,
that mental state will be found wherever there is an innaminatory
condition that Chamomilla fits. In pneumonia, in bronchitis, laryngitis,
inflammations of the ear, erysipelas, headaches, fevers, Chamomilla is
capable of curing when the mental state is present, and the symptoms,
in particular, are present.

The headaches of Chamomilla are found in scnsiti\e people, sensi-
tive women. Nervous ; overstrained ; overtired. Fidgety. Excitable
women that suffer from pain. A little headache seems an enormous
thing. Throbbing, tearing, bursting pains. Congestive licadaches.
Worse when thinking of tlie pain, or when thinking about the suffer-
ings. The headaches are worse evenings. A partu ular time in the
evening for many complaints to he worse is 9 o*clock. Sometimes 9
o’clock in the morning, and sometimes 9 in the evening. Fever condi-
tion worse 9 o’clock in the morning. Pains worse in the cnening, and
especially worse about 9 o’clock. Stitching, tearing pains in the temples
and head. Wandering pains in the temples. Pressing pain in the
head as soon as attention was directed to it, better by busying the
mind at something else, or by occupation ; forcing one’s self to do
something, and to think of something else. Congestion to the head.
Violent neuralgia of the face, teerh^ jear, sides of the head. Pains in-
side of the mouth are ameliorated by cold. Pains of the ear and sides
of the head are ameliorated by heat ; earache ameliorated by heat.

There arc pains in the eyes. Inflammation of the eyes with bleeding.
Oozing of a bloody water from the eyes of the new born infant.
Chamomilla will cure if there is irritability of the temper. Profuse
acrid discharges ; yellow discharges ; discharges of purulent matter
from the eyes. Violent pressure in the orbit. Lachrymation accom-
panying coryza with sneezing. Stuffing up of the nose. Headaches,
irritability. Associated with the above is a symptom : “Face red and
hot on one side, the other side pale.” Like the whole constitution of
the remedy there is a great sensitiveness of hearing. Roaring, ringing
and singing in the ears. Stitching pains in the cars, ameliorated by
heat. Pressing earache. You will see the little one when the pain
comes on put its hands up to its ears, and spitefully moaning, yelling
and screaming. Violent pains in the ear. When old enough to talk
about it will complain of heat in the car, and a feeling of fulness as if
the ear were obstructed or stuffed up. In adults, nervous, sensitive
women who cannot ride in the wind without covering up their ears.
The ears are so sensitive to air when other parts of the face and head



358


CHAMOMILLA


are not sensitive to air. You will find some patients that call not have
air touch the neck. Others have extra covering between the shoulders.
Chamomilla singles out the ears. The whole body is sensitive to air
and to cold, and he wants to dress with plenty of covering.

Sneezing, watery coryza. Hot face on one side, and often with pains
in the head and jaws. Fluent coryza, viscid, acrid, with loss of smell.
Loss of smell lasting v hilc the cold lasts.

Rending pains in the face, sometimes involving the teeth and the
outer face at the same time. It is not an uncommon thing to have a
very sensitive woman if she is disturbed by chagrin, if she has been
vexed by her servant, to go to her room and suffer tortures from pain
in the face from that excitement, from anger. If it is the outer nerves
in the face the pains will be ameliorated by heat ; but when it affects
the teeth the pains will be ameliorated by cold. Heat of the face,
while the rest of the body is cold. “The face sweats after eating or
drinking.” It is a common feature of this remedy to sweat only about
the head, the hairy scalp. Sometimes during measles or scarlet fever
we will have Chamomilla manifestations. Sweating about the head,
face red on one side. “One-sided swelling of the check that is, an
inflammatory attack, gets redder, and redder, and finally purple, going
into erysipelas, with the mental symptoms. Hot face, redness of one
side. Burning in the face. Neuralgia of the face. If anything warm
is taken into the mouth it will bring on aching in the teeth, and some-
times burning and throbbing in the roots of the teeth ; tearing, stiching,
stinging pains, aggra\ ated by talking ; aggravated in the open air ; ag-
gravated in a warm room, or getting warm in bed, anything that heats
up the body will aggravate this toothache ; ameliorated by holding cold
drinks in the mouth. Toothache that is entirely absent in the day-
time ; as soon as it comes night, and the patient gets into the warm bed,
then these shooting, tearing pains begin ; with the irritability, over-
sensitiveness to pain, the mental state, hot head, you have the Chamo-
milla toothache. ‘^Swelling and inflammation of the gums. Threaten-
ed abscess of the gums. Toothache when coming into a warm room,”
when it has been better in the cold air. This toothache is one that
may be brought on by taking cold, by exposing one's self to cold air
when sweating ; and yet the toothache itself when present is ameliorat-
ed by cold. “Toothache from a draft of air.” “Ameliorated from
eating cold things. Worse before midnight.” The most of the troubles
of Chamomilla that come on in the evening and night subside about or
sometimes before midnight. From midnight to morning almost all of
the complaints of Chamomilla are absent. Many of them are absent
during the day. It has aggravation in the fore-pan of the night.
“Teeth feel too long. Swollen gums.” The Chamomilla infant will
often hold a glass of cold water against the gums. The little one has



CHAMOMILLA


359


inflamed gums, painful gums, the coming forth of the teeth is painful,
and it seems to want to prolong the cold in the mouth ; when it is so
young you would not think it would realize the good of making use of
the cold edge of the glass. Offensive foetid smell from the mouth.

The spasms that affect the child all over arc likely to affect the
larynx, and sometimes affect the larynx without affecting the child
anywhere else. “Spasms of the larynx during cough, or without
cough. Spasmodic constriction of the larynx. Choking. Spasms of
the throat. Sore and inflamed.” Chamomilla cures sore throat when
the throat is of a uniform redness, spreading pretty evenly over the
whole throat, with considerable swelling. Inflammation of tonsils.
Much redness ; when the mental state is present. It will never cure a
sore throat except in these irritable constitutions, such as suffer from
pain, such as arc easily angered, in a constant fret. The Chamomilla
mental state determines w'hen you are to give Chamomilla in sore
throat.

"Want of appetite. Great thirst for cold water and desire for acid
drinks. Unquenchable thirst.” Aversion to coffee, warm drinks, to
soups and liquid foods. The aversion to coffee is a strange thing.
Chamomilla and coffee are very much alike in the general sensitivity
of the economy. They antidote each other. When persons have been
overdrinking coffee, nurses drinking coffee to keep up at night to take
care of the patient ; persons overdrinking coffee when tired and over-
worked. Chamomilla is its antidote. “Thirsty, and hot with the
pains.” When the pains come, no matter where, she heats up, and
sometimes becomes really feverish. Fare red, especially on one side.
Head hot : extreme irritability.

Chamomilla has much vomiting. Eructations of gas which smells
like sulphuretted hydrogen. The Chamomilla patient has violent retch-
ing. Making violent efforts to vomit. Seems that it will tear the
stomach. Covered with cold sw'eat. Exhausted. That is just what
Morphine does. If you have ever seen a patient who has been over-
dosed by a doctor — I hope that you will ne\er sec one that has been
overdosed by yourself. Do not make a case, you will have one soon
enough — ^but if you get into a town where there is an allopathic physi-
cian, and he happens to give Morphine to one of these oversensitive
patients ; it may relieve her pain for a little while, but on will come the
awful eructations, and she will retch and vomit, and continue to retch
when there is nothing to vomit. Chamomilla will stop that, the first
dose, in a few minutes, and it is the only remedy you will need. It
will always stop the vomiting from Morphine after the crude effect of
Morphine has passed away and the vomiting comes.

Colic, especially in the little ones, in the infants. Pain in the stomach
and abdomen. The child doubles up, and screams, and kicks ; wants to



360


CHAMOMILIJV


be carried ; is extremely irritable ; attack comes on in the evening ; one
side of the face red, the other side pale ; wants things, and when they
are given docs not want them ; and you have a Chamomilla colic. It is a
wind colic. It lasts a fraction of a minute, and then it straightens out
again. It shows that it is a cramp, a wind-cramp. In adults, who have
felt these wsymptoins, they arc said to be cutting, burning, griping.
Griping pains. Of course, such are the pains that are called colicky.
Cramps in the bowels. Griping pains. Sometimes griping as if must
go to stool. The abdomen distended like a drum. Sometimes ameli-
orated by warm applications. “Colic while urinating that is an un-
common symptom. “Colic in the morning. Tympanitic abdomen.”

The most striking Chamomilla stool is ^rass greeti, or like chopped
eggs, or like these two chopped up ; yellow and white, intermingled
with mucus that is grass green, like chopped grass ; chopped spinach.
Greenish, slimy discharges, greenish water. Those old enough to ex-
press themselves in the proving said that the stool felt hot while it
passed. It smells like sulphuretted hydrogen. Copious stool ; scanty
stool, with dysenteric straining. Watery diarrhma, six or eight pass-
ages daily. Mucous diarrhoea. Green, watery stool, feces and mucus.
'‘Yellowish brown stool.” Also constipation, with no ability to strain.
A paralytic weakness of the rectum ; inactivity of the rectum. Anus is
“pouting,” with swollen appearance and redness.

The woman, such as 1 liave described, oversensitive to pain, snap-
pish, suffering intensely from a little pain, takes on many symptoms
at the menstrual period. The incnsirual flow is black, clotted, offen-
sive. Cramping pains in the uterus, clutching and griping, ameliorated
by heat. “Oversensitive to pain,” with all the pains and complaints,
and the mental state, the irritability, the snappish mental state at a
menstrual period. Whether it be a menorrhagia, or a metrorrhagia,
there arc copious black clots. “Menstrual colic following anger,”
M^hich means violent cramping pains in the uterus during menstniation
if she has had any great excitement to anger her. Sexual irritability,
emotions, disturbance of mind, will bring on cramps at the men-
strual period in a woman who is not subject to cramps, affecting her
as if she had taken cold. It is a very useful remedy in membranou.s
clysmenorrhoca. It, perhaps, has existed from the first menstrual
period. Every month the woman throws off a little membranous
formation. This is thrown off with violent labor-like pains, and often
with clots. Chamomilla may be a palliative. It is not the constitutional
remedy that clears away, and prevents the future formation of this
membrane, like the deeper antipsorics, but it is often palliative in th^
more severe attacks, with the irritable condition of the mind ; feverish
condition ameliorated by heat ; cramping, and clutching like labor
pains. “Yellow, smarting leucorrhoea. Excessive menstruation ; blood



CHAMOM 1 IJ.A 361

dark, nearly black, clotted, with pain through Irom back to front, at-
tacks of syncope, coldness of limbs, much thirst.’'

In pregnancy the woman has also Chamomilla conditions. Irregu
lar contractions ; false labor pains. I^abor pains that are felt in wrong
places. Labor pains that are felt too much in the back. Contractions
that are most painful, cutting, tearing, bringing out screams, so irri-
table ; she scolds the pains ; she scolds the doctor ; she scolds every-
body ; drives the doctor out of the room : drives the nurse off, and
then calls for her again : refuses things that are offered. Labor pains
that are clutching here, and clutching there, and cramping, showing
that certain fibres of the uterus are contracting in one direction, and
certain other fibres in another. There is not that uniform, regular
contraction that should take place in the expulsion of the contents of
the uterus ; expulsion of a mole or exjmlsion of a child. If the physi-
cian can have the pregnant woman under his care during the period of
gestation he ought to be able to select remedies to remove these irregu-
lar contractions of the uterus, or fo prevent them when it comes time
for labor. The pains are then not so violent. She feels the contrac-
tions, but in many instances they are painless. You will not always be
able to prepare women, they will not always permit it. Women are
more inclined to be notional and whimsical and to have their own way
a short time before confinement ihari at any other time. . A w^oman
ought to be under treatment all through, gestation, and. sometimes it
takes longer. Gestation is a fortuitc^is time for the woman, to ' take
treatment. Symptoms representative t>f her disordered state come out
then that do not appear at any other time. If she has a psoric condi-
tion it may remain dormant until pregnancy comes on. which may act
as an exciting cause to bring oiit the conditions that are in the con-
stitution. It furnishes, therefore, a good time for the homoeopathic
physician to study the case and give that woman a constitutional rem-
edy based upon those symptoms that will not only remove those
symptoms and prepare her for confinement, but will remove very much
of the disorder in her economy, and she will go on through life liberat-
ed from much distress, cured from many conditions that perhaps
would not have come out until some other occasion brought them out.
A woman that knows much about Homoeopathy would submit herself
regularly to constitutional treatment during gestation, that is, would
be particular to give the physician everything, all the details, all the
sufferings, all the trouble, that he may study that case. The things
that are to be observed during gestation are to be added to the con-
situtional symptoms found when gestation is not present, because they
are all evidence of a disturbance in that one patient. And it is the
patient that is to be treated, not a disease. It is simply another form
of disturbance, of disorder of the economy. The things that Chamo*

46



362


CHAMOMILLA


milla reaches during confinement, and during its course, and at the
close of it, are irregular contractions, like hourglass contractions.
‘‘Rigidity of the os.’" After confinement, after-pains. With all these
the same menta] condition, the same oversensiriveness to pain. “Post-
partum haemorrhage.” Every time the child is put to the breast,
cramping of the uterus ; cramp in the back. Either of these, or both,
Chamomilla cures. The two principal remedies you will have to rely
on for these conditions, cramping in the back and cramping in the
abdomen every time the child is put to the breast, are Chamomilla and
Piilsatilla, They are two decidedly different remedies in the mental
sphere. One is mild and gentle, though whimsical ; and the other is
snappish and irritable. Both arc sensitive to pain, Init Chamomilla is
far more sensitive to pain than Pulsatilla,

Chamomilla has inflammation of the mammary glands. You cannot
prescribe for that unless you have something along with it, and I am
sure you will recognize a Chamomilla patient. The woman goes into
convulsions. At the beginning of the confinement the husband comes
into the room in some snappish way, “to make his wife behave her-
self it makes her mad, and she goes into convulsions. The doctor,
perhaps, has just turned his back upon it, but now he says, “Well,
why did I not think to give this woman a dose of Chamomilla? If I
had done that I would have prevented these convulsions.” She becomes
very philosophical after a dose of Chamomilla, and often goes to sleep.

There are many suffocative attacks and difficulties of breathing, in-
flammation of the larynx, etc., that you can read up easily. The cough
of Chamomilla has some striking things in it. It is a hard cough, a
dry, hacking cough. The child goes to sleep at night and coughs and
does not wake up. Coughs in its sleep. It is a little feverish has
taken cold, and one side of the face is flushed. It is crabbed when it is
awake. The child becomes angry when it has a cold and a little cough,
and a little disturbance of the larynx and bronchial tubes has been
noticed coming on, and all at once it becomes more excitable, wants to
be carried, and if not pleased, or is angered, it will go into a hard
coughing spell, and cough and vomit. “Coughing spells from anger.”
That is, he coughs when there is already a cold or a cough, and if the
patient becomes angry he has a fit of coughing. The coughing com-
plaints, and chest complaints, and laryngeal complaints are generally
worse at night. The feverish condition comes on at night with the
Chamomilla colds, with the Chamomilla whooping cough, with the
Chamomilla chest complaints. Most of the complaints of Chamomilla
are better after midnight. From 9 o’clock to midnight they are worse.
“6ry cough worse at night and during sleep,” Dry cough from catch-
ing cold. Rough, scraping cough of children in winter, with tickling in
suprasternal fossa, worse at night. Dry cough, continuing during



CHAMOMlLtA


363


sleep. Amelioration of cough when getting warm in bed. Chamo-
milla is a very common remedy in whooping cough, where the child
wants to be carried ; keeps the nurse busy all the time. Coughs and
gags and vomits, and it is very irritable and srapricious in all of its
wants and coughs during sleep.

You can now easily detect the chest symptoms. They go with the
mental symptoms and the irritability and cough. The cough in the
chest is scarcely different from the cough in the larynx and the cough
from cold, ft is the same Chamomilla cough. Cough during sleep.
During most of the complaints, fevers, colds, acute complaints and
little attacks, burning of the extremities. Stitching pains in the limbs.
Cramping in the muscles. Limbs go to sleep. With the pains in the
limbs, and sometimes in other parts, but particularly in the limbs, a
benumbed feeling, or pains with the feeling of deadness, pains accom-
panied by a benumbed feeling, sometimes almost complete loss of sen-
sation of the skin, yet the pains in the long nerves, in the extremities
are very violent, and the patient seems just as sensitive to pain as at
other times. Extremely sensitive to pain, but the pains themselves
cause a benumbing feeling to follow them. It has been called in older
books a paralyzing pain. Convulsions of the extremities. Convul-
sions of the whole body. ‘‘Cramps in the legs and calves. Tearing
pains in the feet following a severe chill. Burning of the soles at night ,
puts the feet out of bed.'* All the routine prcscribers whenever the
patient is known to put the feet out ;of bed give Sulphur, yet there is a
large list of remedies with hot feet^ burning soles, and all of them will
put the feet out of bed, of course, to cool them off. There is no reason
why they should all get Sulphur.

Another feature of the pains that come on at night, sometimes before
ntidnight is, they arc so violent that he cannot keep still. When the
child has pains he wants to be carried, that seems to do him good.
When the adult has pains at night in bed he gets up and walks the
floor. Benumbing pains, pains ameliorated by heat, pains that drive
him out of bed at night, with twitchings of the limbs. Oversensitive-
ness to pain. Great irritability. The Chamomilla patient can not go
to sleep at night. He is sleepy, like Bell., but he cannot sleep. If he
quiets down during the day he wants to go to sleep. But as soon as
the time comes to go to bed he is wdde awake, he is sleepless and rest-
less at night, especially the fore part. At times the Chamomilla pa-
tient becomes so full of visions and so much excited during the fore
part of the night in his efforts to go to sleep that when he docs go 10
sleep he jerks and twitches and has horrid dreams, and is full of
sufferings. “Anxious dreams. Sees horrible apparitions and starts :
dreams about fatal accidents.'’ Worn out mentally from trying to go
to sleep, and he is tired out.



364


cheudonium


CHELIDONIUM

Chelidoniiim is a remedy morejmitable for acute diseases^, though it
cures certain chronic conditions. It is not a very deep acting remedy. It
is about like Bryonia in its general plane, length and depth of action.
It has been used principal ly in g^ stric^and intestinal catarrhs, in acute
and semi-chronic Tiver troiiSlSPand in right-sIde^T pneiimoniali niS'
skiiT iriikely to be sallow, and gradually increases to a marked jaundice
in connection with these complaints. Semi-chronic gastritis, with
jaundice. “Gastro-duodenal cattarh. Congestion and soreness in the
liver, with jaundice. Right-sided pneumonia, complicated with liver
troubles, or jaundice.'’ Ibis remedy seems to act throughout the sys-
tem, but almost always along with it the liver is involved, and it is
suitable for what the old people and the doctors called “biliousness.’’
The patient is generally bilious, has nausea and \'omiting. Distension
of the veins. Yellowish grey color of the skin.

Very few mental symptoms have been brought out in its proving
not enough to give us a good idea of the desires and aversions. We
do not get a clear idea of the intellectual faculties, it needs further
proving, yet in many regions it has had su])eral)undance of proving.
“Sadness and anxiety." Brooding over some sort of trouble generally
runs through the mental state. “Anxiety, allowing no rest," keeping
the patient uneasy day and night. Sadness, as if she had committed a
crime ; as if some dreadful thing was going to happen. So sad that
she thinks she must die. Weeping despondency. Distaste for mental
exertion and conversation. If you examine those medicines that act
primarily upon the liver, that slow down the action of the liver, you
will find the word “melancholia." With heart troubles, great excite-
ment., With liver troubles, slowing dowm of the mental state, in-
ability of the mind to work, sluggishness of the mind, inability to
think, inability to meditate, slow pulse. Sluggishness of the whole
economy. The sensoriiim is very commonly disturbed, and the patient
is dizzy. “Things go round in a circle." Dizziness comes, and it does
not let up until nausea, and sometimes vomiting, follows. “So much
turning in the head that he vomits. Confusion of mind. Loss of con-
sciousness and fainting." These are also common features with liver
troubles.

The mind symptoms are present more or less with the following
liver symptoms ; There are pains of a dull aching character, “sorc?-
ness." Bruised pains. Tenderness of the liver to touch. Aching
pains, that seem to involve the whole right lobe of the liver ; creating a
sensation of fulness. Pressure upwards, with difficulty of breathing.
Press ure downwards, sym pathetk LJwit^ the^^stomach, with j he nausea
and vomiting. And then more intense pain felt imder^tlTf" right



CHELIDOWIUM


3^5


scapula. “Dull aching pains under the right scapula ; sharp, shooting
the right scapula” ; these complicate themselves again with
pneumonia, with pleurisy. It cures pneumonia and pleurisy ; it cures
various forms of congestion in thcliver, when these pains go Irom he-
fore backward, and seem to be felt through the back, "btiiching in
the region of the liver, extending through to back. Hard pains felt
through the back.’* Some patients will describe these pains as shooting
pains ; some as tearing pains, and others as sharp pains, going through
the right hypochondnum or through the right lobe of the liver to tiie
back. 'Tains from the region of the liver, shooting towards the back
and shoulders. Spasmodic pain in the region of the liver. Pressing
pain in the region of the liver.*' In congestion or inilammation, fulness
and enlargement, semi-chronic cases, or even acute, tliis medicine
proves suitable for such conditions. I'he right hypocliondrium is
tense and painful to pressure.

This remedy has cured gall stone colic.^ Ihactitioncrs, who know'
how^ to direct a remedy, relieve gall stone colic in a few minutes. We
have remedies that act on the circular fibres of these little tubes, caus-
ing them to relax and allow the stone to pass painles?sly. In a perleci
state of health, of course, there are no stones in the bile that is lield in
the gall bladder, but this little cystic duct opens its mouth and a little
gall stone engages in it, and it creates and irritation by scratching along
tfie^muedus membrane oF that little lube. When this pain is a shooting,
stabbing, tearing," lancinating paii^ extending through to the back,
CSclidbnium will cure it. The "^Sistaiit It relieves the patient says :
“Why, what a relief ; the pain has gone.” The remedy relieved
that spasm, the little duct opens up and the stone passes out through
the ductus communis choledochus. Every remedy that is indicated by
the symptoms will cure gall stone colic.

A patient lying in bed, with great heat, extreme sensitiveness, cannot
have the body touched, screaming with p^ins, red face and hot liead,
will gall stone colic, will be relieved in three minutes by Bell.j but
that is not at all like this remedy. Natriim s ulpli. ixnd many other
remedies have cured gall stone colic in a few minutes, when the
symptoms agreed.

Now as to the pneumonia, it is generally of the right side, or rigJit-
sided spreading to the left. The right-sidedness is marked, and bur
small portions of the left lung are involved. The pleura is generally
involved, and so there are stitching, tearing pains. One may nor prac-
tice long before he will find a Chelidonium patient, sitting up in bed
with high fever, bending forward upon his elbows, holding himself per-
fectly still, for this medicine has asjniich, aggravatjon from motioiws
All of the pains are extrTindy aggravated from motion. This
patient is sitting wit h a pain that tran sfixes_hinxi..JbxLX^J^^



366


CHEUX)N1UM


cann ot mo ve without the pain shooting through him like a knife. The
"hcxt day you will sec that his skin is" growing Y^how. If you see him
in the beginning Chelidonium will relieve him aifd you will prevent
that pneumonia. It is not uncommon in children, and it is extremely
common in adults.

Do not get confused with Bryonia, Both are violently worse from
motion. Bryonia wants to lie on the painful side, or wants to lie on the
back if the pneumonia is mostly in the posterior part of the right lung.

C helidonium he is worse from touch and motion.

Bell has that extremely painful, tearing, rending of the right lung
with pleurisy, but in Belly one cannot touch that right side, cannot
press It, but must lie on the other side and he cannot move. Cannot
stand a jar of the bed, because of the extreme sensitiveness to motion.
I mention all three in this particular way because they have some
things in common, but the remedies arc different.

Chelidonium has cough with chest symptoms of the right side, liver
affections, and the mental affections that commonly belong to these,
violent aggravation from motion. The pains are ameliorated by heat.
Pain that extends to the stomach, ameliorated by heat. Mental symp-
toms ameliorated by eating. Craves hot milk ; hot fluids. Eating
warm food ameliorates the liver, the chest and stomach symptoms.

“Bilious vomiting. Retching : bilious eructations. Nausea and retch-
ing during an attack of anxiety.’’ These arc all commonly pixsent dur-
ing the complaints described. The pains, when they become severe,
seem to strike the stomach and cause vomiting. Ameliorated by some-
thing hot. “A feeling of anguish in the pit of the stomach. Presistent
pain in the stomach ; aggravated by motion and ameliorated by eructa-
tions. Constriction and sensitiveness in the pit of the stomach.” These
are all aggravated by touch and ameliorated by eating. “Constant ach-
ing pain in the stomach, ameliorated by food. Constrictive, pinching
pain in the stomach better from drawing up the limbs and lyng on the
left side, ameliorated by eating.”

It has many eye symptoms. Stitching pains. “Opacity of the
cornea.” Inflammations. Bruised pain in the eyes. Right supra-
orbital neuralgia.” In many instances it prefers the right side.

In the face the jaundice is the most marked thing that is expressed ;
and, then, we have the dirty gray complexion. “Pale, dirty-yellow-face.”

The headaches are brought on from heat,, unlike the stomach and the
liver, and the lungs, etc. The head is aggravated from motion, ag-
gravated from heat, aggravated from a warm room, aggravated from
warm applications. There is where it differs from the internal or
general state. There are numerous headaches. Periodical bilious sick
headaches, with vomiting of bile, brought on from exposure to heat,
from being overheated, aggravated from motion, wants to lie perfectly



CHININUM ARSENICOSUM 367

quiet in a dark room, and better from vomiting bile. Old-fashioned
bilious sick headaches.

Bilious diarrhoea.^ Along with jaundice, clay-like, pale, hecal, putty-
like stool. Bileless stool. Stool too light colored. Siool quite white in
children. Diarrhoea and constipation alternate. Stool brown, white,
watery, green mucus, thin, pasty, bright yellows or gray tinged with
yellow.

Hoarseness. “While coughing, pain in the larynx, and pressure in
the larynx.’'

The difficult breathing comes on with liver symptoms and pneu-
monia and chest troubles in general. “Difficult respiration, with short
fits of coughing. Short, (jiiick breathing. Anxiety as if he must
choke. Difficult breathing ; tightness over the chest as if breathing
would be hindered.” It has also nightly attacks of humid asthma.
This is brought on from every change of the weather. All its com-
plaints are brought on from changes in the weather. He cannot stand
weather changes, either too cold or too warm. Rheumatic complaints
in the shoulders, hips and limbs, from changes in the weather.

With complaints of the liver, lungs and chest, there arc coughs.
They are spasmodic. The chronic cough is violent, spasmodic, dry,
coming in paroxysms. “Spasmodic cough, without expectoration.'*
After it has existed a while there will he some expectoration. “Re-
peated attacks of short cough. Sh<yjt cough, with little grayish phelgm.
Rattling, fatiguing cough.”

In the limbs there are rheumatii^ and neuralgic pains. Neuralgia of
the limbs in general, most violent. Limbs feel heavy and stiff. Limbs
flabby. Later the patients runs down somewhat, weak heart, weak cir-
culation ; dropsical conditions of the limbs. Great restlessness.
“Trembling and twitching of the limbs. Weariness. Indolence. In-
disposition to work.”

The neuralgias arc more common in the head and face than in the
lower parts of the body, in the limbs and in the extremities.

It has sharp, febrile attacks, such as found in pneumonia with chill ;
and in inflammation of the liver. It has cured intermittent fever, com-
ing in the afternoon and evening.

Itching of the skin. Jaundice. It has cured old putrid ulcers.

CHININUM ARSENICOSUM

Complaints come on at night. Open air aggravates most complaints.
General increasing anaemia. Inflamed parts turn black. Chlorosis,
Sensitive to cold, and complaints are worse from cold and from be-
coming cold. Tendency to take cold.

. This is a useful remedy in weakly constitutions. Cold, pale, cmaci-



368


CHININUM ARSENICOSUM


ated people. In prolonged suppuration ; after ha<t5inorrhages. Chronic
diarrhoea, when rlie weakness is the most prominent feature. Fulness
of blood vessels. Dropsy in sacs, or wclema. Emaciation. Cannot
sustain a physical exertion . Faints on slight provocation. Wants to
!)e warm ; wants warm drinks and warm food. Warm room amelior-
ates. Wants to lie down. Aversion to motion. Stitching and tearing
pains. Periodicity is most marked. Pulsation all over the body*
Pulse fast, feeble and irregular. Relaxed and flabby {Calc). Sen-
sitive to pain. Many symptoms come during sleep. Standing in-
creases many symptoms. Sensitive io touch. Trembling. Walking in
the open air aggravates. Weakness from walking. Complaints come
on in windy, stormy weather.

Easily angered, and refuses to talk or to answer questions. Anxiety
day and night, but worse in the evening, worse during chill ; anxiety
with fear. Anxiety during fever, even becomes wild. Anxiety on
waking. Desires things which he cares nothing for after he gets them.
Becomes critical with his most intimate friends. Complaining. Con-
fusion of mind in the morning on waking. Over conscientious about
trifles {Silicea, Thuja). Delirious at night ; after haemorrhage. Many
imaginations, illusions of fancy ; secs images, frightful images. De-
spair during chill, heat and suffering. Discontented with everything.
Discouraged easily, and faint hearted. Dulness of mind. Becomes ex-
cited over small matters. Exaltation of fancy. Fear at night that evil
will come to him : fear of ghosts. Forgetful. Mind overwhelmed with
ideas at night. Impatience in intermittent fever. Becomes indifferent
to all enjoyment. Aversion to work. Irritable during chill, and on
w'aking. Jumps out of bed during the fever. Moaning during the
chill and the fever. Loathing of life. Weakness of memory. He is
easily offended, and looks for insults. Great restlessness at night, and
during fever. Anxious restlessness, driving him out of bed ; driving to
despair. Extreme sadness, especially during chill and fever, and some-
times during the sweat. Oversensitiveness to noise, and in general.
Sentimental. Mental symptoms from sexual excesses, and loss of vital
fluids. Refuses to talk, and remains .silent. Sits by the hour in silence
without moving. Wandering speech. vStarting on falling asleep, and
waking as from fright. Lies in bed in a state of stupefaction in low
forms of fever. vSuicidal disposition. Suspicious, Persistent thoughts.
Timid. Weary of life. Weeping. The chilliness is brought on by
thinking of it. The headache is worse by mental exertion.

Vertigo comes in the evening, with nausea ; while walking in the
open air.

Cerebral congestion with great heat of the head. The forehead
becomes cold and covered with sweat. Constriction of the head. Great
heat in the forehead. Heaviness in the head in the morning. Motion



CillNlNUM AHSKNICOSUM


3^>9

is felt in the brain on moving the head. Sensation of rushing in the
brain, down right side of the neck and arm ])ccoming convulsive, and
ending in real convulsion. Violent darting pains in the head prevent-
ing sleep. Pain in the whole head. Pain ; in the morning on waking,
in then afternoon, but most severe at night. Night headaches. Cold
air brings on the head pains. The scalp is sensitive to touch, to comb-
ing the Lair, and to binding up the liair during the suffering. Catarrhal
headache. Pain very severe during the chill and lieat, hut ameliorated
as the sweat ])ecomcs free. Pains worse or brought on from becoming
cold. With coryza tlic pain is violent ; worse coughing or jarring,
after earing. Hammering headaches. Headaches during menses.
Mental exertion aggravates the headache. Nervous headache, and
headache from excitement or noise. Paroxysmal pains. Periodical
headaches : headache every two weeks. Pulsating pains. Pains worse
walking. Neuralgic pains, worse in letl side, ameliorated by rubbing.
Aching felt deep in the head. Pains in tlie forehead, mostly on the
right side ; in occiput after sleej) : in sides of head in the evening ; in
temples and forehead : in vertex. Bruised pain all over the head after
fever, and after sleep. Burning pain in left occipital region extending
down the neck in the morning. Bursting pain. Pressing pain. Press-
ing in the forehead ; over the eyes. Pressing in the occiput and
temples. Stitching and tearing pains in the head. Perspiration on
the forehead. Complaints come on from uncovering the head in
cold air.

Inflamed eyes. Ladirymation. Intense photo[)hol)ia and spasms
of orbicularis muscles. Oiisliing hot tears. Large ulcers on each eye,
worse from midnight until 3 a. xr. Scrofulous opthalmia, worse
after I A. M. Flickering before the left eye. Pain in the eyes at
night. Burning pains. Pressing. Sunken eyes. Dim vision. Sparks
before the eyes. WcmP vision.

Noises in the ears ; buzzing, humming, ringing, roarings singing.
Stitching in the cars. Earache. Pain burning, stitching^ tearing^
Hearing acute. Hearing impaired.

Coryza with discharge. Dry coryza. Nasal catarrh with bloody
discharge, or purulent discharge. Dryness in the nose. Epistaxis.
Nose obstructed. Sneezing. Excoriation of the corners of the nose.
Especially useful for periodical coryza and frequent taking cold in
the nose which keeps a catarrh in constant activity.

Chlorotic face. Cracked lips. Bluish lips. Pale earthy face. Cir-
cumscribed red cheeks with pale face. Sickly color of face. Jaun-
diced face. Expression anxious. The pains of the face are worse in
the open air ; burning, tearing. Periodical pains. Swelling of sub-
maxilary and parotid glands. Perspiration cold. (Edema of face,
Ulceration of the lips.

47



CHININUM ARSENICOSUM


Burning canker sores in the mouth. Bleeding from mucous mem-
branes of the mouth. Cracked tongue. Tongue black, brown, white
or yellow. Dry mouth and tongue. Hot mouth. Burning rawness
of the tongue. Sore tongue. Salivation. Swollen gums and tongue.
Taste bad, bitter while eating ; insipid, metallic, saltish, sour, sweetish.
Vesicles on the tongue. Pain in the teeth at night, < by biting the
teeth together, from touch ; cold drinks. Pains come on periodically,
arc jerking, pulsating, tearing, and date back to malarial fever.

Contraction in the throat. Dryness in the throat. Gangrenous in-
flammation of the throat with putrid odor, in malignant scarlet fever.
The throat feels hot. This remedy has been used in diphtheria when
the exudation was blackish, and putrid odor from the mouth. Great
pain on swallowing. Burning in the throat. Stitching in the throat
on swallowing. Difficult swallowing. Swollen throat. Constant clear-
ing of the throat.

Appetite diminished, or ravenous. No appetite for breakfast.
Strong appetite without relish of food. Aversion to rich food and
fats ; aversion to food, to meat. Desires wine ; cold drinks, sour things,
sweet things. Sensation of coldness in the stomach. Emptiness,
better by eating. Eructations after eating, bitter, empty, of food, sour.
Water brash. Sensation of fulness after eating. Heartburn. Great
weight in the stomach after eating. Hiccough. Stomach easily dis-
ordered. Cannot digest eggs or fish. Water tastes bitter. Nausea
after eating, during headache. Pain in the stomach from coughing ;
after eating. Burning ; cramping ; pressing, soreness ; stitching, tear-
ing. Pulsating. Retching with cough. Strong thirst, in the even-
ing, during perspiration; for small drinks during heat. Vomiting at
night, on coughing, after drinking, after eating, with headache ; of bile,
black, blood, food, mucus : sour ; water. Nausea and vomiting followed
by sleep. Sudden inclination to vomit at 2 p.m.

Sensation of coldness in the abdomen during chill. Distension
morning, after eating, tympanitis, ascites ; enlarged liver and spleen
from malarial influences. Flatulence, in intermittent fever. Fulness
in the abdomen. Hardness of the liver. Heaviness as from a load
in the abdomen after eating. Great pain in the abdomen during chill,
like colic ; during diarrhoea ; after eating ; before stool ; ameliorated
by lying on the abdomen. Great pain in the region of the liver, in the
hypogastrium, in the region of the umbilicus. The kinds of pain in
the abdomen are burning, cramping, cutting, dragging ; soreness ;
stitching. Much rumbling and tension.

Constipation, with hard, knotty stools. Diarrhoea, morning, after-
noon, NIGHT, after midnight; after cold drinks ; from taking cold ;
AFTER eating; after fruit; in hot weather. Dystentery. Much flatus,
offensive. Bleeding from anus. Haemorrhoids. Involuntary stool



CHININUM AKSENICOSUM


37 i

and urine. Itching of the anus. Moisture about the anus. Pain in
the anus during stool. Burning in the anus during diarrhoea, during
stool. Pressing pain. Stitching. Paralytic weakness of the rectum.
Ineffectual urging to stool. Stool bilious, black, bloody, clay colored,
copious, frequent, lientekic, offensive, liquid, water. Diarrhoea with
intermittent fever.

Spasmodic retention of urine. Urging to urinate, freejuent, in-
effectual. Involuntary urination at night ; after stool. Urine albu-
niinous, bloody, burning ; cloudy on standing ; dark, greenish, pale,
copious at night, offensive, scanty. Sediment is red and sandy. Sugar.
Clear watery urine.

Erections feeble. Seminal emissions.

Itching of vulva. Leucorrhoea, excoriating, bloody, copious, after
menses, offensive, thin. Menses absent ; copious, dark, too freejuenr,
offensive, painful, pale, protracted ; suppressed. Uterine haemorrhage.
Prolapsus.

Catarrh of larynx and trachea. Rawness in larynx. Soreness in
larynx. Hoarseness ; rough voice.

Respiration quick, asthmatic, deep, difficult in evening and night ;
difficult with cough; difficult while lying; raiiling ; short. Su^ocation.
Wheezing. Whistling. Suffocation in the forenoon during phthisis.
Must sit bent forward ])y an open window in the attack of suffotation,
worse in any other position. Every day at 9 a. m. Suffocation.

Cough, morning, afternoon, evening, night ; after midnight ; asth-
matic, from deep breathing ; from full feeling in chest ; during chill.
Dry cough, at night, during fever. Cough exhausting. Cough during
fever. Hacking cough. Irritation in larynx and trachea. Loose
cough. Motion aggravates the cough. Short cough. Spasmodic
cough. Suffocative cough. Talking aggravates the cough. Tickling
in air passages causes cough. Expectoration bloody, copious ; diffi-
cult ; MUCUS, offensive, purulent; tastes bitter, flat, salty. Expectora-
tion is viscid, while.

Anxiety in chest, region of heart. Constriction. Haemorrhage of
lungs. Oppression of chest. Angina pectoris with dropsical .symp-
loms. Pain in the chest, during cough. Pains in the sides of the
chest. Rawness in the chest. Stitching in the chest on coughing.
Stitching in the heart. Palpitation of the heart, anxious, aggravated
on slight exertion, leaning back against chair ; violent. Sensation as
if heart ceased to beat. Full pulse. Weakness in chest. Weakness
of respiratory muscles. Violent pain in left mammary region, as
though part were torn with red hot tongs. Aching in region of seventh
rib on inspiration.

Coldness of the hack at night. Eruptions on the back. Pain in
the back, during chill. Pain in the cervical region, in scapula, between



37 -


CHININUM ARSENICOSUM


scapulae, in lumbar region ; in sacral region, in spine. Aching ; bruished ;
drawing ; soreness in spine ; tearing Stiffness in cervical region.
Weak feeling in back.

Limbs icy cold. Upper limbs cold. Cold hands and feet. Cold
knees. Cold legs. Cramps in calves. Blueness of finger nails. Erup-
tion on limbs. Excoriation lietvvcen thighs. Heaviness of limbs, of
lower limbs. After prolonged suppuration in hip joint disease, btitch-
ing in limbs, in lower limlis. Weakness of limbs, forearms, lower
limbs, legs. Gooseflesh on lower limbs with chilliness. Palms hot
and dry. Pain in limbs, rheumatic, in ihe joints ; gouty joints. Pain
in the upper limbs, shoulders, l^ain in tlie knees. Aching pains in
all the limbs. Wandering aching pains. Aching of the biceps of left
arm. Pain in flexors of left forearm, in radial side near elbow. Burn-
ing in the limbs, in the feet. Drawing pain in the limbs, upper limbs :
thighs, knees, feet. Stitching in shoulders ; upper arms, hips, thighs,
knees, feet. Tearing pain in the limbs ; upper limbs, shoulders, elbows.
wrist, hand, fingers; lower limbs, thighs, legs, ankles, feet. Restless-
ness of the limbs ; lozver limbs, legs, feet. Stiffness of the limbs,
hands, fingers ; lower limbs. Dropsical swelling of the Itands and feet.
Trembling of the limbs; hands; lower limbs. Weakness of the lower
limbs. Weakness of the limbs, joints, upper limbs ; lozver limbs, knees,
thighs.

Sleep deep. Sleep during fever. Dreams anxious, of death, fright-
ful misfortune, vexatious, vdvid. Falling asleep late, restless until
3 A. M. Restless Sleep. Sleepiness aflcrnoon. evening. Sleepless-
ness, Ijefore midnight. Sleep is unrefrcsliing. Wakens too early, fre-
quently. Yawns much.

Intermittent fever. CiulL;, morning, forenoon, noon, afieknoon
evening, night, midnight ; ope;/ air; walking in the open air; antici-
pating ; in bed. Drinking aggravates chill. Quotidian chill ; c|uotidian
or tertian. Hard, shaking chill. Chill like cold waves with goose-
flesh all over body. Warm room ameliorates. External warmlli
ameliorates. High fever follows chill. Fever without chill afternoon
and evening. Fever and chill alternate. Burning fever. Feverish
all the time, but more so at night. Dry heat at night. Hectic fever.
Heat during sleep. Chill, heat, then sweat. During the heat he
desires to uncover. Perspiration, morning, night J during anxiety,
COLD; from coughing; zvith iveakness ; during slight exertion; follozv*
ing iever ; from motion ; profuse ; during sleep ; after zvaking ; staining
linen yellow. Fevers from living in damp rooms. Malarial fevers.
Symptoms increase while perspiring. Fevers zvith extreme prostration.

Anaesthesia of the skm. Burning. Cold skin. Bluish discolora-
tion ; pale ; yellow ; jaundice every summer. Dryness. Burning erup-
tions, boils, pimples. Urticaria after scratching. Vesicles. Formica-



CICUTA VIROSA


373


iion, Gooseflesh. Itching, burning. Skin very sensitive, a Iccling
of soreness. Sticking. Dropsical swelling of skin. Ulcers, burning,
sensitive, stinging.


CICUTA VIROSA

This remedy is of interest because of its convulsive tendency. It
puts the whole nervous system in such a state of increased irritability
that pressure on a part causes convulsions. The convulsions extend
from center to cirmumfcrence ; the head, face and eyes arc lirst alfectcd.
An aura in the stomach gives warning of the convulsion. vSomc com-
plaints spread from the chest, especially from the heart ; tlie rigors
and chills begin in the chest : and there is a sensation of coldness about
the heart ; and from there it extends to other parts. Convulsions
often begin about the head and throat and extend downward. The
whole body is in such a state of tension that, after excitement, a fire
rages througliout the economy and causes convulsions. Any irritation
in the throat or oesophagus will cause violent convulsions in (his region.
On swallowing a fish bone, instead of only a pricicing sensation as
would occur in phlegmatic individuals, the irritation is so great that a
spasm commences and spreads to other parts. It was the old remedy
for tetanus and spasms caused by splinters in the skin or under the
nails, competing with Bell At the present day we find the most irc-
qiicntly indicated remedies for injuries to nerves aie Led. and Hyper.

A peculiar feature about some of the symptoms is that they re-
semble catalepsy. The cataleptic condition may be present or a con-
dition very similar to it. He recollects nothing that took place or that
he said during a certain period. He knows nobody, and lies wiihout
recognizing anyone, but when asked quc-siiuns he answers correctly,
and subscciuently he has no recollection of wliat took place.

It is a cerebo-spinal irritant ; the head is drawn back oj)isihoionos ;
all the limbs are convulsed and rigid. It has cured traumatic tetanus
lockjaw, epilepsy, epileptiform convulsions.

With severe pains in the bowels come convulsive movements and
convulsions. If the stomach is disordered or chilled, or if he has fear
or other mental conditions, convtdsions come on. He is extremely
sensitive to touch, and touch and drafts bring on (onvulsions. The
convulsions spread from above downwards, and thus it is ilic opposite
of Cupr. The convulsions of Cnpr. spread from tlic extremities to
the centre ; i. c., the little convulsions, merely cramps, arc first felt in
the fingers and then in the hands ami later in the chest and wliole
body. In Cicuta the little convulsions of the head, eyes and throat
spread down the back to the extremities with violent contortions. The
convulsions of Stcale sometimes begin in the face.



374


CICUTA VIROSA


At times he knows no one, but when touched and spoken to he
answers correctly. Suddenly consciousness returns and he remembers
nothing of what has occurred. He confuses the present with the past.
He imagines himself a young child. Everything is confused and
strange. He docs not know where he is. The faces of old friends
look strange ; he looks at them and wonders if they are the same per-
wsons he used to know. His house and familar places look strange.
Voices sound strange. The senses of sight and smell and all the other
special senses arc disturbed and confused. He is confused as to him-
self, his age and circumstances. A woman on coming out of the
cataleptic attacks often takes on childish behavior. A man thinks that
he is a child and acts like one ; silly laughter, playing with toys, and
other acts of childish behavior. He feels as if he were in a strange
place, and this causes fear. Thinks of the future with anxiety.
Mental torpor ; loss of ideas and sensation extending over a certain
period. Memory a blank for hours or days with or without convul-
sions. Convulsions generally take the place of the ecstatic or cata-
leptic condition. Natr. m. is somewhat similar to the mental con-
dition of this remedy, as the Natr, m, patient goes about doing all her
household work and other functions and next day knows nothing about
it. Nux mos\ is another remedy that has such a complete blank when
going about doing things, a complete abstraction of mind.

This patient has strange desires ; desires to cat coal and many other
strange articles, because he is unable to distinguish between things
edible and things unfit to be eaten ; cats coal and raw potatoes. Wants
to be alone ; dislike to society. Singing, shouting, dancing ; likes
toys, jumps about like a child. Lies in bed lamenting and w^ailing.
Great agitation ; child gra.sps at one’s clothing in a frightened manner.
This is likely to occur before the convulsion, great horror in the
countenance, yet he has no recollection of the horror when he comes
out of the convulsion. That state of anxiety and fear comes after
the attack has begun, though the convulsions have not yet conic on.
Between the convulsions the patient is mild, gentle, placid and yield-
ing, which distinguishes it from Strych, and Nux v, convulsions. The
Nux convulsions are all over the body and are worse from touch and
draft, blueness and purple color of the body, but between the convul-
sions the patient is very irritable. Of course, when they go out of
one convulsion into another you cannot see this, but when out of
the convulsion the Nux patient is very irritable. Thei Cicuta patient, out
of the convulsion, is full of sadness, anxiety, and darkness, borrows
trouble from the future, is affected by sad stories, is pessimistic. He
is afraid of society, afraid of company, and wants to be alone. He is
suspicious and shuns people ; despises others ; over-estimation of him-
self. In this it approximates Plat, but there is no further resemblance



CICITTA VIROSA


375


between the two remedies. Full of fear ; fright will bring on con-
vulsions, like Op.j, Ign,, and Aeon.

Full of vertigo. The whole sensoriiim is violently excited. Things
turn around in a circle. Vertigo on walking, glassy eyes, etc. Com-
plaints brought on from injuries to the skull, from blows on the head.
Many times there is no trouble in the region of the injury ; there may
be compression and yet all the pains be in distant parts ; drawing oi’
the muscles and cramps. Concussion of tlic brain and chronic injuries
therefrom, especially spasms. Semi-lateral headaches forcing the
patient to sit still erect. Headache as if the brain were loose on w^alk-
ing. When thinking of the exact nature of the pain it ceased. It has
cured ccrebro-spinal meningitis when there were convulsions and the
convulsions were aggravated from touch, with fever and even spotted
mottled skin. Mind and head symptoms after injuries. On going
into a ccrebro-spinal meningitis the patient sits in a chair talking as if
nothing were wrong, when, quick as a flash, he passes into another
state in which he knows no one ; he falls over limp, he is put to bed,
and though he answers questions he remains in a semi-conscious state,
knowing no one. This may change into a spasm. The head is bent
back in spasms ; jerking back of the head ; spasms begin in the head
and go downward. Violent shocks in the head, arms and legs. Head
hot and extremities cold, like BelL in its convulsions. Sweat on the
scalp w^hen sleeping. Child rolls head from side to side. Hot head.

Convulvsive action about the eyes : pupils dilated and insensible ;
patient lies fixed in one place, with starting, fixed, glassy, upturned
eyes, like Cupr. Strabismus may lie the only spasm the child is sub-
ject to from ccicbral irritation. Every time the child is friglncncd
it has strabismus ; when touched or when it has cold, or after a fall
hitting the head, or coming periodically, it has strabismus.

The nose is sensitive to touch. Touch and jarring bring on com-
plaints, and hence it was so useful in, and was the first remedy for,
the result of injuries and irritability and over-sensibility.

It has troubles from shaving : it is useful in such eruptions as come
in the whiskers ; barber's itch : a solid crop of eruptions all over the
face wherever the whiskers grow. Eruptions on the cheek like eczema.
Swelling of the submaxillary glands. Erysipelatous eruptions. It is
closely related to Conium about the lips and lids, in that a small amount
of pressure causes induration. It has cured epithelioma of the lips.

The throat troubles are mostly spasmodic. After swallowing a
fish bone or stick which lodges in the throat a spasm comes on. After
Cicuta the spasms will cease and it can be taken out. It is useful in
cases of injury, accompanied with violent choking, so that be cannot
allow an examination to be made.

Cold sensation in the chest. Spasms of the chest. Feels as if the



37 ^>


CINA


heart stopped beating. Spasmodic symptoms of the back. Opisthoto-
nos. All conditions of the limbs are of a spasmodic character.

CINA

Cilia is pre-eminently a child’s remedy, but it is suitable for con-
ditions in adults that arc seldom thought of. A marked feature run-
ning through is loiichiness, mental and physical. The child wants
something, but docs not know what. The cliild is aggravated by touch
and even by being looked at, and is worse from seeing strangers. The
skin is sensitive to touch. The scalp and back of the neck, the shoul-
ders and arms arc so sensitive, that it is almost a soreness as if
bruised. The hpyerasthesia is both mental and physical. The old
routine of giving Cina for worms need not go into your notes, for if
you are guided by symptoms the jiatient will be cured and the worms
will go.

This patient is disturbed by e\ cry thing, w^orse alter eating even a
moderate meal. The child takes a moderate supper and dreams all
night, jerks and twitches in sleep, rouses up in a fright, talks excitedly
about what he lias drcainecl, thinks it is real, and secs dogs, phantoms,
and frightful things he has dreametl about. The dream is prolonged
into the wakeful liours. Screams and trembles, with much anxiety
on waking ; wliines and complains. While this little patient is aggra-
^ated by being liandletl yet lie wants to be carried and kept busy, like
Cliamoniilla ; although not so intensely irritable as that remedy, yet he
must lie carried. At first on taking him out of the crib he screams
when taken hold of ; the lirst touch aggravates. This aggravation
from touch and sensitiveness runs through the convulsions and fevers,
with delirium, glassy eyes, drawn mouth and white ring around the
nose and mouth. With a disordered stomach be has convulsions after
eating, with the head drawn back and glassy eyes. The stomach is
sour and the child is always spitting up sour milk and lielching sour
wind. I1ie cliild smells sour. 'Fhc mother says that ‘'Baby has a
worm lircath,’' hut the same odor is present when there arc no worms.
In the convulsions there arc loss of consciousness and frothing at the
mouth.

Hallucinations of smell, sight and taste, in the delirious state, after
taking cold, or on waking from sleep ; wakes up with the delusion.
Things taste and smell differently. The senses of taste and touch are
exaggerated or perverted.

In some cases of internal hydrocephalus, not with enlarged skull
but with increase of the fluid in the ventricles and central canal of the
spinal cord, the patients take on Cina symptoms. Rolling of the head
frequent headaches ; sensitiveness to jar ; cannot be touched or tapped



CXNA


377


Along the spinal cord without headache ; always worse in the sun ; the
head is hot and the feet are cold in the sun. Cina will cure some of
these cases. They cannot stand any kind of disturbance ; it produces
a convulsion. They cannot be punished because they go into convul-
sions. If the iter a tertio ad quartum veniriculum is closed they will
be incurable, the internal pressure will go on and they will die from it.
Such congenital states are incurable.

Dull headache with sensitiveness of the eyes. Headache before and
after epileptic attacks and after intermittents. Before and during
the headache sensitiveness of the skull. Cina children cannot have
the hair combed, and the Cina woman must have her hair down in
head and nerve complaints.

There is coldness of the extremities and also some itching of the
skin, but the head symptoms are predominant. From slight disturb-
ances of the mind he cannot digest, and he has diarrhoea. The com-
plaints are aggravated in summer ; the heat affects the brain, arrests
his functions, and on comes diarrhoea with green, slimy stools or white
stools, and the child vomits. It is pre-eminently brain in Cina ; the
orders are not received from the brain and so stomach symptoms de-
velop, and worms hatch out. If he is cured the healthy gastric juice
will chase the worms out.

The child turns his head from side to side. The pains are some-
times better from turning the head from side to side. You will see
this in sensitive women, who must have their hair down ; rolling the
head relieves, not shaking as in the text, that is too violent.

All sorts of colors before the jeyes. Objects look yellow. It is
useful in sensitive women, sensitive nervous women, w^ho are always
worse from using the eyes, and get pain in the head and eyes from
sewing. It is like Ruta in that respect, symptoms of eye-strain. It
is not so much indicated in young people but more when presbyopia
is beginning in middle-aged women, and there is the effort to strain
the eyes on fine work or print. Rubs the eyes and can then see more
clearly. On rising from the bed blackness before the eyes ; different
colors, especially yellow. Strabismus when worms arc present, de-
pending really on brain trouble because the worms are dependent
upon that.

Face sunken, pallid, wings of nose drawn in. Blue ring or gray
streak around the mouth. ''A sure sign of worms," the mother says.
Child rubs its nose with the hands or on the pillow or on the nurse’s
shoulder. Child bores into the nose until the blood comes. The
sickly aspect is striking, but it is representative of brain trouble, central
trouble. The brain symptoms are the highest and most important.
If frightened, whipped, or scolded, the brain is disturbed and the



378


CINCHONA


Stomach disordered. They get indigestion and breed worms ; white
or blue appearance about the mouth, grinding of the teeth during sleep.
Before the child has teeth it has a chewing motion, a side to side
movement. Sensitiveness of the teeth to the cold air and cold water.
Bleeding from the mouth and nose. Inability to swallow liquids ;
they gurgle down the oesophagus — ^before and after convulsions. When
the head symptoms are present, the milk or water gurgles down the
oesophagus with a gurgling cluck. This is present in diarrhoea and
vomiting with brain symptoms. Ars, and Cupr. are also prominent in
gurgling down the oesophagus when swallowing. Choreic movements
exetnd to the tongue.

The child or adult is not relieved by eating, is still hungry. The
stomach is loaded and yet he is hungry. After vomiting you would
expect there would be an aversion to food, but there is in Cina the
same empty, hungry feeling. When there is gnawing in the stomach
after eating, or when the child has taken all it can hold yet cries for
the bottle, or empties its stomach by spitting up and vomiting the food
and then reaches out whining and crying for more, think of Cina.
Shuddering when drinking wine as if it were vinegar.

Abdomen hard and bloated. Very often the Cina child will flop
over on its belly and get to sleep in that way. If it is turned on the
side it wakes up again. While in the mother’s arms it will go to sleep
with the abdomen resting on the mother’s shoulder, but when she puts
it on the side in bed it wakens. If you had a child with copious,
gushing, violently foetid stool, ameliorated by lying on the abdomen,
and it would have another stool if lying any other way, Podoph, would
be the remedy. That would not be Cina. The Cina stool is not very
copious, and often white.

Gagging cough in the morning. Short, hacking cough at night.
Spasmodic cough. Whooping cough.

Oversensitiveness to touch ; trembling, spasms, chorea. Spasmodic
yawning. Child cannot sleep unless on the belly or in constant motion.

CINCHONA

Now we shall take up the study of Cinchona, or China. Persons
who have suffered much from neuralgias due to malarial influences,
who have become anaemic and sickly from repeated haemorrhages, are
likely to develop sysmptoms calling for China. China produces a
gradually increasing anaemia, with great pallor and weakness. It is
sometimes indicated in plethoric individuals, but this is the exception,
and even in this class we find that the symptoms are tending towards
the cachectic state, which is avoided by the prompt action
remedy.



CmCHONA


379


Throughout the body there is a gradually increasing sensiti\'ity, a
gradually increasing irritability of the nerves ; the nerves arc always
in a fret, so that these people will say : '‘Doctor, what is the matter
with me, I am so nervous ?*' Everywhere there are twinning, tearing,
cutting pains — in the limbs and over the body. And so great is the
sensitiveness to touch that the nerves can many limes be outlined ;
as, for instance, the little nerves in the fingers, because of their ex-
treme sensitiveness. The China patient grows increasingly sensitive
to touch, to motion, to cold air, so that he is chilled from exposure.
The pains are brought on by exposure to the wind, by cold air, and
are increased by motion and touch. Old malarial conditions that have
been suppressed with quinine ; gradually increasing pallor, bloodless-
ness, cachexia, until the patient is always catching cold, has liver
troubles, bowel troubles, disordered stomach, is made miserable and
sick by nearly everything he does. He cannot eat fruit without having
indigestion ; he cannot eat sour things. He is debilitated, pale, waxy,
suffers from pains, such as are found in quinine subjects, and breaks
out into a perspiration up the least exertion.

This patient bleeds easily ; bleeds from any orifice of the body —
from the nose, from the throat, from the uterus. And after haemor-
rhage complaints come on. Running through the remedy as a general
constitutional state is a tendency to congestion and often inflammation
in connection with haemorrhages. Inflammation of the part that bleeds
or of distant parts. For instance, a ^’^oman aborts, has a haemorrhage,
but with apparently no provocation, inflammation of the uterus or of
the lungs sets in. With these inflaihmations there is also great irrita-
bility of the tissues, tearing pains, cramping in the muscles and actual
convulsions. When a China patient bleeds a little, for instance, in
confinement, right in the midst of the bleeding convulsions come on.
You would scarcely need to think of any other remedy. Secale is the
one other medicine that has this, but the two do not look alike. Secale
wants the covers all off and the windows open, even in cold weather.
It a draft of air blows on a China patient, while in labor, she may go
into convulsions. In the midst of labor the pains cease and convul-
sions come on. Another feature about this inflammation is its rapid
progress and intensity, quickly going into gangrene. Inflammation
after haemorrhage and the parts rapidly turn black.

China has a fulness of the veins. Not exactly a varicose condition,
but a sort of paralysis of the coatings of the veins. The veins become
full during fever.

All of these complaints are such as we find in broken down constitu-
tions, in feeble, sensitive patients, especially in* sensitive women.
Sensitive to the odors of flowers, of cooking, of tobacco. Weak, re-
laxed, emaciated, pale, with feeble heart, feeble circulation and ten-



3^0 cinchona

dency to dropsy. Dropsy runs through the remedy ; anasarca and also
dropsy of shut sacs. A peculiar thing about this dropsy is that it
comes after haemorrhage. In the anaemic condition, directly follow-
ing the loss of blood, dropsy appears. This is the typical China
patient.

Catarrhal condition of all mucous membranes. Gastro-duodcnal
catarrh, ending in jaundice. Old liver subjects with jaundice. They
have lived for a long time under the influence of the malarial miasm.
Feeble, sensitive, anaemic. We see such cases in the South and South-
west, and long the Mississippi Valley.

Periodicity is regarded as the most important indication for China,
but it is a mistake. Periodicity is the symptom upon which Quinine^
is given. China has periodicity, but in no greater degree than many
other remedies and is not so frequently indicated as routine prescribers
suppose. Allopaths give Quinine whenever there is any periodicity in
complaints. Still periodicity is a strong feature in this remedy. Pains
come on with regularity at a given time each day. Intermittent fevers
appear with regularity and run a regular course.

A part of this periodicity is an aggravation at night, and sometimes
sharply at midnight. In colic that comes on regularly every night at
12 o'clock, and it may be, perhaps, a week before you suspect it to be
a China colic. A lady had colic and bloating of the abdomen every
night at i 2 o'clock. After suffering many nights a single dose of China
prevented any further trouble. Haemorrhage from the nose coming
on with regularity. Diarrhoea at night. Several gushing, black,
watery stools during the night ; in the daytime, only after eating.
There is a general aggravation after eating.

Remember that this is a chilly patient, sensitive to drafts, sensitive
to cold, whose complaints are brought on by being exposed to cold air ;
sensitive to touch, sensitive to motion. Extreme irritability of the
tissues.

China is indicated in conditions following the loss of blood and other
animal fluids ; as, for instance, in those who are suffering from sexual
excesses, from secret vice. They have become feeble, sleepless and
irritable. There is weakness and general coldness of the skin ; twitch-
ing and jerking of the limbs ; drawing and cramping in the muscles ;
chronic jerking ; epileptiform convulsion ; paralytic weakness ; rush of
blood to the head ; ringing in the ears ; darkness before the eyes ; faint-
ing on the slightest provocation. Such is the China cachexia, and
with this in view, the mental state will scarcely be a surprise to you.
It is just such as you would expect in this nervous, sensitive patient.
Weakness of mind. Inability to think or remember. Full of fear at
night. Fear of animals, dogs, of creeping things. Wants to commit
suicide, but lacks courage. Gradually the mind grows weaker ; he



UNCHONA


38i

Uses wl*ong expressions or misplaces words. Lies awake at night
making plans, theorizing, building air castles, thinking oi the wonder-
ful things he is going to do some day. In the morning he wonders
how he could have thought such foolish things. After sleep his mind
is clear and he looks more philosophically on the altairs of life.
Unable to entertain any mental proposition that means work. He
dreads work. He is apathetic, indittcrent, low spirited, silent, disin-
clined to think. He is unable to control the mind, to make it do what
he wants it to do. You see it is not as yet a real insanity.

This state of mind comes on after haemorrhage. Insomnia after
haemorrhage. A woman, after having suffered great loss of blood,
will be sleepless night after night.

After haemorrhage we may have dizziness. It is a natural conse-
quence ; dizziness and fainting. But ordinarily, after the proper diet
tor a few days, these symptoms will have disappeared. With the
China patient they go from bad to worse. The woman after severe
haemorrhage does not make blood. There is mal-assimilation, and the
vertigo persists for days and weeks. China will restore order.

The remedy is full of headaches. Congestive headaches in broken
down constitutions. Extremities cold and body covered with a cold
sweat. Rending, tearing pains. Pressing and throbbing. As soon
as the air strikes the head those pains come on. Headache better in
a warm room ; worse from touch J worse from motion ; worse from
cold. These are the principal features. A slight touch will aggravate
the disturbance. But notice the ' exception. Hard pressure ameli-
orates the China pains, as light pressure aggravates. Sensitiveness
of the tissues ; sensitiveness along the course of the nerves ; the pains
are brought on by touch, by cold air. Stitches in the head with pulsa-
tion in temples, which can be felt with the fingers ; ameliorated by hard
pressure, but aggravated by touch. The jar and motion of walking
hurt the head. Even turning over in bed aggravates. Cannot ride
in a carriage or anything that jolts. Ameliorated by hard pressure.
Throbbing headaches, aggravated by a draft of air, in the open air,
from the slightest touch ; ameliorated by hard pressure. The scalp
feels as if the hair was grasped roughly. It is sensitive to touch.
Profuse sweating of the scalp. Headaches aggravated at night. Head-
aches from sexual excesses ; loss of animal fluids.

Now we come to the eye. Photophobia. Yellowness of the sclera.
Exposure to cold wind will bring on neuralgia ; ameliorated from
keeping quiet and from keeping warm. “Nocturnal blindness, dim-
ness of vision. Feeling as if sand were in the eyes. Pains worse from
light. Better in the dark.*'

In the ear and the nose you find the same sensitiveness as in eyes ;
every little noise is painful. Ringing, roaring, buzzing, and singing.



CINCHONA


38^1

chirping like crickets in the ears. Dry catarrh of the middle eaf^
Hardness of hearing is not infrequently the result of this condition.
It gradually increases until there is total deafness, and the noises in
the ear continue long after the patient has lost the ability to distinguish
articulate sounds. Hsemorrhage from the ear. Offensive, bloody,
purulent discharges.

Frequent nosebleed in anaentic patients. Here, again, the dryness
and catarrhal conditions. Dry coryza ; or fluent coryza, suppressed
and causing violent head pains. Odors nauseate. Sensitiveness to
the odors of flowers, cooking, tobacco.

The face is withered, shrunken, sallow, anaemic, sickly. Red when
the fever is on and sometimes when the chill is on, but in the apyrexia
pale, sickly and sallow. Neuralgia of the face ; tearing, rending, knife-
like pains with the usual modalities. The veins of the face are dis-
tended. This is frequently observed during the fever and sweat of
the China intermittents.

The teeth get loose, the gums swell. The teeth are painful while
Shewing ; they feel too long. Toothache with every little cold. Rend-
ing as if teeth were being pulled out, every time the child nurses at the
breast. Exudations about the teeth and gums. Black, and foetid ;
great putridity in the lower forms of fever.

The taste is extremely acute. Exaggerated so that nothing tastes
natural. '^Bitter taste in the mouth. Food tastes bitter or too salty.
Burning as from pepper on tip of the tongue. Dryness in the mouth
and throat. Difficult swallowing.’* Sometimes there is canine hunger,
but one of the most common features is loathing of everything ; aver-
sion to all food. The China patient is often passive in regard to
eating. Sits down to eat and the food tastes fairly good and he fills
up. But it does not matter much whether he eats or not. '‘Loathing
and violent hunger.*' “Hunger and yet want of appetite. Indiffer-
ence to eating and drinking. Only while eating some appetite and
natural taste for food return. Loss of appetite. Aversion to all
food. Aversion to bread,” His appetite varies. Thirst is peculiar.
The patient will say : “I know my chill is coming on now because I
have thirst.” Thirst before the chill, but as soon as the chill comes
on there is no thirst. But when he begins to warm up he begins to
get thirsty ; that is, during the period in which the two lap he is thirsty,
but when the chill has fairly subsided and the heat is upon him his
thirst subsides also and he only wants to wet his mouth. But as the
hot spell begins to subside he increases the amount taken, and all
through the sweat he can hardly get water enough. Thirst before and
after the chill and thirst during the sweat. No thirst during the chill.
No thirst during the hot spell. You will cure more cases of inter-
mittent fever with Ipecac and Nux vomica, than with China. China



CINCHONA


383


has well-defined chill, fever and sweat

Gastric symptoms from eating fish, fruit, and from drinking wine.
Flatulent distension almost to bursting. There are constant eructa-
tions, loud and strong, and yet no relief, so extensive is the flatulence.
In Carbo veg. after belching a little, there is relief. Lyc. has both.
Tympanitic distension of the abdomen and stomach in low forms of
fever. Cannot move on account of soreness in the bowels. Vomiting
of blood. Sometimes followed by dropsy of the extremities. “Hic-
cough. Nausea. Vomiting. Eructations, tasting of food, or they
are bitter, sour. Frequent vomiting. Vomiting of sour mucus, bile,
blood.” Likely to occur at night. • Pulsation in the stomach and
rumbling. Cold feeling in the stomach. Fermentation after eating
fruit. Acidity. Disorders of the stomach after milk.

Diarrhcea. Copious, watery black discharges from the bowels.
Gurgling and rumbling in the abdomen. Stool immediately after eat-
ing and at night. Great quantities of flatus expelled from the bowels.
Diarrhoea comes on gradually. Stools more and more watery. Chronic
diarrhoea, with emaciation and aggravation at night. Petroleum has
a chronic diarrhoea, but only in the daytime.

Of the male genital organs the most striking feature is weakness.
Of the female genital organs there is a different class of conditions.
In the woman who has been subject to uterine haemorrhages you may
look out at any moment for a sudden, sharp attack of inflammation
of the ovaries. Haemorrhage fron) the uterus. Prolapse. Menses
too early and too profuse ; black, f clotted blood ; menstrual colic :
metrorrhagia. Pains and convulsions ; convulsions come on in the
midst of the haemorrhage ; cramps in the uterus along with haemor-
rhage ; labor-like pains ; ringing in the ears ; loss of sight ; sliding down
in bed. In confinement the lochia is profuse and lasts too long. De-
terioration of health from prolonged lactation ; toothache ; neuralgia
of the face.

Difficult respiration, rattling and filling up of the chest with mucus ;
asthma. “Pressure in the chest, as from violent rush of blood ; violent
palpitation, bloody sputa, sudden prostration.” Dry, suffocative cough
at night ; profuse night sweats. Pains in the chest, increasing sensi-
tiveness to cold, heat and redness of the face with cold hands.

Along the spine there are sore spots. Tearing, darting pains in the
limhs, ameliorated by heat and hard pressure, brought on by touch,
by becoming chilled. Worse at night. “Knees weak, especially when
walkmg.”

China cures low forms of fever, remittent or intermittent, typhoid
or malarial.



384


CISTUS CANADENSIS


CISTUS CANADENSIS

This remedy is an antipsoric, a deep-acting remedy. It runs very
close to Calcarea, but is milder in its action. It has the same exhaus-
tion from exertion, dyspnoea, sweating and coldness that we find in
Calcarea,

What will forcibly call your attention to a remedy will be the curing
of a bad and typical case. I remember the first time my attention
was decidedly called to Cistus. I had put it on my list to study from
time to time and had come to the conclusion that it was only a side
issue, until a young lady, nineteen years of age fell under my observa-
tion. The glands of the neck were large and hard, the parotids
especially ; she had foetid otorrhoea ; her eyes were inflamed and sup-
purating ; there were fissures at the corners of the eyes ; her lips were
cracked and bleeding, and she had salt rheum at the ends of the fingers.
I could not make Calcarea fit the patient, but after much study this
little remedy seemed to be just what I needed ; and although she had
had an immense amount of Homoeopathy, good and bad, this remedy
cured.

The glands inflame, become swollen and suppurate. It causes cries
and cures old ulcers. It has a scrofulous constitution. It is useful
in chronic diarrhoea, with enlarged glands, even in those who are
flabby, sickly and pallid and who cannot go upstairs without losing
their breath. All the mucous membranes throw out a thick, yellowish,
offensive mucus and hence it is suitable in old and troublesome catarrh.
The chest fills up with mucus and he feels relieved after expectora-
tion, but after he empties the chest it feels raw. It has eruptions,
herpes, tetter, scaly eruptions, salt rheum on the hands and ends of
the fingers, with cracking and bleeding of the fingers in winter and
from washing in cold water.

All its complaints are worse from mental exertion. He is excitable.
His cough, headache and pains are worse from mental exertion.
Pains shoot from the head to the ear. Shooting, stitching, tearing
pains in inflamed parts. Old discharges from the ear date back to
eruptive diseases. He feels as if paralyzed after mental exertion, and!
mental excitement increases his sufferings, like Calcarea and Borax.
If he is compelled to fast headache comes on, and like Lyc,, the head-
ache will be relieved after eating. Frontal headache with coldness.
In a warm room the perspiration comes out, and it is cold, and the
more he sweats the colder he gets. Pain in the forehead with cold
sweat, and the colder he gets the worse the pain becomes. Sick head-
aches and great prostration with the headache. Sensation of internal
coldness of the forehead, especially in warm room. Pressing pain
at the root of the nose with headache. The parotid gland is so much



CISTOS CANADENSIS


385


enlarged that it pushes the head to one side. The glands of the
abdomen swell with chronic diarrhoea, and the swelling may be tuber-
culous. Enlarged glands, with or without eruptions.

All over the body there is a sensation of crawling ; formication ;
tingling and creeping like ants, and no eruption. He scratches till the
skin is raw trying to get relieved of the itching and prickling. Eruption
upon the face ; eczema. Eruptions about the ear.

Cold feeling or burning in the nose. This is difficult to distinguish.
In acute coryza the nose fills up with thick, yellow mucus, and when
this is blown out it leaves the nasal cavity empty, and there is irrita-
tion ; one will say it is a rawness, another will say a coldness, and
another will describe it as a burning. There is relief when the nose
fills up again with mucus. In Ars. the mucus in the nose is so acrid
that it burns, but in Ant. c., Esenins, and in this remedy when the
nose is empty there is a burning or rawness. The sensation of rawness,
coldness or burning is caused by the inhalation of air. An epidemic
of coryza was prevalent, and this was the strongest symptom — the
pain caused by inhaling air. great burning from inhaled air. But it
is not in the acute coryza that we see the value of this remedy, it is in
the old, chronic case, with thick discharge, and a cold feeling or burn-
ing in the nose when inhaling air.

‘‘Sharp shooting, intolerable itching and thick crusts, with burning
on right zygoma."' This remedy has cured lupus on the face. Caries
of the lower jaw. Open, bleeding cancer on the lower lip. Lupus
cxedens. Pain in all the joints of th^ face. It cures old, deep-seated,
eating ulcers about the ankle and ihin, with copious acrid discharge,
formication and swollen glands, aggravation from bathing, extreme
sensitiveness to the open air^ only comfortable when very warm.

The teeth have all sorts of disturbances ; the gums settle away, the
teeth become loose ; scorbutic gums. The same cold feeling is de-
scribed in the throat as in the nose — smarting and coldness. Mouth
and throat full of mucus. The throat feels rough, as if full of sand.
Dry spots in the throat. The throat looks glossy, shining as if var-
nished, in old atrophic catarrhs. Every cold .settles in the throat.
Hot air feels good everywhere. In old cases there is trouble with
scrofulous glands, which are enlarged, and the patient wants the heat ;
goes to the register and turns the heat on, wants to feel the heat in
the nose, throat and lungs. Patients going into tuberculosis have that
desire for heat ; chilly persons. They do not feel cold to touch, but
they are cold subjectively, chilly. Hawking of gum-like mucus, espe-
cially in the morning, fauces inflamed and dry. Supuration of the
glands of the throat.

These patients crave pungent things, and especially want something
to warm them up, something to build them up, something stimulating :

49



386 CLEMATIS ERECTA

herring, cheese ; something “strong.”

“Chronic induration and inilammation of the mammae. Left
mamma inflamed, suppurating, with a feeling of fulness in the chest.
Sensibility to cold air,” with inflamed glands. We see its ten-
dency to produce enlargement of the glands, and this would make us
think of it in growths with involvement of the glands all around. The
glands of the neck are enlarged in lines, like knotted rope, as in Hodge-
kin's disease. Only a limited number of remedies have this knotting.

Itching of the skin and mucous membrane. The itching in the ear
is not relieved by scratching, and the part is raw from the constant
rubbing and scratching. The eyes constantly itch. In the throat
there is continuous itching. In the chest there is a constant tickling,
causing cough. At the anus and all other orifices there is itching, and
the itching parts are rubbed until raw and bleeding.

Scrofula ; swelling and suppuration of the glands of the neck.
Eruption on the back like shingles. Scrofulous ulcer on the back.
Burning, bruised pain in the coccyx, worse from touch. That is like
Carbo an., in which the coccyx burns when pressed on, especially after
a slight injury in a nervous woman.

Tetter on the hands ; blisters oozing after scratching. Diseases of
the nails. Hard, thickened places on the hands of workmen, with
deep cracks.

The febrile symptoms have not been sufficiently brought out. In
chronic cases there is copious sweat with exhaustion. Night-sweats.

CLEMATIS ERECTA

Clematis has only been partially proved, and consequently it applies
only to a few conditions, but these arc very important, so that it cannot
be passed over. It has vesicular eruptions almost erysipelatous in
character. One almost constant mental state is that he fears to be
alone, yet dreads company. He dreads the necessity of having com-
pany, and it seems that the atmosphere is full of frightful and distress-
ing things to worry him. This makes him low-spirited. The remedy
seems to fit the sycotic constitution in its mental state and its generals.
It seems to be fitted to those who had gonorrhoea recently suppressed,
because after that suppression will come on this mental state with
inflammation of glands.

It is rather singular about the eruptions. One would not think that
from so harmless a little shrub so much trouble would come ; but there
are persons who are just as sensitive to this vine as to Rhus, and it
resembles Rhus to a great extent in its manifestations. It produces
just as poisonous a condition as Rhus, Here I might speak of several
remedies which relate to the Rhus poison, There are many vesicular



CtEMAllS ERECTA


387


remedies that look like Rhus, and all oi‘ them you will have to use
more or less in their antidotal relations to each other, but it is well to
be sure in a given case which one of them produced the poison.
Croton tig., Rhus, Ranunculus, Anacardium and Clematis at times look
so much alike that I am unable to tell them apart by their eruptions.
They are all similar enough to each other to become universal anti-
dotes. The others are all deeper acting than Rhus. The Ranunculus,
the little buttercup, has cured epithelioma of the lids. It has cured
cancerous affections, so we say it goes deep into the tissues.

On the outer head we have a part of the manifestations of Clematis ;
vesicular eruptions with great itching, stinging and crawling. Now
what is true of the eruption here will be true of the Clematis eruption
everywhere. It is aggravated from washing. It will smart and burn,
and a quasi-inflammation will set in from washing. Contrast this
with the internal features of the remedy. In the teeth and jaws the
pain is violent, but while the eniption is made worse from cold ap-
plications, the pain inside the jaw and the teeth is relieved by cold
water held in the mouth, and aggravated violently from heat, and
from the warmth of the bed. The eruption is aggravated from the
warmth of the bed, and also from cold washing. We have to go into
the details a little to see whether an eruption is Rhus or whether it ts
Clematis, or something else. Vesicular eruptions filling with yellow
fluid and with induration under the vesicles. It produces eruptions
very closely related to herpes and eczema, and they spread. About
the eyes we have vesicular eruption^. If seen in one stage it will be
vesicular, and if later, it will be sren as an ulceration. Simple and
graver forms of herpes. Herpes zoster about the body. “Burning
and smarting of the eyes; worse from closing them. Inflammation
of the iris. Eyes inflamed, protruded, dim. Chronic irritation of


The pains in connection with the teeth are aggravated from the
warmth of the bed, which is general ; they come at night are aggra-
vated from warm things held in the mouth ^d

ing cold water in the mouth. Stitching and drawing pams in the meth
wfrse at night ; better for a short time from holding cold water in the
mouth; better from drawing in cold air; worse from the warm
the bed. The toothache is tolerable during the day, but as soon as h
lies down in bed and assumes a horizontal position it
intolerable degree. Pain in hollow tooth, better by cold water

tf the glands of the groin is a striking feature even when
connected ^th scirrhus. It is connected also with suppressed go
rhoea, and with rheumatism of the joints. Pam and swelling of the
right spermatic cord; this is worse at night, worse from wa g



3^8 clematis EflECTA

from the warmth of the bed. While it has both sides, strange to say
there is more trouble in the glands that are on the right side of the
body than on the left. It has produced much trouble in the bladder.
Constant urging to urinate, most painful tenesmus. Flow stopping
and starting. The urethra is painful to pressure. Micturition is re-
markably slow, only a feeble stream because of the smallness of the
urethra.

It is the nature of this remedy to infiltrate and inflame tissues, and
hence it is useful in those cases of gonorrhoea where they have been
slow in passing away, where they have been treated by injection.
That slow inflammation of the urethra will infiltrate and the urethra
feels like a large whip-cord, painful upon pressure, and this goes on
until the canal is almost closed. You will be surprised to find, when
Clematis is indicated, that after giving that remedy the discharge is
re-established, and soon the old stricture goes away. At the end of
two or three months he feels nothing of it.

A striking feature in connection with the urine, bladder, etc., is
that the patient cannot quite empty the bladder. He always feels as
if there was a little more, and when he appears to have finished it
will keep dribbling away. This is a common feature of stricture.
‘Inability to evacuate all the urine at once. When beginning to
urinate it burns the worst, while urinating it sticks in urethra, and
after urinating it still continues to burn. Discharge from the urethra
of thick pus.'' It is seldom indicated in the very first stage of gonor-
rhoea during the highest inflammation, but in those cases that are in-
clined to hang on. Then come the sequelae if gonorrhoea be sup-
pressed. Inflammation of the testes is common, and this is one of
the medicines suitable. Strange to say, the right side of the body is
more commonly affected than the left. Intermittent flow of the urine.
Urine stops and starts with the chordee still present. The right
spermatic cord is very sensitive. Pain in the testes, drawing. Pain-
ful, inflamed and swollen testes. Orchitis with much painful swelling
and hardness. Now when the swelling has gone down — ^perhaps you
gave Puls,, which was the remedy for the time, but it did not finish
the case — there is induration of this portion. Swelling of the right
half of the scrotum with thickening and hanging low down.

Provings have not been made very much in women, which is to be
regretted, because it would be well to know if this remedy affects the
ovaries as it does the testes. It has been clinically used, and has
cured many troubles in women, especially inflammation in the mam-
mary gland. “Ulceration and hardness of glands. Scirrhus of the
breast with induration and ulceration. Scirrhus of the left mamma
with stitches in the shoulder this is a clinical symptom, “worse in
the night.’' She cannot bear to be uncovered.



COCCULUS INDICUS


389


It has rheumatic conditions of the limbs from suppressed gonor-
rhoea. Great nervous weakness and twitchings of the muscles. It has
pain on lying down and preparatory to going to sleep. An electric
shock ; twitching, jerking, as if a faradic battery had been turned on.
It has also a general febrile condition, but nothing very striking.

Vesicular eruptions on the body. Herpetic eruptions here and there ;
it has a herpetic constitution. “Eruption of vesicles and pustules ;
from the former exuded a clear, watery secretion, from the latter a
purulent fluid.” Yellow vesicles and yellow pustules. Both arc com-
mon to this remedy. “Dark, burning eruptions with violent itching.”
Herpes that ulcerate. Ichorous, spreading ulcers.

COCCULUS INDICUS

We will study the general system and the mind as usual. Cocculus
slows down all the activities of the body and mind, producing a sort
of paralytic weakness. Behind time in all its actions. All the nervous
Impressions are slow in reaching the centres. If you pinch this
patient on the great toe he wants a minute and then says “oh,” instead
of doing it at once. In response to questions he answers slowly, after
apparent meditation, but it is an effort to meditate. And so with all
nervous manifestations, thought, muscular activity, etc. He cannot
endure any muscular exertion, because he is weak ; he is tired. lirst
comes this slowness, then a sort ' of visible paralytic condition, and
then complete paralysis. This may be local or general. Ihere are
certain causes which produce thest effects. A wile nursing her hus-
band, a daughter nursing her father, becomes worn out by the
anxiety, worry and loss of sleep. She is exhausted , unable to sustain
any mental or physical effort ; weak in the knees, weak in the back,
and when the times comes for her to sleep she cannot sleep. Sickness
brought about in this manner is analogous to that caused by the Coc-
culus poison, and hence Cocculus from the time of Hahnemann to the
present time has been a remedy for complaints from nursing, not
exactly complaints that come on in the professional nurse, for Coccu-
lus needs the combination of vexation, anxiety and prolonged loss of
sleep, such as you have in the mother or daughter who is nursing, or
the nurse when she takes on the anxiety felt by a member of the
family; a wife nursing her husband through typhoid, or other long
spell of sickness. At the end of it she is prostrated in body and mind,
she cannot sleep, she has congestive headaches, nausea, vomiting and
vertigo. That shows how a Cocculus case begins. One who is thus
exhausted in body and mind goes out for a ride. She gets sick head-
ache, pain in the back, dizziness, nausea and vomiting. She gets mto
the car to take a journey. Sick headache comes on. She goes on



390 COCCULUS IKDICUS

a mile or two and will have nausea, vomiting and sick headache. She
feels weak all over, feels as if she would sink away.

The Cocculus patient gets into a w^agon to ride, sick headache,
nausea, vertigo come on. The Cocculus patient cannot endure motion.
Aggravated by talking, by motion, by the motion of the eyes, by
riding. Wants plenty of time to turn the head cautiously to see things.
Wants plenty of time to move, to think, to do everything. The whole
economy is slowed down, inactive.

Tremulous, tired, excitable. The hands tremble when taking hold
of anything, or he takes hold of it awkwardly and drops it. In-
coordination runs through this remedy, and hence it has been used
with good effect in locomotor ataxia. It has staggering and numb-
ness. Numbness is quite a feature of this remedy. Numbness of
the lower extremities, in the fingers, in the shoulder, of the side of
the face. Complaints from anxiety.

Extreme irritability of the nervous system. The least noise or jar
is unbearable. You have heard that BelL is worse from a jar. So
is Cocculus, and quite like BelL Cocculus is also like Belladonna in
its sleeplessness, and other general conditions. This sensation of sea-
sickness and dizziness is sometimes felt all over the body ; a sort of
faint feeling which is followed sometimes by loss of consciousness,
or a paralytic rigidity. Stiffness of the joints is a common feature in
Cocculus. It belongs to the limbs in generah But it is such a strong
symptom I will mention it here. Limbs straightened out and held
there for a while are painful when flexed. Persons who have been
suffering from anxiety, prostrated, will lie on the back, straighten out
the limbs, and get up only with great difficulty. The doctor comes
and he discovers what is the matter. He bends the limbs and she
screams, but she is relieved after the bending, and then she can get
up and move about. You cannot find that anywhere else. It is
entirely without inflammation. It is a sort of a paralytic stiffness, a
paralysis of the tired body and mind. The Cocculus headaches and
backaches, pains and distress are present. A man will stretch out his
leg on a chair and he cannot flex it until he reaches down with his
hands to assist. Such things arc strange. Faintness on moving the
body, fainting from pain in the bowels, from colic. With all this
slowing down of the thoughts and activities the patient remains ex-
tremely sensitive to suffering, sensitive to pain.

Spasms through the body like electric shocks, convulsions after loss
of sleep. This patient goes on with nervousness and excitement,
anxiety and loss of sleep until convulsions supervene. Tetanus.
Cholera, attacks of paralytic weakness with pain, paralysis of the face,
of the eyes, paralysis of the muscles everywhere, paralysis of the limbs.
Even diphtheria has been known to induce a state very much like I have



COCCULUS INDICUS


39 *

described as due to loss of sleep and anxiety. I remember a case of
paralysis of the lower extremities that was prescribed for by a very
careful homoeopathic physician many years ago. It was one of the
things that surprised me in the early days of my prescribing and
observation. It was the case of a little girl with paralysis of lower
extremities after diphtheria and no hope was given. But Doctor
Moore (he was then an Octogenarian) looked over the case. I was
acquainted with the family and with the doctor. He studied the case
carefully and gave Cocculus c.m. It was not many days before the
child began to move the legs, and the condition was perfectly cleared
up, and I have never ceased to wonder at it. It was a good prescrip-
tion perfectly in accord with all the elements of the case. Doctor
Moore was one of the pupils of Lippe and Hcring.

You can hardly sec what is coming when the mental activities arc
slowed down, from anxiety, and loss of sleep, such as we have in
nursing. The mind appears like approaching imbecility, and as you
look upon the true Cocculus case you wonder if that patient has not
been growing insane for a year or two, because the mind seems almost
a blank. He looks into space and slowly turning the eyes toward the
questioner answers with difficulty. It occurs in nervous prostration,
in typhoid fever. It is so nearly like Phos, acid that the two remedies
must be carefully individualized. Time passes quickly. He cannot
realize that it has been a whole night. A week has gone by, and it
seems but a moment, he is so daked. Slowness of comprehension ;
cannot find the right word to express his thoughts, so slowly docs his
mind w'ork ; what has passed lie cannot remember ; forgets what he
has just read ; cannot talk ; cannot bear the least noise ; cannot bear
the least contraction. The tongue will not respond. There is con-
fusion of mind and difficulty of articulation. An idea comes into his
mind and becomes fixed. He cannot convert it or move it, but it just
stays there, and if he speaks he will say something that will cause you
to realize that that same idea is holding on to him. So he appears to
be in a state of imbecility. Mental derangement wuth vertigo. With
most all the mental symptoms there is vertigo. He lies in a state of
apparent unconsciousness, yet knows all that is going on and at times
is even able to remember and describe what was going on, but docs
not even wink ; does not move a muscle. Tlicre is an appearance of
ecstacy, a smile upon the face. Knows what is going on, yet with
complete relaxation of the muscles without speech or apparent recogni-
tion of anyone. Perfectly relaxed, and yet knowing what is going on.
That resembles catatonia. Unable to think. Fears death. Feels as
if some awful thing was about to happen. All this is the result of
grief, anxiety, vexation, prolonged loss of sleep. The vertigo is
usually attended with nausea, A Cocculus case cannot look out of



392


COCCULUS INDICUS


the car window, cannot look down from the boat and see water moving,
without nausea immediately.

Perhaps you can even now surmise what the head symptoms are to
be. With the headaches comes dizziness, extreme nausea and gastric
symptoms. Headaches brought on from riding in a wagon or riding
in the cars or on shipboard ; headache from motion. Cannot accom-
modate the eyes to moving objects ; dizziness and whirling and head-
ache. Congestion of the head, pressing, throbbing headache. Head-
ache as if the skull would burst, or like a great valve opening and
shutting. Sick headache with vertigo. Headache again from working
in the sun. Sick headache from riding in a carriage.

Dim sightedness and disturbance of vision. Paralytic weakness of
the muscles of the eyes, as well as the muscles of accommodation.
The face becomes pale and sickly. Pale as death, with pains in the
face, vertigo and nausea. Tearing pains in the face. Neuralgia of
the face. Face bloated. Quivering and twitching of the muscles of
the face. Paralysis of the muscles of the face. Numbness of the
face. Twitching, jerking, numbness, paralysis, tearing pains.

Prostration and nervous exhaustion accompany most of the com-
plaints of Cocculus.

Stomach symptoms. Loathing of food. Metallic taste in the
mouth. Bitter taste in the mouth. Sour, nauseous taste in the mouth,
and no food tempts him. He lies there sick with a little fever or a
‘'cold." Headache, vertigo, nausea, loathing. Intermittent fevers
with pains in the limbs, especially in the knees and bones of the legs,
with that peculiar stiffness, nausea, and loathing of food. In inter-
mittent fever or perhaps a low typhoid state, we have this loathing
of food with nausea. You go to the bedside and you ask the nurse,
“What have you been feeding the patient ?“ and the patient gags.
The thought of food makes the patient gag. The nurse will say that
every time she mentions food the patient gags. The thought of food
or the smell of food in the other room, or in the kitchen, will nauseate
the patient. Two medicines have this — Cocculus and Colchicutri,

Paralytic conditions. Paralysis of the oesophagus. Cannot swal-
low. “Paralytic condition of the throat after diphtheria." Sore
throat with low forms of fever. The fever is gone but the patient
does not rally, there is much nervous trembling, numbness, twitching
of muscles and great weakness. Sensation as though a worm were
crawling in the stomach. Spasms of the stomach. Violent attacks
of gastralgia, violent cramp of the stomach. Griping, pinching, con-
strictive pain. The pain in the bowels feels as if the intestines were
pinched between sharp stones. This causes fainting and vomiting.
Colicky pains in the bowels ; great distension of the abdomen, such as
is found in typhoid fever : tension of the abdomen after drinking ;



coccus CACTI


393


flatulent colic. Tearing, cutting, spasmodic pains in the bowels.
Radiating pains in the bowels accompanying diarrhoea. A paralytic
condition of the rectum. Inability to press at stool. Urging to stool
and burning in rectum. Disposition to stool, but peristaltic motion in
upper intestines is wanting.

Copious menstrual flow, menses too soon ; last too long. Catamenia
two weeks before the time. In women prostrated from grief and from
anxiety, and from prolonged loss of sleep, menses come too soon, are
copious and prolonged. Headache, vertigo, nausea. Violent, cramp-
ing pains in the bowels, clutching pains in the uterus during menstrua-
tion. Again,, just such a patient as described will have a suppression
of the menstrual flow, or for weeks and months will have no menstrual
flow ; or just at the rime the menstrua! period should come on there is
a copious leucorrhcea that takes the place of the menses. The woman
is emaciated, and grows more and more sickly and chlorotic. The
face is of greenish, yellow, sallow hue. '‘Leucorrhoea in place of the
menses,” or “copious leucorrboea between the menstrual periods.”

The heart is weak, pulse feeble. Paralytic weakness in the limbs,
numbness, jerking of the muscles, twitching, quivering, loss of^ sensa-
tion, loss of power, muscular weakness in all the limbs. Numbness
and paralytic feeling in the limbs. Awkwardness of the fingers and
hands. On attempting to grasp the one hand with the other there is
migratory numbness, or a more permanent numbness associated with
paralytic weakness, sometimes chan^able ; sometimes one side is
numb and the other paralyzed. The soles of the feet go to sleep.
Numbness of the soles of the feet, such as we have in locomotor
ataxia ; cold feet. The knees give way from weakness. Totters
while walking and threatens to fall to one side. Knees stiff. Par-
alysis of the lower extremities, proceeding from the small of the back.
Arising from cold, from the abuse of Mercury, Paralysis of the lower
limbs, with stiffness, numbness and bruised feeling.

Sleeplessncxss from long nursing and from night watching ; that is a
symptom that I have called your attention to so often. Anxious,
frightful dreams ; ill effects from loss of sleep and night watching.
‘‘Slightest loss of sleep tells on him.’'

COCCUS CACTI

There is a little remedy and will be a relief after the study of so
many difficult ones. With fuller proving it will doubtless show
itself a deep-acting constitutional remedy. Although it has .cured
some defep-seated chronic troubles, it has been used chiefly in acute
affections. This is only because of the scantiness of its provings and
our lack of knowledge concerning it in a general way. Very few

50



394


coccus CACTI


mental symptoms have been brought out. Its use, so far as dem-
onstrated, is mostly in catarrhal conditions of the air passages, and
whooping cough, with copious, ropy, jelly-like mucus. Great quan-
tities of this mucus form in the nose, in the throat, in the air pas-
sages generally, and in the vagina. The routine practitioner, when-
ever he sees thick, ropy, gelatinous mucus, thinks only of Kali bi.
That comes from the study of key-notes. But it must be remembered
that other remedies besides Kali bt. have this.

Spasmodic cough : whooping cough ; the cough of drunkards. The
chronic catarrhal state of the Coccus cacti patient comes on especially
in the winter. It comes on when the cold weather begins and lasts
till the warm weather conics. The patient is cold, and his complaints
come on in cold weather. He is sensitive to cold, easily takes cold.
But you must distinguish between the patient himself and his com-
plaints, because they are entirely opposite to each other. When he
once becomes sick from exposure to cold, he is always worse in a
warm room and better in the cold air. His cough is brought on in a
warm room ; from being too warm in bed ; from drinking warm things.
It is better from drinking cold things in a cold room ; worse from
exertion ; from getting heated up ; from becoming warm ; that is, after
the complaint has once set in, it reverses itself.

This is not unlike many other remedies. I have received many
letters from doctors, saying : ‘"Why is it that in your repertory and
in Boenninghausen’s, certain remedies are put dowm as better from
cold and worse from cold? They certainly cannot have both.'’ But
they do have both, sometimes under different conditions and some-
times under the same conditions. Sometimes these are primary, some-
times they are secondary symptoms. A remedy must be examined to
ascertain how it is that these circumstances can be the very oppovsitc
of each other. But commonly Boenninghausen registers both those
things that belong to particulars and those things that belong to gen-
erals, and if the symptom, in his judgment, is strikingly worse by a
certain circumstance, even if it is the very opposite of the general, he
has that symptom in boldfaced type. Phos, is a good illustration of
what we have been talking about. If you make a careful study of
Phos, you will see that the complaints of the chest arc all worse from
cold, from cold air and from being cold. He catches cold and it
settles in the chest, and the cough and irritation in the chest are worse
from cold and being exposed to cold air. But he wants cold things in
the stomach* His stomach feels better from cold things, Let him
have head trouble and his head is better from cold, he wants cold
things in his stomach. If he has stomach trouble, it is made worse
by linything hot ; he w^ants cold water to drink, and as soon as It gets
warm, he vomits it up. You see Pho$, is worse from cold and wor»^



coccus CACTI


39S


from heat. The pains in the extremities are better from heat.

The chronic cough, as has been said, is likely to begin with cold
weather and last all winter, v/ith a copious formation of mucus in the
chest. It is a spasmodic cough, forcing the patient into the most
violent efforts. The face becomes purple. Finally he retches and
vomits long strings of tough, ropy mucus, filling the mouth and throat
and causing him to choke. This is due to the fact that the mucus is so
tenacious that it cannot be ejected from the pharynx in the usual way,
therefore he must vomit. Now, there is a striking feature of this
remedy. Anything coming in contact with the pharynx, the inside of
the mouth, or even the gums, produces gagging and retching and will
bring on the cough. We find this in the chronic states of sensitive
persons, who are unable to brush the teeth or rinse the mouth without
gagging and sometimes vomiting.

There is a general hypera'sthesia of the skin and mucous mem-
branes. Sensitive to the presrurc of the clothing.

With the chest troubles there is much dyspnoea. He cannot walk
without bringing on difficult breathing. He cannot ascend a height
without suffocation. After the quantities of mucus are cleared out the
cough is better and he goes on for two, three or four hours, when
another one of these awful attacks comes on. They are apt to be
worse at night when he becomes warm in bed. If he can lie in a cool
room without much covering he will go longer without coughing.

The whooping cough is of a similar character. You will see the
child lying in bed with the covers off. It wants the room cold, and
the mother will tell you that if she can get to it quickly enough with a
drink of cold water she can ward off the paroxysm. The chest fills up
with mucus untill respiration cannot be carried on any longer and it
must be cleared out, yet the child will resist and hold its breath to pre-
vent coughing. You will be astonished to sec how speedily Coccus
cacti will change the character of that cough. One of the earliest signs
of improvement will be observed in the easier respiration. The cough
becomes less violent, the retching passes away, and in a week or ten
days the cough will go, too. Cough worse after eating, worse on
waking, worse in a warm room.

In the early stages of whooping cough Carbo veg, will develop and
bring out the symptoms and furnish a good picture for a second
prescription, even if it does not cure.

Discharge of thick yellow mucus from the nose : nose stopped up,
with inclination to sneeze. Great dryness of the nose. The air pass-
ages burn after the mucus has been cleared away. The chest burns
from the mere exhaling of air. Sore throat with redness. Tickling
in the throat. Sensation of a hair or crumb lodged in the throat
behind the larynx. Fauces very sensitive. Arch of palate and



39 ^


COCCUS CACTI


fauces, as far as visible, very red. Burning in the throat < in the
warmth, especially when warmed up in bed, < from warm drinks,
though hot drinks are not so bad. Better from cold drinks. If the
patient gets warm in bed or the room gets warm he commences to
clutch the larynx and cough. The slightest touch on the palate or
even the gums in examination of the throat will cause gagging some-
times when the parts look normal. He cannot hawk without gagging.
On swallowing food sometimes it will come right back again and
cause gagging and retching.

Great thirst ; wants water often and in large quantities. Nauseous
taste in the mouth ; never rid of it. Nausea in the throat. Vomiting
of white, bitter tasting froth. Toothache ; sudden drawing pains in
the teeth, worse from cold and from touch.

The mental symptoms are chiefly depression and anxiety. Great
sadness ; a cloud seems to hang over everything. Apprehensiveness,
especially at 2 to 4 a. m. This state may alternate with loquacity and
liveliness, like Lachesis, There are other symptoms worse after sleep ;
wakes in the morning with basilar headache, or with headache in the
forehead ; < mental exertion ; after lying down ; sometimes > from
slow motion ; < on coughing and from exertion ; > after sleep.

A strong feature is its action on the kidneys, resembling acute par-
enchymatous nephritis. Albumen in the urine. Dark red sediment in
the urine. Pain shooting from the kidney to the bladder and down
the legs ; < from motion. Renal colic. Urging to urinate, but
inability to pass urine until a large clot of blood has been paSwSed. In
Coccus cacti the right side of the heart is affected, the vessels become
friable and there is haemorrhage, oozing of blood, forming great black
clots. The above symptom suggests a woman with uterine haemor-
rhage. There are haemorrhages of the uterus where the blood flows
freely, coagulates slowly and does not form much of any clot in the
vagina. But in this remedy the clots form very rapidly and the
vagina becomes packed, and the bladder cannot be emptied untill the
clot is expelled. Uterine haemorrhage is a strong feature of this
remedy. Copious, frequent, prolonged menstrual flow. Large, hard,
black clots fill the uteru.s, are expelled by labor-like pains, and form
again. Inflammation of uterus and vagina, with copious, thick, white,
jelly-like, ropy mucus. Soreness of the vulva ; cannot bear the
pressure of the clothing.

Haemoptysis, dark, clotted < from exertion.

In the male there is impotance with dull pain in the loins. Dull
pains in the region of the kidneys, with albuminuria ; heavy sediment
in the urine, etc., just such a state as you would find in a child that
had taken cold after scarlet fever.



COFFEA


397


COFFEA

This drug is characterized by a general sensitivity. Sensitiveness
of vision, of hearing, of smell, of touch ; sensitiveness to pain. It is
most astonishing sometimes about this great sensitiveness. Pains are
increased by noise. Sensitiveness of hearing is so great that sounds
are painful. Pains in the face, toothache, headache ; pains in the
lower limbs ; everywhere aggravated by noise. All the nervous dis-
turbances possible are found in this medicine, and they are all aggra-
vated by noise. Even the opening of the door and the ringing of the
door-bell produces great suffering. Such patients are so sensitive
that they hear sounds which those in a state of health cannot hear.
Perhaps no medicine in the Materia Medica approximates this sensi-
tiveness of hearing where it is accompanied with pain, unless it be
Nux vom. Those practitioners who do not know this generally resort
to Nux vom. for pains aggravated from voices in another room, or
from noise or the sound of children. Many remedies have increase
of nervousness from noise ; noise aggravates headache, and aggravates
suffering about the head, and makes some persons nervous. But
pain in the extremities aggravated by noise is peculiar. It seems that
the noise disturbs him so that he cannot bear pain.

The Coffea state is brought on by emotions or violent excitement
of the mind, but especially by joy ot ‘‘pleasant surprise.’* The result
is sleeplessness, nervous excitement, neuralgia, twitching of muscles,
toothache, faccache, red face and hot head.

You may be called to the bedside of a woman who has been labor-
ing for some great cause. She works persistently, is successful, but
goes to bed with weeping, delirium, neuralgia, sleeplessness. Her
heart palpitates, her pulse flickers, she has fainting spells, and without
Coffea she may die. Coffee drinkers who keep up through some
ordeal and then break down are similarly affected.

The Coffea patient is sensitive to wine. A small amount of wine
intensifies the nervousness, produces sleeplessness, flushed face, fever-
ishness, great excitement. Not necessarily intoxication, but nervous
excitement. Coflea has a painful sensitiveness of the skin beyond
comprehension. I remember one particular case. A woman had her
lower limb out of bed and it was as red as fire down one side. I
walked toward it to put my hand on it. But she said, “Oh, don't
touch it, I can’t bear to have it touched ; I can’t touch it myself.” I
asked how long this had been coming on. She said, “Oh, it all came
on within an hour. Such a symptom is common in coffee drinkers.
There was no fever. Intense stinging, burning pains in the skin with
the redness and heat with coarse rash coming on suddenly, leaving just
as suddenly. The sensitive part is aggravated by cold air, aggravated



39 ^


C^FFEA


by any wind or from fanning, from motion, yet aggravated by
warmth. Aggravated from anyone walking across the floor. The
woman I referred to scowled when I was walking toward the bed.
A number of times I have seen such things relieved within a few
minutes by Coffea.

Fainting from sudden emotions. Hysteria, nervousness, weeping.
Pitiful weeping from pain ; trembling and weeping from hurt feel-
ings ; the slightest neglect. The greatest mental and physical ex-
haustion : great restlessness ; lying awake most of the night. The
wakefulness produced by Coffea is well known, even to the laity. It
is taken by nurses to keep them awake nights with their patients. The
Coffea patient is quick to act and to think. So full of ideas that she
lies awake nights making plans, thinking of a thousand things ; utterly
unable to banish the thoughts that flood the mind ; hears the clocks
on the distant steeples, as do Opium, China and Nux vom. Hears
the dogs barking. So great is the brain activity, the mental excite-
ment, that she hears noises that are purely imaginary. Memory
active, easy comprehension full of ideas ; increased power to think
and to debate. Coffea increases the mental capacity. But after a
while reaction follows ; she becomes stupid and sleepy. There is no
end to the fancies, to the visions. Fanciful visions come before the
mind. Recalls things not thought of for years ; recalls poetry that
was recited in childhood. Eyes brilliant ; pupils dilated ; face flushed ;
head hot.

With all these nervous states the patient dreads the fresh air. He
is extremely sensitive to cold, sensitive to the wind and cold weather.
Complaints come on in the cold weather, from the cold air. Pain in
the mouth and jaws, better front holding ice-^cold water in the mouth.
This applies to toothache and faceache where it is deep in the jaws.
Hot head ; inflamed condition of the gums. Pain in the teeth ; rend-
ing, tearing pain in the teeth, brought on from exposure to cold, from
emotions, from excitement, from joy ; aggravated from motion ;
ameliorated by ice or ice-cold things ; aggravated by warm food.
Cannot drink warm tea, it so intensifies the pain. That is a particular.
The particulars contrast with the generals. In one place you may
see ‘'better from cold” in black-faced type, but it relates to the face
and jaws. Worse from cold is a general. Aversion to cold air, aver-
sion to the open air unless it is very warm and still. Aversion to
wind. “Neuralgic toothache entirely relieved by holding cold water
in the mouth, returning as it becomes warm. Toothache during the
menstrual period. Complaints of anaemic children during dentition.’'
’'Those nervous, excitable children that talk to the nurse and the
mother very rapidly with brilliant eyes, red face, cannot go to sleep.
It will quiet the patient and actually favor the growth of the tooth in



COFFEA


399


a painless manner* That is the description of a nervous child with
many nervous brain and mental troubles. This child is extremely
sensitive ; it takes cold. The routine prescriber gives Belladonna to
a child who has hot head, hot face and throbbing carotids, and when
it does not help he gives more Belladonna, and increases the size of
his dose untli the child has a proving. He makes a Belladonna child
out of it when Coffca would have cured it. In most instances where
Belladonna is indicated the child is sluggish and stupid, and would
like to sleep. With Coffea there is excitement. The child hears
things its mother cannot hear ; sees things : imagines things. Wakes
up in fright. Sees this, that and the other thing in the room. Wakes
up excited as if it had visions. Looks for things, and finally sees
they arc not there. Such things are strong features of Coffea.

At times the head is hot, the face is flushed and the eyes so brilliant
that one fears apoplexy. Patients will often tell you that they hear
a ‘‘noise” in the head, a ringing and roaring in the occiput. The ear
is the one organ capable of registering sounds. But strange to say,
the ears are sometimes very deceiving. Roaring in the ears some-
times seems as if it were in the occiput. Sometimes it is accompanied

with a sensation of tingling or bubbling in the head. When patients

say, “I have a roaring in the head,” you know that means in the ear ;
many times accompanying roaring, ringing in the cars, buzzing in the
ears, is a peculiar sensation of vibration in the head that is mistaken
by the patient for a sound. I mentiop that because the Coffea patient
feels a crackling or a bubbling in the, occiput. The head feels badly :
it feds too small. Headache, as of something pressing hard upon the
surface of the brain. You would naturally suppose there was a press-
ing because of the congestive state heretofore described. “Headache
as if the whole brain were torn and bruised, or dashed to pieces.
Worse from motion, noise or light.” The eye and the head symp-
toms are worse from noise and light. “Headache intolerable. Head

feels small, and as if filled with fluid. Nervous hysterical headache.

One-sided headache.” There is another head symptom which is quite
common. A feeling as if a nail were driven into the head. Coffca
headaches are worse from walking, from motion ; from the mere
moving across the floor, he says he feels a draft of air on his head.
And that is true of the pain in any part of the body. If a Coffea
patient should have a pain in the hand, swinging of the hand through
the air will aggravate. It is worse both from the motion and from
the air. I want to illustrate that in this way in order to show how
sensitive he is to air, and especially the painful part to cold air ; when
he moves against the air, against even still air he feels it. Bur the
amelioration of the toothache from cnld is an exception, is a particular.

The neuralgia of the face is a common feature of old coffee



400


COFFEA


drinkers. Sensitive persons take coffee and finally become habituated
to it. They say they cannot get along without it. They must have
coffee. Such individuals should stop coffee. When coffee furnishes
a crutch it is a sure indication that drinking it must be stopped. So
it is with tea or any beverage. Such persons sometimes become
sensitive to coffee, and they drink it in great quantities ; the face
becomes red ; headaches come on, and other symptoms of Coffea.
Stopping coffee brings out quite a proving, and you have to study
Cham, and Nux for an antidote. In all these remedies you get oppo-
site effects. Now Opium will illustrate that. The first effect of
Ophnn is to constipate. Let several doses be given, and as the effects
of the Opium wear off he may have diarrhoea. Opium eaters can
seldom stop because a diarrhoea comes on. If you should ever have
an Opium case and diarrhoea comes on Puls, will nearly always control
it. But there are individuals who reverse that. Often small doses
of Opium will bring on dysentery, and if it is increased, bloody dys-
entery and inflammation of the bowels come on. Of course, one is
action and the other the reaction.

A woman who is a confirmed coffee drinker will have menses too
soon and lasting too long. Uterine haemorrhage is not uncommon.
Another feature of Coffea is that the woman can scarcely wear the
napkin during menstruation {Platinum). The parts arc in a state
of hyperaesthesia. The vagina is hot and sensitive, often preventing
coition. In the text it reads “Great sensitiveness of female genital
organs, with general excitability. She is in a state of ecstacy. Uterine
haemorrhage with excessive sensitivcncvss of organs and voluptuous
itching. Metrorrhagia ; large black lumps.’' Sometimes large bright
red lumps. “Worse from every motion, with violent pain in the
groins, and fear of death.” Excessive sensitiveness about the vulva
with voluptuous itching, is a strong feature of Coffea, and you will
often find such symptoms in coffee drinkers.

During and after labor we also see this great excitement, all these
nervous manifestations. The nervous system is in a fret, and such
a mental state as described comes on with after-pains ; extremely sensi-
tive to pain, cries out ; sees visions ; hears all sorts of noises. Pains
aggravated from motion ; aggravated from noise. Wants everybody
to keep still in the house.

Convulsions of children. “Puerperal convulsions. Extreme ex-
citability.” “Palpitation of the heart, pulse fluttering.” “Strong,
((uick palpitation of the heart with extreme nervousness, sleepless-
ness and cerebral erethism caused by unexpected news of great good
fortune.” Let a woman about to go into confinement hear suddenly
some unusually good news and the becomes almost ecstatic ; carries
the symptom all through confinement, The child is affected, the milk



CX51CHICVM


401


is affected* The milk flows away. Haemorrhage is likely to come on.
Great nervousness, excitability, fear.

COLCHICUM

It is rather singular that traditional medicine used Colchicum so
much for gout. In all the old books it was recommended for this
malady. The provings corroborate the fact that Colchicum fits into
many conditions of gout. Acute rheumatism and uric acid diathesis ;
rheumatic complaints in general, with swelling and without swelling.
But traditional medicine does not tell us what kind of gout to give it
in or what kind of rheumatism. It was really the medicine of
experience. ‘If it is gout, try Colchicum,’' The question of what
was to be done with the patient when the remedy failed never came up.
It was “Give the prescription and keep at it,” and drugs were admin-
istered until the painent, steadily growing worse, passed from one
doctor’s hands to another's. It is true that Colchicum fits into the
gouty state. Spells of cold, wet weather will slack up the flow of
urine, make it scanty, or decrease the quantity of solids in the urine.
This takes place in the provings of Colchicum and has been verified
many times. It is well known that such a condition will bring about
or intensify the gouty state. If the solids in the urine are deficient, if
they are not carried off in the urine, something must happen, and the
gouty state comes on.

Colchicum is aggravated by cold, ^ainp weather; by the cold rains
in the Fall. It is aggravated by anything that will debilitate. It is
aggravated in the extreme heat of summer ; it has a summer rheu-
matism ; the heat will slack up the flow of urine or the quantity of
solids in the urine,

A striking feature running through the remedy is its tendency to
move from one joint to another, from one side to another, from below
upwards, or from above downwards. Rheumatic conditions with
swelling or without swelling ; first here, next there, changing about
from place to place. Another striking feature is the general dropsical
condition. When the hands and feet swell, and there is pitting on
pressure. Dropsy of the abdominal cavity ; of the pericardium ; of the
pleurae and dropsy of serous sacs. Swellings that are inflammatory
and rheumatic ; swellings that are dropsical, with pale urine. Whether
copious or scanty, still it is pale.

Muscular rheumatism and rheumatism of the white fibrous tissues
of the joints. Rheumatic troubles that have been going on for some
time will end in cardiac troubles. When cardiac troubles with val*
vular defects are present, almost the first thing the busy doctor thinks
of is a history of rheumatism. Let me Say that a part of the study

5^



402


COLCmCUM


of Materia Medica consists in the observation of sick people. A busy
physician learns without books, though of course he should familial i^c
himself with the literature, so that from reading, as well as observa-
tion, he may acquire a knowledge of the general nature of sickness.
When he listens to the patient’s story or makes a physical examination,
be knows how such cases usually conduct themselves. He knows what
to expect. He knows the natural trend of sickness and instantly
recognizes what is strange and unusual. He will not recognize what
is strange and unusual unless he knows what is natural. So your
books on symptomatology and pathology, diagnosis, etc., will tell you
much of this, but as you gain experience in homoeopathic practice
you will get a much finer idea of this because your Materia Medica
teaches you to observe more closely. The Materia Medica man learns
to single out and trace every little thing in order to individualize. So
it may be said that years of observation in studying disease, studying
the sick man along with the Materia Medica, will open to the mind a
much grander knowledge of the sicknesses of humanity than can be
had by practicing traditional medicine. Traditional medicine benumbs
the ability to observe.

All the complaints of this remedy are aggravated from motion. The
painful complaints, the head complaints, the bowel complaints, the
liver complaints, the stomach complaints, are all worse from motion.
Such an aggravation from motion that he dreads to move. About as
marked as we find in Bryonia. Aversion to motion, and aggravation
from motion. Aggravation from becoming cold and in cold, damp
weather. He is a chilly patient, sensitive to cold. Most rheumatic
patients are sensitive to cold, but there are a few exceptions. There
is no greater rheumatic patient than the Ledum patient. He presents
both sides. Though he is cold, his pains arc ameliorated by cpld. In
Colchicumt the pains are ameliorated by heat, by wrapping up, by being
warrn. If he moves, any suffering that he may have will be intensi-
fied. Great prostration accompanies the complaints of this remedy.
Weakness of the limbs, great exhaustion, nervous exhaustion of a
typhoid character. He gradually growls weaker like one going into
Bright’s disease. He has grown weak for some time, and he is pallid
and waxy. His hands and feet pit upon pressure. Examine the urine
and you will find albumen in it. The urine becomes black like ink with
albumen. There is an unusual degree of irritability of the tissues,
soreness, sensitiveness to touch, sensitiveness to motion ; bruised feel-
ing of the joints and of the whole body. Touch and motion bring on a
painful sensation in the body as of electric vibrations. Great weak-
ness and exhaustion. He cannot exert himself in the least without
causing dyspnoea. Must lie down ; does not want to move ; sinking of
strength; seems as if his life will flow out of him from motion and



COLCmcUM


403


from exertion ; so tired and exhausted. This naturally occurs when
going towards Bright’s disease, when going towards a continued
fever. Kidney affections and liver affections. Lassitude, prostration,
anxiety. The muscles twitch and electric shocks pass through the
body. A paralytic weakness was observed in the poisonous effects
and too prolonged provings. The jaw hangs down, the muscles are
flabby, relaxed. He lies on the back as if sinking ; slides down in bed
like one in typhoid, in low forms of rheumatic and in continued fevers,
so great is the exhaustion. Paralysis of the limbs or of one limb, or
of any part.

The Colchicum patient is almost constantly sweating, even with
fever, and sometimes the sweat is cold. A draft blows upon him, sup-
presses that sweat and the paralytic condition of the limbs comes on ;
suppression of urine and retention of urine. This describes the pro-
found character and type of sickness. Low forms of sickness ; pros-
trating sickness ; sickness with nervous trembling ; with great exhaus-
tion. After acute disease has passed away, great weakness and dropsy
follows. Dropsy after scarlet fever.

With all these troubles, the stomach and the bowel symptoms are
very decided. This is like Cocculus, Absolutely unable to touch
food. Nausea, gagging, retching at the bare mention of food in his
presence. The thought and smell of food bring on nausea and vomit-
ing. With all these low forms of disease, these states described, we
can see that this kind of weakness is little different from the Cocculus
weakness. Colchicum has delirium, prostration, depression of mind,
great sensitiveness to pain, which he seems to feel in his mind, and it
brings out mental symptoms. Very senvsitive to pain ; confusion of
the mind ; disorders of comprehension. Cannot understand what he
reads. The headaches are all of a rheumatic character. Very often
the whole skull, the pericranium, is sore as if bruised. The scalp is
sensitive. Pressure in the head — constriction ; pressing, bursting
headaches. Heat in the head. Tearing in the scalp. Headaches are
all aggravated by motion.

The eye symptoms are of a rheumatic character, arc connected with
rheumatism, rheumatic fever. It is not very uncommon to have iritis
in connection with rheumatic fever and it is a strong feature of Colchi-
cum. Ulcers of the lids, styes, much lachrymation in the open air.
The tears excoriate and cause redness of the lids.

He takes cold easily. Sneezing, stuffing up of the nostrils. Nose-
bleed in rheumatic and gouty constitutions. But there is one feature
that is more marked in Colchicum than all others. He is so sensitive
to odors that he smells things which others do not smell. He smells
odors from which he is nauseated. ‘^Strong odors make him quite
beside himself.’^ You say ‘‘soup" or “broth," or something to eat^



COLCHlCUM


404

and he gets sick. He can smell the things in the kitchen, in spite of
much precaution, and this runs through the remedy. In typhoid
fever, prostrated beyond the usual — and typhoid is always prostrated
enough — he is unusually prostrated. He cannot take milk, cannot
take raw eggs, cannot take soup, because he gags at the mere thought
of them. He has gone on for days, and his family are afraid that he
is going to starve to death. That aggravation from odors is so strong
with him that it seems to take possession of him. It involves his
appetite, his weakness, his stomach. So it does seem that it is a
strong feature. Notice that this is one of his loves ; it is a perverted
love, and the loves are general whether they are manifested through
the eyes, nose or touch. It enters into his very life because it involves
hatred to odor, and when it stands out in low forms of disease like the
continued fevers, the exhaustive fevers and rheumatic complaints it
becomes a general. It would be a particular if it were something that
applied to the things alone, but you see it enters into the very innermost.
Involves a hatred, becomes mental, becomes a part of the man. He
himself may be said to hate odors, hate the smell of food and the
thought of it. Do not say “food*’ in the presence of a Colchicum
patient, but give him Colchicum first, and pretty soon he will want
something to eat. It removes that hatred for food. What a vital
thing it must be when a man hates that which will keep him alive.

The teeth are very sensitive. “Rheumatic teeth.’' The gums settle
away ; after a while the teeth become loose. Pain in the teeth ; rheu-
matic condition of the jaws and the teeth. “Grinding of the teeth,
teeth sensitive when pressed together.”

“Aversion to food ; loathing the sight and smell,” more the smell of
it. “The smell of fish, eggs, fat meats or broths causes nausea even
unto faintness.” The Colchicum patient may have much thirst or no
thirst, or these may alternate. Nausea and vomiting are very strong
features. “Nausea and inclination to vomit, caused by swallowing
saliva. Nausea, eructations and copious vomiting of mucus and bile.
Violent retching followed by copious and forcible vomiting of food,
and then of bile.”

In the stomach there is sometimes coldness and sometimes burning.
Now it may be that the Colchicum patient has both coldness and burn-
ing. They are both recorded in the Repertory and in the provings,
but it is sometimes difficult to tell which is which, more difficult than
you will imagine unless you try a piece of ice somewhere and .some-
thing very hot.

“Burning in the pit of the stomach.” Coldness in the stomach.
Now the abdomen furnishes us still more to observe. The abdomen is
distended with flatus, tympanitic. Great soreness in the whole abdo-
men. Just such ^ tympanitic condition as we have in typhoid. If you



COLCmCfJM


405


ever happen to be in the country practicing medicine, and the farmer’s
cows get into a fresh clover patch and eat themselves full and become
distended so that you are afraid they arc going to explode offer your
services and give each one of those cows a few pellets of Colchicum.
It will be but a few minutes before the wind will get out of there to
your surprise and the farmer s, too ; and you may convert him to
Homoeopathy. Farmers have been known to put a butcher knife into
the pouch of the cow between the last short ribs to let the wind out.
The cow will get well, but Colchicum is better than the butcher’s
knife. The same is true of the horse ; in fact, of man or beast.

When the abdomen is violently distended and tympanitic, Colchicum
is often a suitable remedy.

Spasmodic pains, colic, tearing pains, burning, griping pains, forc-
ing the patient to bend double. Aggravated from motion. Great
tenderness and soreness with the colic. Aggravated from eating ;
ameliorated from bending double. And then comes the diarrhoea. It
has just such a diarrhoea as is found in low forms of fever. Dys-
enteric or diarrhoeic stools that are jelly like. They form in the pan a
solid mass of jelly like, coagulated mucus. Very painful, extremely
painful is the Colchicum stool. Great soreness in the abdomen.

Great relaxation of the parts. Protrusion of the rectum. Putrid,
dark, bloody mucus. **Bloody discharges from the bowels with
deathly nausea.” Fall dysentery, with discharges of white mucus and
violent tenesmus. Putrid, dark, clotted blood and mucus pass from
the bowels. Diarrhoea with violent, colicky pains. Bloody stools
with scrapings from the intestines and protrusion of anus. Profuse,

watery stools in hot, damp weather or in the Autumn. Watery, jelly-

like mucus passes from anus with violent spasm in sphincter. It
passes as a thin, watery flow ; but as soon as it cools, it forms a jelly.

The urine burns when it passes. It is attended with much pain.
Inflammation of the kidneys, inflammation of the bladder ; tenesmus ;
retention of urine. The kidneys manufacture no urine ; scanty urine
with dropsy. The urine is inky, that is, very dark brown and some-
times almost black, loaded with albumen. This remedy conforms
principally to the acute form of Bright’s disease.

Great dyspnoea, rapid, short breathing ; the heart’s impulse strong.
Respiration accelerated. The heart’s impulse can be heard all over
the room. Palpitation ; oppression of the chest. Feels as if he had
a great weight on the chest ; cannot breathe. Hydrothorax ; the
pleural cavities distended with serum, causing the dyspnoea. "Heart’s
action muffled, indistinct, very weak.” Stinging, tearing pains in the
muscles of the chest.

Paralytic pains in the arms ; enlarged finger joints. This also tells
what a low form of sickness, what a feeble circulation the medicine



4o6


CQLOCYNTH


brings about, ‘'Weakness so that he strikes the knees together when
walking ; pain all over as if bruised. Swelling of the joints.'' The
joints are most affected. Muscular rheumatism. Numbness, oedema,
swelling of the limbs.


COLOCYNTH

The principal feature of Colocyiith is its severe, tearing, neuralgic
pains ; so severe that the patient is unable to keep still. Sometimes
they are > by motion — at least it appears that they are worse during
rest — > by pressure and sometimes > by heat. Pains occur in the
face, abdomen, along the course of the nerves.

These pains are often due to a very singular cause, namely, anger
with indignation. Hence persons who are haughty and easily offended
or chagrined have Colocynth complaints. Anger will be followed by
violent neuralgia in the head, eyes, down the spine and in the in-
testines.

In spite of extreme restlessness there is great weakness with the
pains. A patient suffering with chronic diarrhoea, with severe colic,
will sometimes become so weak that he can hardly speak. A feeling
of faintness, or even fainting, is by no means an unusual concomitant
of the pains. Griping occurs along the course of nerves, and in some
cases numbness, pricking and tingling, like the crawling of ants in
the part affected.

With many doctors Colocynth is a routine remedy for sciatica ; and
only when it fails to do they take the symptoms of the case in order to
find the remedy that is indicated. There is no excuse for such prac-
tice. Where the pain is better from hard pressure and from heat,
where it is worse during repose and drives the patient to despair,
Colocynth will generally cure. But it is not indicated in all cases.
Some remedies select the muscles and tendons, some the bones and
periosteum, while others select the great nerve trunks in which to
manifest their symptoms. The pains of Colocynth appear, as a rule,
in the larger nerves.

The mental symptoms are not very striking. As soon as the prover
of Colocynth begins to have pains along the course of nerves he
becomes irritable ; everything vexes him ; he is worse from vexation.

Screams with the pains. Walks about the room and becomes in-
creasingly anxious as the pain goes on. Disinclined to talk or to
answer, or to see friends.

His friends irritate him and he wants to be alone.

He has all he can do to stand those terrible pains.

Vomiting and diarrhoea frequently come with the pains, especially
if tliey are in the abdomen.



CQLQCYNra


407


Colic comes on in paroxysms that grow in intensity.

The patient becomes increasingly nauseated until finally he vomits
and he continues to retch after the stomach is empty.

Colocynth produces a state in the nervous system like that found
in individuals who have for years been laboring under annoyances and
vexations. A man whose business affairs have been going wrong
becomes irritable and nervous exhaustion follows. A woman who
must watch her unfaithful husband night and day to keep him away
from other women gradually assumes a sensitive irritable state of mind
and is upset by the least provocation. This is the state of the Colo-
cynth prover.

You will seldom find this medicine indicated in strong, vigorous,
healthy people who have suddenly become sick. It is more likely to be
in the constitution just described, and those who are in the habit of
overeating.

We find tearing pains in the scalp, brought on by anger ; exhaustion;
pains that are better from pressure and heat, and worse when not in
motion.

Constant, gnawing pains in the head.

Painful, tearing, digging through the whole brain, becoming unbear:
able when moving the eyelids.

Intense pain through the whole head ; worse from moving the eyes.

Severe, pressing, tearing headache, causing her to cry out.

Intermittent headache in those of^ a rheumatic, gouty or nervous
diathesis.

Pain tearing and screwing together.

Violent periodical or intermittent headache.

Such are some of the expressions in the text. But the particular
character of the pain is not as important as the circumstances that are
likely to cause it and the conditions in which the patient has been
living. Knowing the life of a patient affords much knowledge of the
patient himself.

The same violent neuralgic pains are found in the eye.

. .Rheumatic iritis, worse in the evening and night.

Severe, burning, cutting and sticking pains in the eye.

Burning is more characteristic of the pains of the eyes than -of other
parts of the head and face.

Sharp, cutting stabs ; pressing pains.

The faceache is especially important, because Colocynth is one ot
the most frequently indicated remedies for neuralgia of this region.
Thcrfe are three remedies which are indicated in faceache more often
than any others, Belladonna , Magnesia phosphorica and Colocynth.

The Belladonna pains arc as violent as any, and are accompanied
by red face, flashing eyes, hot head, and great sensitiveness of the



4o8


COLOCYNIH


part to touch.

In Colocynth the pains come in waves, are better from heat^ from
pressure, worse if anything during rest, and are brought on by excite-
ment or vexation. They are generally on the left side ; while those
of Belladonna are on the right, and arc caused by cold^

Magnesia phospliorica has tearing and pains that shoot like
lightning along the nerves and are relieved by heat and pressure.

The expression of the Colocynth face is one of anxiety from the
severity of the suffering. No matter where the pain is the face is
distorted. Finally, it becomes pale and the cheeks become blue.

Tearing pains in the cheek-bones, or more correctly, in the infra-
orbital nerve where it emerges from the foramen. Sometimes this
pain feels like a hot wire, sometimes like a cold nail, and sometimes
it is rearing, burning or stinging. Frequently it spreads over the face,
following the ramifications of the small branches of the nerve, usually
on the left side. The patient cries out and is very restless.

Tearing or burning pain extending to the ear and head.

All pains are better from pressure, but this is in the beginning.
After the pain has been going for several days with increasing severity,
the part becomes very sensitive and pressure cannot be endured.

Aversion to food.

Violent thirst.

Colic brought on from drinking while overheated ; from eating in-
digestible things, from high living ; colic from eating potatoes.

Potatoes and starchy foods disagree with the Colocynth patient like
Ahtmina.

The vomiting of Colocynth is different from that of most other
remedies. Nausea does not appear at first, but when the pain becomes
sufficiently intense nausea and vomiting begin, the contents of the
stomach are ejected, and the patient continues to retch until the
severity of the suffering decreases.

The stomach pains are clutching, cramping and digging, as if grasped
by the fingers.

Similar pains occur lower down in the abdomen, but they arc still
better from hard pressure, and from doubling up — which amounts to
pressure — come on in paroxysms of increasing severity, until the
patient is nauseated and vomits, and are associated with great rest-
lessness and faint, sinking feeling at the pit of the stomach. The
victim bends down over the back of a chair, or over the foot-board
if unable to get out of bed.

In the Guiding Symptoms we find several pages of repetitions, show^
ing how extensively this medicine is applicable in abdominal com-
plaints where these symptoms are present. It would be well to read
th^m, ' .



CONIUM MACULATUM


409


The pains in the lower part of the abdomen are relieved by drawing
up the limbs and pressing with the fists. In the violent ovarian neu-
rigias of Colocynth, the woman will flex the limb of the painful side
hard against the abdomen and hold it there.

The physician asks: “What has happened to give you these pains ?"
Her answer is likely to be: “My servant spilled some dirty water on
a handsome rug, we had some words over it, and this is the result,”
Colic from anger with indignation ; better from bending double and
worse in the upright position, while standing or bending backwards.

Colic of infants when they arc relieved by lying on the stomach :
as soon as the position is changed they begin to scream again.

The same symptoms accompanying the diarrhoea and dysentery.
The stools consist of white mucus, arc thick, ropy and jelly-like ; at times
bloody. At first they may be copious, strong smelling, pappy, and
later watery, yellow, scanty and almost inodorous.

Diarrhoea and dysentery from anger with indignation; the most
awful tenesmus during stool ; urging to stool with colic.

Eating ever so little, brings on the colic, urging and stool.

Watery stools after eating.

Many of these cases find relief from heat and the warmth of the

bed.


CONIUM MACULATUM

This medicine is a deep, long acting antipsoric, establishing a state
of dirorder in the economy that is so far reaching and so long lasting
that it disturbs almost all the tissues of the body. The complaints
are brought on from taking cold, and the glands become affected all
over the body. From every little cold the glands become hard and
sore. Infiltration in deep-seated diseases in the region of ulcers and
in the region of inflamed parts ; in the glands along the course of the
lymphatics, so we get a chain like knots. The glands under the arm
inflame and ulcerate. The glands in the neck, in the groin and abdo-
men become enlarged. Ulcerated parts indurate. An abscess of the
breast becomes surrounded by lumps and nodules. Nodules in the
breast even where milk has not yet formed ; lumps and nodules, in-
durations and enlarged glands form under the skin all over the body.
Conium has been used extensively for malignant affections of glands,
because it takes hold of glands from the beginning and infiltrates, and
they g radually grow to a stoOT^-hardness. like scirrhus. Now, another
grand feature runningthrough this rcmedyn[r“ the action upon the
nerves. The nerves are in a state of great debility. Trembling, jerk-
ing of the muscles and twitching from the weakness of the nerves.
Inability to stand any physical effort without great exhaustion.

5 ^



410


CONIUM MACULATUM


Gradually growing paralytic weakness, somewhat as was described in
Cocculus. Exhaustion of body and mind, that is, a general slowing
down of all the activities of the body. The liver becomes indurated,
sluggish, enlarged. The bladder is weak, can expel only a part of the
urine. Or sometimes there is a paralytic condition and no expulsive
power. This shows that the remedy increases toward a paralytic
weakness.

Hysteria. Hypochondriacal state of mind, with the nervousness,
trembling and weakness of the muscles. He gets tired in the earlier
stages, but finally this goes on until the limbs are paralytic,

A great many of the complaints are painless. The ulcers and the
paralytic conditions are painless. Great physical and mental debility ;
great prostration of the muscular system ; exhaustion, tremulous weak-
ness. Paralysis of the legs and hip. Mental symptoms, nervous
symptoms, trembling, in widows and widowers who have suddenly
been deprived of their sexual relations. When in a state of consider-
able vigor, if suddenly deprived, the woman or the man takes on a
state of trembling weakness, inability to stand any mental effort, and
inability to put the attention upon things said by others. Not so
marked or not so common in the woman as in the man. When this
state comes on in a woman who is of unusual sexual vigor there may
be severe congestion of the uterus and ovaries, Apis is more likely to
fit her symptoms than Conium. But with hysteria and excitability
Conium is often the remedy. Many of its symptoms come about from
such a cause.

Conium has such a deep action that it gradually brings about a state
of imbecility. The mind gives out. The mind at first becomes tired
like the muscles of the body. Unable to sustain any mental effort.
The memory is weak. The mind will not concentrate, it will not force
itself to attention ; it cannot meditate, and then comes imbecility.
Inability to stand any mental effort or to rivet the attention upon any-
thing are some of the most important symptoms in this medicine.
Insanity of a periodical type. Imbecility, though, is fair more fre-
quent than insanity. When you come to examine the mental states
you will see symptoms that will make you think the patient is deliri-
ous, but that is not quite it. It is a slow-forming weakness of mind ;
not that rapid, active state, such as accompanies a fever ; it is a de-
lirium without a fever, so to speak, which is not constant. Forms of
insanity that are passive. He thinks slowly, and he continues in this
stage for wcaks and months, if he recovers at all. Those excitable
cases that have more or less violence and activity in mental states arc
such as will correspond to Bell., Hyos , Stram. and Ars. You see
nothing of that in this medicine. This state of the mind has come
on BO gradually that the family has not observed it The mind is fuU



CONIUM MACULATUM


411


of strange things that have come little by little, and when the family
look over the many things that he has done and said they begin to
wonder if he is not becoming insane, but he is traveling toward a state
of imbecility. Conium is ot a slow, passive character. Complete in-
difference ; takes no interest in anything, particularly when walking
in the open air. “He is averse to being near people and to talking of
those passing him ; is inclined to seize hold of and abuse them.” lhat,
of course, is an insane act, “Sad and gloomy. Great unhappiness of
mind, recurring every fourteen days,’’ showing a two weeKS periodic-
ity. The Conium patient will sit and mope in the corner in a state
of sadness and depression, giving no reason only that he is so sad.
A hypochondriacal subject going around with whims and notions lhat
people attempt to reason him out of, and the more they attempt to
reason with him the more sad he is. Morose, peevish, vexed. Lvery-
thing vexes and disturbs him. Cannot endure any kind of excitement,
it brings on physical and mental distress, biings on weakness and sad-
ness. Sometimes Conium symptoms will be found in persons who
have suffered from grief ; they become broken in memory. This is
likely to come first. They forget, never can recall things just as they
want them. And so they grow weaker and weaker until they become
imbeciles. If it is decidedly mental, imbecility results ; if it is taking
a physical course the ending is paralysis, and it is not uncommon for
a general paralytic weakness to co|ne on, so that body and mind
progress toward weakness together tmtil some decided manifestation
is made, and then it will be seen to $e going toward paralysis, or some
decided manifestation is made which will send it toward imbecility,
and then the body will seem to remain stationary. There comes a
time in these cases where there is a sort of division between the body
and the mind. Whenever under homceopathic treatment the physical
improves and the mental grows worse, that patient will never be cured.
There are such cases. I never like to see the physical grow better and
the mental grow worse in any degree. That does not mean the aggra-
vation caused by the remedy. If the mental does not improve it
means that the patient is growing worse. There is no better evidence
of the good action of a remedy than mental improvement.

Conium patients cannot endure even the slightest alcoholic drink.
Any wine or stimulating beverage will bring on trembling, excitement,
weakness of mind and prostration. There are many headaches in
these patients. Patients going into decline will manifest headaches.
Stitching, tearing pains in the bead ; throbbing in the head. Signs
precursory to a giving out of the brain. Neuralgia.

Weakness of muscles. Weakness of muscles on one side of the
face. Paralysis of the upper lids. Tingling pa'ns. These are only
in keeping with the signs of a general breakdown. We would not



CONIUM MACULA'nJM


411

think of giving Conium for those sudden, violent congestions of the
brain, or sudden, violent attacks of pain in the head, face or eyes,
but those that accompany a general progressive disease. There are
stitching, lancinating, knife-like pains along the course of nerves about
face and eyes and head. Stitching in the top of the head. Burning
on top of the head. Often the symptoms will lead the homoeopathic
physician to make a physical examination. A great deal more im-
portant than the physical examination arc the symptoms that point
out a remedy.

Excitement will bring on headaches. Numbness of the scalp is one
of the common symptoms of Conium. It is a general ; wherever there
is trouble there will be numbness, numbness with pains, very often
numbness with the weakness. Paralytic conditions arc attended with
numbness. Sick headache with inability to urinate. Great giddiness.
Everything in the room seems to go around. Confused feeling in the
head. Often sits lost in thought. Vertigo and pressure in the head
with unaltered pulse. Vertigo worse from stooping. The slightest
spiritous drink intoxicates him. Vertigo when turning the head, like
turning in a circle, when rising from a seat ; worse when lying down,
as though the bed were turning in a circle; when turning in bed or
when looking around. The vertigo most common in Conium is that
which comes on while lying in bed rolling the eyes or turning the eyes.
This is somewhat as it is in Cocculus, not as to vertigo alone, but the
general slowed down condition of the muscles. The paresis, or weakr
ness of the muscles all over the body is also present in the eyes. There
is a muscular weakness of all the muscles of the eye, so that the
Conium patient is unable to watch moving objects without getting
sick headaches, visual and mental disturbances. Riding on the cars,
watching things in rapid motion, and inability to focus rapidly — slow-
ness of the accommodation is what we must call it — is the cause for
many sicknesses. Inability to follow moving objects with sufficient
rapidity and a headache comes on. “Objects look red, rainbow-col-
ored, striped ; confused spots ; double vision ; weakness of sight. Short-
sighted ; cannot read long without letters running together."' All this
is due to defective accommodation. “Sluggish adaptation of the eye
to varied range of vision. Vision becomes blurred when he is irritable.
Weakness and dazzling of the eyes, together with dizziness. Aversion
to light without inflammation of the eyes,** The pupil will not accom-
modate itself to the changes between strong light and dim light, and
he suffers from it. Severe photophobia and lachrymation. Photo-
phobia without congestion of any tissue without or within the globe of
the eye. Sometimes the pupils are contracted and sometimes dilated.
Conium has cured ulcer of the cornea. “Burning in the eyes when
reading.^' Shooting, smarting, cutting, burning pain in the eyes. The



CONItfM MACULATUM


4^3


lidwS indurate, thicken and are heavy and fall. It is with difficulty that
he can lift them up. So this paralysis extends all through the muscles
of the body and affects the mind similarly. “Could scarcely raise the
eyelids, they seemed pressed down by a heavy weight. Burning on
entire surface of lids ; hordeola ; paralysis of muscles of the eyes,"
A marked condition is that of swelling of the glands about the lace,
car and under the jaws. The parotids are swollen and hard. The
same gradually increasing hardness in the sub-maxillary and sub-
lingual glands. Enlai'gement of the glands of the side of the neck in
cancerous affections. It has cured epithelioma of the lid, and of the
nose and of the cheek. Ulcers about the lip with induration. Deep
under the ulcer there will be hardness, and along all the vessels that
send lymph towards that ulcer there will be a chain of knots.

Paresis extending to paralysis of the oesophagus ; difficulty in swal-
lowing ; food goes down part way and stops. As food is about to
pass the cardiac orifice it stops and enters with a great effort. '‘Strange
rising in the throat, with sense of stuffiing, as if something were lodged
there. Sense of fullness in the throat as of a lump, with involuntary
attempts at swallowing. Fullness in throat with suppressed eructa-
tions. Pressure in oesophagus as if a round body were ascending from
stomach." That is a nervous affection found in nervous women and
has been called globus hystericus. When a woman feels as if she
wanted to cry, and she swallows and, chokes, she will have a similar
lump in the throat. Nervous, broken-down constitutions ; tired of life ;
sees nothing in the future but sickntes and sorrow and paralysis or
imbecility. When they have their lucid moments they weep, become
sad over their enlarged glands and weakness, and have a lump in the
throat.

There are many stomach troubles ; ulceration of the stomach ; cancer
of the stomach. Conium is one of the greatest palliatives in symptoms
of the stomach when all the symptoms agree. It will palliate cancer-
ous conditions for a while, then on comes the difficulty again, because
when the symptoms Rave advanced sufficiently to indicate Conium
many times there is no hope of cure.

Hardness of the abdomen, great sensitiveness of the abdomen.
Pinching pains, stitching pains, colicky, cutting pains, cramping pains.
Bearing down in the abdomen — ^in the woman — as if the uterus would
escape. Often more common than diarrhoea is constipation with in-
effectual urging, hard stool, paralysis of the rectum. Inability to
strain at stool, inability to expel contents because of the paralytic
weakness of all the muscles that take part in expulsion. Pulsation
and emptiness in the abdomen after a normal stool. The woman
strains so much at stool that the uterus protrudes from the vagina.
After every stool tremulous weakness and palpitation. The urine



414


CONIUM MACULATUM


wiU Stop and start. ,He str ains to expel the urine and gets tired and
sj:reani of urine stops and without any pressure whatever
it starts again, and it does that two or three times during urination.
I rreguTaf muscular actions while passing urine. ''Intermittent
ot urine, with cutting after micturition. Urine turbid after standing*”
Weakness of the sexual powers of the male ; impotency. He may
have most violent sexual desire yet he is impotent, ‘‘Great sexual
desire with partial or complete incapacity. Emissions without dreams.
Painful emissions and painful ejaculations,'* Ihere is a catarrhal
state of the seminal vesicles attended with much soreness, so that when
ejaculation takes place there is cutting like a knife, as if the semen
were acrid. Bad effects from suppressed sexual desire in widowers
and those who have been accustomed to coition. "Sexual weakness.
Insufficient erection, lasting only a short time ; weakness after embrace.
Swelling and induration of testicles.” Hardness and swelling of the
testicles gradually comes on. "Discharge of prostatic fluid on every
change of emotion, without voluptuous thoughts, or while expelling
faeces ; with itching of the prepuce.” Hence we have a strange inter-
mingling of increased irritability of the parts, the neck of the bladder,
sexual organs, prostrate gland, with weakness, with impotency. In
the male, remember, there is induration and enlargement of the testi-
cles ; in the woman induration and enlargement of the ovaries and
uterus. ‘'Uterine spasms during too early and scanty menses.” Sore-
ness in the abdomen in the early stages of gestation, motions of the
child are painful. Burning, stinging, tearing pains in the neck of the
uterus. Great soreness of the breasts. This medicine has dwindling
of the mammary glands as well as enlargement and induration. Sup^
pressed menstruation, painful menstruation, throl)bmg, tearing, burn-
in the uterus arid "ml Ec " ovanes, in the p^is. It ha^jeur^
fibroid_.tum of the uterus. It has rStrainedT cancerous growth of
the cervix. C5ne of the most distressing growths known to women
is a cancerous growth of the cervix. It is the most difficult to check-
of all the cancerous affections known. It will progress most rapidly,
but Conium is one of those remedies that will slow down that inflam-
mation ^nd restrain somewhat the haemorrhages. Conium has pro-
duced induration and infiltration of the cervix.

Difficult breathing. Dry cough almost constantly, worse lying in
bed. Cough when first lying down. Is obliged to sit up and cough
is out. Taking a deep breath causes cough. Such are the striking
features of a Conium cough. In the chest, violent stitches. Painful
swelling of the breasts. Rending, tearing pains in the chest.

In the back,_weakness is a most striking thing, with some dorsal
gailMU Lancinating^pairis' are spoken of. ^ "ill effects of bruSer and
shocks to the spine.” After injuries, especially in the lumbar region,



CROTALUS HORRIDUS


4>5


pains and filling up of the veins of the lower limbs. Rheumatic pains ;
paralysis of the lower limbs ; ulceration. And the sufferings and con-
ditions are better by letting the limbs hang down. Conium differs
from a great many medicines. It is common for pains and aches to
be relieved by putting the feet up on a chair ; by putting them up in
bed. But the patient with the rheumatism, with the ulceration of the
legs and the other strange sufferings of the legs, will lie down and
permit his legs to hang over the bed up as far as the knee. That is
something that somebody ought to undertake to account for, so we
could have at least one thing we could prescribe for under pathology.
But up to date we have no explanation. Tottering gait in middle-aged
men.

Another grand feature of the remedy ;_he sweats copiously^_during
sleep. Sometimes the patient will say that if he merely closes the
eye's 'he will sweat. It is certainly true on closing the eyes prepara-
tory to going to sleep he will break out in a sweat. Owing to the fact
that Conium produces such a marked induration and infiltration of
tissues that have been inflamed, stenoses are apt to form where in-
flammation has been present. Stricture of the urethra and stenosis
of the os uteri have been cured by Conium.

CROTALUS HORRIDUS, (RATTLESNAKE)

<

The first impression would be to rlbel against the use of such su^
stances as Crotalus. Lachesis, Apis attd! other animal poisons, and it is
true that the lay mind must look with something like horror upon their
administration ; but when they arc properly used and when we con-
sider the dreadfuincss of the necessity demanding them, and also when
we have ascertained that there can be no substitute when demanded,
and again that they are potentized and changed until they are perfect.y
pure, because reduced to a state of simple substance, the horror passes
away from the mind. It is true that the diseases that call for the use
of such substances as Crotalus are very grave. When at the bedside
of a Crotalus patient one feels that death is very near, the subject is
horrible to look upon, and the mother in regard to her child, or the
husband, would immediately say, “Doctor, use anything in order to
save the life ; resort to anything in order to heal this sick one.

The symptoms are peculiar in Crotalus. The remedy stands out
by itself. There can be no substitute for it, as there is no other
remedy, taken as a whole, that looks like it. The odier snake poisons
form the nearest resemblance, but this one is the most dreadful ot
all, excepting, perhaps, the Ancistrodon contortrix (Copperhead).
In the case of snake bites we get the most dire effects ; we see death
itself, we see the ending after a very rapid course, the very highest



4i6


CROTALUS HORRIDUS


type of zymosis. These snake poisons are supposed to be cyan-
hydrates of soda and other salts. It is known that alcohol is the
natural solvent of the cyanhydrates, and because of this alcohol has
been used in great quantities in snake bites, and it has frequently pro-
longed and even saved life. If he lives through the violent at-
tack he goes on forever manifesting the chronic effects, and from
these we have collected symptoms. Dogs that have been bitten mani-
fested the chronic effects of rattlesnake bite, and in them a peculiar
periodicity has been manifested, viz., every spring as the cold weather
subsides and the warm days begin. I once had the privilege of tracing
up a dog that had been bitten by the Cenchris and had survived. It
was bitten in the region of the neck, and in that region a large abscess
formed every spring as long as that dog lived, until old age, when he
died from that disease. The periodicity in the snake poisons is re-
lated to the spring, to the coining on of the warm weather.

Another marked general feature in Crotalus, as in most of the other
Ophidians, is that the patient sleeps into the aggravation.

The poison of the Crotalus horridus, in its earliest manifestations,
is like unto the zymotic changes that we find in scarlet fever, in diph-
theria, in typhoid and low forms of blood poisoning, those cases that
come on with great rapidity, breaking down of the blood, relaxation
of the blood vessels, bleeding from all of the orifices of the body,
rapidly increasing unconsciousness like one intoxicated and bcvSotted in
appearance. A mental and physical prostration that is almost paraly-
tic in character. Scarlet fever when it becomes putrid ; typhoid when
it becomes putrid, diphtheria with much bleeding and putridity. The
body appears mottled, blue intermingled with yellow. Jaundice comes
on with astonishing quickness, and the eyes become yellow, and the
skin becomes yellow and mottled. Blue in spots. Black and blue
spots as if bruised, intermingled with yellow. After haemorrhages the
skin becomes extremely anaemic. It is yellow, pale, bloodless. The
body looks like wax. Haemorrhage from the ears, eyes, nose, lungs,
from the mucous membranes everywhere, from the bowels, from the
uterus. A haemorrhagic constitution. Crotalus is indicated in disease
of the very lowest, the most putrid type, coming on with unusual
rapidity, reaching that putrid state in an unusually short time. One
who has been poisoned rapidly sinks into this besotted, benumbed,
putrid, semi-conscious state. There is a feeling as if death were coming
over him. As the blood oozes out it becomes black. It is sometimes
fluid.

An awful state of nervousness prevails. Trembling of the limbs,
tremulous weakness. On protruding the tongue it comes out quiver-
ing. Tired by the slightest exertion. Sudden prostration of the vital
powers. A paralytic weakness prevails throughout. Twitching of



CROTALUS HORRIDUS


4n


the muscles, trembling of the limbs. Sliding down in bed occurs in
the typhoid conditions where this remedy has proved of benefit, the
forms of yellow fever with great prostration. This species of yellow
fever has been cured by this remedy. Convulsions and paralysis. It
has twitching of muscles something like chorea, trembling, localized
spasms, hysterical manifestations.

The mental symptoms are well worth examining. The low form
of delirium, muttering, talking to himself is a peculiar form of
loquacity. It differs somewhat from Lachesis. Both have loquacity.
The Lack, loquacity is so rapid that if anyone in the room commences
to tell something the patient will take it up and finish the story,
although he has never heard anything about it, so active is his mind.
No one is permitted to finish a story in the presence of a Lack, patient.
One will commence to tell something. He will say, “Oh, yes ; I under-
stand it,*’ and he will go off on another line and finish up with some-
thing entirely different. Crotalus does that, too, but Crotalus will
take it up and mumble and stumble over his words in a clumsy man-
ner. It is a low passive state like intoxication ; in Lack, it is wild
excitement. “Delirium with languor, drowsiness, stupor.” That tells
it. “Loquacious delirium with desire to escape from bed.” It is
passive, however. Ilis motions are slow. “Muttering delirium of
typhus. Sadness.” His thoughts dwell on death continually. “Ex-
cessive sensitiveness. Moved to tears by reading. Melancholy with
timidity, fear. Anxious and pale, with cold sweat. Irritable, cross,
infuriated by least annoyance.” On. motion there is vertigo, dizziness.
On keeping still there is pain. On going to sleep there is pain, and
he is roused by violent pain. The longer he sleeps the more severe
that pain in the head.

He sleeps into his symptoms. All the snake poisons more or less
sleep into troubles. The head troubles come on after sleep. He sleeps
into headache. The longer he sleeps the harder are the headaches.
The headache is so hard in the back of the head that it is almost im-
possible to raise it from the pillow. The muscles become so tired he
has to take hold of it with his hands. This belongs also to Loch. A
congestive headache with waxy face, yellow, purple, mottled face, as
if there had been bruises. “Headache extending into the eyes. Bilious
headache every few days.” Severe sick headache, together with
dizziness, throbbing in the top of the head. Dull, pulsating headaches.

hecruy^ throbbing, occipitah headaches/^ or the whole head is in
a state of congestion* He is confused and dazed. Head feels too
large. Head feels full, feels as if it would burst. Headaches that
come on in waves as if they came up the back, a singing of blood up-
wards, an orgasm described as if the blood rushed upwards. Head-
ache with surging in waves and excited by motion or jar, by turning"

53



4i8 crotalus horridus

over in bed, by rising up in bed, or by lying down. Change of posi-
tion will cause this surging. In Lack, it is described, and I have seen
it verified, as beginning away down in the spine and surging upward
coincident with the pulse.

Haemorrhage from the eyes. Yellow appearance of the eyes. ‘‘Blood
exudes from the eye, burning in eyes ; redness with lachrymation.’'
Pressure in the eyes as if the eyes would be pushed out from the head.
Paralysis of the upper lids. Inflammation of the mucous membrane
of the lids.

Surging in the ears. “Sensitive to noises.'* Dull aching and throb-
bing in the ears. Foetid, copious, yellow, offensive, bloody discharges
from the ears. Blood oozing from the ears in drops in zymotic dis-
eases, low forms of scarlet fever, or of diphtheria where there is
oozing from the eyes and cars, and copious bleeding from the nose.
The nose is the most common organ to bleed in zymotic diseases.
The rush of blood seems to get relief from bleeding from the nose.
In this medicine the congestion to the head is violent with bleeding
from the nose. It has cured all forms of foetid discharge. Horrible,
foetid, putrid discharges from the nose. Ozaena.

Inflammation of the parotid gland. Blueness and discoloration of
the face. Yellow appearance of the face, a marked condition of jaun-
dice, In girls who appear waxy or anaemic, yellowish green, have for
a long time missed the menstrual period and break out in pustules
and pimples.

This patient often wakes up during the night grinding the teeth.
Tlie taste is bad, putrid. Inflammation of the gums. Bleeding from
the mouth. Inflammation of the throat with bleeding of the throat.
Burning in the throat and mouth. Trembling, quivering and swollen
tongue. Trembling of the tongue when it is put out. Trembling of
the hands when they are moved. Those cases of diphtheria that ooze
blood from the nose and mouth are very low types, and arc sure to
die without a well-selected remedy. The throat will be filled up under
such circumstances with a diphtheritic membrane that looks dark.
There is bleeding all around it. Sore mouth with bleeding. Ulcers
in the mouth. Ulcers after Merc, in those who are pouring forth
saliva on the pillow at night. Bleeding ulcers in the mouth. Difficult
swallowing. Malignant diphtheria. Cannot lie on the right side or
back without instantly producing black, bilious vomiting. This is a
wonderfully bilious remedy, sick headaches, vomiting of bile in great
quantities. The various low forms of disease calling for Crotalus
often begin with vomiting great quantities of bile, sometimes bile
mixed with blood.

Pain in the stomach, coldness as if a piece of ice were in the
stomach or in the abdomen. Stomach irritable, unable to retain any^



CROTALUS HORRmUS


419


thing, constantly throws up blood. Crotalus has cured ulceration of
the stomach. It has greatly restrained the growth of carcinoma when
there is much vomiting of bile and blood. Vomiting in many instances
where the blood has no tendency to coagulate. iNow, with all these
ulcerations of the stomach, cancerous allections, low zymotic disease,
jaundice is nearly always present ; jaundice and more or less of bleed-
ing; fever seldom runs high; sometimes the temperature is subnormal,
but with oozing and bleedings, with dark haemorrhage irom the nose
and mouth and dark, scanty, bloody urine containing albumen. The
abdomen is greatly distended like the tympanitic abdomen of typhoid
and the low zymotic diseases. Ulceration of the bowels, haemorrhage
from the bowels. Much pain and soreness in the abdomen with numb-
ness. Feeling in it as if it were made of wood. ‘‘Stool black, thin,
like coffee grounds. Dysentery of septic origin from foul water, food,
etc. Diarrhoea from noxious efiluvia.’" Inflammation of the ovaries
and of the uterus. Low form of putrid fever, tiaemorrhages. Either
dark clots or blood that has no tendency to coagulate and keeps on
flowing. There is great trouble at the climacteric period. Hot Hashes.
Jaundice. Haemorrhage from the uterus or from other parts. Cancer
of the uterus with much bleeding. Great offensiveness. Patient be-
comes yellow, jaundiced, great exhaustion, mottled appearance of the
skin, swelling of the face, of the leg, especially along the course of the
veins. Phlegmasia alba dolens. Worse from the slightest touch.
Worse from jar, from motion.

There is some reason to think that this will be more or less a heart
remedy from the great cardiac weakness it produces. But the other
snake poisons like Naja, Lack, and Elaps have had more clinical ap-
plication than this one. This one seems to prostrate the heart, but
also to prostrate the whole hody, and its complaints arc more general.
Mottled appearance of the limbs. Gangrenous appearance of the
extremities.

Boils, carbuncles and eruptions are surrounded by a purplish con-
dition of the skin, a mottled, blue, splotched or marbled state. It
produces boils, abscesses and a condition somewhat resembling a car-
buncle, with burning and violent pains, but the peculiar feature is the
doughy centre. Around the boil or carbuncle for many inches there
is oedema, with pitting upon pressure. The boil, or abscess, or car-
buncle will bleed a thick, black blood that will not coagulate. Car*
buncles that come upon the neck and upon the back begin with a
(pustule, tod then several come and they are surrounded by little
pustules and papules and there is pitting upon pressure. For these
carbuncles you will need to study particularly Arsenicum, Anthra-
cinum, Lachesis, Secale and Crotalus. They are the medicines that
have in their nature malignancy and manifestation.



420


CROTON tlGLlOM


In puerperal fever there is a continued oozing of black offensive
blood that will not coagulate ; bleeding from every orifice of the body
as well as from the uterus. Imagine a woman who is pregnant suffer-
ing from typhoid fever. She aborts and a low zymotic state comes
on with the symptoms that I have described and with all the appear-
ances as if she would bleed to death after the abortion. The blood will
not coagulate and the flow continues. Or in a woman during a
typhoid fever menstruation comes on. It is not a true menstrual flow,
that is, it does not resemble the ordinary flow, because it is copious,
dark and liquid, a continuous oozing with all the grave symptoms de-
scribed, and especially the besotted countenance, the comatose state,
the appearance as if she were intoxicated, lying as one dead. When
aroused every muscle trembles ; if the tongue is protruded it trembles,
and there is inability to articulate. Crotalus may save her life. Would
it be possible to think of graver states of sickness than such as are
produced by the ophidia? When a physician sees these symptoms
coming on he immediately thinks of a class of remedies that can cover
such a state, remedies like Baptisia, Arsenicum, Secale and the
Ophidia, and sometimes Arnica, Phosphorus and Pyrogen,

In the more chronic conditions the individual manifests a terrible
state as to his sleep. He rises from sleep as in a fright ; has horrible
dreams of murder, of death, of dead bodies and dead people, of asso-
ciating with the dead and with corpses, of being in graveyards ; even
the smell of the cadaver is dreamed of. While he is awake he is
tired, he is stupid, he cannot add figures, he makes mistakes in writing,
he transposes sentences, and in words he transposes letters. He is
unable to take care of his own accounts, for he cannot add up things
that are at all particular. Sleep alternates with long and tedious
periods of wakefulness. He is disturbed by any change to warm
weather. Great irritability, sensitive to spheres, easily disturbed by
his surroundings, and easily wrought up into a pitch of excitement are
also features of this remedy. Following this up he is suspicious of
his friends and is unable to reason upon a rational basis. He craves
intoxicating drinks and is unable to resist the craving. This wonder-
ful resemblance to old inebriates has led to the use of Crotalus in de-
lirium tremens ; it has the besotted countenance, the purple aspect of
the face, the peculiar kind of hunger in the drunkard, the craving by
spells for stimulants. There is every reason to believe that in fat,
robust, besotted drunkards it may, if properly used, be a remedy deep
enough to remove the appetite for strong drink.

CROTON TIGLIUM

Croton oil, when applied to the skin, produces both vesicles and



CROTON TIGUUM


4^1

pustules upon an inflamed base, and the part becomes very red and
sore. The inflammation often increases until it resembles erysipelas,
but more commonly the eruption produced resembles a vesicular
eczema. This eruption will come on for a few days and will then
desiccate, and in a few days longer it will desquamate.

When one has been overdosed, as is done in a too prolonged proving,
or by the crude drug, or when the prover has been markedly sensitive,
we get an alternation of states, the internal alternating with the ex-
ternal. After the eruption is out the internal manifestations are not
present, as is seen in the rheumatic state, the cough and the bowel
symptoms. If wc study these groups separately we will find they are
all interesting.

First, its cough. It has an asthmatic cough, coming on in the middle
of the night, often arousing the patient from a sound sleep. Attacks
of violent coughing, with dyspnoea and choking, worse at night and
worse on lying down, compelling him to sit up, to be bolstered up in
bed, or to sit up in a reclining chair. His friends wonder if he is not
going into consumption. If it is a child they wonder whether it is
not whooping cough. There is extreme irritation of the air passages,
so that the inhalation of air brings on the cough. Sensitive to deep
breathing. Now, this will go on for a while and finally he will break
out with an eruption somewhere upon the body, vesicles and pustules,
in clusters and patches, that become inflamed and red and finally dry
up and desquamate and disappear, cand then back comes his cough.
This may go on as a chronic state, a|id when such is the case it will be
very well to know this remedy.

The next most important symptoms are the bowel symptoms, and
perhaps they are the best known of any of its symptoms outside of
the eruption. It is suitable in both acute and chronic diarrhoea. It
is suitable in cholera infantum. The marked feature is the extreme
suddenness with which the stool is ejected. It seems to come out in
one gush of yellow, watery or pappy stool ; soft, thin faeces, coming
out with one gush, So marked is this that it is not an uncommon
thing for a rural patient to describe it as “like tliat of a goose.** It
all gushes out in one squirt. The mother says of the little patient :
“You would be astonished, doctor, at the violent rush, for it all comes
out with one squirt.** That is descriptive. Many remedies have a
holding on and a prolonged effort at stool, until it takes quite a long
time. Many of the diarrhoeas are prolonged with numerous little
gushes of thin faeces or water, but this particular feature is striking.
It may not always be so, but this violent gush of thin, yellow faeces
or yellow water is a striking feature of the remedy. With this the
abdomen is very sensitive, and is greatly distended ; there is much
gurgling in the bowel, and when the physician puts his hand upon it



42a


CROTON ttCUUM


the patient will say he feels the gurgling, as if he were full of water,
and it probably is so, for the expulsion of the stool would not occur
in one strong gush were it not for the fact that the colon and rectum
were full of Huid. Another peculiar thing commonly attending
Croton tig. diarrhoeas is that pressure over the abdomen or pressure
about the umbilicus causes a pain in the rectum and urging to stool,
and a feeling, with the expulsion of the stool, as if the rectum would
protrude. Clinically it has been described as if the pain followed the
intestines all the way down to the anus. The taking of a little water,
or of a little milk, what would ordinarily be suitable food for such a
diarrhoea, will at times cause an instant urging to stool ; he must go
to stool immediately after eating. This gives the general features of
the Croton tig. diarrhoea. If it is in an infant there is great ex-
haustion, tympanitic abdomen, much rumbling of the bowels, great
sinking, and as soon as the infant lakes one mouthful of milk or draws
from the mother's breast it expels a gush of liquid or pappy stool.

Another most important group of symptoms is its eye symptoms.
It has eye symptoms of an mllammatory character, and around the
eyes and upon the lids are vesicles and pustules. Pustules upon the
cornea, granular lids. Inflammation of all the tissues of the eye. It
has an inllammation of the iris and conjunctiva. The bloodvessels
of the eyes are distended, the eye looks red and raw. The eyelids
when turned out are seen to be greatly inflamed and granular, covered
with vesicles and pustules. With this inflammatory condition there is
a sensation very commonly present in the Croton tig. eye cases, as if
the eye were drawn backwards by a string, or as if the optic nerves were
dragging the eyes backwards into the head. This drawing in the
back of the eye as with a string is also peculiar to Paris quadrilolia,
but the conditions are difterent in Paris quad. In headaches trom
overuse of the eyes in engravers or those doing fine needle work, with
much neuralgia in the head, due probably to the overuse of the eyes,
when the pains in the eyes are not attended with inflammation, but
are more of the type of dull aches and pains that you might call only
rheumatic or neuralgic, with this sensation as if the eyes were drawn
back into the brain ; in these neuralgic cases use Paris quad. But in.
the inflammatory conditions such as I have described, with the same
drawing back as with a string, Croton tig. is the remedy.

Troublesome eczema of the scalp in infants, either purely vesicular
or intermingled more or less with pustules. The vesicles dry up and
then desquamate, and now there is a red, raw, inflamed surface, sen-
sitive to touch. After desquamation has pretty nearly finished, a new
crop of pustules and vesicles comes out, and while one place is clearing
off another is vesicular. This is how it goes on with a chronic eczema-
The eruptions are often about the eyes, on the temples, over the face



CROTON TIGUUM


423


and on top of the head. The appearance is so nearly like Sepia that
the two very often cannot be distinguished. Sepia has the same vesic-
ulation intermingled with pustules, the bleeding and rawness of the
surface and the eruption of new crops. Sepia is more frequently in-
dicated in this raw and bleeding state of the scalp, in crusta lactea, or
the eruption of children that Grot. tig. Under Croton tig. infants in
this state very often have attacks of gushing diarrhoea, coming on
from the slightest disturbance or indigestion ; this is a great help in
guiding to the remedy. When the two groups of symptoms are com-
bined, the scalp symptoms and the diarrhoea, you can hardly make a
mistake. You will see this also, that if the diarrhoea is at all pro-
longed, the head will steadily improve and you will think your j^atient
is getting well of the scalp trouble, but when the diarrhoea slackens
up a little out will come a fresh crop. If the diarrhoea becomes chronic
the external eruption will disappear, and if the diarrhoea improves
the external eruption gets worse. It seems necessary in such a consti-
tution to have a vent. The mucous membrane is but the internal skin,
and the integument of the body the external skin, and this remedy es-
pecially manifests itself upon one or the other of these, the mucous
membrane or the integument.

It has another manifestation that you want to carry in mind, a
group of symptoms in relation to lactation. After confinement the
mother may go on a little while with all things following normally,
but all at once she commences to have pains in one or the other mam-
mary gland, and the drawing as with a string comes up again. It
feels to her as if a string were attached behind the nipple pulling back-
ward, a sharp, drawing, stinging pain that will in some instances keep
her walking the floor night and day. Though it is hut a little thing it
is a very important symptom to know with Croton tig. We see this
drawing, as with a string, in the eye and in the breast, and also the
symptom, very like the Plumbum symptom, drawing in the naval upon
pressure, somewhat like a string. Associating such things together
will enable you to understand them as a part of the nature of the
remedy and to keep them in mind. I once cured a woman of this
painful drawing from the nipple as with a string. I watched her walk
the floor and saw that the suffering must be very intense, for at times
it brought tears to her eyes. She had borne it several nights, which
shows that Croton tig. is capable of curing a pain that is very pro-
longed or tedious. The breast had been poulticed, hot applications had
been put upon it, and they did not give relief, a point which is worth
remembering.

In cholera infantum we will naturally have the symptoms of vomit-
ing, which, however, are not so common to Croton tig., although it has
soinb vomiting. So- in cases of cholera infantum, in which the vomit-



424 CROTON TIGUUM

ing is not so important a feature as the loose bowels, the remedy may
be Crot. tog. A symptom is reported that is of great value. Excessive
nausea with vanishing of sight, vertigo, worse after drinking, with
frequent discharges of yellowish-green water from the bowels ; ex-
cessive nausea, much water in the mouth. So we note the excessive
nausea and not so great vomiting. The nausea is more like that of
Ipecac., but in Ipecac, we have nothing like the stools of Crot. tig., we
have only scanty little gushes, every minute a little gush with tenes-
mus. Vomiting is the all important symptom in the cholera infantum
of Ipecac., and when the stomach is emptied there is overwhelming
retching and exhaustion from it, and the stools are scanty ; but in
Croton tig. the stools arc copious and while there is nausea the vomit-
ing is seldom and scanty.

Another feature to be considered in this remedy is its relation to
Rhus. It is an antidote to Rhus, Croton tig. is closely related in its
vesicular eruption to the Rhus family (particularly Rhus tox.). Ana
cardium, Sepia and Anagallis. The eruptions of Croton tig. very
often select as a location the genital organs. Rhus does the same, and
when the genital organs are the principal seat of the eruptions in
Rhus poisoning Croton tig. will commonly be its antidote; also when
the eruptions arc most about the eyes and scalp Croton tig. will often
furnish an antidote. When the symptoms, however, confine them-
selves to the palms of the hands Croton tig. is not the remedy, but it
is Anagallis. Anagallis does upon the palms of the hands just what
Croton tig. does upon the genitals. If you examine Anagallis you
will find that the eruptions will come out and desquamate, and no
sooner does the surface look as if it would heal than a new crop
comes out, Rhus is similar in that it locates upon the palms of the
hands, but Rhus does not repeat itself upon inflamed surfaces. In
the Croton tig. eruption there is some burning, but nothing like that
of Rhus. The Rhus burning pain in eruptions that are marked is
almost like fire. It is worse from the air, and it is better from dip-
ping the part in water as hot as it is possible to endure it. Persons
who have these Rhus eruptions talk about scalding their hands to
relieve the itching and burning. So it is with Croton tig., but it is
usually so sore he cannot touch it ; when the eruption is so mild that
he can handle it, we find that the slightest rubbing relieves the itch-
ing. In Rhus touch aggravates the itching. In bad cases of Rhus
poisoning h6 will hold his fingers far apart if they have very large
blisters upon them, and he will not touch Ac place because it estab-
lishes a voluptuous itching that nearly drives him wild. Although
this is not so with Croton tig., still they are similar enough to each
other to be antidotal ; they do not have to be exactly alike, but they
need to be similar. It is true that remedies that are relieved by



CUPRUM METALLICUM


425


scratching are more nearly antidotal to such remedies as are relieved
by scratching. The more similar the better ; but medicines will anti-
dote each other when they are similar only in general character, and
they will cure disease when they are similar in general character. It
is also true that medicines while they arc not similar in general char-
acter may be similar enough in special localities to remove the symp-
toms in these localities, while the disease will go on. The remedy in
this case is not similar enough to cure the disease, but it has removed
some of the symptoms. That is the most miserable kind of a pre-
scription, as it changes the manifestations of the disease without
changing its nature. In that way a very poor prescription may hunt
around and get one remedy for one group of symptoms and another
remedy for another group, and the patient be worse off than before.
If the remedies are similar as to their general nature, then the little
superficial symptoms arc not so extremely important.

‘‘Frequent, corrosive itching on glans and scrotum.’' “Vesicular
eruption on scrotum and penis.” It is a remedy for vesicular and
pustular eruptions upon the genital organs. It is closely related to
Petroleum, which has fine ted vesicular and granular elevations, inter-
mingled with fine red rash upon the genitals, itching intensely, worse
at times by scratching until burning comes on and then bleeding which
relieves.


CUPRUM MEtALLICUM

Cuprum is pre-eminently a convulsive medicine. The convulsive
tendency associates itself with almost every complaint that Cuprum
creates and cures. It has convulsions in every degree of violence,
from the mere twitching of little muscles and of single muscles to
convulsions of all the muscles of the body. When these are coming
on the earliest threatenings arc drawings in the fingers, clenching of
the thumbs or twitching of the muscles. It has twitching, quivering,
trembling, and it has also tonic contractions, so that the hands are
closed violently. In this condition the thumbs are first affected ; they
are drawn into the palms and then the fingers close down over themi
with great violence. In the fingers and toes and in the extremities
the spasmodic condition increases and extends until the limbs are in a
State of great exhaustion. Tonic contractions, the limbs being drawn
up with great violence and it seems as if the frame would be tom to-
pieces by the violent contractions of the mtiscles everywhere. Often
the contractions assume a clonic form, with jerking and twitching.

Cupmm has many mental symptoms. It has a great variety in its
delirium, incoherent prattling, talking of all sorts of subjects incoher-
ently. It has produced a variety of mental symptoms: delirium, ih*

54



4^6


CUPRUM METALLICUM


coherency of speech, loss of memory. During its different conqt'
plaints, such as cholera, some forms of fever, the puerperal state,
dysmenorrhoea, congestion of the brain, etc., there is delirium, uncon-
sciousness and jerking and twitching of the muscles. The eyes roll
in various directions, but commonly upwards and outwards or up-
wards and inwards. There is bleeding from the nose and the vision
is disturbed. Between the convulsive attacks there is incoherent talk,
delirium, during which the patient is spiteful, violent, weeping or
shrieking. They go into convulsions with a shriek. In one place it
is spoken of as bellowing like a calf.

This drug has the ability to produce a group of spasms followed
by the appearance as if the patient were dead, or in a state of ecstacy.
Convulsive conditions sometimes terminate in a state of stasis during
which the mind ceases to act and the muscles remain quiet or only
quiver. This is often one of the leading features in whooping-coiigh
when Cuprum is indicated. To bring it down to the language of the
mother, the description which she gives of the little one, which will
probably make you remember it better than if I use the text, she says
that when the child is seized with a spell of this violent whooping-
cough, the face, becomes livid or blue, the finger nails become dis-
colored, the eyes are turned up, the child coughs until it loses its
breath, and then lies in a state of insensibility for a long time until she
fears the child will never breathe again, but with violent spasmodic
action in its breathing, the child from shortest breaths comes to itself
again just as if brought back to life. You have here all the violent
features of a convulsive whooping-cough. In addition to what the
mother says you may also observe a few things, but the whole make
up of such a case, its whole nature, shows that it is a Cuprum w^hoop-
ing-cough. If the mother can get there quickly enough with a little
cold water she will stop the cough. Cold water especially will
i:elievc the spasm, and so the mother soon gets into the habit of hurry-
ing for a glass of cold water, and the child also knows, if it has tried
it once, that glass of cold water will relieve it. Whenever the
respiratory organs are affected there is spasmodic breathing, dyspnoea.
There is also rattling in the chest. The more dyspnoea there is the
more likely his thumbs will be clenched and the fingers cramped.

In the lower part of the chest, in the region of the xiphoid appen-
dix, there is a spasmodic condition that is very troublesome. It
seems to be at times a constriction so severe that he thinks he will die,
and at others a feeling as if he were transfixed with a knife from the
xiphoid appendix to the back. Some say it feels as if a lump were
in that region and others as if much wind were collected in the
stc^E^ch. It destroys the fullness of the voice, and it seems as if his
life would be squeezed out. Sometimes then it takes the form of colic



Cuprum metallicuM


427


and sometimes of neuralgia. If you examine the sensation of tight-
ness in the region of the stomach you will see at once how the voice
is affected. You will find the patient sitting up in bed ; he tells you
in a cracked and squeaking voice that he will soon die if he is not
relieved ; his face is a picture of fear and anguish he really looks as
if he were going to die ; the sensation is dreadful. Cuprum speedily
cures this complaint. This constriction and dyspnoea occur some-
times in cholera morbus and in painful menstruation. Spasms of the
chest are also accompanied by this constriction and a nervous spasmodic
breathing. He is not able to take a full breath.

The Cuprum patient is full of cramps. There are cramps in the
limbs and in the muscles of the chest, with trembling and weakness.
In old age, and in premature old age, it is useful for those cramps
that come in the calves, the soles of the feet, and the toes and fingers
at night in bed. In debilitated, nervous, tremulous old people.
Cuprum serves a peculiar purpose. When an old man, who has been
single a long time, marries, his cramps will sometimes prevent him
performing the act of coition. He has cramps in the calves and soles
as soon as he begins the act. It is especially suitable to young men
who have become prematurely old from vices, from strong drink,
from late nights and various abuses, and these cramps are not unlikely
to occur in such subjects. Cuprum and Graphites are the two reme-
dies for cramps coming under these circumstances, but whereas Cuprum
is said to produce cramps that present the act. Graphites is said
to bring on the cramps during the act. The two remedies however
compete closely with each other, and hence if Graphites corresponds
to the constitution of the patient, it. should be given, and the same in
regard to Cuprum. Sulphur also has cured this state.

In spasmodic conditions that come on during menstruation Cuprum
is also useful. Painful menstruation with spasms commencing in the
fingers and extending over the body. Tonic contractions that look
like hysterical manifestations. They may be hysterical, but that does
not interfere with Cuprum curing, if they are only spasmodic or con-
vulsive. Violent dysmenorrhoea with delirium, turning up of the eyes,
contortions of the face and epileptiform manifestations.

In epilepsy calling for Cuprum we have the contractions and jerk-
ings of the fingers and toes. He falls with a shriek and during the
attack passes urine and faeces. It is indicated in epilepsy that begins
with a violent constriaion in the lower part of the chest as I have
described, or with the contractions in the fingers that spread oil over
the body, to all the muscles.

Again, it is a remedy sometimes needed in the puerperal state before
or after delivery. The case may be of uraemic character, but no
matter ; the urine is scanty and albuminous. During the progress of



428


CUPRUM METALLIGUM


the labor the patient suddenly becomes blind. All light seems to her
to disappear from the room, the labor pains cease, and convidsions
come on, commencing in the fingers and toes. When you meet these
cases do not forget Cuprum. You will look a long time before you
can cure a case of this kind without Cuprum.

In cholera morbus with gushing, watery stools and copious vomit-
ing, the stomach and bowels are emptied of their contents. The
patient is fairly emptied out, becomes blue all over, the extremities
are cold, there is jerking of the muscles, cramping of the extremities
and of the fingers and toes, spasms of the chest ; he is cold, mottled,
blue in blotches, going into collapse ; the finger nails and toe nails and
the hands and feet are blue. There are several remedies that look
like Cuprum in such a condition. In cholera we would naturally
hunt for such remedies as produce cholera-like discharges, more or
less spasmodic conditions, the great blueness, coldness, sinking and
collapse. We would here refer to Hahnemann's observation.
Hahnemann had not seen a case of cholera, but he perceived that the
disease produced appearances resembling the symptoms of Cuprum,
Camphor and Veratrum, He saw from the description of the disease
that the general aspect of cholera was like the general aspect of
Cuprum, Camphor and Veratrum, and these three remedies are the
typical cholera remedies. They all have the general feature of cholera,
its nature and general aspect. They all have the exhaustive vomiting
and diarrhoea, the coldness, the tendency to collapse, the sinking from
the emptying out of the fluids of the body.

From what I have said you will see that the Cuprum case is, above
all others, the spasmodic case. It has the most intense spasms, and
the spasms being the leading feature, they overshadow all the other
symptoms of the case. He is full of cramps and is compelled to cry
out with the pain from the contractions of the muscles. Camphor is
the coldest of all the three remedies ; the Camphor patient is cold as
death. Camphor has the blueness,, the exhaustive discharge, though
less than Cuprum and Veratrum; but whereas in the two latter reme-
dies the patient is willing to be covered up, in Camphor he wants the
windows open and wants to be cool. Though he is cold he wants to
be uncovered and to have the windows open. But just here let me
mention another feature in Camphor, It has also some convulsions
which are painful, and when the pain is on he wants to be covered up
and wants the windows shut. If there are cramps in the bowels with
the pain, he wants to be covered up. So that in Camphor, during all
of its complaints in febrile conditions (and fever is very rare in
Camphor), and during the pains he wants to be covered up and warm,
but during the coldness he wants to be uncovered and have the air.
In cholera, then, the extreme coldness and blueness point to Camphor,



ClfPRUM METALUCU^^


429


Again, with Camphor there are often scanty as well as copious di$-
charges, so that the cholera patient is often taken so suddenly that he
has the coldness, blueness and exhaustion and almost no vomiting or
diarrhoea, a condition called dry cholera. It simply means an un-
commonly small amount of vomiting and diarrhoea. This is Camphor.
Another prominent feature is the great coldness of the body without
the usual sweat that belongs to the disease. Cuprum and Veratrum
have the cold clammy sweat, and Camphor also has sweat, but more
commonly the patient needing Camphor is very cold, blue and dry and
wants to be uncovered. That is striking. Now wc go to Veratrum
and see that we can have three remedies very much alike, and so per-
fectly adapted to cholera and yet so different. Veratrum is peculiar
because of its copious exihaustive discharges, copious sweat, copious
discharges from the bowels, copious vomiting, and great coldness of
the sweat. There is some cramping and he wants to be warm ; he is
ameliorated by hot drinks, and by the application of hot bottles which
relieve pain and suffering.

These three remedies tend downward into collapse and death.
Now to repeat : Cuprum for the cases of a convulsive character, Cam-
phor in cases characterized by extreme coldness and more or less dry-
ness, and Veratrum when the copious sweat, vomiting and purging
are the features. That is little to remember, but with that you can
enter an epidemic of cholera with oa^fidence.

In cholera-like states there are other remedies which relate to
Cuprum and which ought to be cemfidered. Podophyllum has cramps,
mainly in the bowels. It has a painless, gushing diarrhoea with
vomiting as well, and hence is useful in cholera morbus.

The cramps in Podophyllum are violent, they feel to him as if the
intestines were being tied in knots. The watery stool is yellow, and,
if examined a little while after, it looks as if corn meal had been
stirred into it. The odor is dreadful, smelling like a Podophyllum
stool. If you say it smells like stinking meat that only partly
describes it ; it is not quite cadaveric but it is horribly offensive and
penetrating. The stool is gushing, copious, and is accompanied by
dreadful exhaustion. ‘It is a wonder where it can all come from,’'
says the mother, speaking of the exhausting diarrhoea in an infant
or in a child. The stool runs away gushingly, in prolonged squirts,
with a sensation of emptiness, sinking, deathly goneness in the whole
abdomen. Phosphorus also ought to be thought of in relation to
Cuprum. It also has cramps in the bowels, exhaustive diarrhoea,
sinking as if dying, but commonly with heat of the skin, with burning
internally, with gurgling of all the fluids taken into the stomach; as
spon as they come to the stomach they commence to gurgle, and
gurgle all the way . through the bowel. A drink of water seems to



430 CUPRUM MeTALUCUM

flow through the bowel with a gurgle. Now this gurgling in Cuprum
commences at the throat ; he swallows with a gurgle ; gurgling in the
oesophagus when swallowing.

Convulsive cramps all over the body with twitching, jerking, trem*
bling and blueness of the skin. Everything he does, all his actions arc
spasmodic, are convulsive. All the sphincters are convulsive. All
the activities are irregular, disorderly and convulsive when poisoned
with copper. Bear these things in mind as we study every region in
Cuprum. Repression or driving in of eruptions, attended with diar-
rhoea and convulsions, sometimes only convulsions. We note a case
of measles or scarlet fever with a rash that has been suppressed by a
chill or exposure to wind and convulsions have come on. That be-
longs to Zincum and Cuprum, sometimes to Bryonia^ but to Zincum
and Cuprum particularly. Twitching of the limbs from a sudden
suppression of a scarlet fever, with suppression of urine, chorea, etc.
Cramping of the muscles of the chest ; cramping of the calves ; cramp-
ing all over. Suppressed eruptions. Discharges that have been in
existence quite a long time. The individual has become debilitated
and worn out with excitement, but this discharge barely kept him
alive. He has gradually grown weaker, but he has kept about be-
cause he had a discharge. It has furnished him a safety-valve. If
stopped suddenly convulsions will come on. That is like Cuprum. A
woman has suffered a long time with a copious leucorrhoea and some
unwise doctor tells her she must take injections and she checks it up
for a few days, hysterical convulsions, crampings and tearings of the
muscles come on ; contractions of the fingers and toes. Discharges
from old ulcers, fistulas suppressed.

Cuprum will re-establish a discharge that has been suddenly sup-
pressed and convulsions followed. It stops the convulsions and re-
establishes the discharge. It has caries, it has senile gangrene, or the
gangrene that belongs to old age : old shriveled up octogenarians,
whose toes and fingers get dark in spots ; feeble circulation.

In the Cuprum patient the nerves are all the time wrought up to the
highest tension ; wants to fly, wants to do something dreadful. Im-
pulsiveness. Compelled to do something ; restless and tossing about —
a constant uneasiness ; nervous trembling ; always tired. Great weak-
ness of the muscles, and relaxation of the body when the convulsions
are not on.; Twitching and jerking and starting during sleep.
Grinding of the teeth with brain affections. Inflammations ceases
suddenly and you wonder what has happened. All at once comes on
insanity, delirium, convulsions, blindness ; evidence of cerebral con-
gestions and inflammation appearing with wonderful suddenness.
Metastasis. A perfect change from one part of the body to another.
The same thing may occur from a suppressed eruption, or sup-



CUPRUM METALLICUM


43 •

pressed discharge, or a suppressed diarrhoea, and it goes to the brain,
a&cjts the mind and brings on insanity ; a wild, active, maniacal
delirium. Cuprum is not passive in its business. Violence is mani-
fested everywhere. Violence in its diarrhoea, violence in its vomiting,
violence in its spasmodic action ; strange and violent things in its
mania and delirium. Hysterical cramps and hysterical attitudes may
change in a night or in a day to St. Vitus’ dance, and go on with it
as if nothing had happened. Such is the suddenness with which it
changes its character. This is not generally known of Cuprum — this
constant changing about. Spasmodic affections in general. Spas-
modic coughs, spasms all over the body. The face becomes purple. He
loses his breath ; suffocates. The mother thinks the child will never
come to life again. Spasms of the chest ; spasms of the larynx :
spasms of the whole respiratory system of such a character that the
child seems to be choking to death.

Whooping cough. With every spell of whooping cough comes
this awful spasmodic state, this spasmodic coughing. Jerking of the
muscles. Cuprum has spasms of the limbs with all sorts of contrac-
tions such as arc found in hysterical constitutions. Puerperal con-
vulsions. Convulsions where a limb will first flex and then extend —
an alternation of flexion and extension. In a child you will see the
leg all at once shoot out with great violence, then up against the
abdomen again with great violence, and then again shoot out. It is
hard work to find another remedy that has that. Tabacum has it, but
not many others. Convulsions with' flexion and extension are com-
mon to Cuprum. Convulsions of tfie limbs, twitching and jerking of
the muscles. We get a part of the symptom-picture in one and part
in another.

Violent congestion in the head, violent pains in the head. Tingling
pain in the vertex, severe pain in the vertex, bruised pain. Crawling
sensation in vertex, stitches in the temples. Congestion of the brain.
Meningitis. Headache after cpilepdc attacks. Paralysis of the brain
with symptoms of collapse. Metastasis to the brain from other
organs.

About the face ; convulsions, jerking of the eyes ; twitching of the
lids. Bruised pain in the eyes. Spasms of the muscles of the eye so
that the eyes jerk and twitch, first from one side and then the other.
Rolling of the eyes. “Quick rotation of the balls with the lids closed.
Lids spasmodically closed” Closed so that they seem to snap. “In
flammation of the periosteum about the eyes* and cellular tissue of the
lachrymal glands.” Spots of ulceration on the cornea. Face and
lips blue. The face is purple in convulsions and whooping cough ;
lips blue.

Inflammation of the tongue. Paralysis of the tongue. It is not



43 ^


CUPRUM METALLICUM


an uncommon thing to find paralysis in Cuprum after convulsions.
The violence of the convulsions seems to have brought about a re-
action and paralytic weakness, a numbness and tingling, a loss of
motility. ‘'Spasms of the throat, preventing speech. Sensation as if
constricted on swallowing. Great thirst for cold drinks.” Many
complaints are ameliorated by drinking cold water. The spasms are
sometimes mitigated by drinking cold water. The cough is brought
on sometimes by inhaling cold air, but stopped by drinking cold
water, like Coccus cacti, ‘‘Desire for warm food and drinks. Eats
hastily.” Indigestion from milk.

Then there is nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea connected more or
Jess with spasms. Spasms of the stomach. Spasms of the chest with
diarrhoea and vomiting. Cramps of the calves and the fingers and
toes. “Presssure in the stomach.” In the stomach and bowels period-
ical cramps. Cramps coming periodically. It has cured colic in the
form of violent cramps coming every two weeks with perfect regu-
larity. It has pain in the stomach, and a pain under the xiphoid
appendix that seems as if it would take his life. If it is not removed
he will certainly die in a little while. Constriction across the chest,
suffocation, cramps of the legs. Cuprum goes deep into the life, and
it has many a time taken such a grand hold of an old hysterical sub-
ject that it has completely eradicated in a short time the hysterical
tendency to cramps. In Cuprum particularly, early in the cramps the
thumbs commence to draw down. It is with difficulty that they can
be lifted up. They will draw back again, and then the fingers will
clinch over them and draw so tightly it is painful. In children with
such convulsions, and in hysterics with such convulsions. Cuprum
goes deep into the life and eradicates this tendency to convulsions and
cramps. Uraemic convulsions. Convulsions with suppressed or
scanty urine. No urine in the bladdei. In young girls beginning to
menstruate, violent cramps in the limbs, cramps in the abdomen,
diarrhoea, cramps in the utems. Epileptic spasms coming at every
menstrual period. Before or during menses, or after suppression,
violent, unbearable cramps in the abdomen. A case something like
this is not so very uncommon. Girls, at about the time of puberty,
go in bathing, when their mothers have been a little too prudish, a
little too sensitive, and have not told their daughters what they might
expect, and to look out for bathing in cold water at certain times.
The menstrual flow starts. From a cold bath she suppresses that
flow and on come convulsions. That is in keeping with Cuprum.
Hysterical convulsions they may be called. They will take the form,
quite likely, of hysterical convulsions ; they may take the form of
chorea. Instead of convulsions it may take the form of congestion,
of the brain with violent delirium. Again, the menses not appearing



CYCLAMEN


433


after suppression, after sweat, and convulsions come on ; frequent
spasms during menses. Cuprum is not generally known to be such
a wonderful medicine where there is anaemia ; but it has chlorosis. It
is a deep acting medicine. It affects with great powder the whole
voluntary system, the desires and aversions. It is suitable in those
girls who have always had their own way, have never been crossed,
and when they grow olden and reach puberty, and have got to submit
to some sort of discipline or never become women, they have mad fits,
have cramps. Cuprum wull sometimes make them sensible, so in that
way it fits into the loves and hates. It belongs to the ^oluntary system
most prominently.

Spasmodic respiration : great dyspnoea, asthmatic breathing. At
tacks of spasmodic asthma and most violent spasmodic coughs. “Dry,
hard, difficult cough, rattling in the chest, spasms. Dry spasmodic
cough until he suftocates. Face is red or purple.”

CYCLAMEN

Aversion to motion, yet tnoiion atnelioratcs her pain and uneasiness.

Aversion to the open air, yet open air ameliorates some symptoms,
especially the coryza and cough.

The marked dullness of the senses and special senses is a striking
part of this picture.

Chlorosis ; irregular menses ; and palpitation.

Stitching pains.

Weakness and aggravation from exertion.

Flabby muscles.

Most symptoms ameliorated by walking.

Very restless at night.

Great lassitude.

Weakness in the evening, ameliorated by moving about.

Sensitive to cold, and cold air.

Complaints from being overheated.

Alternations of moods is a striking feature of the mental state.

Great flow of ideas alternates with weak memory.

Joyous feeling alternating with irritability.

Serene humor changes suddenly into seriousness or peevishness.

Grief and fear keep her in continuous mental agitation.

Dullness of mind prevents mental labor.

Absorbed in thought ; seeks solitude ; thinks about the future.

Answers incoherently ; confussion of mind.

Aversion to work, and dread of open air.

Wants to remain in a warm room, and in solitude.

Remains a long time silent. Excitement with trembling.

55



434


CYCLAMEN


Sadness, as if she had wronged semebody (Aur,),

Tearful and meditates upon her grief, which is only imaginary.

Thinks she is alone in the world and persecuted by every one
(China).

Obstinate and censorious. She grows steadily weaker ; fainting
spells come on ; she becomes pale and anaemic.

These symptoms are important if associated with scanty menses or
amenorrhoea.

Vertigo when walking in the open air ; objects turn in a circle ;
ameliorated in a room, and when sitting. Everything turns dark
before the eyes, and she falls as if fainting.

The pain in the head is stunning, and makes her fear she will lose
her senses. Boring, darting, pressing in forehead and temples.
Violent pains in the forehead- Pains worse lying on painful side or
back. Pains one-sided. Pain morning and evening, ameliorated by
vomiting; worse by motion and in open air. Obscure vision with the
pains. Pressure in vertex, as if brain were enveloped in a cloth,
which would deprive him of his senses. Headache with flickering
before the eyes on rising in the morning. Pulsating in the head. Rush
of blood to the head ; anxiety and confusion of mind ; obscuration of
vision ; vertigo ; general coldness, after dinner. Headache ameli-
orated by cold applications. Headaches from disordered stomach.
Head feels as if he had on a skull cap. Tearing pains in the scalp.

In the field of vision there are spots, fog, bluish colors, flickerings,
glittering objects ; various colors — ^now yellow, and again green ; fiery
sparks, smoke ; halo around the light, black specks or flies. Dimness
of vision. Diplopia. Convergent strabismus. Dilated pupils. Hemi-
opia. Heat and burning. Lids oedematous. Swelling of upper lids.
Dryness and itching of lids. Dim vision during headache. Impaired
vision, smell, hearing and taste.

Dullness of hearing. Humming, ringing and roaring in the ears.
Drawing pains.

Sense of smell diminished. Dryness in the nose. Dry, or fluent
coryza, worse in a warm room, better in the open air or cool room.
Sneezing and watery discharge in a warm room, entirely relieved in
the open air. Walking in the cold open air is his most comfortable
pastime. Pressing pain over nasal bone during coryza. Takes cold
from being overheated and from overheated rooms.

Pale, sickly face ; dark under the eyes in woman. Contracted
forehead — a frown.

Dry lips. Numbness of upper lip.

Boring, stitching, tearing in the teeth. Jerking in the teeth at night.
Taste is lost, or perverted ; flat ; bad ; putrid ; rancid ; all food tastes
too salty. Tongue white, or yellowish. Burning blisters on tongue.



CYCLAMEN


435

Saliva increased. Burning, tip of tongue. Saliva tastes salty. Viscid
mucus in the mouth.

Burning, dryness and scraping in the throat.

Loss of appetite and even aversion to food. Thirstless, except in
the evening during fever. Desires lemonade [Nit, ac,^ Bell., Sab.).
Aversion to bread and butter, and fatty things ; but desires inedible
things. Disgust for meat ; craves sardines. Satiety after the first
mouthful {Lyc.) and then he loathes food. Stomach weak. Nausea
after eating. Pork disagrees. The stomach symptoms are much like
Pulsatilla. Symptoms worse after coffee. Vomiting after eating.
Vomiting in the morning. Vomiting watery mucus. Eructations.
Aching in the stomach and burning in oesophagus, better by walking
about. Fulness, as if he had eaten too much. Weight in the stomach
after eating. Stitching pains in the stomach.

Colicky pains in the abdomen, ameliorated by walking about. Ten-
derness all over the abdomen, even hypogastrium. Gnawing pains in
the evening. Gnawing pains after food. Rumbling and gurgling in
the abdomen. Paroxysmal cramps during the night, ameliorated by
walking about. Stitching pains in the abdomen and liver.

Diarrhoea after coffee. Diarrhoea in chlorotic women subject to
sick headaches and menstrual irregularitievS. Watery, forcible stool,
odorless, brownish, yellow. Diarrhoea in the evening. Constipation ;
stool hard. Nausea. Colic before stool. Colic and urging after
stool. Haemorrhoids that bleed. Drawing, pressing pain about the
anus, as if a spot would suppurate.

Frequent urging to urinate. Ineffectual urging to urinate. Urine
profuse, watery. Flocculent sediment ; iridescent cuticle. Stitching
in the urethra with desire to urinate.

In the male the sexual desire is diminished. Irritable prostate
gland, with stitching pains ; urging to stool and urine (Nux).

Menses too soon, or too late ; irregular, or suppressed ; copious,
prolonged, or scanty. When profuse, the mental symptoms are better.
Flow black and clotted. Labor-like pains at the menstrual period,
commencing in small of back and running down each side of the
pubes. Uterine haemorrhage. Dread of open air. Menses sup-
pressed, palpitation of the heart, weeping, aversion to company and
dread of open air. Rush of blood to the head, and scanty flow.
Suppressed menses from over-exertion, or being overheated. Faint-
ing at the menstrual period. After menses, milk in mammae. Com-
plaints after weaning {China).

Much scraping in the larynx at night, thick, white mucus. Tickling
in the larynx and trachea. Oppression of chest. Suffocative cough,
caused by scraping and dryness in the trachea. Cough comes on
during sleep, from dryness and constriction of larynx. Cough ameli-



436 DIGITAU^

orated in the open air, even in a cold wind*

Pressure in the middle of the sternum. Weakness in the chest.
Stitching in the chest and heart. Tearing, stitching, and shortness of
breath during motion and rest.

Palpitation and anaemic murmurs. Tumultuous action of the heart;
great lassitude. Weak pulse. Sensation as if air streamed from
nipples. Mammae swollen, containing milk in non-pregnant women.
Mammae swollen and very hard after menses.

Drawing pains in the neck, with stiffness. Twinges up the back,
ameliorated by drawing the shoulders back. Stitching in the region
of the right kidney, worse during inhalation. Pain in the small of
the back while sitting, ceases on rising.

Tearing, drawing pains in the limbs. Hypera\sthesia of the skin.
Flabby muscles. Tearing, drawing in the upper limbs. Sensation
of weakness of the hands, as if she must let fall what she holds in hei^
hands. Writer’s cramp. Drawing pains in flexors of the leg. Burn-
ing sore pain in heels. Toes feel dead after walking. Weakness in
the limbs.

Sleep not restful, disturbed by anxious dreams ; frightful, vivid
dreams. Restless sleep. Late falling asleep. Wakens early, but
wants to sleep late. Nightmare. Wakens early, but too tired and
sleepy, cannot rise. Pollutions in dreams

Chill, fever and sweat. Chill not ameliorated by warm clothing.
Chilliness during menses. Chill forenoon or evening. Chill pre-
dominates in the evening. Heat of face follows chill. Chill and heat
alternate. Sensation of heat through whole body, particularly in face
and hands. Heat, with swelling of the veins {Cfnna\ General heat
after eating. Sweat at night during sleep, offensive. Sweat some-
times on lower part of body.

Itching at night in bed. Numbness after scratching, or changing
places by scratching.

DIGITALIS

This drug as used by the Old School has done more mischief than
any one drug in their Materia Medica. Every patient who had a
fast heart, or anything the matter with the heart, was given Digitalis,
It has caused more deaths than any drug. If administered when the
heart is going fast it will soon produce a peculiar kind of paralysis ;
the heart then having lost its balance-wheel, compensation gives out,
the patient sinks and finally dies. They do not know that many
patients would have lived through fevers, pneumonia and other acute
diseases if it had not been for this medicine, used as they have used it
in the tincture, in many-drop doses, until the heart was slowed down.



DIGITALIS


437 .


They call it sedative ; yes, it is a sedative. It makes the patient very
sedate. You have seen how very sedate a patient looks after he has
been in the hands of an undertaker and has on his best garments.
That is what Digitalis does. In that way it is a sedative in the hands
of the allopath. A homoeopathic physician never prescribes to bring
down the pulse. He prescribes for the patient and the heart’s action
takes care of itself.

Digitalis is a very poor fever medicine. Instead of being indicated
when the pulse is fast, the proving says it is indicated when the pulse
is slow. The allopath gives it when the pulse is fast to make it slow ;
if given to a well person it will make the pulse slow, and when indi-
cated in a sick person the pulse is slow.

It produces a great disturbance of the liver. “Congestion and en-
largement of the liver. Soreness of the liver.” Tenderness about
the liver — but during that time the pulse is slow. It makes the bowels
very sluggish, produces inactivity of the liver, and stools arc Idlcless,
light colored, putty-like — and the pulse is slow. Add to that jaun-
dice and you have a grand picture of Digitalis. Jaundice with slow
pulse, with uneasiness in the liver, pale stool, and even if you have
never seen or heard of Digitalis before you will scarcely miss it.
Now, you might add a myriad of little symptoms, but it does not
change the aspect of things. It is Digitalis.

Another group of symptoms that belongs with the Digitalis heart,
the Digitalis liver and the Digitalis bowels, is a gone, sinking feeling
in the stomach. It seems as if he would die, and he does not get
better from eating. It is a nervous, deal thy sinking that comes with
many heart troubles. You would not be surprised to find in Digi-
talis much nervous prostration. Restlessness and great nervous
weakness. “Feels as it would fly to pieces. Anxiety. Feels that
something is going to happen.” Seems as if his whole economy were
full of anxious feelings and restlessness. Lassitude, faintness,
exhaustion and extreme prostration. Faints on the slightest provoca-
tion. It begins in the stomach ; an awful sensation of weakness in the
stomach and bowels.

His sleep is full of horrible dreams, nightmare, fright. Dreams ot
falling — that is very common with cardiac affections. When the
pulse is too slow, when it is irregular, the brain is irregularly supplied
with blood during sleep, and there is a turbulent state. A shock goes
through the body like an electric shock, like internal jerkings, twitch-
ings. Sudden muscular movements, as if a current of electricity
passed through the body. This, with slow pulse, with a sense of
faintness, and great weakness. Bluish paleness of the lips in persons
who suffer at times with cardiac spells — it seems at times as if thq
pulse would cease. Face becomes blue, the fingers become blue. Wants



438 IMGITAUS

to lie on the back. Frequently startled in sleep ; jerking at night.

The heart symptoms are numerous, but none is so important as the
slow pulse. The pulse is slow in the beginning of the case. It may
now be flying like lighting. He is anxious, restless, has horrible
dreams and sinking in the stomach — that sounds like the advanced
stage of Digitalis — but I want to know if in the beginning, the pulse
was slow. The patient himself seldom knows, but someone says that
in the beginning the pulse was 48 ; that is Digitalis. If the pulse in
the beginning was rapid do not think of Digitalis, for it will not do
any good. The Digitalis pulse is at first slow and perhaps remains
so for many days, until finally the heart commences to go with a
quiver, with an irregular beat, intermits, feels as if it would cease to
beat, and then we have all these strange manifestations. Weakness
is the very character of the Digitalis pulse, and all these character^
istics go along with it. First it is slow, and sometimes strong. Slow,
strong pulse when rheumatism is threatening the heart. “Violent,
but not very rapid pulse. Sudden violent beating of the heart, with
disturbed rhythm.” The slightest motion increases anxiety and pal-
pitation. When the pulse is going very slow, sometimes down to 40,
the patient turns the head and the pulse flutters and increases in its
action. If he turns over in bed it seems as if the heart would stop.
If he moves he feels it fluttering all over him, and it settles back and
is slow again ; but, finally, it changes and flutters all the time.

Palpitation of the heart originating in grief. Sudden sensation as
though the heart stood still. Fluttering of the heart. The least
muscular exertion renders the heart's action labored and intermittent
— in a feeble heart. A person with an enlarged liver, with a slow
pulse, with jaundice and pale and stool. With that he will have a trouble-
some cough. Digitalis is not much of a remedy for a cough unless it
is a cardiac cough. Cough at midnight. Cough, with expectoration
of “boiled starch." Cough, with expectoration of bloody mucus in
hypostatic congestion of the lungs. Cough, brought on by talking,
walking, drinking anything cold, bending the body. These are coughs
associated with other troubles.

The • same thing is to be said of the respiration. There are diffl-
culties of respiration, along with cardiac troubles and liver troubles,
“Respiration irregular and performed with great difficulty. Con-
stant desire to take a deep breath. When he goes to sleep the breath
seems to fade away, then he wakes up with a gasp, Lachesis^ Phos^
phorus, Carbo veg, and some other remedies have that ; remedies that
affect the cerebellum particularly, producing a congestion of the cere-
bellum. When a patient goes to sleep the cerebrum says to the cere-
bellum: “Now you carry on this breathing a little while, I am getting
tired." But the cerebellum is not equal to the occasion. It is con-



DIGITALIS


439


gested, and just as soon as the cerebrum begins to rest the cerebellum
goes to sleep, too, and lets the patient suffer ; and in that way we get
suffocation. The cerebellum presides over respiration during sleep
and the cerebrum presides over respiration when the patient is awake.
We might learn that from the provings of medicines if we never
found it before.

‘Tear of suffocation at night/’ Now, to analyze that. He knows
from experience that every time he drops into a sleep he suffocates,
and hence he fears to go to sleep for fear he will suffocate. The fear
of suffocation at night is from this origin. It is the same if he falls
asleep in the day time. “Can only breathe in gasps.” Digitalis is a
useful medicine when there is a filling up of the lower part of the
lungs. The patient is sitting up in bed, and there is dullness in the
lower part of each lung and plenty of resonance in the upper portion.
Then it is, if he lies dowm, he will suffocate. Digitalis likes mostly to
lie flat on the back with no pillow, when there is no filling up of the
lungs. But when there is hypostatic congestion he suffocates. If
■early in the case the pulse was slow and it has become fast. Digitalis
may be of some benefit.

Now, a feature in connection with the genito-urinary organs. In
old cases of enlarged prostate gland I do not know what I would do
without Digitalis. Where there is a constant teasing to pass urine.
In many instances where the catheter has been used for months or
years because he is unable to pass uriiie in a natural way, and where
there is a residuary urine in old bachelors and old mem Digitalis is a
good remedy. It diminishes the size of the prostate gland and has
many times cured. “Dropsy with suppression of urine.” In uraemic
poisoning and in various phases of Bright's disease of the kidneys we
have symptoms indicating Digitalis. Re.eniion of urine : dribbling of
urine. Spermatorrhoea. Nightly emission. In persons addicted for years
to secret vices. Enlarged prostate gland.

It is capable of curing chronic gonorrheea. It has cured acute
gonorrhoea. It has cured inflammation of that thin, delicate mem-
brane covering the glans penis. Dropsical swelling of the genitals.

“Loss of appetite and violent thirst.” Most doctors give .Sulphur
when the patient drinks much and eats little. The nausea of Digitalis
is not like that of Ipecac, and Bryonia. It is a singular nausea. The
smell of food excites a deathly nausea, a sinking, a goneness, asso-
ciaed with cardiac troubles, with jaundice and liver troubles. The
nausea is accompanied by a deathly feeling, as if he is sinking away.
Sometimes the nausea is relieved by eating, but the sinking remains
after eating, showing that it is something besides hunger. “Persist-
ent nausea. Extreme sensitiveness in the pit of the stomach. Faint-
ness and sinking in the pit of the stomach as If he would die. No



440


DROSERA ROTUNDIFOLIA


appetite, but great thirst. Soreness and hardness in the region of
the liver. Sensitiveness to pressure in the region of the liver.'' Now
remember the liver and the heart symtoms, the jaundice, the slow
pulse, the awful sinking in the stomach, the enlargement of the
prostate gland, the gt’ay stool, and you have the principal symptoms
of Digitalis.

After all that I have said you are not surprised at the horrible
anxiety that the Digitalis patient carries with him all the time. He
wants to be alone ; sadness, melancholy, despondency and restlessness.
He can't decide upon anything that he ought to do ; tremulousness.
The stomach, bowel and liver troubles are just what you see some-
times in a hard drinker after trying to break off. He is prostrated ;
his heart gives out, is irregular, weak, slow ; and he has sadness and
melancholy : inability to apply himself. Digitalis will help him
straighten out.


DROSERA ROTUNDIFOLIA

The use of this medicine has been mostly limited to whooping-
cough, but it has a more extensive use. When we examine its spas-
modic nature, its exhaustion, its cramps, which extend through a large
number of complaints, we must realize that it is a more extensive
remedy. Epileptiform spasms, prolonged sleeplessness, copious
sw^cat on waking from sleep, restlessness and anxiety. Imagines that
he is constantly persecuted. Flashes of heat, dread of the night.
Many complaints come on in the night. Anxiety, sleeplessness, and
fear of ghosts. Spasmodic cough. Fear of l^eing alone and suspicious
of his most intimate friends. Confusion of mind and much dizziness.
Lancinating pains in various parts of the body, especially in the head,
and must support the head with the hands. Must support the chest
when coughing. Must press upon the abdomen. Pressive, congestive
headaches. Corrosive itching in various parts of the body with
mcaslc-like eruptions. The eyeballs become prominent and congested
from coughing during measles and in convulsions. Stiching pain in
the eyes. Noises in the ears, roaring, humming and drumming. Ear-
ache in children. Stitching in the cars. Bleeding from various
orifices, especially from the nose, throat, larynx, and chest when
coughing, in connection with the spasmodic coughs. Ordinarily the
face is pale and sunken with heat of the face and he has cold ex-
tremities, except when coughing, at which time the face becomes red,
congested, and purple like Bell, and Cupr, Stitching pains will be
found in many complaints. Putrid taste in the mouth is a common
symptom when it is found in phthisical conditions of the lungs, larynx,
and also in whooping cough. Bloody saliva and haemorrhage from



DROSERA ROTUNDIFOLIA


441


the mouth. Difficulty in swallowing solid foods. Constriction of
the throat and of the larynx and constriction of the cesophagus pre-
venting swallowing. Cramping constriction runs all through the
Temcdy. Cramping of the hands upon undertaking to hold on to
something. When grasping the broom handle. In the throat there
is burning and scraping. Stitching pains in the throat. The throat
is dark red or purple. I believe that Drosera has a clinical symptom
of great value. Scraping in the larynx and cough after eating. In
its proving it has cough after drinking. It has especially cough alter
eating and drinking cold things. This cough comes from tickling in
the larynx and constrictions in the larynx. Nausea and vomiting.
Vomiting of blood and bile in the morning and vomiting of mucus
and food when coughing. Coughing until he retches and vomits.
Constricting pains in the pit of the stomach. Constricting pains in
the sides of the abdomen. Colic after sour food. Perhaps the most
troublesome irritation found in this remedy is in the larynx, where
there will be found clutching, cramping, constricting, and burning.
Hoarseness and continued irritation causing coughing and continued
irritation and scraping of the larynx. Accumulation of mucus in the
larynx, dryness in the larynx, spasms of the epiglottis. Violent spas-
modic cough from tickling in the larynx. Violent tickling in the
larynx brings on cough, rousing him from wsleep, coming on every few
hours with increasing intensity making the remedy resemble whooping
cough, in which it has been very useftil. Sensation in the larynx like
a feather. Spasms of the larynx. Spasms of the extremities when
coughing. The cough is brought on fronx tickling, from accumula-
tion of mucus in the larynx. These conditions are found in phthisis
of the larynx, in whooping cough, in laryngitis, and in catarrh of the
larynx.

Spasmodic difficulties of the chest and larynx cause difficult breath-
ing and suffocation. Sensation as of something in the chest prevent-
ing breathing when talking or coughing. Difficult breathing and
cough coming after midnight. Difficult breathing especially on waking.
Not able to utter a sound. Difficult breathing and suffocating sensa-
tion, The face becomes purple from spasms in the larynx. Com-
pression of the chest. These attacks of suffocation come on with the
cough or come upon lying dowm. Asthmatic breathing from talking
and constriction in the larynx. Deep sounding, hoarse cough, rough
scraping cough, loud whooping cough, spasmodic whooping cough.
Violent constriction of the chest and muscles of the throat and larynx
wdth whooping cough. Whooping cough coming in paroxysms of two
or three hours, hut violently worse after lying down at night and
toward 3 o’clock in the morning. Most tormenting tickling in the
larynx urging to cough. Paroxysmal dry cough from tickling in the



442


DtJLCAMARA — ^BITTER SWEET.


larynx. Spasmodic cough, sympathetic cough from spinal irritation.
Violent spasmodic cough in young girls going into consumption.
Cough with expectoration of bright red or black clotted blood. Bloody
expectoration. These spasmodic coughs come often during measles
or after an attack of measles. An irritation in the larynx remains.
It is one of the most frequently indicated remedies for measles. Like
Carbo veg. Severe attacks of stitching in the chest when sneezing
or coughing. He must press on the chest with the hand for relief.
Makes an effort to hold chest with the hand when coughing, the cough
is so violent. Compression of the chest, burning sensation in the
chest, stitching pains in the chest. It is a very useful remedy in
chronic bronchitis with spasmodic cough. It is a great palliative for
the spasmodic cough that occurs in consumption and all along the
course of tuberculosis of the lungs. In these chest complaints, pains
between the shoulders, pains in the back as if bruised from coughing.
Coldness in the hands and feet and blueness of the extremities.
Cramps in the extremities with the cough. The cough becomes so
violent that the patient goes into convulsions. Along with these
spasmodic coughs especially in phthisical conditions there are febrile
attacks. Chill and chilliness and one-sided chill. Chill and fever
with whooping cough. Chill and fever with inflammation of the
larynx. The heat as well as the cough is worse after midnight.
Cold sweat on the forehead and on the extremities. Sweat over the
whole body following the fever. Copious sweat all over the whole
body with the cough. The cough ends in great exhaustion. Whooping
cough with fever.


DULCAMARA— BITTER SWEET

This medicine seems especially to affect the mucous membranes.
It appears to have a tendency to establish or ultimate discharges, both
acute and chronic.

The Dulcamara patient is disturbed by every change in the weather,
from warm to cold, from dry to moist, and from suddenly cooling the
body while perspiring. He is ameliorated in dry, even weather; cold
and damp aggravate all the conditions. He is worse evening and
night and during rest.

Dulcamara produces catarrh of the stomach, intestines, nose, eyes,
ears, and inflammatory conditions of the skin with eruptions. If you
go through any of these in detail, you will be astonished to find how
disturbed is the constitutional state of this patient by weather changes.

It is a medicine wonderfully useful in diarrhoea, at the close of the
summer, hot days and cold nights, with changeable stool; diarrhoea
of infants. There seems to be no digestion ; yellow, slimy stool ;



DUU:AMARA— BITTER SWEET.


443


yellow-green stool, with undigested stool ; frequent stool, blood in
the stool and quite a mass of slime, showing a marked catarrhal state.
This gets better and worse ; this gets better under ordinary remedies ;
it will often get better from Pulsatilla, because Pulsatilla symptoms
seem to predominate, and sometimes It is relieved by Ariiica ; but
every time the child takes cold, it comes back again, and soon the
physician will realize that he has not struck the remedy belonging to
all the symptoms. It is very often an annoying condition, because the
symptoms are not recognized until two or three attacks liave come.
It is not easy to discover that the attacks come on from cold.

Every year women bring their babies back from the mountains, at
the end of the season, and then we get some Dulcamara cases. One
needs to be in the mountains at the close of the summer season to
know what the condition is. If you go into the mountains at such a
time, either in the North or West, you will notice that the sun's rays
beat down during the day with great force, but along towards sunset
if you walk out a draft of cold air comes down that will chill you to
the bone. This will make the baby sick ; it is too warm to take the
child out in the middle of the day, and so he is taken out in his car-
riage in the evening ; he has been overheated in the house during the
day, and then catches this draft in the evening. Dulcamara is suit-
able for conditions that would arise from just such a state. So with
an adult who has been out in the heat of the sun and catches the cold
draft by night, which means hot days and cold nights, such as occur
in the fall of the year, at the close of the summer and coming in of
the winter ; this intermingling of hot air and cold drafts. You go up
towards the foot of the hills after a hot day, you will walk through
a stratum of air that will make you perspire and the next minute a
cold air that will make you want your overcoat on, and then again a
stratum of hot air and so on. Such a state will bring out a sweat
and then suppress it. The symptoms that come from Dulcamara
seem to be like symptoms that airse from just such causes. And we
are free, then, to infer from such an experience that Dulcamara cures
these cases. I have been puzzled in times past over these babies that
have been brought home from the mountains, and have prescribed
upon the visible symptoms, until I thought about the matter carefully
and figured it out that they had come from these hot and cold regions.
Babies have to be hurried home at times, because of the diarrhoeas
that cannot be cured in the mountains, but a dose of Dulcamara will
enable them to stay there and live right in that same climate. Chronic
recurrent dysentery from cold. If they have a dose of Dulcamara
it fortifies them against the continual taking of cold.

There are people in a certain kind of business that really constitute
a Dulcamara state. Suppose we look at our ice-cream men and our



444


DULCAMARA— -BITTER SWEET.


ice handlers and cold storage men ; in a cold room they are handling
ice; the summer weather is hot, they must go out and take some of
the heat, and then they go back into their cold rooms and handle the
ice, I have seen these things and have had occasion to follov/ them
out. These men are subject at times to bowel troubles, and othei
catarrhal affections, but generally to diarrhoeic affections. Their
business cannot stop because it is their means of living. Dulcamara
cures such chronic diarrhoeas when the symptoms agree. Arsenicum
is a medicine that would be suitable for such patients if the symptoms
agreed, but the symptoms at times agree with Dulcamara, for that is the
nature of the remedy, to take cold from cold, damp places, from sup*
pressing a sweat, from going out of a hot atmosphere into an icc house,
into icy rooms ; into cold rooms ; in this climate such complaints as come
on from overexertion, overheating, and then throwing off the clothing
and becoming chilled, suppressing the sweat ; fevers may come on,
aching in the bones, trembling with the aching, trembling in the
muscles, and as the fever goes on, he is in a distressed state, cannot
remember, forgets what he was about to speak of, forgets the word
that would naturally express his idea, and he enters into a dazed
state, a state of confusion. It suits these colds that have this slug-
gish circulation of the brain, with trembling and chilliness, coldness
as if in the bones.

Dulcamara is full of rheumatism, full of rheumatic pains and aches,
sore and bruised all over, the joints are inflamed, become red, sensi-
tive to touch and are swollen. It is suitable in cases of inflammatory
rheumatism, due to suppressed perspiration, induced by changing
from a high to low temperature, or from cold, wet weather. Worse
evening and night and during rest.

Now, it has many chronic complaints. A catarrhal condition of the
eyes, purulent discharges, thick, yellow discharges, granular lids ;
eyes become red every time he takes cold ; ‘‘every time he takes cold
it settles in the eyes,'" is a common expression of the patient. The
patient will often ask the question, “Why is it, doctor, that every time
I take cold it settles in my eyes? If I get into a cold atmosphere, or
take off my coat after being heated, 1 have to look out.” If it be-
comes cold in the night and he has thrown the clothes off, he takes
cold, or, if a cold rain comes on, he takes cold and then has sore eyes.
Such eyes are very often effectually cured by Dulcamara. As to the
eye itself, it is only an ordinary catarrhal state, but the manner in
which it comes on is the important thing. That is the nature of the
patient to have sore eyes whenever he takes cold ; it belongs to some
other remedies as well, but this one particularly.

Dulcamara has also catarrhal discharges from the nose, with bloody
crusts ; blowing out thick, yellow mucus all the time. In infants and



DULCAMARA — ^BITTER SWEET.


W


children who have sniffles, they are always worse in cold, damp
weather. When the patient says: “Doctor, in cold, damp weather
I cannot breathe through my nose ; my nose stuffs up or, “1 must
sleep with my mouth open/* Dulcamara is a very uselul remedy to
know in catarrhal cases that always stuff up w^hen there is a cold rain.

It is markedly an autumnal remedy. The Dulcamara patients go
through the summer very comfortably ; their catarrhal condiiicns to a
great extent pass away ; the warm days and warm nights, because of
the even temperature, seem to agree with them, bur as soon as the cold
nights come on and the cold rains come, all their difficulties return ;
there is an increase of the rheumatism and of the catarrhal discharges.
This medicine has been used a long time by our mothers. They used
to make ointments out of Dulcamara. You will find that the old
ladies, in almost any rural district in which Dulcamara growls, gather
it and make it into a salve for ulcers. Well, it is astonishing how
soothing it is when applied externally to smarting wounds, whether in
solution or salve or any other way. But it is a better medicine, of
course, when indicated by symptoms of the constitutional state ; it is
a better medicine if used internally. It produces ulcers and a ten-
dency to ulceration of the mucous membranes and this condition will
become phagedenic. Sometimes it starts as nothing more than an
herpetic eruption, but it spreads and finally yellow pus forms and then
the granulations that should come, do not come : an eating condition
appears and the surface does not heap. Kspecially along the shin bone
there will be raw places, which even' extend to the periosteum, to the
bone, producing necrosis and caries ; so we have affections of the
mucous membranes or skin, first becoming vesiculated and then break-
ing open and eating. It is especially related to very sensitive, bleeding
ulcers with false granulations, phagedenic ulcers. This is not gen-
erally known ; it is a matter of experience with those that have watched
this medicine ; and again, strange to say, Arseiiiciini, which I have
already mentioned once or twice, has this state. Arsenicum leads all
other medicines for ulcers that eat, phagedenic ulcers. Arsenicum is
a typical remedy for spreading sores, for spreading ulcers, and espe-
cially those that conic from a bubo that has opened and will not heal.

Another feature of this medicine is its tendency to throw out erup-
tions over the body. It is a wonderfully eruptive medicine, producing
vesicles, crusts, dry, brown crusts, humid crusts, herpes. Dulcamara
produces eruptions so nearly like impetigo that it has been found a
useful remedy in that condition, i.e., multiple little hoiUike eruptions ;
it produces little boils, and the boils spread* Enlargement and hard-
ness of the glands. Eruptions upon the scalp that look so much
like crusta lactea that Dulcamara has been found a very useful medi-
cine. Extreme soreness, itching, and the itching is not relieved by



44^ DULCAMARA— BmEfiL SWEEt.

scratcJling, and the scratching goes on until bleeding and rawness take
place. Eruptions that come out upon the face, upon the forehead, all
over the nose, but especially on the cheeks, which become completely
covered with these crusts ; eczema of infants. Children only a few
weeks old break out with these scalp eruptions, and Dulcamara is one
of the medicines that you will need to know. It is about as frequently
indicated as any of the medicines. Sepia, Arsenicum, Graphites, Dul-
camara, Petroleum, Sulphur and Calcarea are about equally indicated,
but of these, in this climate at least, I think Sepia is probably more fre-
quently indicated.

All of these catarrhal symptoms, the rheumatic symptoms, the erup-
tions upon the skin, are subject to the peculiar aggravations of the con-
stitutional state. No matter what the symptoms are. the constitutional
state is worse in cold, damp weather.

‘‘Catarrhal and rheumatic headaches in cold, damp weather." When
the headache is the main trouble, the catarrh takes a different course
from what it does when the catarrh is the principal ailment. There
are two ways in which that conducts itself. In some Dulcamara pa-
tients, whenever he takes cold from the cold, damp weather, he com-
mences to sneeze, and to get a coryza, and soon comes a copious, thick,
yellow flow from the nose. On the other hand. Dulcamara has a dry
catarrh in its first stage, and a fluid catarrh only in the second stage.
One who is subject to Dulcamara headaches, has the dry catarrh ;
whenever he takes cold instead of the usual catarrhal flow with it, he
at first sneezes and then feels a dryness in the air passages, a slacking
up of the usual discharge, which would give him relief, and then he
knows that he must look out, for along will come the neuralgic pains,
pains in the occiput, and finally over the whole head. Congestive head-
aches, with neuralgic pains and dry nose. Every spell of cold, damp
weather will bring on that headache. The catarrh is not always acute
enough for him to pay attention to it. He does not say very much
about it. The Dulcamara headache is very severe, is accompanied by
tremendous pains, and he may go to the doctor with the idea of get-
ting rid of the headache, but it is a catarrhal state that is suppressed,
that has slackened up, and the nose becomes dry. As soon as the flow
starts up his headache is relieved. Then headache of this catarrhal
kind that comes on from every cold, damp spell, or from getting over-
heated, from getting into a cold draft after being overheated, or get
ting overheated with too much clothing, and then throwing the coat
off, will also belong to the Dulcamara state.

A form of eruption that is very likely to be a Dulcamara eruption
is the ringworm, herpes circinatus. It comes sometimes upon the face
and scalp. Children sometimes have ringworms in the hair. Dul-
camara will nearly always cure these ringworms in the hair.



DtHLCAMAHA— BITTER SWEET.


447


The Dulcamara child is very susceptible to earache.

‘'Coryza dry, relieved by motion, worse during rest, and renewed by
the slightest exposure, and worse in cold air.’* Some coryzas cannot
tolerate the warm room, and others want a warm room. The Dul-
camara coryza is worse going out in the open air and better from mo-
tion. The Nux vomica coryza is better in the open air. The patient
feels much aching distress in the nose. The Nux vomica patient ordi-
narily wants warmth and warm air and a warm room, but with the
coryza he is the very opposite ; he wants motion in the open air, he
looks for coo] air, for it relieves the distressing sensation. In the
warm room there is a tickling sensation in the nose, and the nose will
drip, night and day. The Nux vomica coryza is w’orse in the house,
and worse in the night, and worse in the warm bed, so that the dis-
charge will run all over the pillow. In Dulcamara it is more fluent in
the house, in the warmth, and less fluent in the cold air in a cold room.
With the Dulcamara coryza, if the patient should go into a cold room
pain will commence in the nasal bones and he will begin to sneeze, and
water will be discharged from the nose. That very state would re-
lieve a Nux vomica patient. Allium cepa is made tvorse in a warm
room ; like Nux vomica, is better in cold, open air. Commences to
sneeze as soon as he gets into a warm room. So that we see the mean-
ing of such things, the necessity of going into particulars and examin-
ing every case.

Here is a state that you will often! find in the fall of the year, some-
where about August 20th. They soiiietimes call it hay fever. Every
year as the nights become cold, and there is cold, damp weather and
fall rains, he has a stuffing up of tl-e nose with constant sneezing and
wants the nose kept warm. I have known these cases at times to sit in
a warm room with cloths, wrung out of hot water, over the face and
nose to relieve the distress, the catarrhal state of the eyes and the
stuffing up of the nose. Heat relieves the stuffing up of the nose . These
patients can sometimes breathe with these hot cloths over the nose, but
if they go out into the night air, or a cold place, and especially if there
is a damp, fall rain, they suffer much. Other cases of hay fever suffer
during the day, and they go to as cold a place as they can find, and are
even driven to the mountains for a cool place. These things arc in-
dicative of a state of the constitution ; the state gives out signs and
symptoms to lead the intelligent physician to cure. If that state had no
means of making itself known by signs and symptoms, there could be
no curing it by remedies.

“Profuse discharge of water from the nose and eyes, worse in the
open air,^’ “better in a closed room, on awakening in the morning,
etc. The Dulcamara patient is so sensitive to newly mown grass and
drying weeds, that he is obliged to absent himself from the country



448


DULCAMARA — ^BITTER SWEET,


where they are found. For hay fever we have especially to look up
such remedies as have complaints worse in the fall of the year. There
are other conditions that are just as much hay fever, for instance,
“rose cold’' that comes on in June. There arc other conditions that
come on in the spring, sometimes cured by Naja and Lachesis, So
that we have to observe the time of the year, the time of the day, night
or day aggravations ; the wet and the dry remedies, the hot and the
cold remedies. We have to study the remedy by circumstances.

The Dulcamara patient often becomes a sickly patient, with threat-
ening of the catarrhal discharges to centre in the bronchial tubes, z.e.,
in the mucous membrane of the breathing apparatus. Many adults
die of acute phthisis that might have been cured by Dulcamara, and
you will find very commonly among this class of patients those that
are worse from every cold, damp spell of w^eather. Such enter right
into the Dulcamara sphere. They are better by going South where
there is a continuously wann climate. The Dulcamara patient is a
sickly patient, threatened with acute phthisis ; pallid face, sickly yellow
and sallow. This shows tliat it goes deeply into the life, creating such
disorders as are found in very sick patients, i. c\y those chronically
sick, in persons whose vital economy is so much disordered that it
cannot keep the body in repair.

The throat comes in for its share of trouble. Persons who in every
cold damp spell have a sore throat, from getting overheated, throwing
off the wraps, getting into a cold place. The Dulcamara patient says :
“Well now, I know I am fixed : I am now chilled ; I begin to feel
hoarseness in my throat.” On comes the sore throat ; it fills with
mucus, with yellow slime ; the tonsils become inflamed ; even quinsy
comes on. Or it may affect the throat uniformly ; it may become red
and inflamed and dry at times, and at other times filled with mucus,
and at night the throat fills with thick, yellow, tough mucus, which
is hawked up in great quantities. These colds that settle first in the
nose and throat, post-nasal catarrh, of the very worst sort, gradually
creep on until the wiiolc respiratory apparatus is in a state of catarrhal
dnflammation. Every cold that he takes aggravates his catarrh
wherever that may be. If it be in the nose, then the nose is aggra-
vated ; if in the chest, then those parts are aggravated. A continual
rousing up. Every experienced physician must have met with many
cases where for a time he felt unable to cope with the case because
of his inability to reach the constitutional state that underlies this
continual taking cold. So he puzzles, for a long time, and prescribes
on the immediate attack and palliates it. For instance, the immediate
attack might look like Belladonna or Bryonia, Ferrum phos, or Arseni-
cum, etc.: he treats that attack without taking into consideration the
underlying constitutional state of the patient. It is quite a profitable



OULC4NURA— BITTEK SWEET


449


business for one who has not much conscience and not much intelli-
gence. But a conscientious physician feels worried and knows he is
not doing what he ought to do by his patient, unless he reaches out
for the remedy which touches the constitution. It is far more useful
to keep people from taking colds than to cure colds.

There is a form of acute Bright's disease that Dulcamara cures.
You can probably now surmise from what we have said of the nature
of the remedy, that in cases of Bright's disease following scarlet
fever, or from malaria, or in any acute disease that has ended badly,
i e., the patient has been exposed to the cold too soon, and has taken
‘"cold,” or from sudden change of weather, damp and cold, the feet
commence to swell, there is albumin in the urine, the limbs are waxy,
the face becomes waxy and sallow, and there is constant urging to
urinate. Dulcamara, with other constitutional symptoms, will be
suitable.

In bladder catarrh, where there is a copious discharge of mucus, or
muco-pus in the urine ; when the urine stands, a thick, purulent sedi-
ment, yellowish-white, and a constant urging to urinate ; every time
he takes a little cold, the urine becomes bloody, the frequency of
urination is increased, the urine becomes irritating, the catarrh of the
bladder rouses up like a flame, all the symptoms are worse in cold,
damp weather, and from getting chilled ; better from becoming warm.
So you see whether it is a catarrh of the kidney or a catarrhal state
of the bladder, or an attack of dysentery, or an attack of sudden diar-
rheea, every cold spell of the weatbet brings on an increase of the
trouble.

There is another Dulcamara symptom which will often be expressed
suddenly in the midst of a lot of other symptoms. After you have
been hunting for a long time, the patient will say: ‘‘Doctor, if I get
chilled, I must hurry to urinate ; if I get into a cold place, I have to
go to stool, or to urinate.” So we see that the symptoms come on
when the patient is cold, and are better when he is warm. Any
catarrhal trouble of the bladder that is better in the summer and worse
in the winter.

In dry, teasing coughs that are winter "'colds," that go away in the
summer and return in the winter. Psorinum has a dry, teasing,
winter cough. Arsenicum has a winter cough.

"Rash comes out upon the face before the menses.” "As a fore-
runner of catamenia, with extraordinary sexual excitement, herpetic
eruptions.” Its "cold” sores are very troublesome. The patients
are subject to these "cold” sores upon the lips and upon the genitals.
Every time he takes “cold,” herpes labialis, herpes preputialis.
"Catarrhal ailments in cold, damp weather.” "Mammae engorged,
hard, sore and painful.” "Mammary glands swollen, inactive, pain-

57



450 EirpATORIUM PERFOUATIJM (BONESET)

less, itching, in consequence of a ‘cold’ which seems to have settled
in them.”

“Cough, from damp, cold, atmosphere, or from getting wet.”
“Cough, dry, hoarse and rough, or loose, with copious expectoration
of mucus and dull hearing ; catarrhal fever." The cough is worse
lying and in a warm room and better in the open air.

Rheumatic lameness and stiffness in the back from taking cold
better by motion. Drawing pain in the lumber region extending to
the lower limbs during rest. Stiff neck from every exposure to cold.
Stitching, tearing, rheumatic pains in limbs after exposure to cold, better
by motion, worse at night or in the evening, with some fever. Sore,
bruised feeling all over the body. Warts on hands, fingers and face.

EUPATORIUM PERJFOLIATUM (BONESET)

Every time 1 take up one of these old domestic remedies I am
astonished at the extended discoveries of medical properties in the
household as seen in their domestic use. All through the Eastern
States, in the rural districts, among the first old settlers, Boneset-tea
was a medicine for colds For every cold in the head, or running
of the nose, every bone-ache or high fever, or headache from cold,
the good old housewife had her Boneset-tea ready. Sure enough it
did such things, and the provings sustain its use. The proving shows
that Boneset produces upon healthy people symptoms like the colds
the old farmers used to suffer from.

The common winter colds through the Eastern States and the North
arc attended with much sneezing and coryza, pain in the head, as if
it would burst, which is aggravated from motion, chilliness with the
desire to be warmly covered ; the bones ache as if they would break ;
there is fever, thirst, and a general aggravation from motion. Such
common everyday colds correspond sometimes to Eupatorium and
sometimes to Bryonia. These two remedies are very similar, but the
aching in the bones is marked in Eupatorium. If this state goes on
for a few days the patient will become yellow, the cold will settle in
the chest, a pneumonia may develop, or an inflammation of the liver,
or ah attack commonly called a bilious fever. Such fevers frequently
call for Bryonia and Eupatorium, each fitting its own cases. These
remedies are especially useful throughout New England, New York,
Ohio, the North and Canada. They do not have this kind of a cold
very frequently in the warmer climates, but Eupatorium is often in-
dicated in the warmer climates for fevers, yellow fever, bilious fever,
break-bone fever and intermittent fever. It seems to be useful in
one kind of complairits in one climate and in another kind of com-
plaints in another climate.



EUPAl’OKIUM PERFOUATUM (BONESET)


45 *


In the Southwest and the West, in the valleys of the great rivers,
Eupatorium cures complaints beginning as if the back would break,
great shivering from head to toot spreading from the back, great
sensitiveness to cold, congestive headaches, ilushed face, yellow skin
and yellow eyes, pain in the abdomen, and in the region of the liver,
inability to retain any food, nausea from the sight and smell of food ;
the bones ache as if they would break, the fever runs high, the urine
is of a mahogany color, the longue is heavily coated yellow, and there
is nausea and vomiting of bile, riiat gives the picture of Eupatorium
in the Mississippi Valley, in the Ohio Valley, in Florida and Alabama,
and all through the Southern States. The most prominent symptoms
are the vomiting of bile, the aching of the bones as if they would
break, the pains in the stomach after eating, and the nausea from the
thought and smell of food. The stomach is very irritable ; the thought
of food gags him. The patient desires to keep still, but the pain is so
severe that he must move and so he appears restless. These are
among the acute manifestations, and arc things only veiy general that
we must take up and apply to sick people.

Eupatorium has been a very useful remedy in intermittent fever,
when epidemic in the valleys. Among the first signs is nausea some
time before the attack, and there are sometimes spells of vomiting of
bile. About seven or nine o’clock in the forenoon, he commences to
shudder, the shivering runs down back and spreads from the back
to the extremities ; he has violent t^iirst, but the shiverings are made
w^orsc from drinking so that he cfeiie not drink cold water. There is
soreness and pulsation in the back of the head, violent pain in the
occiput and back before and during the chill. During the chill he
wants to cover up and the clothing needs to be piled on. The thirst
extends through all the stages. At the close of the chill there is
vomiting ; often it docs not occur until the heat, but before the sweat
fairly sets in he vomits copiously, first the contents of the stomach and
then bile. When the heat is on he seems to burn all over, sometimes
as though with electric sparks. Intense heat, burning in the top of
the head, his feet burn and his skin burns. The burning is more
intense than the heat would justify. It is characteristic of this remedy
for the sweat to be scanty ; a violent chill, intense fever which passes
off slowly, and very scanty sweat. The bones ache as if they would
break. During the chill his head aches as if it would burst, it throbs,
it tears, it stings, it burns ; he describes the headache in terms express-
ive of violence, as if probably a congestive headache. One would
think after the fever subsides and he commences to sweat a little that
he would get relief, which is true excepting the headache, which often
gets worse clear through to the end of the attack, and sometimes it
win last all day and night; then he will have a whole day free from



45 ^


EUPATORIUM PERFOUATUM (BONESET)


the headache, but on the third day at seven or nine o'clock on will
come the same trouble with increasing violence. At times these
attacks are prolonged, the one will extend into the other, that is
enter into a sort of remittent charactei with no intermission. The
longer this runs the more the liver becomes engorged, and finally the
urine is loaded with bile, the stool becomes whitish, the fever increases,
the nausea increasing, the tongue becomes pointed and elongated, and
is dry, the headache is extremely painful, and a state of masked fever
comes on.

In those intermittent fevers that begin with violent shaking, and the
headache continues without sweat, or, if with sweat the headache is
made worse, thirst during all stages, vomiting of bile at the close of
the heat or during the heat, with the awful boneaches, the Western
men, who study their Materia Medica, know that they have a sure
cure in Eupatorium. The time for the administration of this dose is
at the close of the paroxysm. You get the best effect when reaction
is at the best, and that is when reaction is setting in, after a paroxysm
has passed off. That is true of every paroxysmal disease, where it
is possible to wait until the end. You cannot mitigate them very
much during the attack, indeed, if the medicine is given then it very
often increases the difficulty, but if you wait until the close of the
paroxysm you get the full benefit of your medicine, and the next
paroxysm will not develop, or will be lighter, or, if another attack is
brought on immediately you may rest assured there will be no more.
It is not an uncommon thing in intermittent fever, when the remedy
has been administered at the close of the paroxysm, for the next
paroxysm to come within twenty-four hours after the administration
of the medicine ; these mixed cases are often in a state of disorder.
One who does not know this would immediately show the white
feather, would be alarmed, would be afraid the patient was getting
worse, but you have only to wait for ihe subsidence of the attack and
you will see that you have broken its cycle and periodicity.

When this remedy has been apparently indicated by intermittents,
and it has not proved of sufficient depth to root out the intermittent,
there arc two remedies, either of which is likely to follow it, and these
arc Natrum muriaticum and Sepia, These two remedies are very
closely related to Eupatorium and take up the work where it leaves
off, when the symptoms agree.

This medicine has also a chronic constitutional state, viz. : its gouty
nature. It is a very useful medicine in gout. It has gouty soreness
and inflamed nodosities of the finger joints, of the elbow joint, pain
and gouty swelling of the great toe, red tumefaction of the joint of
the great toe. It establishes, in persons who are subject to chalk
stone, deposits around the finger joints. These gouty subjects take



EUPATORICM PBRFtHJATUM (BONESHI)


4S3


cold, the bones ache, the joints become inflamed, the patient will say
he is chilly, the skin becomes yellow, the mine is charged with bile,
the stool becomes whitish, and he becomes weak. In many instances
these patients have been for years resorting to Burgundy for relief
of their gouty joints and the weakness. Some one of our homoeo-
pathic remedies will relieve the suffering, but in those old gouty sub-
jects who have been always drinking wine, you cannot take the wine
away from them at once ; you cannot do it while they are having the
attack, because they have become so accustomed to it. Burgundy is
the kind of wine very commonly used by the gouty, but the Scotch-
man with his gout thinks he must always have a little Scotch whiskey
and in the attack it is quite impossible to take it away from him. What
has been his custom must be followed out for a while because he
would grow weaker, but it is damaging him, and hence it is difficult
to contend with gouty subjects who have been taking stimulants. You
do not get the full ^nefit of Homoeopathy and you cannot stop his
stimulants because weakness will follow. Persons who have not
taken wine as a regular beverage can and should do without it, as it
interferes with the action of the homoeopathic remedy.

These gouty patients have terrible sick headaches. Pain in the base
of the brain and back of the head, associated with gouty joints. These
are often referred to as arthritic headaches, that is, gouty headaches,
headaches associated with painful joints. Or the headaches may
alternate with pains in the joints. Congestive headaches, the pain
being in the base of the brain, more or less throbbing ; the pain
spreads up through the head and produces a general congestive
attack. Sometimes these headaches come on when the joints are feel-
ing better, and the more headache he has the less pain he has in the
extremities ; and again, when the gout affects the extremities, then the
headaches diminish. Headaches, having a third and seventh-day
aggravation, coming with more or less periodicity. With the head-
ache there will be nausea and vomiting of bile, nausea at the thought
and smell of food. This gouty individual is also subject to vertigo,
and the sensation as if he would fall to the left is especially noted
with the coming on of the headache. The vertigo comes on in the
morning ; when he gets up he feels as if he would sway to the left,
and he has to guard himself in turning to the left. Sometimes in
intermittent fever this symptom of swaying to the left and vertigo
ending in nausea and vomiting, violent pain in the back of the head
and pain in the bones, are the first threatenings.

Wc have in this remedy also other gouty manifestations: shooting
through the temples, shooting from the left to the right side of the
head ; shooting ^ through the head ; stitching, tearing pains in the
limbs as well as the bone aches. The headaches are so violent that



-154


eupatorujm perfolutum (boneset)


they make him sick at the stomach. In gouty headaches, in inter-
mittents at the close of the intense heat, in periodical headaches, the
course is the same, the pain is so intense that nausea is soon brought
on and then he vomits bile. Eupatorium has not been used on its
symptoms in gouty states as often as it might have been. In inter-
mittent fever it is well known ; in headaches it is only occasionally
used. Only occasionally does a man realize its great benefit in head-
aches and in remittent fevers. In gouty and rheumatic affections it
may be suited to the symptoms and is more useful than is generally
known. It is not the purpose of our talks to point out ultimates of
disease. I do not look upon gout as a disease, but as a great class of
symptoms of a rheumatic character that occur in the human family ;
a great mass of symptoms that may be called gouty, a tendency to
enlargement of the joints and gouty deposits in the urine. The ordi-
nary so-called lithaemia is a gouty constitution. The gouty state of
the economy is the superficial or apparent cause ; the real cause rests
in the miasm. So when I speak of gout I do not mean the name of
a disease, but a class of manifestations that are met in large cities
especially, less frequently in the country where the people live on
farms and take plenty ot exercise and have wholesome food and are
not housed up. It is supposed to be due to wine drinking. Often
when I say to patients that the symptoms arc somewhat gouty, they
reply, “I am not in the habit of drinking wine. I have not been a
high liver.’’ Such conditions of course bring on a tendency to gout.

Painful soreness in the eyeballs like Bryonia and GeUemium. The
eyeballs are very senstive to touch and sore to pressure ; feel as If
he had been struck a blow in the eye ; sore, bruised, pain in the eye.
Coryza w^tih aching in every bone.

With the bilious attacks there often may be an ending m a diar-
rhoea ; copious green discharges, green fluid or semi-fluid stools, but
after the attack has lingered until there is one grand emptying out of
the bowels, this vsymptom will disappear and the secondary state
comes on in which tliere is constipation and a light-colored stool, or
bilelcss stool.

Boneset has a dry, hacking, teasing cough, that seems to rack the
whole frame, as if it would break him up, it is so sore, and he so
much disturbed by motion. A great amount of tribulation is found
in the respiratory tract, in the bronchial tubes. We find a cough in
capillary bronchitis that shakes the whole frame, analogous to Bryonia
and Phosphorus. The subject is extremely sentitive to the cold air,
as much so as in Nux vomica. Nux vomica havS aching in the bones
as if they would break ; he wants the room hot, and wants to be cov-
ered with clothing which relieves ; often the slightest lifting of the
covers increases the chilliness, which is true also of Eupatorium, so



EUPATORUIM PERKOLUni.M (bONESET)


455


they run close together. In Nux vomica wc have the dreadful irrita-
bility of temper ; in Eupatorium wc have overwhelming sadness. The
Nux vomica patient is nor likely to say much about dying, he is too
irritable to go into the next world : not so with Kupaiorium, he is full
of sadness.

There are other states that comes on secondarily in this medicine.
After malarial attacks and in gouty affections, etc., there is bloating
of the lower limbs, oedematous swelling. It is not an uncommon thing
for a malarial fever that has lingered a long time to he attended with
swelling of the lower limbs. Eupatorium very strongly competes
with Natrum rriuriaticum, China ^ and Arsenicum in such lingering
malaria. When the symptoms have largely subsided and left only
this state of anaemia and dropsy of the lower extremities, in the badly
treated cases, it is very difficult to find \vhat medicine to administer,
and the course that the homoeopath must pursue is to go back and
examine the patient to find the symptoms he had at the time of the
intermittent fever, before he was meddled with. If now there is
swelling of the extremities, and you get symptoms to show you that
he needed Eupatorium in the beginning, Eupatorium will still cure
the dropsy of the extremities. It may bring back the chill, it may
bring back an orderly state that you can prescribe on. If in the
beginning he needed Arsenicum, that remedy will bring back the chill,
turn it right end to and cure his symptoms. The trouble is that the
symptoms were only suppressed, had not been cured. So the medi-
cine he needed, but has never had for the chill, may be the medicine
that he needs now. Then think of; Eupatorium in dropsical sw^ellings
of the feet and ankles, and in gouty swellings also. The gouty sw^ell-
iiigs are all of an inflammatory character. Very commonly these arc
closely related to hydrarthrosis, and here Eupatorium is to be com-
pared with Arsenicum. Gouty inflammation of the knee. All the
way through this remedy you read about bone-aches and bone pains.

It is peculiar that medicines come around on time wdth an exacti-
tude. Diseases do the same thing, and wc must see that it is also
peculiar that they come with a regular cycle, a regular periodicity.
We meet with headaches that come every seven days, headaches also
that come once in tw^o weeks, and there are remedies that have seven-
day aggravations and fourteen-day aggravations and three-day aggra-
vations, remedies that bring out their symptoms just in this form.
Do not be surprised when your patient is prcfectly under the influence
of Aurum if he has a characteristic aggravation every rvventy-onc
days. There are quite a number of remedies having fourteen-clay
aggravations, e, g., CJiina and Arsenicum. Again, there arc autumnal
aggravations, spring aggravations, winter aggravations, aggravations
from cold weather and aggravations in the summer from heat. Some



45<^ SUPaSAj^

remedicB have both the latter.


EUPHRASIA

Euphrasia is a short acting remedy of great usefulness in acute
catarrhal affections with or without fever. Headaches that occur
with coryza and eye symptoms, head aches in the evening as if
bruised. Stitching pain in the head. Head aches as if the head
would burst with dazzling of the eyes from sunlight. These are
catarrhal headaches with profuse watery discharge from the eyes and
nose. The eye symptoms of Euphrasia are its most prominent feature.
Catarrh:.! condition of the eyes with copious, acrid, watery discharge
with or without coryza. (Cutting pain in the eyes extending into the
head, pressure in the eyes as if caused by sand. Sensation of dry-
ness, burning, biting in the eyes. Sensation of dust in the eyes.
Violent itching of the eyes obliging rubbing and winking, with copious
lachryniation. Pupils much contracted and much tumefaction of the
mucous membrane with redness and enlarged blood vessels and smart-
ing. Iritis from rheumatism or in connection with rheumatic joints.
Copious thin or thick discharges. General inflammation of all the
tissues of the eyes. Ulceration of the cornea. It has cured Pannus.
Pustular inflammation. Opacity of the cornea after injuries of the
eye. It is suitable in the most violent acute conjunctivitis. Ambly-
opia with inflammation of conjunctiva and lids. Copious lachryma-
tion and burning. The mucous membranes of the lids and eyeballs
are injected, red, and vascular. Glutination of the lids in the morn-
ing. Copious, acrid lachrymation with fluent discharge from the nose
during coryza. Dryness of the lids and the margins of the lids red.
swollen, and burning. The lids are very sensitive and swollen. The
margins of the lids itch and burn. Suppuration of the margins of
the lids. Much swelling of the lids with inflammation. Fine rash
about the eyes with puffiness of the lids. Blurred vision. Paralysis
of the third nerve.

The next most important group of symptoms is in connection with
the nose. Sneezing and fluent coryza. The di.scharge is bland and
this occurs with acrid lachrymation. The nasal mucous membrane
is swollen. Profuse, bland, fluent, coryza- After this coryza has
existed for a day or two it extends into the larynx with a hard cough.
The coryza is worse during the night while lying down. The cough
is worse in the daytime and ameliorated by lying down. The remedy
has a rash like measles and it has febrile symptoms ; therefore, when
these symptoms are duly considered, it will be seen that Euphrasia
is siimlar to the symptoms that occur in measles. It is a wonderful
medicine in measles though not so frequently indicated as Pulsatilla



FEKRUM METALXJCUM


457


owing to the fact that this combination of symptoms docs not often
come. Hoarseness in the morning. Irritation in the larynx com-
pelling him to cough, followed by pressure beneath the sternum.
Abundant secretion in the larynx causing loose cough with rattling in
the chest. Deep inspiration is difficult. The cough, considered by
itself, furnishes a very rare group of symptoms. Cough with copious
expectoration along with or following coryza. Difficult respiration
ameliorated at night while lying down. Worse in the morning when
moving about with copious expectoration. Violent cough from tick-
ling in the larynx. No cough at night causes the remedy to resemble
Bry, and Mang. The dyspnoea and cough are ameliorated by lying
down. The coryza symptoms, otherwise, are worse at night and from
lying down. When these symptoms occur in grippe or influenza, this
beomes a very suitable remedy. The abundance of mucus scraped
from the larynx and trachea is often like the ending of bad colds.
The expectoration is easy and almost without cough. It comes up
without much effort. Pressive pain beneath the sternum showing
that the trachea is especially involved in the catarrhal condition. The
pain in the eyes is worse in the open air. The coryza is worse in the
open air. The cough sometimes comes on in the open air. Windy
weather causes fluent coryza. Cold air and windy weather cause
lachrymation. He is a chilly patient and cannot get warm in bed.
There is chill, fever, and sweat in this remedy. This chill predomi-
nates. The fever occurs mostly dufing the day with red face and
cold hands. The heat descends the body. The perspiration is often
confined to the front part of the body. Perspiration during sleep at
night. Strange odor sometimes very offensive and most profuse upon
the chest. It is especially suitable in catarrhal fever, influenza and
measles. When the symptoms agree, it will make a violent attack of
measles turn into a very simple form, making the patient feel better,
bring out the eruption, control the fever, and relieve the cough, coryza,
and other catarrhal symptoms. Streaming, hot, burning tears with
rash, photophobia, running from the nose, intense throbbing head-
aches, redness of the eyes, photophobia from fever, dry cough during
measles.


FERRUM METALLICUM

We will take up the study of Ferrum metallicum. The Old School
has been giving Iron for anaemia throughout all tradition. They have
given it in great quantities, in the form of the tincture of chloride,
and the carbonate. Whenever the patient became anaemic, pallid,
waxy and weak, Iron was the tonic. It is true that Iron produces
anaemia, and it would be aistonishing to any one who ever read the

58



FERRUM METALUCUM


458

provings of Fcrrum of the allopaths did not create additional blood-
lessness with the doses of Iron they administer. It is true that under
the provings, and under those circumstances where Iron has been
given in excess, the patient becomes greenish, waxy, yellow and pallid,
with a sickly and ana:inic countenance. The lips become pale ; the
cars lose their pink color ; the skin of the body L'ccoines waxy, and
there comes a tendency to haemorrhage, at limes with clots, but com-
monly with copious, thin, liquid blood, very dark. The clots will
separate and the iluid parts look brown, dirty and watery. The
patient gradually emaciates. He is pallid and waxy ; liis muscles
become flabby and relaxed ; he is incapable of endurance. All the
muscular fibers become tired from any exertion. Rapid exercise, oC
any unusual exertion, is impossible. Any rapid exertion or motion
brings on weakness, dyspnoea, sinking and fainting.

A strange thing running through all the constitutional conditions
of Ferrum is that the pains and sufferings come on during rest. The
palpitation sometimes comes on during rest, the dyspnoea comes on
during rest, and even the weakness. The patient is ameliorated by
moving gently about, but any exertion tires and causes faintness. Any
rapid motion aggravates the complaints. The pains are ameliorated
by moving about the house slowly, so that tlie exertion does not excite
or fatigue. In many cases ihc paiieni is dropsical. The skin pits
upon pressure and is pale, yet tlie face shows an appearance of
plethora. From every little excitement the face becomes flushed.
During the chill the face becomes red. From faking wine or stimu-
lant the face becomes flushed, and the patient, though flabby, relaxed
and tired, does not get credit for being sick. She fails to get the’
sympathy of her friends. She is feeble, she suffers from palpitation
and dyspnoea, she has great weakncvss with inability to do anything
like work, she feels tliai she must lie down— yet the face is flushed.
This is called a pseudo-plethora. The blood-vessels arc distended,
the veins variccjse, and their coatings relaxed. On this account bleed-
ing takes place easily ; capillary oozing : hamorrhage from all parts
of the body ; hemorrhage from the nose, the lungs, tlie uterus. Women
suffer much from hemorrhage from the uterus, especially during and
after the climacteric period. Ferrum will be found of great value—
when the symptoms agree — in that wonderful anemic state called
''green sickness,’’ that comes on with girls at the time of puberty and
!in the years that follow it. There vdll be almost no menstrual flow,
but a cough will develop, with great pallor. So common is this sick-
ness among girls that all mothers are acquainted with and dread it.
In a large practice you will have a number of cases of chlorosis.

Sometimes the early menstrual period is attended with a, copious
flow, then a great weakness occurs, and this goes on for a number;



FERRUM METAIXICITM


459


of years before anything like menstrual regularity is established. In
these cases the Old School always used to feed their patients Iron in
great quantities, but the more Iron the patient took the worse she grew.

Congestion, tending upwards, with red face, hot head and coldness
of the extremities. But the heat of the head and face is not at all
in proportion to the red appearance. It will be found that this con-
gestion upward in Ferrum will take place during a chill, in septic
fevers or in other forms of fe\cr, and the head is not always hot, but
sometimes cool. The face may be red and cool.

Another grand feature of Ferrum is that, like China ^ it has com-
plaints from loss of animal fluids ; from prolonged haemorrhage, with
weakness remaining a long time. ThcTc is no repair, no assimilation.
The bones are soft and easily bent ; they take on crooks. Emaciated
and feeble children. Dryness of the joints, causing cracking on
motion. Sudden emaciation, with false plethora.

Redness of face— a healthy looking bloom — in one who is unable
to walk fast on the street, or to stand any exertion. Yet some of the
complaints of Ferrum are better from occupation, from doing vSome-
ihing, from taking a little exercise, because the complaints come on
during rest. Over-cxcitability and sensivity of the nerves ; over-
sensitiveness to pain. The sensitive woman who needs Ferrum has
a flushed face and is often complaining because she gets no sympathy.
She does not look sick, yet she puffs on going up stairs ; she feels
weak and wants to lie down.

Restless when keeping still ; mutit keep the limbs moving. Rend-
ing pains in the limbs ; dull aching in the limbs. These pass off when
moving about (juictly and gently, like Pulsatilla. But Ferrum is a
very cold remedy, and is ameliorated by w^armth, except the pains
about the neck, face and teeth, which arc ameliorated by cold. But
most of the pains are ameliorated by heat ; the patient wants to keep
warm and dreads anything like fresh air or a draught.

Weakness and prostration ; weakness even from talking. Pros-
tration with irregular pulse and rapid pulse, or with too slow pulse ;
palpitation. And then comes paralytic weakness ; the limbs give out.
Paralytic conditions from anannia or liamorrhage. Fainting speels
from haemorrhage. Jerking and twitching of the muscles-; chorea;
catalepsy.

You may easily imagine something of the character of the mental
symptoms, for they are like the physical. The mind is confused and
the patient tearful. Depression of spirits ; mental weariness and de-
pression. The highest degree of depression and despondency.
Anxiety from the slightest cause; irritability. The least noise, like
the crackling of paper, sets the patient wild. It brings on nervous-
excitement and restlessness ; she must get up and move. Excitement



460


FERRUM METALLICUM


from the slightest opposition. Any sudden or rapid motion, or the
least hurry, causes blackness before the eyes ; dizziness ; things turn
in a circle ; she must sit down. And with all this the face is red.
When alone and at rest, the face becomes pale and cold, but the least
excitement brings a flush to the cheeks.

The headaches are congestive in character, with mounting of blood
upwards. There is a sense of fullness and distension, with red face.
Fullness and distension of the eyes ; fullness of the neck. Palpitation
of the heart. Exophthalmic goitre. The headaches are ameliorated
by pressure. Ferrum wants to be pressed 10 support the veins. Throb-
bing like hammers in the head. Every quick motion aggravates the
headache. Coughing aggravates the headache ; pain in the head and
occiput from coughing. These pains are sometimes ameliorated by
walking gently. Going up stairs, sitting down, rising from a seat —
unless iit is done very deliberately — will arouse all the pains of
Ferrum. Any sudden motion will bring on hammering and a feeling
of great expansion in the head. And then will come more or less
shooting, tearing pains. Beating in the back of the head from rising
or from coughing, because coughing is a sudden motion. Confusion
of mind with hammering headache. Rush of blood to the head. Con-
gestive headaches from excitement ; from taking cold ; from exposure ;
lasting three or four days or a week. The face is flushed and perhaps
cold, the head somewhat hot, but not as hot as would be expected.

Redness of the eye ; engorged vessels. Great weakness, dyspnoea
and palpitation. Writing — a mental operation — causes the headache
to reappear. Great sensitiveness of the scalp. The patient must let
the hair hang down. Mental disorders and headaches accompanying
or following haemorrhages, and in lying-in women. Bloated appear-
ance about the eyes. All sorts of disturbance of vision from con-
gestion. Venous stasis ,* swelling of the eyelids ; pus-like discharge.
Over-sensitiveness to sound ; ringing in the ears.

The symptoms of the nose are numerous. Colds and catarrhal
troubles, ending in nosebleed. Nosebleed on slight provocation, with
headaches at the menstrual nisus. Scabs form in the nose. Extreme
paleness of the face ; face becomes red and flushed on the least
emotion. Flushed face with dropsy of the lower limbs ; flushed face
with chill. Thirst during the chill is a striking feature of Ferrum,
During the menstrual period there are violent pains, and as soon as
the pain starts the face becomes flushed.

Nothing taken into the stomach digests, and yet there is no special
nausea. It is the exception to find nausea in Ferrum. Food goes
into the stomach and is vomited without nausea — simply emptied out.
Sometimes there are eructations of food by the mouthful, like Phos-
phorus, Phosphorus was the remedy with all the old masters for



FERRUM METALLICUM


461


Spitting up of food by the mouthful until the stomach was empty.
Canine hunger. It says in the next: “Double the amount of an ordi-
nary meal in the evening was hardly sufficient/’ All food tastes
bitter; solid food is dry and insipid. After eating there are eructa-
tions. Heat in the stomach ; regurgitation of food. Spasmodic press-
ure in the stomach after the least food or drink, especially after
meat. Aversion to meat, to eggs, to sour fruit. Aversion to milk,
and to his accustomed tobacco and beer. Sweet wdnes agree, but sour
wines and all sour things disagree. The tongue feels as if burnt.
As soon as the stomach is empty vomiting ceases until he eats again.
Vomiting of food, immediately after midnight. Vomitus tastes sour.

Ferrum is occasionally indicated during pregnancy. A few weeks
after becoming pregnant the woman commences to throw up her food
by the mouthful. There is no nausea, but the face is flushed and the
woman is flabby and weak. She vomits without becoming sick. Full-
ness and pressure in the stomach ; pressure in the stomach after eating.
Ferrum is an unusually interesting remedy because of this peculiar
stomach. It is like a leather bag; it will not digest anything. Fill
it up and it empties itself just as easily as it was filled.

Ferrum has a troublesome diarrhoea, with acrid watery excoriating
stool. Morning diarrhoea. Many of these patients are old sinners
with broken-down constitutions, who have suffered long from consti-
pation. Chronic constipation with iiieffectual urging and hard, difficult
stools, ;

Relaxation runs through the j^medy. From this relaxation there
is prolapsus of the rectum, vagina and uterus. Dragging down in the
lower part of the body, as if the organs would come out — and some-
times they do come out.

The bladder is also relaxed. Its sphincter is weak, and there is no
regularity of its muscular action. Hence, we have involuntary urina-
tion from suddeen motion, from walking, or from coughing. In little
children the urine dribbles all day. Just as long as the child plays the
urine dribbles and keeps the clothing wet, but this better while kcep-
ing perfectly quiet. The bladder is so relaxed and tired that it cannot
hold the urine, and as soon as it is partially filled it allows its contents
to escape. This relaxation runs through the remedy and gives it
character, just like a human being. You know what each one of your
friends is likely to do on every occasion. So it is with a remedy.
You ought to know what it is most likely to do, in order to know
what it will accomplish in curing the sick.

Weakness and relaxation of the genital organs is common to Ferrum.
The menstrual flow comes in for its share. Copious, watery flow ;
haemorrhage or suppression — ^amenorrhoea — ^no flow at all, only a
Icucorrhoea. Suppression of the menses with great nervous excite-



462


FERKUM METALLICUM


men! ; with flushed face ; with weakness and palpitation. Prolapsus
of the vagina. Insensibility of the vagina during coition. Metror-
rhagia. Menses too soon too profuse and lasting too long.

Difficult respiration ; pains and disturbances in the chest. Difficult
breathing, with a sense of a great load on the chest. Suffocating fits
at night ; catarrhal conditions of the respiratory tract ; congestion of
the chest ; dyspnoea. Spasmodic cough, such as we find in whooping-
cough, coming on in violent paroxysms. Cough after every meal,
with gagging, emptying the stomach of its contents. Cough felt in
the head. Cough worse from the abuse of brandy, tobacco or tea.
Cough coming on after the loss of fluids, as after haemorrhages. Chest
troubles following uterine haemorrhage, and after other haemorrhages.
Coughing up blood : bleeding from the lungs. Persons debilitated by
secret vices, with a tendency to go into tuberculosis.

Palpitation of the heart from fear, excitement, or exertion. Rapid
action of the heart, or sometimes slow action. Fatty degeneration of
the heart. Pulse accelerated toward evening. Pulsations throughout
the body, feeling like little hammers.

Rheumatic pains in the extremities, ameliorated by heat and by
gentle motion ; aggravated by cold, by exertion, or by rapid motion.
Pains through the deltoid muscles are spoken of more prominently
than pains in other parts, but these pains are no more striking than the
pains anywhere in Ferrum. Tearing pains through the limbs.
Inability to raise the arm ; paralytic pains — that is, pains that are
benumbing. Pains that make him feci as if he were going to lose the
power to move the part. Violent pains in the hip-joint arc just as
common as the pains in the shoulder. Lippe says, “Rheumatism in
the left shoulder,’’ but it is just as common in the right. Rheumatic
pains in the deltoid muscle of either side. Violent pain in the muscles
and along the nerves. Pinching in the right deltoid ; boring in the
right shoulder : aggravated by motion and by the weight of the bed-
clothes ; ameliorated by heat. Tearing and stinging pains. The Fer-
rum pains come on in the night, because the patient attempts to keep
still in bed. Rest brings on the Ferrum pains. When moving gently
about in the daytime he will not have so much pain. Coldness of the
limbs ; and again, heat of the soles and palms — they change about.
With all this weakness and prostration dropsical conditions come on,
so that the feet and hands become bloated.

Evening chill or chilliness with fever, cold hands and feet and red
face. Icy cold feet vdth the chill. Chill ameliorated after eating.
Thirst with the chill. Copious sweat which stains yellow. All symp-
toms worse while sweating. Strong-smelling night sweats. All the
febrile symptoms are better by slowly moving about. In intermittent
fever after the abuse of quinine.



FERRUM PHOSPWORICUM


463


We read in the text that Fcrrum is a remedy for diarrba?a in die
Jast stages of consumption. Well sometimes it is- if the patient is
prepared to die. Ferrum will stop the diarrhoea, but after it is stopped
the patient will not live long. The diarrlioea is not usually painful.
It is annoying, but it is painless, and the night sweats arc painless.
Do not suppress them ; tlicy had better be let alone. Let die jiaiicnt
go on to a peaceful termination. The best remedy for diarrhoea in
the last stages of consumption is Saccharum lac t is in the crude form,
given in very small c|uantiries and repeated as often as is rcc|uircd by
the patient and the bystanders.

FERRUM PHOSPHORICUM

Great weakness, and desire to lie down. Nervous at night.
Rheumatic conditions. While it has been used by Schuessler's followers
for the first stage of inflammatory fevers, it is useful in die higher
potencies in chronic diseases, and is a deep acting anti-psoric. It could
not be less than the Ferrum and Phosplioric acid that form it. For
many years 1 followed the Schuessler indications, hut by the aid of
new provings, homoeopathic: aggravations, and clinical experience the
present arrangement of symptoms furnishes my guide for diis valuable
homoeopathic remedy.

The time of aggravation of some complaints is in the morning, some
in afternoon ; others come in the evening and night, and after mid-
night. The patient is sensitive to the open air, and many symptoms
are aggravated in open air. The most noticeable features are atiicmia
and chlorosis {like Ferrum), The general pliysical anxiety i? more
like Phos, acid. Lack of vital heat, and aggravation in cold air and
from becoming cold. Always taking cold. Congestion of head and
organs, with fever and red lace. The general weakness is like the
low vitality of the phthisical inheritance. Dropsical conditions.
Symptoms worse after eating, from physical exertion. Fainting spcels
Cold drinks bring on symptoms. Sour food aggravates. Vascular
fullness and distension of veins. The hscmorrhagic condition is a
strong feature, as it is in Ferrum, Phos, acid and Phos, The nervous-
ness of hysteria and hypochondriasis is found in this remedy. Sore-
ness through the body, especially in congested parts ; with aggravation
from jar and walking. Complaints from lifting and straining muscles,
and from sprains. Many symptoms ate worse lying in bed and from
rest, and ameliorated by moving slowly about {like Ferrum), hut the
great lassitude compels him to lie down. Motion tliat is a real exer-
tion aggravates, but slow motion ameliorates. Numbness of parts
^nd suffering parts. Surging of blood in body and head. Stitching,
tearing pains. Tearing downwards. False plethora. Strong pulsa-



464


FERRUM PHOSPHORICUM


lion over body, and in head. Strong, full, frequent pulse. Generally
oversensitive, and sensiitve to pain. Standing aggravates many com-
plaints. Trembling limbs. All combine to give us a remedy broad
and deep acting.

This remedy has marked anger, even to violence ; producing weak-
ness, headache, trembling, sweat, and other nervous manifestations.
Anxiety at night, as if he had done a great wrong to somebody ; after
eating : with apprehensivencss ; during fever ; about the future ; hypo-
chondriacal. Cheerful, talkative and hilarious ; unnatural excitement,
mingled with sadness. This remedy has been used in delirium tremens.
Aversion to company and feels better when alone. He is unable
to concentrate the mind, or reflect ordinary questions ; can not study.
Confusion of mind when trying to think, in the morning, in the even-
ing, after eating ; ameliorated by washing the face in cold water. He
is dissatisfied with everything he possesses, and with his surround-
ings. Very excitable in the evening. The fullness in his head makes
him fear apoplexy. Fear of going into a crowd, or death, that some
evil will come to him, of misfortune, of people. Forgetful. It is an
excellent remedy for hysterical girls, when other symptoms agree.

His ideas are abundant, and there is unusual clearness of mind
{Coff,), Again, extreme indifference to all pleasure and exciting
events. Aversion to work. It might well be thought of for puerperal
mania from the note, ''Sows eat up their young.'' It has plenty of
cerebral hyperaemia, then why not madness? Irritability. Alternating
moods. Morose. Obstinate. Restlessness at night in bed, tossing
about much during fever. Sadness in the evening before menses.
Extremely sensitive to noise. Stupefaction. Indisposed to talk.
Aversion to thinking. Weeping. Aversion to mental work.

Vertigo in afternoon from hyperaemia of brain, during chill, on
closing the eyes ; tendency to fall forwards ; during headache ; as if
intoxicated ; looking downwards ; during menses ; with nausea ; on
rising up ; on rising from bed. Staggering when walking, with vanish-
ing of sight. Sensation as if the head were pushed forward while
walking.

The head feels cold and the vertex is sensitive to cold air. Hyper-
aemia of the brain. Constriction of the scalp. Empty sensation in the
head ; during menses. Sensation of fullness in the head. The hair
falls out. The head feels very hot. Flushes of heat, and red face.
Heat in head ; in vertex ; during menses. The head feels heavy during
menses. Weight in forehead and occiput. Itching of the scalp.
Headache, in morning in bed, in afternoon, in evening. Cold air ameli-
orates the general headaches ; ascending steps aggravates ; blinding
headache ; catarrhal headaches. Headache during chill, aggravated
on, closing the eyes; cold afiplications ameliorate ; with coryza; aggra-



FERRUM PHOSPHORICUM


465


vated on coughing, after eating, excitement. Headache during menses,
worse from light and noise. Hammering headaches. Headache
aggravated from a jar. He is compelled to lie down. Lying ameli-
orates. Headache during menses ; on motion, and on moving the
head ; noise. Paroxysmal pains. Pressure ameliorates. Pulsating
pains. Riding in a carriage aggravates. Sitting. Stooping ; walk-
ing. Wrapping up the head brings on or aggravates the headache.
Pulsating in head and temples, worse on right side. Headache with
hot, red face and vomiting food. Severe frontal headache with epis-
taxis, which ameliorates. Predominance of suffering on right side of
forehead, aggravated in the morning on waking, evening ; ameliorated
in open air ; aggravated on coughing. Pain above the eyes. Pain in
the occiput, on coughing, jarring : during menses. Pain in sides of
head and temples, in vertex. Pain in vertex during profuse menses.
Boring pain in temples. Bursting pain in head. Pressing pain in
whole head, pressing outward, forehead, in frontal eminence, temples ;
vertex like a stone. Soreness of the scalp, of occiput, vertex. Stitclv
ing pains in head, in forehead, over eyes occiput extending to fore-
head, on stooping ; sides of head, temples, vertex. Tearing pains in
head. General pulsation in head, aggravated by motion, and stoop-
ing ; strong in forehead ; in occiput on coughing, in temples, in vertex.
Shocks in the head.

Discharge of mucus from the eyes. Conjunctivitis with photo-
phobia, Can not see on stooping. Blood vessels enlarged. Larchy-
mation. Half open lids. Pain in ey<Ssf{ aching, burning; sand. Stitch-
ing. Sensation of protrusion. Rednel^s of conjunctiva, of balls and
lids. Sunken eyes. Swollen lids. Sclerotics jaundiced. Vanishing
of sight as from fainting.

Purulent discharge from the ear. Itching in ear. Noises in the
ear ; roaring, buzzing, humming, ringing and singing. Catarrh of
Eustachian tubes. Inflammatory pains in the ear. Otitis media.
Pain deep in the ear. Drawing. Stitching. Pain and swelling of
the parotid glands. Sensitive to noise. Impaired hearing.

Catarrh of nose. Coryza ; discharge bloody. Crusts form in the
nose. Discharge excoriating, purulent. When this remedy has been
given on the biochemical theory in the low potencies its use has been
limited to the acute stage of coryza, but when used homoeopathically
this limitation does not hold good. Who would think of limiting Fer-
rum or Pho$, acid or Phos. to the acute or first stage of an acute
disease?

Epistaxis with coryza, during fever, or headache when the head
is hot and full. Epistaxis in the morning, on blowing the nose, with
cough. Sneezing.

Chlorotic face. Dark circles under the eyes. Earthy, pale, sallow

59



466


FERRUM PHOSPHORICUM


face. Pale lips. Red face alternating with paleness. Circumscribed
redness of cheeks. Red during fever ; during headache. Yellow.
Liver spots. Dryness of lips. Heat of face ; flushes ; while sitting ;
with toothache : with pains. Hippocratic face. Inflammation of the
parotid. Pain in face, from inflammation of teeth, neuralgia, ameli-
orated by cold applications, aggravated by motion. Pulsating pains.
Stitching. Perspiration of face. Sunken face. Swelling cedema-
tous, from toothache. Swollen parotids.

Bleeding from mouth and gums. Tongue dark red and swollen.
Tongue white. Dry mouth. Inflammation of gums, fauces, tongue
and tonsils. Pains in teeth, with red, hot, swollen gums ; ameliorated
by holding cold water in the mouth, and aggravated by warm things.
Pains in the teeth after eating. Burning of the tongue. Salivation.
Taste insipid, putrid, sweetish.

Constriction of throat. Redness in throat and tonsils. Swollen
tonsils. Heat in throat. Inflammation of throat and tonsils. Lumps
in throat. Pain on swallowing. Burning, Soreness.

Appetite diminished. Ravenous appetite without relish of food.
Appetite entirely gone. Aversion to food, meat, milk. Desires sour
things. Distension of stomach after eating. Eructations, after eat-
ing, better, empty, of food, foul, sour. Water-brash. Fullness after
eating. Heat in stomach. Hiccough. Indigestion. Inflammation of
stomach. Nausea after eating, during pregnancy. Sudden attacks
of nausea, coming at any moment ; sometimes waking her out of sleep,
lasting a short time. Nausea felt in the throat. Nausea while walk-
ing. Pain in the stomach after eating. Burning in the stomach.
Cramping. Pressing after eating. Soreness. Great thirst for much
water. Vomiting, morning, on rising, on coughing, after drinking,
after eating, during fever, during headache, during pregnancy, riding
in a carriage. Violent vomiting ; blood, food, green, sour. Vomiting
with inflammation and pain in the stomach.

The abdomen is distended, and the liver and spleen are enlarged.
Much flatulence, fullness and rumbling, gurgling. The abdomen is
hard. Weight in the abdomen. Inflammation of the peritoneum.
This remedy is curative in many complaints of the liver. Severe pain
in the bowels, in the morning, evening, night; on coughing; during
diarrhoea ; after eating ; during menses ; as if menses would come on ;
paroxysmal, Ijefore stool, when walking. Pain in hypochondria, in
liver. Cramping, colicky pains. Dragging ; pressing. Sore bruised
pains. Tension.

Constipation ; difficult stool. Constriction of anus. Diarrhoea, in
morning, afternoon, night, after midnight; after eating; painless.
Flatus. Haemorrhage from anus, from piles. Haeihorrhoids, ex-
ternal. Involuntary stools. Itching of anus. Moisture about the



FERROM PHOSPHORICUM


467


anus. Pain in rectum during stool ; with dystentery, and fever. Burn-
ing during stool, after stool. Tcnsmus. Pain in rectum from in-
flamimation, canstant, aggravation by pressure on stomach. Prolapsus
of anus, during stool. Ineffectual urging to stool. Stool is excoriating,
bloody, brown, frequent, hard, licnteric, slimy, green mucus, thin,
watery, green watery.

Haemorrhage from the bladder or urethra. Inflammation of the
bladder with fever. Pain in the bladder and neck of the bladder.
Tenesmus. Urging ; constant ; frequent ; with pain in neck of bladder
and end of penis, must urinate immediately, which ameliorates the
pain ; aggravated standing ; only in the daytime. Sudden urging.
Must hasten or urine will escape. Frequent urination. Involuntary
urination in the daytime, ameliorated lying down ; at night in sleep ;
on coughing ; while walking. Pain in the kidneys with fever.

Gleety discharge from the urethra. Gonorrhoea with heat in urethra
in inflammatory stage ; scanty, watery or mucous discharge. Hsemor-
rhage from urethra. Burning in urethra during flow of urine.

Urine albuminous, bloody, burning, cloudy on standing, dark, red,
copious with headache ; ammoniacal, scanty ; much sediment, mucus,
much uric acid ; high specific gravity.

Troublesome nightly erections and seminal emissions. Erections
feeble, or entirely wanting. Sexual passion increased, or entirely
absent. In the woman there is slight change of symptoms ; predis-
position to abort, aversion to coition, or desire much dimished. Leu-
corrhoea, excoriating, before men^S, milky, thin, white. Chlorotic
girls. Menses absent. Menstrual flow bright red, clotted, copious,
dark, too frequent, intermittent, irregular, late, painful, pale, pro-
tracted, scanty, suppressed, thin, watery. Uterine haemorrhage. Pain
in vagina during coition. Dysmenorrhoea with fever and red face.
Bearing down in pelvis with dull pain in ovarian region. Prolapsus
of the uterus. Sterility. Sentitive vagina.

Acute catarrh of air passages. Inflammation of the larynx, with
mucus, raw feeling and rattling in chest, fever, red face. Mucus in
larynx and trachea. Dryness in larynx. Burning in larynx. Rough-
ness in larynx. Hoarseness during coryza. Voice lost, weak.

Respiration asthmatic. Spasmodic asthma Dyspnoea, evening,
night, with cough, while lying. Rattling, Short, Suffocative res-
piration. Stitching in chest on deep inspiration.

Cough, daytime, morning on rising, evening, night ; cold air aggra-
vates ; asthmatic ; acute. Short, spasmodic and very painful cough.
Deep breathing aggravates. Constant cough, with coryza. Dry cough,
Cough after eating ; exhausting ; with fever. Hacking cough. Cough
from irritation in larynx and trachea. Loose cough. Lying aggra-
vates cough. Cough in bed. Paroxysmal cough. Rattling cough.



468


FEKRUM PHOSPHORICUM


Spasmodic. Talking aggravates. Tickling. Tormenting cough, ag-
ravated on walking. Whooping cough. Touching larynx on bending
head over. Increased cough from taking cold in phthisis.

Expectoration in daytime, morning, bloody, bright red, dark, copi-
ous, difficult, frothy, greenish, mucus, offensive, purulent, scanty,
putrid, thick, viscid, whitish, yellow.

Anxiety in chest and region of the heart. Catarrh of the chest.
Congestion of the chest. Constriction of chest and heart. Sensation
of fullness. Haemorrhage of lungs. Heat. Inflammation of bron-
chial tubes, lungs and pleura : oppression of chest. Pain in chest
during cough, during inspiration ; in sides of chest, during deep in-
spiration. Soreness in chest on coughing. Stitching in chest, in sides
of chest, on coughing. Right sided pleuritis. Stitches, aggravated
coughing and breathing. Palpitation at night with anxiety, on exer-
tion and motion, while sitting, walking rapidly. This is a valuable
temporary remedy in the acute colds during the course of phthisis.
In acute phthisis. Spasms of the chest with suffocation, fever and
red face. Rheumatism in the upper thorax.

Coldness in back. *‘Crick’' in the neck or hack. Pain in the back
at night, during menses, on motion, rising from a seat, while sitting,
while walking, cervical region, between shoulders, lumbar region
during menses. Aching. Stitching pains in back. Tearing. Stiffness
in back of neck.

Cold extremities. Cold hands and feet. Cold feet evening in bed.
Cold feet during headache. Contraction of fingers, result of rheu-
matisnt. Cramps in thighs, legs, calves, feet. Blueness of finger
nails. Hot hands, palms ; soles. Heaviness of the limbs, upper limbs ;
legs. Inflammation of joints. Numbness of hands and fingers, legs
and feet. Rheumatic pain in right shoulder and upper arm, of a
drawing, tearing character, aggravated by violent motion of arm,
ameliorated by gentle motion (Ferr.), part sensitive to touch. Dead-
ness of the right hand, could not lift with the hand. Acute rheu-
matism of right shoulder joint, red, swollen and sore. Rheumatism
of right deltoid. Rheumatism of wrist. Rheumatism of knee joint
with fever. Gouty affection of joints. Sciatica. Pain in thighs.
Sore bruised pain in limbs. Stitching pains in limbs, upper limbs ;
shoulders ; hips. Tearing pain in shoulders, upper arms, hips. Shoot-
ing pains in both knees, extending down legs, with fever. Restless
legs. Stiffness of lower limbs, of feet. Swollen joints, upper limbs,
forearm, hands ; feet. Dropsical and rheumatic swelling. Great
weakness of limbs, of joints, knees, legs. The rheumatism goes from
joint to joint, aggravated by the slightest motion.

There are many dreams, anxious, confused, of failing, nightmare,
vivid. Late falling asleep. Restless sleep. Sleepiness in the eve-



FLUORIC ACID 469

ning. Sleepless before midnight, with slecpinees. After once waking
up he is sleepless.

Chill afternoons ; i. p. m. daily. Chill at night in bed. Chilliness.
Shaking chill. The fever predominates. Fever at any time with in-
flammation of organs, joints, or mucus membranes. Fever without
chill. Dry heat with thirst. Flushes of heat. Hectic fever and night
sweats. Internal heat. Remittent fever. Heat after sleep. Per-
spiration in daytime, morning ; clammy ; with great weakness, on
slight exertion, following the fever ; copious ; during sleep.

Burning skin. Coldness. Desquamation. Pale, red skin. Dry skin.
Formication. Great sensitiveness of the skin. Skin feels sore. Ulcer-
ation. Small withered warts.

FLUORIC ACID

It takes a long time for this remedy, in the proving, to develop its
symptoms. It is a very deep-acting medicine, and an antipsoric, anti-
syphilitic and anti-sycotic. It is insidious in its action and its symp-
toms are slow in approach ; it is Ukc the deepest and slowest and most
tedious diseases, the miasms, and hence it is suitable in the very
slowest and lowest forms of disease. While it has in its nature some
febrile action, it is not for this purpose that it is oftenest called for :
its most typical febrile action is very slow and insidious. It corre-
sponds to overheated states of the 'system, old cases of nightly fevers,
coming on week after week and yelir after year.

It is an unusually hot-blooded remedy at times, and again it has
conditions of coldness. In the evening and night great heat seems to
evolve from the body without increase of temperature. The skin
becomes very hot. That patient is often < from warm things, < from
covering, < from warm air ; suffocates somewhat like Puls, in a
warm room. He wants to bathe the face and head in cold water ;
such bathing is grateful. The feet burn and are put out of bed in
the night ; he hunts around in bed for a cool place for the feet and
hands. The soles perspire, and the palms perspire, and the sweat is
acrid, making the parts sore ; excoriation from the sweat between the
toes. The perspiration is offensive; offensive, acrid sweat between
the toes. Burning, unusual heat and acridity are words that modify
a great many symptoms; an acrid lachrymation or other discharge
from the eye ; acrid discharge from the nose, acrid sweat, etc. Sensa-
tion of burning and burning pains in parts ; heat evolved from the
body as a chronic state. Aggravation from heat, from outward heat
and from inward heat, belongs to this remedy. It is a strong feature
of this remedy to be worse from drinking tea and coffee. Warm
drinks bring on a diarrhoea, or flatulence, or disturbance in the stom-



470


FLUORIC ACID


ach, and cause indigestion to manifest itself in various ways. The
symptoms arc worse standing and sitting and better in the open air.

It is a remedy of great depth of action. It so disturbs the func-
tions that there are peculiar outward signs in the nails, in the hair, in
the skin ; they are all imperfectly developed. Whenever such is the
case, we know that a remedy has great depth of action and that it is
very long acting. It forms like incrustations here and there upon
the skin that seem to have no tendency to heal. A crust forms, but
there seems to be no healing beneath the crust. The hair loses its
lustre ; it falls out, and if examined closely under the microscope it is
seen to be necrosed ; little ragged ulcers will be found along the course
of the hair. The ends of the hair are dry, the hair mats and splits
and breaks, becomes ragged in masses and lustreless. The nails are-
crippled, likewise corrugations in the nails ; the nails grow too fast
and grow awkwardly : that is, they arc deformed and crippled, too
thick in some places, and too thin in others ; break easily, brittle.
There is a tendency to breaking down of a slow character, where the
circulation is very feeble, and the skin is near bone or cartilage, as in
the cartilages in the ears, and in the cartilages of joints. Ulcers
develop over the tibia. There is feeble circulation in the hands and
feet and they become cold. In the evening the extremities burn and
are feverish, because that is the time of the feverish state ; but in the
morning and in the daytime there is coldness of the extremities. The
patient is pallid and sickly, and at times becomes waxy and dropsical ;
oedema of the extremities, and particularly of the lower extremities ;
oedema of certain parts ; anlema of the prepuce. When a debilitated
subject, one suffering from bone and cartilaginous troubles, contracts
gonorrhoea, witli it he will have enormous swelling of the prepuce,
and nothing seems to act upon it. Fluoric acid will cure oedema of
the prepuce with gonorrhoea in such a subject. Cannabis saliva has
the same symptom, but it is especially useful in robust cases. Fluoric
acid will prevent the manifestation of disease in sycotic subjects, will
prevent formation of fig warts. It cures fig warts. It produces
hardened, dry warts, and dry crusts upon the skin, and crusts not
unlike riipia. It is useful in syphilitic rupia.

Bone affections stand out prominently. Necrosis, especially of the
long bones, but also of the bones of the ear. It creates an offensive!
acrid discharge from the car. It establishes an offensive ozaena, an
acrid discharge, with necrosis of the nasal bones. It is very analo-
gous to Sihy and it is one of the natural followers of Si7. where SiL
has been too frequently repeated by persons who do not know that
Silkea does its best in a single dose and that it is a long acting
and slow medicine. It not only antidotes the abuse of SiU, but also fol-
lows Sih After practicing a while you will be surprised to observe the



FLUORIC ACID


47 *


pendulum-like action between heat and cold in various complementary
remedies. To make that clear I will illustrate it by using the series
in which this remedy is set and to which it naturally belongs. You
take a patient who is hoi-bloodcd, wlio is always suffering from the
heat, from too much clothing and too warm a room especially in the
evenings, a patient that is tearful and sad, and may be a blonde. Why
you say, I am trying to describe a Pulsatilla patient. Well, yes ; any-
one can see that. Puls, is a hot-blooded patient, but after using that
remedy a while you notice that the patient goes to the other extreme
and becomes chilly, and wants much clothing ; the heat is taken out
of the case. SiL is the natural follow^er of Puls.^ and you would be
astonished to know how often a patient leaving Puls, runs toward
SiL SiL goes deeper into the case, it does more cutting, and it is the
natural chronic of Puls. Other remedies of course follow Puls., but
SiL more frequently than any other medicine. Now, that is the second
step ; the patient has gone from a warm to a cool state ; the overheated
state has been lost and he has gone into SiL, but when Sil, has been
administered for a while it cures the cold state, and removes the chilli-
ness of the patient (remember, however, that Sil. has at times some-
thing of Puls, in it ; in some of its complaints it is < from being over-
heated) and the patient under SiL goes back to the warm state again,
becomes hot-blooded, wants the warm covers thrown off, wants to be
lightly covered. Then it is that this medicine comes in the series.
Fluor, ac. folows Sil. as naturally as Sil. follows Puls. They exist
in threes. There are other remediqs that exist in threes, but the most
common ones you will think of wiH be Sulph.. Calc, and Lyc., Sulph.,
Sars. and Se^p,, and Coloc. and Caust. and Staph., which often follow
each other and rotate in this way. Do not let these facts make you
give a routine remedy unless the symptoms agree, but it does help to
remember that remedies are somewhat similar. It is true that Puls.,
Sil. and Fluor, ac. are similar all along the line as to the nature of
their symptoms. Puls, corresponds to more acute disturbances, or to
the earlier stages of chronic disease, the more active or violent opera-
tions of chronic disease. It will take off the wire edge of the disease,
and it will be followed by some medicine that is complementary to
It, always to be determined by the symptoms that arise. There are

cases that would be greatly injured by so deeply acting a remedy as

Sil. if given in the beginning, that is, the suffering would be unneces-
sary ; but if you commence with Puls, you can mitigate the case and

prepare it to receive SiL, providing the two would appear to be on a

plane of agreement, A very serious case had better first receive Puts.,
and the way being paved by that remedy follow it up with Sil.

Think of the remedy, then, in vicious bone diseases, in necrosis and
caries, in fistulous openings, fistula leading to the teeth, fistula lachry-



472


FLUORIC ACID


malis and fistula in ano; in calcareous degenerations ; in deformity of
the nails, hair and tec A; in affections of the thigh bones and leg bones,
with chronic fistulous openings leading to bone discharging pus which
excoriates the parts all around.

The patient is over-sensitive ; is made worse if the bowels do not
move regularly ; is distressed if the menstrual flow is slightly delayed ;
suffers if the call to urinate cannot be immediately attended to, hence,
as in the text, ‘'headaches > by micturition.” That symptom is all
that is given in the text ; but remember something that is analogous
to it, viz, ; If the call lo urinate be not attended to the headache will
continue to grow <! until the urine is avoided. That is a peculiar
symptom, and it sometimes leads to the study of Fluor, ac. Violent
congestive headache with heat and fullness. Violent occipital headaches,
worse from motion.

Now, if we take into consideration its great depth of action, wc
will see furthermore that it is suitable in some brain diseases. In
persons who have overw'orked, w^ho have been w^orking day and night
to establish a business, or to keep it up, and when there has been con-
stant use of the brain it is suitable. In mental depression and melan-
choly, with great sadness, in young men who have destroyed the
nervous system by vicious practices, by secret vice. It is particularly
suitable for that disorder of the human economy where men have
continuously changed their mistresses. There is a state in which a
man is never satisfied with one woman, but continually changes and
goes from mad to worse until be is a debauchee. If a young man
cannot keep away from women, he is not so bad off if he will only
keep to one, but he goes from one to many, until he stands upon the
street corners and, in his lust, craves the innocent women that go
along the street. Fluoric acid is suitable in that state, like Pienc acid
and Sepia, and these medicines are particularly suited to that con-
dition of enfeeblement of the mind and that disorder of the human
economy that makes man so low, that we have the state described as
“low mindedness.” It takes that form in one who is a sort of de-
bauchee, running after all sorts of things to tickle his fancy, but it
takes another form in a man who stays at home with his good wife.
He takes an aversion to his children and to his dearest friends and his
wife, that is, he has lost that true and noble and orderly affection and
friendship and companionship which ought to exist, and he fights
against it. An orderly man considers his wife his best friend and he
would rather stay with her than go anywhere else. To him there is
no place like home. Now, when man arrives at the state when he
wants to go somewhere else, that he wants to go away from home,
that he is disturbed at home, that everything annoys him at home, that
he no longer loves his children as he once did, he needs Fluoric acid.



FLUORIC ACID


473


“Feeling of indifference towards those he loves best.” The Sepia
state is like this, but Sep, is more frecjucntly indicated in women. The
woman will say, ‘'Doctor, there is one thing that I regret very much,
and that is, I do not seem to enjoy my children, my home, my com-
panions, my hustand and my friends. There is a sort of alienation.'’
Such is the way it is told where it is Sepia, In the man it is more
commonly Fluoric acid, in the woman more commonly Sep,, but this
need not necessarily be so. Sepia corresponds more closely to the con-
dition of the uterus and ovaries, and such conditions, as the woman
alone can have. (Compare Calcarea.)

Fluoric acid has with this state an overwhelming sexual erethism.
He is kept awake niglits by erections. This state of desire forces
itself upon him, not only when he Is with the opposite sex, but at all
times. At times, in the beginning of a gonorrhoea, this condition of
priapism ,and intense uncontrollable sexual desire, with swelling of
the foreskin, is overcome by Fluoric acid. There are times when this
priapism demands Canih., hut that remedy differs wholly in its nature
from this.

Reticence and silence: sitting and saying nothing. This reticence
is like Puls,, and often belongs to the insane who will sit in the corner
and say nothing all day, never uttering one single word, and hardly
answering when spoken to. A patient sits in the corner and says
nothing and does nothing, eats when food is offered, is led to her
room when the time comes, resists nobody, answers nothing; such a
stale is found in Pulsatilla, and is clo$e!y allied to this remedy. There
is some insanity in it, but especially the fatigue and mildness of a
tired biain. Mental exhaustion from overwork or from vices.

It is suitable after SiL in the spinal affeciions that are attended with
paralysis ircm])ling and numbness in the soles of the feet. It will
often stop the progrcvss of structural nervous diseases and prevent the
case from getting worse.

An excellent and very useful feature of this remedy is its ability
to produce varicose veins and varicose ulcers. The veins become
varicosed anywhere, but particularly upon the lower limbs, especially
following pregnancy. Haemorrhoids protrude after a stool; the anus
and rectum protrude, and there is some bleeding, because of the
haemorrhoidal condition. Varicose conditions with very old ulcers
upon the lower extremities; the varicose veins ulcerate. You might
predict what kind of ulcer and what kind of a margin Fluoric acid
would produce. We sec the feebleness of its circulation, wc see its
tendency to create hard crusts, and hardened, horny skin and erup-
tions. We might now easily assume that the inflamed borders of an
ulcer would become indurated, bard and glassy. The margins of
ulcers are indurated and the ulcer is an old, indolent ulcer. Parts

6o



474


FLUORIC ACID


once l)rokcn will not close up. Union will not take place between the
broken ends of bones, there is no repair. From bones and from ulcers,
wc have the foetid, acrid, thin, watery discharges, or at times very
scanty discharges, but acrid, burning the parts all around, raising erup-
tions and scurfs around the ulcers.

From the feebleness of the circulation one might suppose that
numbness would naturally be present, and it is true. The ears become
numb, the scalp becomes numb, there is a sensation as if the back of
the head were made of wood. The scalp loses its sensation, the hair
falls out and crusts form. The extremities become numb and there
is numbness of the feet and hands extending upwards; mimhness,
with or without dropsy; numbness in spinal affections; numbness in
brain diseases. Numbness of the limb not laid on.

‘‘Crusta lactea : dry scales : itches very much, bald places. Caries
of the temporal bone; discharges olfensivc smelling pus periodically.”
‘Whole left side of the head retarded in growth, left eye seems
smaller.’^ That is a clinical state, but it is significant.

Its use in syphilis must not be overlooked. In old cases with
exostoses, caries and necrosis, cases that have been mercurialized, and
treated by other drugs until ulcers have developed or those affections
of the nose that wc have often observed in syphilitic states. He blows
small pieces of bone out of the nose: great pain in the nose; nasal
bones all destroyed, and the nose becomes flat as though only a soft
piece of flesh with perforations. The vulva is eaten off and the
tonsils become honeycombed by syphilitic ulcers. Lingering, low
forms of ulcers and eruptions. The teeth decay or break off or
ulcerate at the roots; fistulous openings from the root of the tooth,
continuing to discharge. Many a lime has this remedy taken away
that ulcer of the root, closed up that fistulous opening, cured the pain,
saved the tooth.

“Craves cold water and is continually hungry.” Often that “all
gone” sensation in the stomach. Is ahvays eating and is relieved from
eating, but like Iodine it docs not last long, for soon he becomes
hungry again. Such medicines arc very deep. Wc sec that they go
to the very root of assimilation and nutrition.

Chronic ulcers of the throat not necessarily syphilitic, but it is par-
ticularly useful in the old forms of syphilis; not generally so suitable
in the earlier ulcers as in those that are associated with the tertiary
forms, with debilitated states, with brain disease, with nervous symp-
toms that go on for years when the patient is supposed to be cured.
Very often the trouble will come back in the throat, and the ulcers
consist of little gummatous growths. SiL especially covers such a
condition, and SiL is also one of the most useful medicines for rooting
out Mercury. In potentized form sil. and Merc, are inimical, yet the



GELSEMIUM


475


high potencies of Sil will antidote crude Mercury,

This patient craves pungent, spicy, highly seasoned things. The
appetite must be tickled; there must be some inducement to cat. At
times the appetite is changeable in spite of the fact that he is over-
whelmingly hungry ; he cannot eat, yet he is > when the food is in
the stomach. > after eating.

The most vicious kind of chronic diarrheea with this low feeble con-
stitution, in insidious complaints. “Morning diarrheea.*’ The itching
of the anus is sometimes intense ; protrusion of the anus during defaeca-
tion ; profuse hsemorrhage after stool ; constipation with piles ; itching
around and in anus, in perineum, etc

This drug is also suitable in the dropsy of drunkards. They are
very often liver dropsies. Old cicatrices become red around the
edges, surrounded by itcliing vesicles, itching violently ; squamous
eruptions upon the body ; dry, cutaneous eruptions upon the body,
very scaly.

“Sensation as if a burning vapor were emitted from the pores of
the body,’' Especially under the covers there is this sensation of great
heat, tremendous, like steam. It is not in fever. He has no fever
but it is a chronic state of giving out heat without thirst, or increase
of temperature.

GELSEMIUM

If you will observe the weather conditions in sharp climates, such
as Minnesoui, Massachusetts and Canada, you will find that the cold
spells are very intense and that people, when exposed, come down with
complaints very rapidly and violently, 'fhat is the w^ay the Bell, and
Aeon, cases come on, hut Geisemium coinplainis do not come from*
such causes nor appear that w^ay. Its complaints are more insidious
and come on with a degree of slowness. A Gels, cold develops its
symptoms several days after the exposure, while the Aeon, cold comes
on a few hours after exposure. The Aconite child exposed during the
day in dry, cold weather will have croup before midnight. But in
the South diseases are very slow. Like the people themselves, their
organs are very slow, and their reaction is slow. Their colds are not
taken from the violent cold, but from getting overheated. Hence,
they take colds and fevers of a low, malarial type ; they have con-
gestive headaches and congestive complaints that do not come on sud-
denly. When we think of the climate, and consider the people, and
the pace of remedies, we see that Gels, is a remedy for warm climates,
while Aeon, is a remedy for colder climates. Certain acute com-
plaints in the North will be like Aconite, while similar complaints wiU
have symptoms in the warmer climate like Gels. The colds and fevers



476 GELSEMIUM

of the mild winters will be more likely to run to this medicine, whereas
the colds and fevers of a violent winter will be more likely to run to
Bell and Aeon, It is true that Aeon, has complaints in hot weather,
fevers and dysentery of hot weather, but they are different from the
complaints of winter.

Gels, has been used mostly in acute troubles. In lingering acute
troubles and in those resembling the chronic it is very useful, but in
chronic miasms it is not the remedy. It is only a short-acting remedy,
though slow in its beginning. In this it is like Bryonia, Bry. com-
plaints come on slowly, and hence it is suitable for fevers coming on
in the southern climates, but it also has sudden violent complaints,
though not to the extent we find in Bell.

The complaints of Gels, arc largely congestive. Cerebral hyper-
a;mia, determination of blood to the brain and to the spinal cord. The
extremities become cold and the head and back become liot. The
symptoms are manifested largely through the brain and spinal cord.
In connection with brain affections there arc convulsions of the ex-
tremities, crampings of the lingers and toes and of the muscles of the
back. Coldness of the fingers and toes ; sometimes the extremities
are icy cold to the knees, while the head is hot and the face purple.
During the congestion the face is purple and mottled. The eyes are
engorged, the pupils dilated (sometimes contracted), the eyes are in
a state of marked congestion with lachrymation and twitching. The
patient feels dazed and talks as if he were delirious ; incoherent,
stupid, forgetful. It is like this in intermittent fever that gradually
develops towards a congestive chill. Great coldness running up the
back from the lower part of the spine to the back of the head. Shud-
dering. as if ice were rubbed up the back. The pains also extend up
the back. With the coldness of the extremities, the very dark red
countenance, the dazed condition of the mind, the glassy eyes and dilated
pupils, we have the neck drawn back and rigidity of the muscles of
the back of the neck, so that the neck cannot be straightened, and there
are violent pains up the back and coldness in the spine. This state
would remind one of crebro-spinal meningitis. Pain in the base of
the brain and in the back of the neck. With all states there is a very
hot skin and a high temperature, with coldness of the extremities.
Sometimes the troubles arc ushered in with a violent chill. This is a
very important remedy to study when such symptoms are present in
intermittents and in a few days the tongue begins to coat, nausea
comes on, ending in vomiting of bile, and insted of there being an
intermission a continued fever extends from one paroxysm into
another, with a higher temperature in the afternoon. The chill prac-
tically subsides, leaving a state which has the appearance of typhoid,
with dry tongue, not much thirst and marked head symptoms, dazed



GELSEMIUM


477


in mind. If this continues many days ‘ delirium and all the features
of typhoid will come on and the fever will change its type altogether
from the intermittent to the continued. In congestive chill with high
temperature occurring in the afternoon, the chill part of it subsiding
and the fever becoming continued. Gels, is a useful remedy. It is
also a very important remedy in afternoon fevers without chill in
infants and in children. You will find in malarial districts that it is
a common thing for the infants to have remittent attacks, while the
adults are having intermittents. It is only occasionally that you will
see a child or infant shake with a distinct chill, but they often go into
a remittent fever, an afternoon fever which will subside along towards
morning, to be followed the next afternoon by fever. With Gels, the
child will lie as still as in Bry, but there is more congestion to the head ;
there is the dark red face and duskiness like Bry,

Running through the febrile complaints, in the spinal meningitis,
in congestion of the brain, in intermittents or remittents that change
to a continued fever, and even in a cold w'hen the patient is sneezing
and has hot face and red eyes, there is one grand feature, viz., a feel-
ing of great weight and tiredness in the entire body and limbs. The
head cannot be lifted from the pillow, so tired and so heavy is it, and
there is such a great weight in the limbs. The Bry. patient lies quietly
because if he moves the pains are worse. He has an aversion to-
motion, Itecause he is conscious that it would cause an increase of
sulfering. J

The heart is feeble and the pulseTs feeble, soft and irregular. There
is palpitation during the febrile state. Palpitation, with weakness and
irregularity of the pulse. There is a .sense of weakness and goneness
in the region of the heart, and this weakness and goneness often
extend into the stomach, involving the whole lower part of the left
side of the chest and across the stomach, creating a sensation of
hunger, like Ignatia and Sepia, There is a hysterical clement running
through Gels, and it has the ]icrvous hunger, or gnawing.

There are cardiac nervous affections like Digitalis, Cactus and
Sepia, Sepia is not known to be as great a heart remedy as Cactus,
but it has cured many cases of heart troubles. Sepia has cured endo-
carditis, and a remedy that will take hold in endocarditis and root if
out must be a deep acting remedy. He feels that if he ceases to move
the heart will cease to beat.

The headaches are of the congc.stive type. The most violent pain
is in the occiput, and it is felt sometimes as a hammering. Every
pulsation is felt like the blow^ of a hammer in the base of the skull.
These headaches are so violent that the patient can not stand up, but
will lie perfectly exhausted, as if paralyzed from the pain. There is
an occipital headache that compels walking or rolling the head. There



478


GELSEMIUM


is commonly relief from lying in bed, bolstered up by pillows, with
the head perfectly quiet. The face is flushed and dusky and the pa-
tient is dazed. After the headache progresses a while, the whole head
seems to enter into a state of congestion, there is one grand pain, too
dreadful to describe, and the patient loses his ability to tell symptoms
and appears dazed ; lies bolstered up in bed, eyes glassy, pupils dilated,
face mottled, and extremities cold. Gels, has also headaches of a
neuralgic character in the temples and over the eyes, with nausea and
aggravation from vomiting. The headache is relieved by passing a
copious quantity of urine ; that is, the urine which has probably been
scanty becomes free and then the headache subsides.

There is much nervous excitcmcn^ Complaints from fear, from
embarrassment, from shock that is attended with fear, from sudden
surprises that are attended with fright, A soldier going into battle
has an involuntary stool , involuntary discharges from fright and sur-
prises accompanying fright. On becoming suddenly overwhelmed by
some surprise he becomes faint, weak and exhausted, he becomes
tired in all the limbs and unable to resist opposing circumstances. His
heart palpitates. This is similar to Arg, nit, /Irg. nit, has the pecu-
liar condition that when dressing for an opera a sudden attack of diar-
rhoea comes on, causing more or less sudden exhaustion, and she must
go several times before she can finish dressing. They who are to
appear before an audience arc detained because of a sudden attack of
diarrhoea. A lady has an attack of diarrhoea when about lo meet
friends over whom she expects to become excited at the meeting. The
anticipation brings on the diarrhoea. Such a state is Arg, nii. These
medicines are so closely related to each other that there are times
when they will appear to do the work of cacli other.

Then we have paralytic affections of the sphincters, and so with the
febrile conditions there is involuntary loss of stool and urine. There
is also paralytic weakness of the extremities and of the hands. With
paralytic states there is aching along the spine and in the muscles of
the back ; drawing, cramping in the muscles of the back and aching
under the left shoulder blade.

There are many disturbances of vision ; double vision, dimness of
vision, appearance of a gauze before the eyes ; confusion of vision
and blindness. These symptoms come on before going into attacks,
in connection with chill, at the coming on of sick headaches and con-
gestive headaches.

All sorts of objects are seen ; the field of vision appears full of
black spots, or full of smoke or little waves of various colors. It is
useful in inflammation of all the tissues of the eye and of the eyelids.
The eyeballs oscillate laterally when using them. Drooping of the
eyelids or ptosis is a marked feature and is in its paralytic nature.



GELSEMIUM


479


The muvscles are relaxed, they do not hold the lids up. The lids close
when he is looking steadily ; they simply fall down over the eyes.

The patient in general is thirstless, and it is the exception that there
is much thirst. It has a profuse, exhaustive sweat and is aggravated
from motion, or rather motion seems to be impossible. It seems tliai
he is unable to move, that he is too weak to move, and this runs
through all complaints. At times it is a remedy for coryza, wirli
sneezing and running of water from the nose, with coldness in the
extremities, and the trouble will go down into the throat and produce
sore throat, with redness, tumefaction, enlargement of the tonsils, hot
head and congested face. With this, as with the other febrile condi-
tions, there is heaviness of the extremities. The red face, the heavi-
ness of the extremities and sore throat that has come on gradually, a
little worse from day to day, until it has become a severe throat, will
lead you to Gels., especially if there is paralytic weakness all over,
and as the throat trouble progresses the food and drink come back
through the nose. This is due to a paralysis of the muscles of de-
glutition. The tongue also becomes paralyzed and docs not perform
its work in an orderly way. There arc times when the paralytic weak-
ness is not sufficiently marked to account for things seen, but there is
an incoordination of muscles and he is awkward. He undertakes to
take hold of an article and takes hold of something else. When he
does grasp his hands feel weak. He is awkward and clumsy and the
muscles do this and that and something not ordered to do. The
trembling incoordination and paresfs are especially noticed during
high excitement and afterwards, and these states occur with the febrile
condition and remain sometimes after. Useful in paralytic cases tlial
begin with fevers. Tearing is felt in the nerves all over the body and
seems to be due to an inflammatory condition. It has cured sciatica,
with tearing pains, associated with great weakness of the limbs. Loss
of sensation is sometimes found ; numbness of the end of the nose,
of the ears, of the tongue, of the fingers, of the hands and feet, numb-
ness, here and there, of the skin.

In the male, the sexual organs arc in the same condition as the
patient in general. The semen dribbles away ; there is imporency, no
ability to perform the sexual act ; the sexual organs arc relaxed.

The sleep is greatly disturbed. He cannot go to sleep ; every ex-
citement keeps him awake. During marked febrile conditions he has
a profound sleep or coma. When he is not in this comatose sleep
during congestion he is in a state of nervous excitement in which he
lies awake thinking, and yet thinks of nothing in particular, because
his mind will not work in an orderly way.

The symptoms of Gels, may be present in inflammation of any organ,
uterus or ovaries, stomach, the lungs and of the rectum. It has con*



480


GLONOINUM


gcstioii of organs, but it has also high grade inflammation. There is
nothing peculiar in the inflammation itself that would indicate Gels.,
neither should Gels, ever be given because there is inflammation, but
when the mental symptoms are present, the delirium, the flushed face,
the determination of blood to the head with the cold extremities, the
Great heaviness of ilia limbs, the disturhance of sensation, the paralysis
of sphincters, then Gels, would be good for inflammation of any organ
of the body. In a most distressing and violent, rapidly spreading ery-
sipelas that seems destined to cause death in a few days all the symp-
toms point to Gels., and though Gels, may not have produced erysipelas
it will stop the progress of the disease in a few hours and the patient
will go on to a quick recovery. Many times when erysipelas has
spread over the face and scalp and in the most dangerous manner with
the dusky red color that belongs to Gels., and other symptoms such as
[ have described in a general way, Gels, has taken hold of the ery-
sipelas and cured. If we master thoroughly the Materia Medica we
do not stop to see if a remedy produces certain kinds of inflammation,
etc., but wc consider the state of the patient.

GLONOINUM

The most common feature in this remedy is the surging of blood
to the head and to the heart. A patient often describes the state as
a feeling as if all the blood in the body must be lushing around the
heart, with a sense of hear or a boiling sensation in the region of
the heart, or in the left side of the chest. Again he complains of a
surging in the head, a warm glowing sensation in ilie head or a feeling
of intense glowing from the .stomach or from the chest up into the
head, attended at times with loss ol consciousness. There are also
wave-like sensations in the head, as if the .skull w^ere being lifted up
and lowered, or as if it were being expanded and contracted. Along
with this there is most intense pain, sometimes as if the head would
burst, sometimes great soreness in the head, or a sense of soreness
felt in the skull. Another accompaniment of the surging is great
throbbing, synchronous with the heat of the heart, and when the skull
has this soreness then the throbbing is like the beating of hammers,
and every pulsation is painful, so that there arc painful pulsations
and sometimes painless pulsations. The pulsations are tremendous
and when they are greatest in the head they are felt also in the ex-
tremities. The fingers and toes pulsate, there is pulsation throughout
the back, and it seems that the whole body throbs. If this continues
a while the soreness in the skull is likely to come on and with it the
painful throbbing, every throb is a pain. In this state, with every
jar in stepping, and every motion, it seems as if the head would be



GLONOINUM


481


crushed. The throbbing becomes more painful from motion. The
vomiting which attends this condition relieves. The head is relieved
in the open air, it is worse in the warmth, and is often relieved from
the application of cold. It is made worse by lying down, or lying
with the head low. In the extremities we have great coldness. The
extremities cold, pale and perspiring, the head hot and the face flushed
and purple or bright red. The pupils are dilated and the eyes red.
Now, if this progresses only a little while, the tongue becomes dry,
red and then brown. There is no great thirst, but the mouth is very
dry. The eyelids become dry and stick to the eyeballs. At times the
skin becomes dry and hot, and the face is red and glistens. All degrees
of confusion of mind, even loss of consciousness, will be present.

Have I not described to a great extent that which is seen in a typical
sunstroke? It is noticeable also that Glonoine symptoms are worse
in the heat of summer and relieved in winter. The dull headaches
and the continuous headaches are aggravated from warm weather
and ameliorated from cold. They are worse in the sun and better
in the shade. All sorts of contrivances will be resorted to by Glon-
oine patients to keep the sun’s heat from the head. When he has
had these troubles for years, and it has become a chronic state, he
will never go out in the warmth of the sun without an umbrella.

Glonoine corresponds to congestive states in the head that come on
suddenly, especially from heat, blit ^also from gaslight, or from any
bright light. The headaches that book-keepers are subject to, espe-
cially in those that have at their de$l^ or over the head, a hot gaslight.
The bright light accompanied by the heat so close to the head will
make this individual subject to headaches. These headaches are re-
lieved by going into the cold air. The head aches all day when he is
at his books, and when he goes home at night and lies down the head-
ache comes on again, and he has to be bolstered up in bed. He wants
the head high, and cold applications to the head ; the headache is re-
lieved from a long sleep, net generally relieved from siesta. From
lying down and taking a nap the headache is sometimes aggravated,
but from a good long sleep, a night’s sleep, he is refreshed. His feet
and hands become warm, the feverish state, and the throbbing all over
the body subsides and he wakes up in the morning comfortable ; but if
he goes out in the sun, or goes to the gaslight, he comes home with
the headache again. Since electric lights have been brought into use
there is not so much heat in the light, but gas throws out an immense
amount of heat in its light.

The child comes down with cerebro-spinal meningitis, the neck is
drawn back, the face is intensely hot, red and shiny, the eyes congested
or glassy, the head and upper part of the body are very warm, the feet
and hands and lower portions of the body and the extremities are cold

61



48at CLONOINUM

tnd covered with cold sweat. It is a most violent congestion to the
brain and spinal cord. Convulsions come on, convulsions throughout
all , the limbs, the neck and whole body drawn back, opisthotonos.
Cold feels good to the head ; heat feels good to the extremities. The
warm room increases the convulsions. When the lower limbs are
covered with clothing in a cool room and the windows open the con-
vulsions are relieved and the patient breaths more easily. With this
head congestion there is difficulty in breathing and audible palpitation.

The head is made worse from shaking or jar, from stooping, from
bending head backwards, after lying down, when ascending steps. It
is aggravated in damp weather, and in the sun, while working under
the gaslight, after overheating with copious sweat, and from the touch
of the hat The weight of the hat is a very common aggravation in
headaches in school children. The little ones work all day in a hot
stuffy room and feel better in the open air, but the weight of the hat
seems an encumberance as in Nitric acid and Calc, phos.

The Glonoine patient is also worse from wine and from stimulants,
and from mental application. When the headache is on he cannot
think, and he cannot write. An additional hindrance to writing is
that he trembles so that he cannot write. Trembling and throbbing
of the fingers so that he is unable to do his work or perform any deli-
cate work with the fingers or hands.

We have puerperal convulsions with such an appearance as I have
described. We may have the same violence in congestive chills, or
in any type of congestion of the brain.

There is a milder form of trouble that calls for its use, a condition
corresponding to the chronic types of disease. This milder form
exists where the patient has simply what might be called a hyperaemia
of the brain, a rush of blood to the head when able to be about. It
comes in spells, comes in moments when he least expects it ; while
walking on the street he feels a surging to the brain like a flush of
heat and a flush on the face, his hands tremble, and the hands and
feet become cold, he breaks out in a sweat ; he looks around him and
does not know which way to go home, he does not know where his
dwelling is He looks in the faces of friends and they seem strange,
he loses his way when he is near home. It is a confusion which soon
parses away, and he feels better again. But these spells come closer
together, and constitute the earlier stages of softening of the brain.
This surging of blood to the brain is attended with dizziness ; he rolls
and staggep, and must take hold of things, and especially does he
suffer in this way from a warm day, or from the heat and light of
the sun.

In threatened apoplexy, and when apoplexy has taken place, if the
violent pressure keeps on, think of this remedy. The clot may not



CLONOINUM


be at first in the place to take life, it may be outside of the life lia(?,
but if the. congestion continues that blood clot will increase. Such
medicines as Opium and Glonoine relieve the blood pressure when the
symptoms agree. They equalize the circulation, and the patient may
not die. A paralytic condition in one arm or leg may go on for
a while, and at the end of many weeks or months the motion may be
regained, and the patient recover; whereas if the suitable remedy had
not been administered to reduce that blood pressure the continued con-
gestion would certainly have ended in death in a few days. The
stertorous breathing, the coma, the history, and the general appear-
ance of an apoplectic patient are found in this remedy, but the intense
heat that comes on in many cases of apoplexy along with the shiny
skin and coldness of the extremities are the guiding features. Opium
is the most frequently indicated medicine, but it must not be adminis-
tered in large doses. The highest potencies are the best and one single
dose is enough.

In a case noted it says, “frantic attempts to jump from the window.'’
The headache was so intense that the patient became violent and at-
tempted to jump from the window. You may rest assured that with
his headache there was all this determination of blood to the head.
It is enough to make one frantic to feel this continued hammering
upon every fraction of the skull. He cannot lie down, and he cannot
walk, because every step increases the jar, so you see why it is that
the word “frantic" is used there. The patient becomes frantic with
the pain. Another expression used is “disinclination to step around,"
The patient wants the room perfectly still. If sitting up in bed, you
will often find a Glonoine patient with both hands pressing upon the
head with all the power possible until the arms are perfectly exhausted.
He wants the head pressed upon all sides. Wants it bandaged, or ft
tight cap fitted down upon it. The headache is worse from bending
backward and from stooping forward. There are times when the
headache is so severe that lying back upon the pillow cannot be tol-
erated. There is a sense of great heaviness in the head. You will
notice, in reading over these congestive headaches as reported, that
each patient has a different way of describing his headache and yet
all have the same story to tell, that of violent determination of blood
to the head.

"Some months after being violently jarred by being thrown from
a carriage, a sensitiveness of the upper part of the back and neck came
on." There are two strong characteristics of Glonoine in that cure,
viz: from wine and the < from lying down." The other symp-

toms might have pointed to other remedies, but these two features ara
there. It is interesting when reading a case, if you have first a knoWh
edge of the Materia Medica, td note what symptoms are verified ;



484 CLONOINUM

when you do not know the Materia Mcdica then the case is confusing.
Now, as we glance over that description we see at once these two
things verified and the rest is fairly consistent. Very commonly the
pain begins in the occiput and goes to the forehead, but the whole head
is in a state of throbbing. But, we notice more particularly, the
‘‘aggravation from motion and the least noise.” This patient will sit
in perfect quietude and silence for hours. You will be astonished to
know how long a Glonoinc patient can sit without moving a muscle,
because motion is so painful- Also “aggravation from lying with the
head low and after sleeping.” It is important for you to know what
that sleeping means. As 1 have said before, the patient very often
is worse after a little sleep, but the common state is relief after a
prolonged sleep. If he can sleep long enough it will subside, unless
it be the congestive sleep, or coma, and then it is a different thing.
“Amelioration from cold and external pressure.” “Vertex burning
hot, likewise upper part of back.” The whole crown of the head feels
as if it were covered by a hot iron, as if an oven were close by. Hot,

especially in the back of the neck and bctw^ccn the shoulders. The

burning heat seems to appear at the top of the head and extend down

between the shoulders ; a sensation of heat, as from a band. “Face

bluish, with a heavy, stupid expression.” The face is bright red, but
if the condition becomes severe the face assumes a dusky appearance,
and the longer this state lasts the more dusky it becomes ; that is true
with apoplexy and also with sunstroke. When the sunstroke first
comes on the face is bright red, intensely hot and shiny, but as the
heat increases the face grows dusky, even to purple. In all of these
cerebral congestions there is a stupid, heavy expression, even going
on to coma. “Frequent deep inspirations.” With this congestion of
the head there is commonly vomiting, palpitation of the heart, pain
in the stomach, great difficulty in breathing and finally loss of con-
sciousness. In another clinical case reported we read: “Every pulsa-
tion is felt as if the head would burst.” Now, suppose the head bones
were already intensely sensitive and sore and the head filled as full
as possible with blood, and then you commenced hammering upon the
blood column you can understand that the pain would be most intense
and would soon end in stupefaction. “Sunken eyes, bluish pallor
under the eyes.” “Red eyes, with photophobia ; optical illusions.
Black speeks before the eyes ; blindness.” “Face pale, in spite of high
fever.” In all of these cerebral congestions of great violence the pulse
fluctuates ; it even becomes fine and wiry and hard ; sometimes be-
comes irregular and also slow.

Another common accompaniment of these congestions is tumefaction
about the neck. The neck feels full. The collar must be opened
as it causes choking, as if he would suffocate. Even in the chronic



CRATIOLA


485


State in the one who stands upon the street corner not knowing his
way home because of the surging of blood in the head, that state is
accompanied by choking and the collar causes uneasiness about the
neck like Lack. He chokes and swells up under the ears. There is
not only a sensation, but with the sensation there is actual swelling.
Tumefaction about the neck and throat, under the chin, and the glands
become swollen.

The next circumstance in the text that brings forth the general
aspect of the remedy is in connection with the catamenia. The men-
strual flow does not appear, it is delayed, with violent congestion to
the head, violent headaches and these symptoms already described.
These congestions may also come on during the menstrual period.
Again, if a uterine haemorrhage stops suddenly, or a copious flow from
any part stops suddenly, the patient comes down with great violence
and the blood rushes to the head.

There are many conditions and complaints in life where we have
surging of blood to the head, when this will be the remedy wanted.
Persons who are subject to palpitation with dyspnoea, upon any effort,
he cannot go uphill, he cannot walk along the pavement without bring-
ing on palpitation and dyspnoea ; any little exertion or excitement
brings on the rush of blood to the heart and fainting spells ; fainting
spells in women, who are not suppose to be subject to fainting. Great
weakness, palpitation, trembling of the limbs, shaking of one or both
hands as with palsy. ‘'Laborious action of the heart” is a strong
feature of the remedy ; pulsation all ;^over. Fluttering in the region of
the heart. Pulse quick, irregular, slow or quick and wiry. There
are some persons that are apparently plethoric ; very much affected
by the slightest exertion and who have pulsation all over ; pulsation in
a warm room. They are sometimes relieved by opening the window
if it is cool, by fanning, by cold air, by cold applications to the head.
In keeping with the remedy, this is clinical application of it; “Chib
dren get sick in the night after sitting up at an open fire or falling
asleep there.” “Bad effects from having the hair cut.” Bell, is gen-
erally thought of for taking cold in the head from having the hair cut.
“Bad effects from being exposed to the sun's rays.” “Bad effects
from sunstroke.”


GRATIOLA

It is a great remedy for nervous prostration ; marked lassitude, with
mental and bodily weakness. It is closely related to Coffea and Nux
vomica and especially useful for the weakness of the will and neu-
ralgic pains in coffee drinkers. In hypochondria and in the fernale it
has melancholia and nymphomania. Convulsive conditions without



CRAtlOtA


486

loss of consciousness. Complaints are better in the open air, but he
is chilly in a warm room (like Pulsatilla) ; complaints predominate
on the left side ; constant vaporous exhalations from the body. Ca-
tarrhal conditions of the stomach and intestines with spasmodic ail-
ments. There is a lack of will power and aversion to work; mental
depression and capriciousness ; he is very irritable and hypochondri-
acal ; fear of the future. Complaints from pride. Bad effects from
coffee and alcohol ; nervous complaints associated with stomach and
bowel troubles. Vertigo during and after eating ; on closing the eyes ;
while reading ; on rising from a seat ; on motion ; vertigo with cerebral
hyperaemia. Heat and fulness of the head ; sensation as though the
head grew smaller ; pulsation in head ; in temples ; rush of blood to
head, after rising from stooping. The head symptoms are better in
the open air and worse or come on in warm room. Pain in the
occiput in the morning on waking, better rising or lying on the face.
Sick headaches, nausea, vomiting or disgust for food, with vertigo,
better in the open air.

Pain in occiput from sneezing. The head feels cold and is sensitive
to cold air. Cold sensation of vertex. Corrugated forehead during
the headache. Itching of the scalp ; itching of the eyes and ears..
Mist before the eyes while reading and green objects appear white.

Pain in eyes as from sand ; itching in the nose. There is a sensa-
tion of burning heat in the face, but it feels cold to the hand.

Swelling of the upper lip in the morning. There is a sensation of
tension of the face and tingling and it feels swollen. The face is
red ; the teeth ache from cold things taken in the mouth. Grinding
of teeth in brain affections.

Pain in the throat, compelling constant swallowing ; much mucus
in the throat, which he cannot eject. Violent thirst ; emptiness in the
stomach after eating; emptiness when he does not need or desire food.
Craves nothing but bread.

Nausea better after eating and by eructations. Vomiting of bitter,
sour water and mucus. A feeling of anxiety in the stomach. Cramp-
ing in the stomach after food and a heavy load that seems to go from

side to side as he turns from side to side, with nausea and eructation.

Distension after eating. Pressure in stomach, after eating. Marked

coldness in stomach. Cramp and hard aching in stomach, pain grows
rapidly worse and seems to extend to back and kidneys.

Cold feeling in abdomen. Cramping like colic with nausea.
Rumbling in abdomen with distension in afternoon and evening.
Swelling of mesenteric glands. Pinching in abdomen, better by pass-
ing flatus. Diarrhoea, with copious gushing, yellow or yellowish-green,
frothy, watery stools ; copious watery vomiting and purging, like
cholera morbus ; copious , green watery stools. The diarriioea is brought



GRAPHITES


487


on from drinking large quantities of water, due to the violent thirst.
During the diarrhoea he is often sensitive to draft and open air which
give him urging to stool. It has cured fully developed, rapid Asiatic
cholera. Green stools and green vomiting, unconscious stools.

Before stool, nausea ; rumbling, cutting ; tenesmus. During stool,
nausea ; burning in rectum ; straining. After stool, burning in rectum ;
tenesmus ; pain in coccyx ; creeping chills ; pain in abdomen. Pro-
trusion of stinging, burning haemorrhoids. Tearing and pricking in
anus. Constriction in anus ; itching anus. Ascarides. Burning in
the urethra during and after urination ; scanty urine becomes turbid
on standing ; unconscious discharge of urine. Stitching in left sper-
matic cord to abdomen and chest.

It is a most useful remedy in the female when there is marked
irritability of the sexual organs, if the sexual desire is great excited ;
it is one of our best remedies for nymphomania. When the desire is
so violent that it drives her to secret vice the remedies are: Gelse-
mium, Gratiola, Origanum^ Nux vomica^ Phosphorus^ Platina and
Zincum.

The menses arc too early and profuse ; darting pain in right mamma
when stooping and during menses worse on rising ; leucorrhoea with
pains in sacrum.

Violent palpitation after stool (Cotimm) with oppression of chest ;
heat in chest, head, hands, with red face.

Rheumatic pains in upper limbs J lore bruised pains in lower limbs,
after walking ; tearing in the tibia while sitting, better while walking.

Sleepiness after eating ; deep sleep.

Itching and burning of the skin, after scratching.

GRAPHITES

The complaints of Garphites arc worse morning, evening and during
the NIGHT, especially before midnight. It is useful in people who
are morbidly fat, or have been fat and are now emaciating ; with con-
stipation more commonly than diarrhoea ; in women in these conditions
whose menstrual habit is pale, late, short and scanty ; catarrhal dis-
charges that are albuminous and viscid represent to the mind some
peculiar general states of the sick man not explainable and not com-
mon to diseased conditions nor to many remedies ; hence, strange, rare
and peculiar. Raw surfaces upon the skin are generally marked by
such viscid glutinous discharges.

It is a very deep acting remedy, like all carbons, and is accompanied
with induration and burning in the base of the ulcers, inflamed tissues
and old cicatrices ; hence, its great usefulness in cancerous growths
and ulceration. Cancerous development in old cicatrices is a strong



488


GRAPHll^


feature of this remedy. Contraction of tendons, especially behind the
knee. It has haemorrhagic oozing of pale blood. In the higher sense
the patient is anaemic and chlorotic. From eruptions, catarrhal dis-
charges, menstrual flow, ulcers, breath and perspiration there is
marked offensiveness (like Carbo v., Psorinum, Kali phos., Kali ars,).
When eruptions or discharges have disappeared suddenly from any
cause and grave chronic phenomena have followed Graphites is one of
the medicines to be studied. Scrofulous conditions and swelling of
galnds ; recurrent herpes upon ail parts of the body and especially
about the anus and genitals ; burning in many parts and especially in
old cicatrices ; general dropsical tendency ; weakness in muscles and
tendons after straining them by overlifting.

The patient is very sensitive to cold and needs warm clothing ; he is
sensitive to the cold in winter and to the heat in summer : he is sensi-
tive to a warm room and desires open air which is grateful. Worse
in a warm bed ; complaints come on from becoming cold or heated ;
tlie headaches are worse in a warm room and better in the open air.
Graphites has cured deep seated spinal complaints, and in such cases
the patient delights to lie heavily covered in a cold draft from an open
window. It is easy to see in this, the resemblance to Carbo veg,, which
often cures when the patient wants to be fanned. Craving for air
is strong in the carbons^ yet often easily chilled and just as easily over-
heated and complaints that come from overheating are related to the
carbons. This one becomes ill from being overheated ; exertion makes
all symptoms worse. Motion increases all symptoms except the numb-
ness and general feeling of stagnation which come on during rest.
Extreme weakness. Weakness and desire to lie down. Paralysis in
any part but especially in the lower limbs ; sensation of paralysis or
stagnation creeps over the body and limbs. He is made sick by bath-
ing and is sensitive to cold, damp weather. What there is in the gen-
eral life to cause eruptions to come out in the bends of the joints
must be left for others to explain, but such is the case with this won-
derful remedy. The same may be said of rawness and excoriation
in the same regions. Cataleptic conditions are very marked in which
the patient is conscious but without power to move or speak ; tremu-
lous sensation throughout the body ; sudden sinking of strength ; sud-
den weakness. Constriction in many parts. It has cured many kinds
of convulsions. It is not the remedy for the convulsion, but in chronic
sickness where the convulsion is but one of many elements it is often
suitable. It has cured epilepsy and hysterio-epilepsy and epileptiform
spasms many times when the totality of symptoms furnished the basis
for the prescription. A careful comparison of the symptoms shows
that this remedy acts predominantly on the left side of the body. The
patient is oversensitive to pain and outer parts arc very sensitive.



GRAPHITES


489


The pains are burning, drawing, pressing. Soreness. Stitching
and tearing. Numbness is more characteristic than pain. The forma-
tion of fissures in all the commissures and in the anus with cracked
and bleeding skin in many parts with much hardening ; the tendency
to grow wens on the scalp and elsewhere are features of this remedy
not to be overlooked, and when coupled with the mental symptoms
form such a strong and striking image of perverted vital action that
the neophyte should not overlook Graphites. It is as broad and deep
as Sulphur, showing the great similarity to this great remedy in chronic
cases.

The patient becomes very restless when attempting close mental
work and there is a marked dread of mental work. The mental de-
pression is extreme, and it is made worse by music : her sadness is so
great that she thinks only of death and salvation. Grief and vexation
cause of recurrence of all her distressing mental sufferings. Her moods
are constantly changing ; while she may recall all the events of youth,
recent events are forgotten ; slow of thought and weakness of mind
worse in the morning ; often excited, hurried and exhilarated in the
evening ; extremely fretful and impatient ; irritable about trifles and
very critical. Irresolution is a marked symptom. She cannot mako
up her mind to do 01 not to do. Extreme activity of mind in the even-
ing and first half of the night, which prevents sleep until midnight ;
apprehensive and distressed in the,, jrnorning and excited in the even-
ing ; extreme anxiety even to desperation.

Vertigo in the morning on wakihg ; in the evening ; on looking up-
wards ; on rising from stooping ; coinpclled to lie down ; with inclina-
tion to fall forward.

When the above general symptoms strongly j^redominate in any
given sickness the following particulars will be cured by this remedy.

Hypersemia of the brain in the evening in a warm room ; frequent
moments of congestion to head and face with faint feelings ; numb-
ness felt in whole head ; burning spot on the vertex ; drawing, pressing
and tearing in forehead over the eyes ; stitching pains in the temples ;
pain from temples to side of face and to shoulders ; one-sided head-
aches in the morning on waking ; tearing in one side of head extending
to teeth and side of neck ; pressing pain on the vertex and occiput ;
compressing, constricting pain in occiput and back of neck ; pain as
though the head were numb ; violent headaches during menses. The
headaches are brought on from becoming cold and from looking into
a bright light ; are worse in a warm room, and better in the open air.
There is marked soreness in the scalp ; itching of the scalp with or
without eruptions ; eczema of the scalp oozing a glutinous fluid ; eczema
behind the cars ; fissures that bleed behind the ears ; scaly eruptions
on scalp ; falling out of the hair ; bald, shiny patches on the scalp.

62 I



490


GRAPHITES


Extreme photophobia in the sunlight with copious lachrymation.
No remedy has photophobia more marked than Graphites. Pain in
the eyes and over the eyes by looking long toward a sunlighted win-
dow ; complaints from eyestrain. Letters appear double when writing,
letters run together when reading ; flickerings and fiery zig-zags just
outside the field of vision in the evening ; misty vision ; vanishing of
sight during menses. Burning, pressing, stitching pains in the eyes.
It has cured ulceration of the cornea. Recurrent pustular inflamma-
tion of the cornea. Keratitis pustulosa in children with fissures in the
canthi, extreme photophobia and eczema on the face. Marked con-
gestion and injected veins of the conjunctiva. Chronic lachrymation
in open air, tears acrid. The fissured canthi bleed easily and itch
violently. Purulent discharges from the eyes : the lids are stuck
together at night : the eyes feci hot : the lids arc much swollen and the
margins are red, raw and bleed easily — sometimes hard ; ulcers on the;
margins of lids ; the lids are covered with crusts ; eczema of the eyelids
and about the eyes ; dry mucus in the lashes, styes on the lids, with
drawing pain, especially when they recur frequently. Cystic tumors
on the lids.

Discharge from the cat of sticky, \ iscid pus ; bloody, offensive.
Noises in ears ; cracking ; humming ; hissing ; ringing ; rushing , roar-
ing ; reverberations. Violent roarings at night and the cars feel
stopped ,* thundering, rolling sounds in ears. Deafness in various
degrees and he hears better in a noise. He can hear better when
riding on the cars in the roaring of the train. Deafness with eczema-
tous eruptions on and behind the ears. Stitching pains in ears in cold
air. Marked swelling of the ears.

Smell very acute ; she c.annot tolerate flowers : loss of smell with
dryness in the nose ; with coryza. Discharge from nose bloody mucus
or pus, vei-y offensive, viscid, thick, sometimes yellow. It is a most
useful remedy in chronic nasal catarrh. Very painful dryness in the
nose. The bones and cartilages of the nose become v€i*y sore to touch.
Sneezing and fluent coryza as marked as in Carbo veg. Frequent
attacks of coryza all winter, worse in cold air ; the coryza extends to
larynx, like Carlo veg ,* the excoriated, sore, cracked nostrils are
plugged with scabs and hard mucus far up in the nose. Ulcers in the
nose. Fissures in the nostrils that burn and indurate.

The face is pale, waxy and sickly. Eczema and herpes are found
on the face with glutinous moisture. Itching with or without erup-
tions. A sensation as of a cobweb on the face. The commissures of
mouth are fissured and the fissures ulcerate and the edges become hard
and there is great burning in them. The skin chaps and cracks and
often becomes excoriated and bleeds. Erysipelas of the face, spread-
ing from right to left. The beard falls out. Crusts form on the lips



GRAPHITES 491

and the chin is covered with eczema. The submaxillary gland is
swollen and indurated. The gums are settling away from the teeth ;
the teeth burn and sting ; drawing pain in teeth in cold wind ; tearing
in teeth worse from warmth. Taste in the mouth is bitter, salty, sour
and like spoiled eggs ; nauseating taste in the morning ; sour taste after
eating. The tongue is coated white; burning blisters on lower lip and
on tip of tongue, painful ulcers on under surface of tongue, putrid
odor from gums and mouth ; breath smells like urine. Dryness of the
mouth in morning on waking ; also in the night on waking ; saliva
flows from the mouth during the night. Chronic sore throat with
ulceration and swelling ; swollen tonsils : nightly pain in throat ; copious
white, viscid mucus ; a continuation of the nasal and post nasal catarrh.
Constant choked feeling or constriction in the throat that makes swal-
lowing difficult. Constant spasms in the throat compelling swallowing.

Ravenous appetite. Violent thirst in the morning with dry mouth
and internal fever. Aversion to meat ; to cooked food ; to fish ; to
salt, to sweets. He is driven to cat to relieve a feeling of suffocation
and burning gnawing in the stomach. Pain in the stomach, relieved
by eating. Eructations bitter : sour : putrid ; tasting of food eaten ; of
greenish water. Rancid heartburn after eating ; nausea much of the
time during menses, with trembling; vomits all she cats; vomiting,
purging and cold sweat. The stomach feels constantly in a spoiled
state or as from indigestion. Flatuknce is as marked as in Carbo veg.,
and the relief from belching is jijist as great. Burning, constriction,
pulsation and cramping are frequent symptoms. Fulness, distension,
pressure are constant features of Graphites. Retching on swallowing
food (like Merc. c.). Gastric catarrh with internal heat drive him to
cat and drink. Gastric pains worse from cold drinks and better by
warm milk ; periodical gastralgia with vomiting of food soon after
eating. It is a wonderful remedy for old drunkards when the gastric
symptoms agree (like Carbon bisulphide).

It is a most useful remedy in hard, swollen, sore liver with weight
and distress in the liver ; stitches in both hypochondria, burning in left
hypochondrium when lying on it ; sensitive to clothing in the liver
region. Great suffering in the abdomen from flatulence ; incarcerated
flatus causes cramping pains, distension, and is a continual source of
distress. Everything eaten seems to ferment and turn to gas ; rum-
bling and movements felt in the abdomen ; there is great burning and
griping ; cramping in the abdomen soon after eating ; the clothing dis-
tresses the abdomen. The slightest indiscretion in eating causes in-
creased flatus, rumbling and diarrhoea ; the abdomen is distended with
dropsy. Herpes zona on the side of abdomen ; herpes over lower ab-
domen and groin ; hard swelling of inguinal glands ; oedema of the
abdominal walls,



492


GRAPHITES


From the anus there is copious discharge of very offensive flatus
day and night. While diarrhoea is not so common as constipation,
yet it is a marked condition in some patients. The diarrhoea is pain-
less with much flatus, with watery, brown, putrid, lienteric stools ; ex-
coriating stools, extreme sorenes of the anus ; fissures of the anus ;
great burning. Chronic diarrhoea ; from the slightest indiscretion in
eating on comes a renewed attack. With the loose stools, and with
the constipated stools copious white jelly-like mucus is often found.
Discharge of mucus from anus and a constant moisture about the out-
side parts. Large haemorrhoids extremely sore with fissures.

Constipation with large, hard, knotty, difficult stools paSwSed with
extreme pain from soreness and fissures of the anus. Long narrow
stools (like Phos,). Violent burning in the anus, prolapsus of the
anus. It has cured many cases of bleeding piles of long standing
where there was extreme soreness and fissures and great burning.
Violent pains during stool. No desire to go to stool for many days.
It requires a long time with hard straining to pass the stool. It often
suits patients who have no stool except by injection or cailiartic.
Violent itching of the anus ; eczema and herpes near the anus or in-
volving the anus. It has cured the stomach and abdominal conditions
that favor the tapeworm.

The urine flows in a feeble stream, l)ccomes very putrid after stand-
ing and deposits much red or white sSedimetu ; after standing the urine
is covered with an iridescent cuticle. After urination there is some
dribbling ; burning in the urinary passages and neck of the bladder
when not urinating ; pain in the sacrum and coccyx when urinating.

Violent sexual excitement and nightly emissions ; the excitement is
so strong that ejaculation comes instantly after intromission. The
opposite state is also found where there is aversion to coition and
erections are wanting. It is a most useful remedy for impotcncy fol-
lowing secret vice and sexual excesses. Emissions with feeble erec-
tions. Herpes on the prepuce ; excoriated and fissured glans penis ;
dropsical swelling of the scrotum and penis, hydrocele in small boys
and baby boys. Itching and moist erupiions on the scrotum. It has
cured gleety, viscid discharge from the urethra. It has cured swollen
testes.

In the female it causes aversion to coition ; enlarged, hard ovaries ;
great tenderness in uterus and ovaries. It has cured ovarian tumor.
Pain in the uterus when reaching high with hands ; bearing down in
uterine region. It cures cauliflower excrescence of the uterus ; it has
restrained the growth of cancer in the cervix uteri, when there was
burning and putrid bloody discharge ; in this it resembles Carbo an.
Menses late, irregular, scanty, pale or mixed with scanty dark, small
clots, short duration. Menses six or eight weeks apart. Menses



GRAPHITES


493


suppressed or very late in chlorotic girls. First menses delayed.
Leucorrhoea instead of the menses {Cocculus), Qidema of the vulva,
Leucorrhoea in gushes day and night. Dryness and heat in the vagina ;
coldness in the vagina. Extreme lassitude during the menses. Many
wsymptoms come during menses ; dry cough, copious sweat ; ordema of
feet ; hoarseness ; coryza ; headache ; nausea ; morning nausea. Violent
itching of the vulva before menses ; marked excoriation of the genitals
and between the thighs during menvses ; excoriating leucorrhcKa before
menses. Leucorrhoea white ; yellowish-white ; thin ; viscid ; oftensive.
Sore, cracked nipples in nursing women. Cancer of the breast coming
in the cicatrix of an old cancer.

Larynx sensitive to touch. Hoarseness in the evening (like Cmho
Dryness in the larynx in the night ; copious glutinous mucus
in the daytime.

He suffocates when falling asleep (like Lachesis) and often wakes
up in the night gasping for l)rcath ; constriction of the chest.

Paroxysmal cough like whooping cough, cough is followed by ex-
pectoration of copious white viscid mucus: j)aroxysms come at any
time It has cured whooping cough. Cough from tickling in the
larynx or trachea; violent night cough; deep inspiration causes cough.
Rawness in the trachea; stitching pains in the chest. Constiction ol
the heart; electric shocks in the h<:art; palpitation on motion or exer-
tion with strong pulsation all ovei the body and in the extremities,
pulse full and heard, slow during iday bur fast in the morning; fast
pulse in evening after eating, wirfi fever. Itching herpetic eruption
on the chest; herpes zona on left side ol chest with pain. Ii is a
useful remedy to ward off phthisis.

Enlarged hard painful glands of neck. Painless swollen glands of
neck. The spine is very sensitive to the jar of the bed; pain in lumbar
region as if “spine were broken;” pain in sacrum with numbness down
the limbs; pain in sacrum and coccyx while urinating; itching and
moisture over the coccyx. Drawing and tearing pains in limbs: weak-
ness of all limbs; sensation of paralysis of limbs; herpes and eczema
on the limbs; marked numbness of the upper limbs, during rest and
when lain on; numbness arid coldness of fingers and hands. Rheu-
matic and tearing pains in shoulders, worse in left. Herpes in axilla
and bend of the elbow; horny callosities on the palms; skin of the
hands hard, fissured, hot and bleeding. Psoriasis of the hands and
fingers ; raw, moist places between the fingers ; the finger nails thick
and brittle ; the finger nails become black and fall off. Great heat of
palms.

Smarting and sore between the nates ; excoriation from walking.
Many eruptions on the thigh, but especially herpes and eczema ; erup-
tions that ooze a glutinous fluid. Numbness of lower limbs during



494


GUAIACUM


rest ; the legs are weak and heavy as if paralyzed ; oedema of the legs
and feet. Herpes in the groin and hollow of the knee. Cold feet in
evening in bed ; copious, offensive sweat of the feet ; ulcers on the feet
and legs ; tearing in thighs, legs, feet and toes ; burning heat in soles
and heels ; gouty tearing in the toes ; spreading blisters on the toes that
become iiiccrs ; the toenails become black ; thick ; and crippled toenails ,
the nails are painful ; ingrowing toenails.

Dreams vivid ; anxious, horrible, vexatious. Sleepless before mid-
night ; sleepiness during the day. Nightly pains in sleep. Frequent
waking. Unrefreshed in the morning.

Graphites should be used more frequently in chronic recurrent inter-
mittent fever. Chill in the evening with tearing in the limbs ; chill
intermingled with the fever ; wants to he covered in all stages ; chill
worse after eating, better after drinking and in open air. Nightly
fevers with chilliness but no sweat : dry heat evening and night, espe-
cially before midnight ; anxiety and restlessness during the fever,
hands and soles very hot ; even burning heat. It has chill with fever
followed by sweat ; sweat from slight exertion ; sweat on front of
body ; the sweat is offensive, cold and stains yellow ; copious night
sweats in weakness and during phthisis ; entire inability to perspire
in many chronic complaints.

Itching of the skin all over the body, with or without eruptions ;
itching worse at night in the warm bed ; itching and burning with
eruptions ; the skin is very hot at night ; excoriation of the skin in
the bends of joints. Every injury festers. Fissures on ends of
fingers, on nipples, labial commissures at anus and vulva, between the
toes. Itching blotches. Erysipelas beginning in face and spreading to
other parts ; erysipelas beginning in face and going from right to left.
Itching over varicose veins ; itching piles. Herpes and eczema cozing
a glutinous moisture. Crusty and scabby ulcers. Hard, painful
cicatrices ; old ulcers wdth proud flesh and burning, itching and sting-
ing ulcers with indurated base and margins.

GUAIACUM.

This is a very deep acting remedy, even deep enough to cure the
symptoms of and turn into order a constitution that is rheumatic,
gouty, and has inherited phthisis. These patients are subject to diar-
rhoea ; the tendons are too short, or they have abscesses, catarrhal
troubles, bronchitis. Drawing, tension and contractions of muscular
fibre. Sore swollen joints. The rheumatic joints are more painful
from warmth {Lac c., Led,, Puls) and more comfortable when cool.
Gouty abscesses of joints. The bones become spongy, or suppurate.
The leg and ankle bones are especially affected. Sensitive periosteum.



GUAIACUM


495


Stitching pains are characteristic, and burning is as marked as in
Arsenicum. Limbs contracted and stiff. Tlic excretions are all
offensive. Drawing, tearing pains. His cold settles in the limbs, and
the joints become sore and the muscles draw. His suffering is in-
creased by the slightest motion or exertion. Gradually increasing ex-
haustion. Progressive emaciation. In the first stage of phthisis it is
a wonderful remedy, when the symptoms agree. The progressive
character of the sickness, the weakness of mind and body, and such
symptoms as belong to deep constitutional troubles. In psoric cases
complicated with syphilis and mercury and other violent drugs we find
use for this most neglected remedy. It is closely related to Causticum,
Sulphur, and Tuberculinum.

Absent minded in the morning. Indolent, and low spirited. Obsti-
nate ; fretful, and forgetful.

Vertigo on rising.

Rheumatic pain in one side of the head, extending to the face.
Gouty headaches. Sensation of looseness of the brain. Stitching in
the head. Pain in forehead, occiput, and deep in the brain. Tearing
pain in the head. Sensation as if blood vessels were distended. Neu-
ralgia on left side of face and head. Pulsating pain, ameliorated by
pressure and walking ; aggravated by sitting and standing. This is
an exception to the general rule, as most symptoms are aggravated by
motion. Perspiration on head and face, when walking in the open air.

Sensation of protrusion of the eyes. Swelling of the eyes. Dilated
pupils.

Tearing in left ear. Paroxysmal pain in ear.

Pain in the bones of the novse. Nose swollen. Fluent coryza.

Pain in the bones of the face, nose and teeth. Face red and swollen,
spotted. Heat in the face in the evening. Sharp pain in right malar
bone. Paroxysmal pain in face, head and neck, every day at 6 P. M.,
lasting until 4 a. m. Dull ache in left side of jaw. Tearing, stitching
in teeth. Pain in teeth when biting jaws together. Inflammation of
the tonsils, worse from drinks, and there is much burning.

Perverted taste. Tongue coated thick white, or brown.

Burning in throat. Tonsillitis ; it prevents suppuration.

Aversion to food, to milk. Much thirst.

Vomits a mass of watery mucus, followed by exhaustion. Nausea
from sensation of mucus in throat.

Burning in stomach and abdomen.

Constrictive sensation in stomach, with anguish and dyspncjca.

Much flatulence in abdomen.

Morning diarrhoea (Sulph.), Stools watery. Constipation, with
hard, crumbling, offensive stool.

Urging to urinate, even after micturition. The urine is profuse,



496


HELLEBORUS NIGER


and foetid. Cutting in urethra while urine flows.

Stitching in neck of bladder after ineffectual urging to urinate.
Emissions without dreams. Discharge from urethra.

Chronic inflammation of ovaries. Menses absent. Membranous
dsymenorrhoea. Shuddering in mamma% with gooseflesh.

Spasms of larynx. Difficult breathing. Palpitation.

Dry, hard cough with fever, finally relieved by expectoration. Copi-
our, putrid expectoration, like pus. Expectoration of blood.

Rheumatism of the muscles of the chest, with great pain on motion.
Stitching pains in chest from motion and breathing. Stitching pains
seem to be in the pleura. Chronic bronchial catarrh with putrid ex-
pectoration, when rheumatism extends to chest. Phthisis pituitosa in
rheumatic and gouty patients. Chest pains after riding in o];>en air.

Palpitation of the heart. Rheumatism of the heart ; frequent weak
pulse.

Rheumatic stiffness of back of neck and back. Stitching in neck
and back. Drawing pains in back between scapulae. All pains aggra-
vated from motion and ameliorated during rest ; aggravated from heat.

Drawing, tearing, stitching pains in upper limbs. Rheumatic pains
in upper arm and shoulder. Pains in finger joints, and then in whole
hand. Hot hands. Stitching in right thumb. Pains all aggravated
from motion ; aggravated from heat.

Shortening of the hamstrings. Pain in thighs extending to knees.
Tearing, drawing pains in legs. Pains in the tibia. Gouty abscess
of knee. Shooting pains in legs from feet to knees. Softening of
tibia and ankle bones. The knee is flexed from the contraction of
hamstrings. The right leg swollen and drawn close to the thigh.
Pains in all the limbs, aggravated from motion and heat. Weakness
of arms and legs. Numbness of lower limbs. Stiffness of limbs.
Weakness of limbs after exertion. Rheumatism of joints, aggravated
from heat and motion. Pain in limbs after taking cold.

Restless sleep. Sleeplessness. Wakens from sleep as if falling.
Nightmare while lying on the back. Unrefreshing sleep.

Chilliness followed by fever in the evening. Burning fever. Hot
hands. Night sweats. Copious perspiration.

The provers that perspired had no urinary symptoms.

HELLEBORUS NIGER.

In all the complaints of Helleborus stupefaction occurs in greater
or less degree. Sometimes it is a complete stupor, sometimes a partial
stupor, but it is always stupefaction and sluggishness.

Hellebore is useful in affections of the brain, spinal cord, the gen-
eral nervous system and mind, but especially in acute inflammatory



HELLEBOROUS NIGER


497


diseases of the brain and spinal cord and their membranes, and in
troubles bordering on insanity. There is a peculiar kind of imbecility
or stupefaction of the body and mind. The extreme state is uncon-
sciousness. Complete unconsciousness in connection with cerebral
congestion, or inflammation which has gone on to hydrocephalus,
cerebro-spinal meningitis, or inflammation of the brain, with stupefac-
tion. Even early in the disease Hellebore lacks the wildness and
acute delirium found is Stramonium and Belladonna, It is passive.
Again, it fits in after the wildness of the delirium has passed away and
the patient has settled down into a state of stupefaction. The patient
lies upon the back, eyes partly open, rolling the head, mouth open,
tongue dry, eyes lustcrless, staring into space. Staring at the individual
talking. Waiting a long time to answer, or not answering at all.

Violent attacks of brain trouble frequently come to a sudden end,
but those that are more passive linger, and that is where Hellebore
comes in. The Hellebore case will linger for weeks and sometimes
months in this state of stupefaction, gradually emaciating. He lies
upon the back with the limbs drawn up ; he looks pale and sickly.
When questioned he answers slowly. The text says: ‘^Stupefaction
bordering on insensibility.’’ Another common expression is: “Dimin-
ished power of the mind over the body.” The muscles will not act ;
they will not obey the will. It is a sort of paralytic state, but “stupe-
faction” expresses it. Cannot project; ideas ; cannot rivet the attention ;
cannot concentrate the mind. The patient appears semi-idiotic.

Delirium is not common, and when present it is muttering. There
is more stupefaction, more “do nothing,” more “say nothing,” than
delirium. Yet there is evidently confusion of mind ; he cannot think.
In many instances, very late in the disease, the patient can be roused
up, and he will act as if he were attemping to think, as if he were
attempting to answer, attempting to move. But he simply stares at
the doctor with eyes partly open, with a dazed expression on his face,
and picks his finger ends.

When questioned the Hellebore patient is not able to tell you what
he has in mind, unless considerably aroused and agitated. But when
so aroused he will talk about spirits, or say that he sees devils. He
sees in his imagination those images that he has read about, or seen
pictured, as the devil, with horns and a tail. A young person who
has never heard of the devil, or of spirits, would not have that form
of hallucination in his delirium. The hallucinations are shaped in
accordance with what he has been taught to imagine.

Hellebore has a peculiar quasi-hystcrical condition — a form of in-
sanity. She imagines she has sinned away her day of grace. Like
Aurum, she believes that she is doing wrong, that she is committing an
unpardonable sin. That is as near as the remedy approaches to insanity.

63



498


HELLEBOROUS NIGER


*'An old woman having been accused of theft by the women around
took it so much to heart that she hanged herself. This suicide pro-
duced such an effect on the women of the village that one after
another accused herself of having caused the death of the old woman.''

The most striking type in Hellebore is the sick child. It comes in
especially in children between two and ten years of age. The staring
— lying on the back and staring with half-closed eyes — is typical of
the remedy. Sometimes the lips move without any sound. The lips
move as if the child wishes to say something, but on further question-
ing the words he wished to speak are lost, forgotten.

In hydrocephalus there is a sharp scream, the brain cry. The child
will cry out in sleepT He will carry the hand to the head and shriek,
like Apis, But the Apis hydrocephalus is far more active and acute.
The Apis patient kicks the covers off ; this patient does not mind the
covers, he does not mind anything. He is not easily disturbed. He
lies upon his back with the limbs drawn up ; often making automatic
motions with the arms and legs. Sometimes one side is paralyzed,
but the other keeps up automatic motions.

Hellebore is useful in the low form of disease known as ''apathetic
typhoid." These same symptoms guide to the remedy. Indifferent
to all external impressions. Rarely much disturbed by being touched,
or by being covered too warmly, or by not being covered at all. He
does not seem to be sensitive to heat, or cold, or pricking, or handling
or pinching. Listlessness. What is called in the text "stubborn
silence" is more an apathetic silence, an inability to speak. It appears
as if he refused to answer, but he docs not ; he does not know how to
answer ; he cannot think.

Fixed ideas in persons who are said to be just a little '*off their
balance," a little queer. And that fixed idea will stay ; there is no use
trying to argue him out of it. The woman gets a fixed idea that she
is going to die on a certain day — and nothing can get it out of her
head. This is not like Aconite, because there is no fear of death.
Aconite has fear of death and fixes the time of death. Fixed idea
that she has committed some sin, which she will at times name and
describe, or perhaps only mention vaguely — but it is very real to her.

When able to be about the patient appears to be sad, because sher
sits and says nothing, and seems to be in a woeful mood. But there
is not that great lamentation, with walking the floor and wringing the
hands ,that we find in Aurum, It is an apathetic state ; she appears
sad and melancholy, whereas perhaps she does little thinking. Any
attempt at consolation, so long as the patient is able to think, only
aggravates the trouble. Like Natrum muriaticum, the complaints are
aggravated by consolation, but the complaints of Natrum muriaticum
are not at all like these. If the Hellebore patient is able to meditate



llELLKBOROt^S KlGER


499


upon his symptoms, they seem to grow better.

Sometimes there are convulsive motions in this remedy, but they are
more likely to be automatic. Motions that seem to have nothing to
do with the will. He simply makes motions, like one moving in an
absent-ntinded state.

The Helleborus patient is benumbed everywhere. The whole senso-
rium is in a benumbed state, a stupefaction, a blunting of general
sensibility. The text says: '‘Vision unimpaired.” Nevertheless he
sees imperfectly ; he does not regard the object his gaze is fixed upon ;
that is, his range of vision appears to be correct, yet if questioned a
little as to what he saw, he has no recollection of it ; it has made no
impression upon his memory or his mind.

Vertigo, with nausea and vomiting. Vertigo from stooping. With
the general stupefaction the head rolls and tosses. The child lies upon
the back and rolls the head from side to side. The eyes are partly
open, and he keeps boring the back of the head into the pillow. This
is partly unconscious and partly to relieve the drawing in the muscles
of the back of the neck. These muscles keep shortening, as the disease
progresses, just as they do in crebro-spinal meningitis ; until the head
is drawn back as far as it can go.

There is burning heat in the head ; shooting pains ; pressive pains
in the head from congestion. Violent occipital headache. Dull aching
in the occiput ; benumbed feeling ill the occiput. A feeling like wood ,
fulness, congestion and pressure. The headaches, the motions of the
head and the appearance of the face are those occurring in congestion
of the brain. I have seen children, after passing through a moder-
ately acute but rather passive first stage, lie in this stupid stale, need-
ing Hellebore for weeks before they received it. When it was given
repair set in ; not instantly, but gradually. The remedy acts slowly
in these slow, stubborn, stupid cases of brain and spinal trouble. Some-
times there is no apparent change until the day after the remedy is
administered or even the next night, when there comes a sweat, a
diarrhoea, or vomiting — ^a reaction. They must not be interfered with
no remedy must be given. They are signs of reaction. If the child
has vitality enough to recover, he will now recover. If the vomiting
is stopped by any remedy that will stop it, the Hellebore will be anti-
doted. Let the vomiting or the diarrhoea or the sweat alone, and it
will pass away during the day. The child will become warm, and in
a few days will return to consciousness — and then what will take
place? Just imagine these benumbed fingers and hands and limbs,
this benumbed skin everywhere. What would be the most natural
thing to develop as evidence of the rousing up of this stupid child?
It is necessary for you to know this. It is not really a part of Ae
teaching of the homoeopathic Materia Medica, but you must know what



500


UELLEBOROUS NIGER


to expect after giving this remedy. It is a clinical obsefvation which
you will see if you see Hellebore cases, and Zincum cases. Zincum
is, if possible, even more profound in its dredful state of stupefaction
than Hellebore. Well, that child’s fingers will commence to tingle.
As he comes back to his normal nervous condition, the fingers com-
mence to tingle, the nose and ears tingle, and the child begins to
scream and toss back and forth and roll about the bed. The neigh-
bors will come in and say, “I would send that doctor away unless he
gives something to help that child but just as sure as you do it you
will have a dead baby in twenty-four hours. That child is getting
well ; let him alone. You will never be able to manage one of these
cases if you do not take the father into a room by himself and tell himi
just how the case will proceed. Do not take the mother ; do not tell
her a word about it, unless she is an unusually excellent mother, be-
cause that is her child, and she is sympathetic, and she will cry when
she hears that child cry ; she will lose her head and will insist upon
the father turning you out of doors. But you take the father aside
beforehand and tell him what is going to happen ; explain it to him so
he will see it for himself ; and tell him that if this is not permitted to
go on, that if the remedy is interfered with, he will lose his child.

It is not so much the awful pains, but it is the itching, tingling and
formication that cause the appearance of extreme agony. Sometimes
in every part of the child’s body it is a week before all these symptoms
go away of themselves— -but they will go away, if left alone.

AH this will make you nervous. Do not stay and watch the case
too long, because if you do you will change the remedy. I never heard
of one solitary cure like these in the hands of an Old School doctor.

The face has a very sickly appearance ; sunken ; gradually emaci-
ating. It has a sooty appearance, just as if soot had settled in the
nostrils and in the corners of the eyes. You will say that the patient
is going to die. Quite likely — without Hellebore. The remedy fits
the kind of cases that the allopath knows nothing about and has no
remedy for. His prognosis is always unfavorable. The face, of
course, expresses the mental symptoms. Wrinkled forehead, bathed
in cold sweat. Paleness of the face and heat of the head. Twitching
of the muscles of the face. We find that knitting of the brow and
wrinkling of the forehead in just this kind of brain trouble. We find
a similar kind of wrinkling in Lycopodium, but the trouble is in the
lungs. In this remedy the nostrils are dilated and sooty. Nor much flap-
ping, but extremely dilated. The eyeballs are glassy and the lids sticky.

There is violent thirst in these fevers, and unusual canine hunger.
The nausea and vomiting are nondescript. In the early part of the
proving there are diarrhoea and dysentery; with copious white gela-
tinous stool ; stool consisting solely of pale tenacious mucus. And



HEPAR SULPHUR


SOI


then comes paralytic constipation, and these prostrated, emaciated
brain cases, such as described, will lie for days without stool, or any
action of the bowels. After a day or two they will not even respond
to injections. Little, hard, dry stool. Again, when reaction comes,
it very commonly comes with a diarrhoea, or a sweat, or vomiting;
perhaps with all three of these conditions.

The urine is retained or suppressed ; sometimes it dribbles away —
passes unconsciously. Urine passed in a feeble stream ; bloody urine.

The patient lies on the back, with his limbs drawn up ; or slides
down in bed. Great debility ; great relaxation ; the muscles refuse to
act. Convulsions of sucklings. Epilepsy with consciousness. Trau-
matic tetanus. Constant somnambulism ; cannot be roused to full
consciousness. Soporous sleep.

HEPAR SULPHUR

The Hepar patient is chilly. He is sensitive to the cold and wants
an unusual amount of clothing when in cold air. He wants the sleep-
ing room very warm and can endure much heat in the room, many
degrees warmer than a healthy person ordinarily desires. He has no
endurance in the cold and all his complaints arc made worse in the
cold. If he becomes cold in sleep his complaints come on ; or if he
is out in the cold, dry wind, compltints come on ; inflammatory and
rheumatic complaints appear. The exposure of hand or foot at night
in hed brings on symptoms. He wints the covers drawn close about
the neck when in bed.

This patient is also oversensitive to impressions, to surroundings
and to pain. What with an ordinary person would only be an ache or
disagreeable sensation becomes with Hepar an intense suffering. But
the pains of Hepar may be very severe, very sharp. Inflamed spots,
eruptions, boils or suppurations are full of sharp pains. This is so
intense that it is described at times as a sticking and jagging like sharp
sticks. The pains in ulcers arc often felt like sticks ; intense and sharp
as if sticks were jagging the ulcer. This sensation is often expressed
by the patient suffering from sore throat. He feels as if he had
swallowed a fish bone or stick. This is in keeping with the general
character, because it is present everywhere, in inflammations, ulcers,
pustules, boils and eruptions ; all seem to have sticks in them or some-
thing jagging. Eruptions are sensitive to touch. This accords with
the oversensitiveness of the nerves found everywhere. The Hepar
patient faints with pain, even from slight pain.

This remedy belongs to patients that are called delicate, that are
oversensitive to impressions. The mind takes part in this oversensi-
tiveness and manifests itself by a state of extreme irritability. Every



svtpmm


50Z

little thing that disturbs the patient makes him intensely angry, abusive
and impulsive. The impulses will overwhelm him and make him wish
to kill his best friend in an instant. Impulses also that are without
cause sometimes crop out in Hepar. A man may have a sudden im-
pulse to stab his friend. A barber has an impulse to cut the throat
of his patron while in the chair. Mothers may have an impulse to
throw the child into the fire or an impulse to set herself on fire ; an
impulse to do violence and to destroy. These symptoms increase to
insanity and then the impulses are often carried out. It becomes a
mania to set fire to things.

The patient is quarrelsome^ hard to get along with ; nothing pleases ;
everybody disturbs; oversensitiveness to persons, to people and to
places. He desires a constant change of persons and things and sur-
roundings and each new surrounding or person or thing again dis-
pleases and makes him irritated. With this irritability of temper and
physical irritability there is a tendency to suppuration in parts. Local-
ized inflammations incline to suppurate, especially in glands and
cellular tissue do we have suppuration and ulcers. The glands of the
neck, axilla and groin and the mammary glands swell, become hard
and suppurate. First the hard swellings with the feeling as if they
had sticks jagging in them, then it becomes highly inflamed and red
over the part and ultimately it suppurates, discharges and heals slowly.
The bone even suppurates and takes on necrosis and caries. Felons
around the root of the nail and ends of the fingers. The nail sup-
purates and loosens and comes off. Sensation of splinters under the
nails, even when they do not suppurate. The nails become hard and
brittle. Warts crack open and bleed, sling and burn and suppurate.
Hepar is especially useful in felons in such a constitution as described,
but sometimes you will have nothing more than the fact that the
patient is a scrawny, chilly patient, who is always taking cold and sub-
ject to felons. I have often had to give Hepar on no better informa-
tion and have known it to stop the tendency to felons. It also com-
petes with Silica,

The patient is often scrawny, and has a tendency to enlargement of
glands. The lymphatic glands are generally hard and enlarged.
ITiey are chronically enlarged without suppuration, and at any cold
that comes on some particular gland may suppurate.

The catarrhal state is general. There is no mucous membrane
exempt, but especially do we have catarrh of the nose, cars, throat,
larynx and chest. The Hepar patient is subject to coryza. In some
instances the colds settle in the nose and then there will be much dis-
charge, with sneezing every time he goes into a cold wind. The cold
winds bring on sneezing and running from the nose, first of a watery
character and finally ending in a thick, yellow, offensive discharge.



HEPAR SULPHUR


SO3


These offensive discharges smell like decomposed cheese, and this char-
acteristic runs through the remedy. The discharges from all parts of
the body smell like old cheese. The discharges from ulcers are offens-
ive, and have a decomposed, cheesy smell. It has discharges running
through it also that smell sour, and this is also a general because it
modifies all things that can be sour. The babies arc always sour in
spite of much washing. Or it may he noticed by the members of the
family that one of the family always smells sour, has a sour perspira-
tion. The discharges from ulcers are sour, and also discharges from
mucous membranes. The discharge from the nose becomes copious,
and causes ulceration in patches. The throat has a catarrhal condi-
tion ; the whole pharynx is in a catarrhal state with copious discharge.
Throat extremely sensitive to touch ; pain as if full of splinters ; pain
on swallowing. The larynx also is painful on talking ; painful as a
bolus of food goes down behind the larynx, and painful to touch with
the hand. There is a loss of voice, and a dry, hoarse bark in adults,
especially in the mornings and evenings. Every time he goes out in
the dry, cold wind, he becomes hoarse, loses the voice and coughs. It
is a dry, hoarse, barking cough. Inspiring cold air will increase the
cough and putting the hand out of bed will increase the pain in the
larynx or cough. Putting the hand or foot out of bed brings a general
aggravation of all the complaints of Hepar. Putting the hand out of
bed accidentally when sleeping will bring on cough, and cause sneezing.
The larynx has its catarrhal statc^ and in oversensitive children this
catarrhal state becomes a croup. Sensitive children that are exposed
during the day in a cold, dry wind, or cold air, come down next morn-
ing with a violent attack of croup. The Hepar croup is worse in the
morning and in the evening ; evening until midnight. Sometimes cases
that at first call for Aconite run into Hepar. The /Icon, croup comes
on with great violence, worse in the evening before midnight. The
child wakes up from its first sleep with a hoarse, barking croup. A
dose of Aocnite may prove entirely sufficient ; or it may be only a pallia-
tive. The child goes to sleep and along towards morning, or at least
sometime after midnight, there is another attack, which shows that
Aeon, was not sufficient. Such a case will be controlled by Hepar.
When the croup comes on after midnight and the child wakes up
frightened, suffocating, rouses up in bed with a dry, hoarse and ring-
ing cough, which rings like a dry whoop, then Spongia will nearly
always be the remedy, and again if Spongia palliates it and it is not
sufficiently deep and there is a morning aggravation which shows that
the trouble is returning Hepar follows. Aeon., Hepar and Spongia
are closely related to each other and they are truly great croup
remedies.

Dry, paroxysmal cough from evening until midnight and sometimes



504


HEPAR SULPHUR


lasting all night, with choking, gagging and Grouping ; some loose
coughing in the daytime ; rawness and scraping the larynx ; worse in
cold air or uncovering hand or foot in bed.

The catarrhal state is sometimes lower down in the trachea, and the
trachea becomes extremely sore from much coughing. The patient
has been coughing days and weeks and has the morning and evening
aggravations ; a rattling, barking cough with great soreness of the chest
in an oversensitive and chilly patient. The cough is attended with
choking and gagging, even to vomiting ; it is worse in the cold air,
and from putting the hand out of bed. He coughs and sweats. There
is much sweating the whole night, without relief. Sweating all night
without relief belongs to a great many complaints of Hepar. He
sweats easily, so that with the cough and on the slightest exertion he
is fairly drenched with perspiration.

It has catarrhal affections of the ear. A sudden inflammation comes
on in the middle ear, an abscess forms, the drum of the ear ruptures
and there is a bloody discharge and sticking, tearing pains in the in-
flamed ear. There is first a sensation of stopping up of the ear, then
bursting and pressure in the ear, and then perforation of the drum.
There is also an inflammatory condition causing a discharge that is
foetid, or a bloody yellow, purulent discharge, thick, with cheesy parti-
cles and smelling like old cheese.

Hepar sometimes is bad on the oculist. When it is indicated, it
cures eyes very quickly, so that the oculist does not have a very long
case and it does away with the necessity for washes in the hands of
the specialist. From the eyes we have the same offensive thick, puru-
lent discharge. Inflammation of the eyes attended with little ulcers.
Ulcers of the cornea, granulations, bloody, offensive discharge from
the eyes. The eyes look red, the iids are inflamed, the edges are turned
out and the margin of the lids become ulcerated. In all sorts of so-
called scrofulous affections, the eye conditions may be covered by
Hepar when the constitutional state is present. The constitutional
state of the patient is the only guide to the remedy. Many times the
eye symptoms are nondescript. You have only an inflamed eye with
catarrhal discharge, and for this you could give a large number of the
anti-psorics ; but when you go into the state of the patient and find
these general symptoms, then this remedy will cure. The general
symptoms mil guide to the remedy that will cure the eyes. You will
see that the specialist for the eyes is often limited unless he knows
how to secure all the symptoms of the patient and selects the remedy
upon the totality of the symptoms.

There are other catarrhal conditions. Catarrh of the bladder, with
purulent discharges in the urine and copious muco-purulent deposits.
Ulcers of the bladder. The walls of the bladder become hardened,



HEPAR SUI.PHUR.


SOS

80 that it has almost no power to expel its contents, and the urine
passes in a slow stream or in drops, or in the male the stream falls
down perpendicularly. No ability to expel the urine with force. It
is a paresis. There is burning in the bladder and frequent, almost
constant, urging to urinate. It has also a catarrhal state of the urethra
that resembles gonorrhoea, and it has been a very useful remedy in
chilly patients with glcety discharge of long standing. Thick dis-
charge of a white, cheesy character. Ulcers and little inflammatory
spots along the urethra. There is a sticking sensation here and there
along the urethra and when passing urine a sensation of a splinter in
the urethra. Copious leucorrhoea with the same offensive, cheesy
smell. The leucorrhoea is so copious that she is compelled to wear
a napkin, and the napkins, I have been told by women who have been
cured by Hepar, are so offensive that they must be taken away and
washed at once because the odor permeates the rooms. This horribly
offensive odor that is so permeating is often cured by Kali phos. It
has really one of the most penetrating of odors, so much so that when
a woman suffers from this leucorrhoea the odor can be detected when
she enters the room.

A very important sphere for Heper is after mercurialization. Many
old people are walking the street at the present day who have been
the victims of Calomel, who have been salivated, who have taken blue
pill for recurrent bilious spells, to ‘tap the liver," until finally they
get into a state of chilliness felt, aa it were, in the bone. They sweat
much about the head, they ache hi the bones, and every change of
weather to cold, and every cold, damp spell affects them. They are
like barometers. Heper is the remedy for that state. They go into
diseases of the bone easily and arc always shivering. While they have
periods of aggravation from warmth, as a general rule they are chilly
subjects, and feel the cold easily. In the more acute affections of
Mercury there is an aggravation from the warmth of the bed, but the
old subjects who have been years ago poisoned with it get almost blood-
less, and they become chilly ; they cannot get clothing enough to keep
them warm, ^hey become withered and shrivelled, and have rheu-
matic affections about the joints. Then it is that the symptoms of
Hepar agree and it becomes a valuable antidote to that state of mer-
curialization. Hepar is also a complement and antidote to potentized
Mercury. When Merc, has been administered and has done all it can
do as a curative remedy, or when it has acted improperly and has some-
what mixed up the case and it is necessary to follow it with the natural
complement or antidote and prepare for another series, Hepar is to be
thought of as one of the natural followers of Merc. It is well known
that Merc, is not followed well by Silica. Sil. does not do useful
work when Merc, is still acting or has been acting. This is the time
64



S!o6,


HEPAR SXn,PHUR-


that Hepar becomes an intercurrent remedy. Sil. follows well after
Hepar, and Hepar follows well after Merc., and thus Hepar becomes'
an intercurrent in that series.

In old syphilitic cases when the symptoms agree Hepar is a very
full and complete remedy. It corresponds to the majority of symp-
toms of syphilis, and it only needs to correspond to the symptoms of
the individual patient when he is syphilitic to be indicated. Thus in
old cases who have been mercurialized, who have had the symptoms
suppressed so that the disease is latent and ready to crop out at any
time, Hepar will come in and have a decided eftect upon the syphilis
and upon the mercury. It will straighten matters out and cause a
development that will lead to clear prescribing. In this relationship
to syphilis and mercury Hepar is closely allied to Staph., Asaf., Nit.
acid, Sil., etc. Especially Hepar the remedy in those cases of syphilis
where great quantities of mercury have been taken, until it is no
longer able to suppress the symptoms of the disease ; in old cases when
the syphilitic miasm attacks the bones of the nose and they sink in,
or a great ulceration takes place ; those cases you sometimes see walk-
ing around the street, with a big patch over the nose or over the open-
ing that leads down into the nasal cavity. When there is severe pain
in the region of the nasal bones, the bridge of the nose is so sensitive
that it cannot be touched and in the root of the nose there is a sensa-
tion as if a splinter were sticking in. For offensive discharge fromi
the nose, foetid ozsena in an old case, which has been mercurialized,
who is chilly in his very bones, think of Hepar. It has cured many
such cases ; it has healed up the ulcers ; it has cured the catarrhal state,
and it has hastened the healing up of the portions of diseased bone,
by hastening the suppuration and has returned the patient to an orderly
state.

As we go into the syphilitic affections that lead into the throat, we
find ulcers of the soft palate which eat away the uvula, small ulcers
which finally unite and destroy the soft palate and then commence
to work upon the osseous portion of the roof of the mouth. The odor
that comes from that mouth when it is opened to show the throat is
extremely offensive ; very often like spoiled cheese. The medicines that
are especially related, or especially useful in this form of ulceration in
old syphilitics, will be Kali bi.. Lack., Merc, cor., Merc, and Hepar,
but in those syphilitic cases that have been mercurialized Hepar and
PJitric add should be thought of. Nitric acid is very closely related
to Hepar ; it is just as chilly ; it has the sensation of sticks in the throat
and; in inflamed parts. It has fine ulcers in the throat, upon the tonsils
and in the larynx. Nitric acid competes with Hepar . You think of
the two together. Both have sensation of a fish bone or stick in the
throat.



HEPAR SULPHUR.


y>r


Hie cartilages of the larynx become attacked in syphilitic affections
and old mercurial affections. When the case is not of syphilitic origin
but is of sycotic origin, small or large white gelatinous polypi form
in the larynx and they are sore, causing loss of voice, or cracked voice ;
when they cause choking or uneasiness, Hepar is one of the remedies.
Hepar, Cak.^ Arg. nit and Nit. ac. and sometimes Thuja are the
remedies related to such conditions.

Again, in the earlier syphilitic manifestations, the chancre has the
feeling of a stick in it ; then comes the formation of a bubo that may
be either non-suppurative or a suppurating gland, associated with a
chancre or a harmless ulcer upon the penis. These conditions are
often indications for Hepar, when the constitutional state is present.
Hepar has also sycotic warts. It is useful in old cases of gleet ; also
when there is a sensation of a splinter in the urethra. In strictures
and constrictions of inflammatory character during the inflammation
there is a tendency to ulcerate, and with this the sensation of a stick
is felt. Arg. nit.. Nit, ac. and Hepar run close together for this kind
of inflammation, and will cure the inflammatory stricture before it
becomes a complete and permanent fibrinous stricture. It is only very
rarely that you will be able with your medicines to cure a stricture
after it has taken on permanency, after it is many years old, but as
long as the inflammation keeps up there is hope. I remember one
very old one that was cured by ^pia. I did not know at first of its
presence, but prescribed Sepia on the symptoms of the case, and the
patient came back with great suflfering in the urethra, and then con*
fessed to me that he had had gonorrhoea and had been troubled for
years with a stricture. That inflammation was aroused anew and
after it ran its course it really left the passage clear and there was
never any more trouble with the stricture. That was a very unusual
result. I have many times prescribed for patients with the utmost
endeavors to do the same thing, and have cured the patient in other
respects, but the stricture would remain. Remember then that Hepar
has fig warts, chronic sycotic discharges, or chronic gonorrhoea, offen-
sive, cheesy discharges, the sensation of sticks in the urethra, inflam-
matory stricture, which will be associated with difficulty in passing
urine, to the extent that there is a weakness of the bladder and the
urine falls perpendicularly.

Hepar has served a valuable purpose in its ability to establish sup-
puration around foreign bodies. For instance, a foreign body is under
the skin or is somewhere unknown. Perhaps it is the tip end of a
projectile after the projectile itself has been taken away, or under the
nail a splinter is forming a suppuration. It is so small that it is iiardly
observed and it is supposed often that the splinter has been entirely
removed, but an inflammatoiy condition starts up. Hepar if indicated



5o8


HEPAR SULPHUR.


by the general symptoms of the patient hastens the suppuration and
heals up the finger, for it has all such things. Silica is another remedy
capable of establishing inflammation and suppuration and removes
little foreign bodies that cannot be located. Of course it is understood
that if the physician knows the location of a splinter, he will take such
steps as are necessary to remove it, and not wait for the action of a
remedy. But at times a needle point breaks off against the bone of
the finger of a seamstress, or small portions of the needle may exist
where they cannot be found without an immense amount of slashing
which the patient refuses. Hepar or Silica will remove it. A little
abscess will form, and the little mite will be discharged. Knowing
that these two remedies have this tendency to establish a suppuration
wherever there are foreign bodies, it is w^ell to be reminded that if a
bullet were encysted in the lungs it would be well, if the symptoms
Called for Hepar or Silica, to consider whether it might not be injuri-
ous to give a remedy that would establish a suppuration. It might be
that the bullet is resting in a vital place, in a net-work of arteries, and
it would be well not to establish suppuration in this vital region. De-
posits of a tubercular character are often located in a place that they
can easily be suppurated out, and the action of the remedy on them)
would be the same as a foreign body. Hence it is that Hepar, aftei"
its administration, will very often abolish a crop of boils all over the
economy because in the skin there are small accumulations of seba-
ceous matter and these will be suppurated out. Sulphur also does this,
so that it may be well to be careful and not give Silica or Sulphur,
or Hepar too often, or too high, in patients that have encysted tubercle
in the lungs. Rokitansky in his numerous post-mortems found a large
number of encysted caseous deposits in the lungs, in cases that had
lived and outgrown these trouble ; they had become encysted and
therefore perfectly safe and the patient had died of something else.
It might be dangerous to administer these medicines that have a ten-
dency to cause suppuration in such, and you should at least proceed
cautiously in using them. After you have seen a great many cases
you will find that you have killed some of them. If our medicines were
not powerful enough to kill folks, they would not be powerful enough
to cure sick folks. It is well for you to realize that you are dealing
with razors when dealing with high potencies. I would rather be in
a room with a dozen negroes slashing with razors than in the hands
of an ignorant pxescriber of high potencies. They are means of
tremendous harm, as well as of tremendous good.

In contrast with Hepar (although Hepar is a form of Calcarea),
Calc. carb. has no such tearing down nature in it. It does not estab-
lish inflammation around foreign bodies and tend to suppurate them
but, but causes a fibrous deposit around bullets and other foreign sub*



HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS


509


stances in the flesh. It causes tubercular deposits to harden and con-
tract and become encysted.

Many excellent homoeopathic physicians have said to me, “I do not
agree with you as to the danger of Sulphur in phthisical cases. I have
cured cases of phthisis with Sulphur.” So have I, many of them. But
I did not refer to curable cases, but to those cases which are well
developed and have grave symptoms. It is well to know all the
elements in the case ; then if you have administered a remedy and
killed your patient, you know at least what you have done. It is better
to know what you have done if you have killed your patient, than to
be ignorant of it and go on and kill some more in the same way.

HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS

Hydrastic is a slow, deep acting remedy, required in many trophic
disturbances, where there is emaciation, catarrhal conditions and
ulceration, even malignant ulceration. Defective assimilation. When
it is noticed that the stomach is the center of most of the symptom
complex. The desires and aversions often give the key to a very
complex totality of symptoms. In this remedy the sinking empty
hunger with loathing of food is striking, strange, rare, and therefore
peculiar. It is characteristic because it is a general of the remedy,
and is predicated of the patient. Great weakness prevails at all times.
Catarrhal symptoms with thick, vijicid, ropy, yellow mucus, sometimes
white, from any mucous membra&C, with or without ulceration. Deep
eating spreading ulcers upon the skin or mucous membrane, with
thick, viscid, yellow pus. Induration in glands, in base of ulcers.
False granulations that bleed much and easily, on the slightest touch.
This remedy has been very useful in the treatment of malignant ulcers.
In such ulcers it is often a great comfort to the patient, even when it
does not cure, as it removes the offensiveness, modifies the pain and
restrains the destructiveness. The burning so commonly found in
such ulcers is a strong symptom of Hydrastis. When the weakness
and emaciation have progressed together for months and years in
chronic stomach disease, fainting comes on, and this is also found in
Hydrastis. In chronic cases, when the tissues have suffered and
not the mind. The astonishing absence of mental symptoms except
the general discouragement incidental to long suffering and weakness
is striking. If it were carefully proved, most likely the mental loves
and hates would come out. The symptoms are better during rest
Small wounds bleed and suppurate.

The headaches are only such as generally belong to stomach dis-
orders, and prolonged nasal catarrh. They are not distinctive. It
has cured eczema with thick crusts.



HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS


5^0


The eyes and face jaundiced. Ulceration of the cornea. Thick,
yellow, viscid, mucous discharge. Chronic inflammation of lids. In-
fammation, thickening, redness of margins of lids.

Otorrhoea with thick, viscid, purulent discharge. Copious mucous
discharge. Catarrh of the Eustachian tubes with many noises in ears.
Ears red, swollen, covered with scales ; fissured behind where con-
nected with head.

The nose is obstructed with stringy, yellow or white mucus. The
air feels cold in the nose, and the membrane is raw and ulcerated.
Ropy mucus is drawn from posterior nares into the throat. Rawness
in both nares with constant urging to blow the nose. Coryza with
discharge, scanty in room and profuse in open air. Bloody, purulent
discharge from nose. Thick, white, or yellow mucous discharge.
Large crusts constantly form in the nose.

The face is sickly, shrunken, pale, waxy, cachectic, jaundiced. It
is of great service in epithelioma of face, nose or lip.

The tongue is yellow, large, flabby and spongy. Feels as if burnt.

Ulceration of mouth, gums, tongue ; spreading and burning. Aphthae
in children and nursing mothers. Excessive secretions of ropy mucusj
golden yellow. Excoriation of mouth. In old mercurial cases.

Catarrhal sore throat of long standing, granulated and ulcerated ;
excoriated and burning. Thick, viscid, yellow mucus that can be
drawn out in ropes.

No appetite ; no thirst ; loathing of food. Nearly all foods disorder
the stomach. Spitting up the food by the mouthful (like Phos, and
Ferr,y Vomits all food. Retains only water and milk. Eructa-
tions, sour, putrid, of food eaten. Empty, faint feeling in stomach
with loathing of food and obstinate constipation with no desire for
stool is a combination that must generally have Hydrastis. Pulsatioi^
in the stomach. Ulceration of the stomach with burning. For sus-
picious lump in region of pyloris. Weight in stomach after eating.
The stomach seems to be only an ordinary sack ; digestion is slow, and
tedious. Fulness after eating, lasting a long time. The empty, sink-
ing feeling is not ameliorated after eating. Sour vomiting. Chronic
gastric catarrh. Slow digestion.

This must be a useful liver remedy, for the following reasons; The
skin is jaundiced ; the stool is light, even white, showing the absence of
bile, and there is distress in the region of the liver. In chronic de-
rangement of the liver. Liver enlarged, hard and nodular.

Cramping pains. Colic, flatulence and distended abdomen. It has
cured many of the usual conditions that generally attend bad digestion
and torpid liver. Intestinal catarrh and ulceration. Sharp pain in
region of spleen.

It has cured obstinate piles, ulceration and fissures of anus. Re«



HYOSCYAMUS.


5n


laxation and prolapsus of anus. Qironic diarrhoea with yellow, thin
faeces, even watery. Intiammation of anus. Stools, biiclcss, white,’
solt, acrid, greenish, much viscid mucus. Hard, nodular stools.
Most obstinate constipation ; no desire for stool for days. Paresis of
the rectum. It cures constipation, when the stomach symptoms agree.
In old cases when enemas no longer act, when the faeces remain high
up, or do not come down into rectum to excite desire, this remedy has
been of great service. In constipation or diarrhoea with “goneness”
in stomach, trembling in the abdomen and palpitation.

Urine scanty or suppressed. Chronic catarrh of bladder with much
viscid mucus in urine, causing difficulty in flow of urine.

Catarrh of the urethra. Chronic gonorrhoea when the discharge
remains yellow in spite of time. Copious, painless discharge. kc-
Jaxed scrotum and testes. Offensive sweat of genitals.

Thick, yellow, viscid leucorrhooa, sometimes white, sometimes offen-
sive. Excoriation of vagina. Soreness in vagina during coition*
Bleeding after coition. Uterine haemorrhage. Menses copious. Re-
laxed, dragging feeling in pelvis. Intense itching of vulva. Epithe-
lioma of mamma.

Most obstinate catarrh of larynx, trachea and bronchial tubes, with
copious, thick, ropy mucus and ulceration. Rawness in air passages.
Catarrh of chest in old people.

The cough is dry, hard ; from tickling in larynx. Rawness in chest.
Rattling cough. Thick, yellow, viscid, sometimes white, expectoration
in old people, or when very chromic,

Palpitation from slowly progressing weakness.

Weakness and stiffness in back in lumbar region, must walk about
before he can straighten up the back. Must use the arms to rise from
a seat.

Rheumatic pains in upper limbs. Weakness and rheumatic pains
in lower limbs. Ulcers on legs and about ankles, with stinging, burn-
ing pains ; high, hard edges ; painful at night in warm bed ; sensitive
to touch. CEdema of feet.

Warmth and washing aggravate ulcers and eruptions. The skin
excoriates easily. Urticaria over body, aggravated at night. Fissures
about mouth and anus. Ulceration, Bed sores. Lupus evedens.

HYOSCYAMUS

Hyoscyamus is full of convulsions, contractions, trembling, quiver-
ing and jerkings of the muscles. Convulsions in vigorous people,
coming on with great violence. Convulsions that involve the whole
economy, with unconsciousness, coming on in the night. Convulsions
in women at the menstrual period ; and then the lesser convulsions of



5‘2


HYOSCYAMUS.


single muscles, and contractions of single muscles. Little jerkings
and twitchings. In low forms of the disease it takes on the latter,
jerkings and twitchings of muscles. In low typhoid states where there
is great prostration with twitching. He feels it himself if conscious
enough to realize it, but others see it. An evidence of great prostra-
tion of the nervous system. Sliding down in bed, twitching of the
muscles. All the muscles tremble and quiver, a constant state of
erethism throughout the economy. A state of irritability and ex-
citability. Convulsive jerks of the limbs, so that all sorts of angular
motions are made, automatic motions. Choreic motions. But angular
motions of the arms, and picking at the bedclothes. Picking at some-
thing in delirium. Gradually increasing weakness, whether it be in
a continued fever where there has been a delirium or excitement, or
in a case of insanity with erethism of the nerves and mind ; ex-
citability and gradually increasing weakness. Complete prostration,
so that the patient slides down in bed, until the jaw drops. So the
intermingling of jerkings and quiverings and tremblings and weak-
ness and convulsive action of muscles are all striking features. Infants
go into convulsions. “Falls suddenly to the ground with cries and
convulsions. Convulsions of children, especially from fright. Con-
vulsions after eating.” The child becomes sick after eating, vomits

and goes into convulsions. “Shrieks and becomes insensible.” Goes
into convulsions, such as the old books used to say, from worms ; and
the mother goes into convulsions soon after the child is born, called
puerperal convulsions. “Convulsions during sleep. Suffocating

speels and convulsions during labor. Toes become spasmodically

cramped.”

The mental state is really the greatest part of Hyoscyamus. Talk-
ing, passive delirium, imaginations, illusions, hallucinations ; talking,
rousing up and talking with a delirious manifestation, and then stupor.
These alternate through complaints. And during sleep talking, crying
out in sleep ; but, talking and mumbling and soliloquizing. Then,
there are wakeful periods, in which there are delirium and illusions and
hallucinations all mingled together. Sometimes the patient is in a
state of hallucination, and the next minute in a state of illusion. Which
means that a part of the time what he sees as hallucinations he believes
to be so ; and then these hallucinations become delusions. Again, the
things he sees he knows are not so, and then they are illusions. But
he is full of hallucinations. He sees all sorts of things, indescribable
things in his hallucinations. He imagines all sorts of things concerning
people, concerning himself, and he gets suspicious. Suspicion runs
through acute sickness ; it runs through the mania in insanity. Sus-
picion that his wife is going to poison him ; that his wife is untrue to
him. Suspicious of everybody. “Refuses to take medicine because



HYOSCYAMUS.


513

it is poisoned/’ ‘Imagines that he is pursued, that the people have all
turned against him, that his friends are no longer his friends. He
carries on conversations with imaginary people.” Talks as if he were
talking to himself, but he really imagines that some one is sitting by
his side, to whom he is talking. Sometimes he talks to dead folks ;
recalls past events with those that have departed. Calls up a dead
sister, or wife, or husband, and enters into conversation just as if
the person were present.

Hyoscyamus has another freak in this peculiar mental state. Per-
haps there may be a queer kind of paper on the wall, and he lies and
looks at it, and if he can possibly turn the figures into rows he will
keep busy at that day and night, and he wants a light there so he can
put them into rows, and he goes to sleep and dreams about it, and
wakes up and goes at it again ; it is the same idea. Sometimes ht
will imagine the things are w^orms, are \errnin, rats, cats, mice, and
he is leading them like children lead around their toy wagons — ^just
like a child. The mind is working in this ; no two alike ; perhaps you
may never see these identical things described, but you will see some-
thing like it that the mind is revelling in, strange and ridiculous things.
One patient had a string of bedbugs going up a wall, and he had
them tied with a string, and was irritated because he could not make
the last one keep up. Hyoscyamus did him a great deal of good.
You do not find that expression in the text, but I will speak of it as
analogous to the things that belonjg to the text. He is in alternate
states. One minute he raves, andi another he scolds in delirium, in
excitement ; the next he is in a atupor. Finally, in a typhoid state,
after he has progressed some time, he passes into quite a profound
stupor. Early in the case he can he roused, and he answers questions
correctly, and he seems to know what you have said to him ; but the
instant he finishes the last answer he appears to be sound asleep.
Then you shake him and ask him another question, he answers that,
and again he is sound asleep. The delirium that belongs to typhoid
grows more and more profound, more and more passive, more and
more muttering, until he passes into a complete unconsciousness from
which he cannot be roused ; in which he will lie for days sometimes,
and weeks, becoming more and more emaciated ; lying there in pro-
found stupor unless this remedy is administered. Lying there picking
the bedclothes, and muttering. Even when he is in a stupor and
realizes nothing, apparently, that is going on, he makes passive
motions, mutters, talks to himself, and once in a while utters a shrill
scream. Picking his fingers, just as if he had something in his fingers
when there is nothing there. He picks at the bedclothes the same
way. Picking at his nightshirt, or picking anything he get his
fingers on. Or, picking in the air, grasping as if he were grasping' at

65



5«4


hyoscyamus.


flies. This passive delirium goes on until he is in a profound stupor,
and lies as one dead. In an insane state it sometimes takes on some-
thing of wildness, but not often. It is more passive, talking and
prattling, sitting still in one corner and jabbering, or lying down, or
going about. “Undertaking to do the usual things, the usual duties.”
That is, the housewife will want to get up and do the things she is
used to doing in the house ; the cooper will want to make barrels and.
the unusual things belonging to that business. Wants to carry on the
usual occupation in his mind, talks about it, carries on the things of
the day, and he keeps busy about it, so it is a busy insanity. Also,
the delirium takes on the type of a busy delirium.

Now, to give you something of an idea as to the grading of this
general type of insanity it should be compared with Stram. and Bell.
You heard in the lecture on Bell, that it is violent, its fever most
intense. There is much excitement. In Stram., when we reach that
you will see that his delirium, his insanity, is expressed in terms of
extreme violence. These three run so close together that something
can be brought out by associating them together. When considering
Hyoscyamus in its mental state it is well to realize that it seldom has
much fever in its insanity. It has a fever sometimes in the low form,
but when Hyoscyamus is thought of in relation to a febrile state the
intensity of the heat would be this order: Bell., Stram., Hyoscyamus.
Now, Bell, is very hot in its mental states. Stram., most violent and
active, murderously violent, is moderately hot in its fever, as a rule.
Hyoscyamus has a low fever, not very high, sometimes none at all,
with its insanity. When one comes to take into consideration the
violence of its delirium, or the maniacal actions, then it changes the
order. The order as to violence of conduct would be: Stram., Bell.,
Hyoscyamus. That brings you to see that even when associated with
those medicines that look most like it, it is at the bottom of the list.
It goes as a passive medicine, while the upper ones are more active.
Hyoscyamus has a passive mania. Does not go into violence. That
is, the patient will sometimes become murderous, but it is more likely
to be suicidal. Sometimes the patient will talk and prattle, sometimes
sit and say nothing. “Full of imaginations and hallucinations when
asleep and when awake. Religious turn of mind” with women who
have been unusually pious ; they take on the delusion that they have
sinned away their day of grace. They have done some awful things.
"She imagines that she has murdered, that she has done some dreadful
thing. She cannot apply the promises that she reads in the Word of
God to herself.” She will say: “They do not mean me, they do not
apply to me, they mean somebody else.”

"Thinks he is in the wrong place. Thinks he is not at home. Sees
persons who are not and who have not been present. Fears bdng



HVOSCYAMUS.


5«5


left alone. Fears poison or being bitten.” These phases sometimes
take on fear in the sense of fear, but it comes from that suspicion
that was spoken of; he suspicions or fears these things will take place.
He imagines these things are to take place, and hence he is suspicious
of all his friends.

Another thing running through the remedy, in insanity and in the
delirium of fevers, is a fear of water, fear of running water. Of
course, hydrophobia, which is named because of that symptom being
a striking feature, has fear of water, but some remedies also have that
fear of water. “Anxiety on hearing running water. A fear of water.”
That runs through Bell., Hyoscyamus, Canth., and, of course, the
nosode Hydrophobinum. Strom, has the fear of water. Stram. has
the fear of anything that might look like water, shining objects, fire
looking-glass. Fear of things that have in any manner whatever the
resemblance of fluids, and hence the sound of fluids. Hydrophobinum
has cured “involuntary urination on hearing running water. Involun-
tary discharge from the bowels on hearing running water.” It has
cured a chronic diarrhoea when that symptom was present. Hyoscy-
amus “makes short, abrupt answers to imaginary questions.” Imag-
ines that somebody has asked a question, and he answers it ; hence,
you will find a patient with typhoid fever answering questions that
you have not asked. He imagines that persons are in the room and
asking him questions. You hear nothing but his answers ; he is in
delirium or insane. “Mutters absurd things to himself. Cries out
suddenly.” !

There is another form of his dHirium, and there are two phases of
this. He wants to go naked ; wants to take the clothing off, and this
must be analyzed. At first you might not understand that, Hyoscy-
amus has such sensitive nerves all over the body in the skin that he
cannot bear the clothing to touch the skin, and he takes it off. That
occurs in insanity and sometimes in delirium, and he has no idea that
he is exposing his body. He appears to be perfectly shameless, but
he has no thought of shamelessness, no thought that he is doing any-
thing unusual, but he does it from the hyperaesthesia of the skin.

There is another phase running through the insanity, which is
salacity, and it is violent at times, so violent that nobody but the old
doctor can form any conception of the awfulness of it, and the dread-
fulness of its effects upon those in the room. With a woman, a 'wife)
or a daughter, this state of salacity is manifested in this way: she
exposes her genitals to the view of everybody coming into the room.
There arc instances where in these violent attacks of salacity a woman
has gathered her clothing up under her arms to expose her genitals
to the doctor as he walked into the room.

"Violent sexual excitement and nymphomania. Obscene things.



HYOSCYAMUS,


516

Speech illustrated by urine, faeces and cow dung/' and all sorts of
things come out in this state of insanity and delirium — and yet this
is only sickness.

‘‘He is violent and beats people. Strikes and bites. Sings con-
stantly and talks hastily. Erotic mania, accompanied by jealousy*
Lascivious mania. Sings amorous songs. Lies in bed naked, or
wrapped in a skin during summer heat." Not because he is cold, but
because of a fancy. Complaints involving any of these mental phases
may come on in a young woman from disappointed affections, from
coming to the conclusion that the young man in whom she has reposed
her confidence has become wholly unworthy of her. It drives her
insane, and she may take on any of these phases.

Patients who have come out of continued fevers, convulsions, or
insanity have paralytic condition of the eyes, of the muscles of the
eyes. “Disturbances of vision. Far-sightedness. Drawing tension
in some of the muscles, and paralysis in others. Strabismus." This
is one of the most frequently indicated remedies. The strabismus
that comes on from brain disease should be cured with a remedy.

In the Hyoscyamus fevers there is so much brain trouble, and there is
left behind a tendency to muscular weakness of the eyes, disturbances
of the eyes, and congestion of the retina, and disturbances of vision.
Double sight. “Obscuration of vision. Night-blindness. Distorted
appearance of the eyes. Spasmodic action of the internal recti."
“Pupils diated and insensible to light." Sometimes contracted, but in
these low unconscious states of typhoid it is likely to be dilated. Then
again, after he recovers from these low forms of disease there is
quivering of the lids, and jerking of the lids, jerking of the muscles
of the eye, so that the eyeball is unsteady. It moves from little spasms
of the various muscles of the globe of the eye. All of these symptoms
occur either along with the fever, or afterwards. The child goes into
convulsions, or has periods of convulsions, where, during the course
of a week or ten days, there have been from fifteen to fifty convul-
sions, and it may be the convulsions have been remedied with Bell,
or Cuprum, or any one of a number of remedies, and afterwards
these eye troubles, strabismus and disturbances of vision. “An
object looked at jumps." The letters jump while reading. Spas-
modic complaints, periodical complaints, paroxysmal complaints of a
nervous character will run through the remedy in various regions,
and especially in its cough, its stomach troubles and abdominal con-
ditions.

The mouth brings forth a lot of symptoms. The mouth is very
dry, “as dry as burnt leather." The tongue tastes like sole leather,
because of dryness. Sometimes the patient will say, “My tongue
rattles iii my mouth, it is so dry." Very great dryness of the mouth.



HYOSCYAMUS.


5>7


throat and nose, wherever the mucous membranes are. Dry, cracked,
red, will bleed in low forms of typhoid. About the second week,
going into the third, the teeth are covered with black blood, lips
cracked and bleeding, ‘Tongue cracked and bleeding. Patient un-
conscious, except by much shaking or repeated calling he is roused”
and slowly puts out that trembling tongue, which is covered with
blood, cracks, and is dry, “Sordes on the teeth” in low forms of
fever. ‘Twitching of the muscles of the face upon attempting to
put out the tongue.” It trembles like it does in Lack., catches on to
the teeth from its great dryness, and the jaw hangs down, relaxed,
the mouth wide open. The whole mouth is dry and offensive. Some-
times during fever the jaw becomes fixed as if it were locked, and
it is with great difficulty that it can be moved. “Closes the teeth
tightly together. Pulsating pains in the teeth. Jerking, throbbing,
tearing in the teeth. Sordes on the teeth and in sleep in these low
forms of fever he is grinding the teeth. Children, either in convul-
sions, or between convulsions, in congestion, also grind the teeth in
the night, and in this comatose state. It says in the text, “The tongue
is red, brown, dry, cracked, hard. Looks like burnt leather. The
tongue does not obey the will. Difficult motion of the tongue ; it is
stiff, protruded with great difficulty. Biting the tongue in talking.”
The tongue becomes paralyzed. “Loss of speech. Utters inarticu-
late sounds. Speech embarrassad. Talks with difficulty.” The
muscles of the throat, of the tongpe, those that take part in swallow-
ing, the muscles of the oesophagui, of the pharynx, become stiff and
paralyzed so that swallowing is diflfecult. “Food taken into the throat
comes up into the nose.” Fluids come out of the nose, or go down
into the larynx. “The sight of water, or the hearing of running
water, or the attempt to swallow water produces spasmodic constric-
tion of the oesophagus.”

The next very important feature of this medicine is its stomach and
abdominal symptoms. Vomiting. Dread of w^ater. Unquenchable
thirst. Aversion to water, as it were, from the stomach ; a mental
fear of water. The stomach is distended. Great pain in the stomach.
Dryness evidently in the stomach like there is in the mouth, because
it occurs along with it. Burning and smarting in the stomach ; and
when there is no inflammation there is vomiting of blood. Stitching
pains, colicky pains, distension. The distension of the whole abdomen.
“Abdomen wonderfully distended, almost to bursting,” I cels like a
drum, tympanitic. “Great soreness; can hardly touch the abdomen
because of the soreness. Cannot be handled, cannot be turned except
with great difficulty, very slowly, and with caution. Cutting pains
in the abdomen,” Inflammation of all the viscera of the abdomen in
low typhoid state, with great distension. Petechia upon the abdomen,



5i8 hyoscyamus.

such as is found in a typhoid.

Then comes the diarrhoea, very much like that which is found in
low forms of continued fever. ‘'Bleeding from the bowels ; ulcera-
tion of Peyer’s glands,” and the yellow, commeal mushy stool. In
Hyoscyamus there is that mushy stool that occurs in typhoid fever,
pappy consistency. Again, a watery, horribly offensive, bloody fluid.
Most of the time the stools and the passages are painless. “Painless
discharges from the bowels. Watery mucus, sometimes odorless, but
commonly very offensive.” Then, another part of it is that the patient
has no realization of the passage. It is involuntary. Both the urine
and the stool are passed wtihout his knowledge. Watery, bloody, or
mushy. Hysterical females and young girls, who are subject to
attacks of diarrhoea and bloody stools. Relaxed state of the bowels
connected with relaxation of the uterus, “Diarrhoea during preg-
nancy. Diarrhoea during typhoid fever. Paralysis of the sphincter
ani. Paralysis of the bladder after labor, so that the urine remains
in the bladder, with no desire to urinate.” The routine remedy for
retention of urine after labor is Caust, Caust,, like Rhus, is a great
remedy for the effect of strain upon muscles and parts, and the violent
effort that a woman passes through in expelling the child in many
instances leaves all the pelvic muscles tired, relaxed, paralyzed,

Then comes that which was mentioned, which really belongs to the
general state more than the local ; violent sexual desire. Violent sexual
desire in girls who never had that desire. Coming on and manifesting
itself only during the inflammation of the brain.

“Labour-like pains from taking cold.” A cold settles in the uterus,
bringing on painful menstruation. Hyoscyamus has various crampings ;
cramps in the fingers and toes and of the muscles here and there ;
temporary paralysis, etc. It has suppressed menstruation. There are
many conditions belonging to menstruation, pregnancy and parturition!
that are hysterical in character. Twitchings, cough, constipation,
diarrhoea, etc., that belong to a hysterical nature. “Puerperal con-
vulsions. Jerks violently at the oncoming of the convulsions. After
miscarriage, haemorrhage of bright red blood. No desire of the bladder
to expel the contents.”

And then comes the voice, the larynx, respiration, and cough. Con-
striction of the larynx. Much mucus in the larynx and air passages,
makes the speech and voice rough. Hoarseness with dry and in-
flamed throat. Speech difficult. Hysterical aphonia. Hyoscyamus and
Veratrum are two medicines that cure and make a nervous hysteri-
cal woman a great deal more sensible.

“Difficult spasmodic respiration from spasm of the chest. Ap-
parently loss of breath ; rattling in the chest.” Hysterical couglx.
Sensitive, hysterical girls, or sensitive women, with spinal irritation.



HYOSCYAMUS.


S‘9

have paroxysmal cough, coming on periodically, coming on from ex-
citement. When this patient hes down in the daytime, at night, any
time, on will come the spasmodic cough with contractions in the
larynx, spasms in the larynx, choking, gagging, and vomiting. “Red-
ness of the face, and sufEocation.” It is a dry, hacking, choking
cough, that racks the whole body, in spinal affections, “'iickling in
the larynx. Dry, hacking, and spasmodic cough, worse lying, belter
sitting, worse at night, after eating, drinking, talking and singing.
Dry, spasmodic, persistent cough.” But its characteristic cough is a
dry, racking, harassing cough, worse lying down. Those young
women and girls with sore spots on the spine from the coccyx to the
brain, sore places that manliest themselves when leaning back against
a chair. These take a little cold in the larynx, and sometimes it is
purely from a nervous attack. Sometimes spinal irritation, spinal

cough in those that have curvature of the spine. “During cough,

spasms in the larynx. Cough worse after midnight; wakes the

patient from sleep. Cough in cold air, and from eating and drinking.
Cough after measles. Violent spasmodic cough.” 'I’he cough is
most exhausting. A cough will sometimes last until the patient is
covered with sweat and is exhausted, and leans forward to get a little
relief; and he coughs until he is exhausted. “Spasms of the muscles
of the chest. Contraction of the muscles of one side of the neck.
Spinal meningitis with convulsions.”

Paralytic weakness of the limbs. Convulsions of the muscles.
Twitching. Frequent twitchings of, the muscles of the hands and feet.

Many complaints come on during sleep. The sleep is a great tribu-
lation to this nervous patient. There are times of sleeplessness.

Again, profound sleep. “Sleepless, or constant sleep.” Either
awake or asleep, there may be muttering. “Long .continued sleep-
lessness. Lascivious dreams. Lying on the back he suddenly sits up
and then lies down again.” That means that the patient wakes out
of sleep, looks all around, wonders what terrible thing he has been
dreaming about ; his dreams seen real. He looks all about and sees
nothing of the objects of his dream, he lies down and goes to sleep
again. He keeps doing that all night. Starts up in a fright. Jerks
in sleep, and cries out. Grates the teeth. Laughing during sleep.
With so much brain trouble as belongs to this medicine, we would
expect the dreams and the fright, the disturbances, the twitching and
trembling in sleep.

Its fevers are low forms of fever, the continued fever, the typhoid.



520


hvpercum


HYPERICUM

One who makes a study of the proving of Hypericum will be
reminded of a class of injuries involving sentient nerves, and it
is not surprising that this remedy has come into use for the re-
sults of such injuries. The surgery of Homoepathy largely in-
volves the use of Arnica, Rhus tox.^ Ledum, Staphisagria^ Calcarea and
Hypcircum. These remedies are used in a routine way when a physician
runs into semi-surgical conditions, or the results of injuries. For the
bruised, *‘black-and-blue/’ sore appearance and sensation Arnica comes
into use ; it corresponds especially to the acute stage until the soreness
and bruised condition have disappeared from the parts injured or from
the whole body ; but for the strains of muscles and tendons Arnica
proves insufficient and a thorough sturly of Rhus will show that that
remedy is suitable for the resultant weakness of tendons and musclCsS,
and the bruised, rheumatic feelings that come on in every storm and
often wear off on continued motion. For the final weakness that persists
even after Rhus we have Calcarea curb.

In these three remedies we have a series, but to distinguish
these from Hypericum is the important thing. Hypericum is only
a minor remedy for bruised and strained tendons and muscles ; it
goes into a different class of complaints. Hypericum and Ledum
run close together, and they have to be compared. Ledum has
much of the sore bruised feeling of Arnica and will often take its
place ; but Hypericum and Ledum come together for consideration
when an injury to a nerve has taken on inflammatory action. Instead
of the muscles and bones and bloodvessels, as in Arnica, Rhus and
Calcarea, the nerves arc the sphere for these two remedies. When
the finger ends or toes have been bruised or lacerated, or a nail has
been tom off, or when a nerve has become pinched between a hammer
and the bone in a blow, and that nerve becomes inflamed and the pain
can be traced up along the nerve, and it is gradually extending toward
the body from the injured part with stitching, darting pains, coming
and going, or shooting up from the region of the injury toward the
body, a dangerous condition is coming on. In this condition Hyperi-
cum is above all the remedies to be thought of and hardly any other
medicine is likely to come in. It hardly need be said that lock-jaw is
threatening.

Sometimes a vicious dog will take hold of an individual through
the thumb, or through the hand or the wrist and run one of his
great teeth through the radial nerve or some of its branches in
the hand, causing a lacerated wound. You may not find in the
earlier stages the symptoms of Hypericum, but they will develop
gradually and you will have them to treat. Do not cut the arm.



HYPERICUM


5 ^^

off, but cure it. We cure all these injuries with medicines— punc-
tured, incised, contused and lacerated wounds, painful wounds.

A wound will sometimes yawn, swell up, no tendency to heal,
look dry and shiny on its edges ; red ; inflamed ; burning, stinging,
tearing pains ; no healing process. That wound needs Hypericum.
It prevents tetanus. Every practitioner knows that lock-jaw may
develop after an injury to sentient nerves. The old school doctor
is frightened by these shooting pains up the arms after an injury.
A shoemaker may stick his awl into the end of his thumb or a carpenter
may stick his finger with a brass tack and he does not think much of it,
but the next night shooting pains extend up the arm with much
violence. The allopathic physician looks upon that as a series matter,
for he sees lock-jaw or tetanus ahead When these pains come on
Hypericum will stop them, and from this stage to advanced states of
tetanus with opisthotonos and lock-jaw Hypericum is the remedy. It
is full of just such symptoms as are found in tetanus and such
symptoms as lead to tetanus and it is full of all the manifestations
of an ascending neuritis.

Again, you may have an old scar, and it comes in contact with
a hard body and is injured, bruised, torn internally, smashed, and
stinging, tearing pains come in that cicatrix, and it burns and stings,
and there is no relief, and the paia runs toward the body along the
course of nerves, A painful cicatrix with pain slihoting up toward
the centre of the body following up the nerves. Hypericum is the
medicine for that.

Now there are other remcdiesi~all know about Arnica, but be
sure you keep it in its place. The first stage of the injury, where
much bruising has been done, and there are none of these pains
that I have described, for the first hours for bruised conditions and
concussions and shocks Arnica is routine, because it produces states
upon the human body like it had been bruised. But you will find
Arnica only fits into that one place. Arnica should never be used for
wounds the way the lay people use it, because if it is used in full
strength it may bring on erysipelas.

Again, for bruised of bone, cartilages, tendons, insertion of tendons,
bruises about cartilages and about joints, Ruta is better than any other
remedy ; and if we study the proving of Ruta we will not be surprised,
because it produces symptoms like those found in such conditions.
Lingering, sore, bruised places on bones, in joints and upon cartilages.
But Ledum comes in very often as a preventive medicine. It is a
preventive medicine when an accident happen to the ends of the!
fingers, if a patient steps on a nail or tack or sticks a splinter under
a finger-nail or into the foot. If a horse pick up a nail, pull it out
and give him a dose of Ledum; there will never be trouble, he wiH

66



Hypericum


not have lock-jaw. These punctured wounds, rat bites, cat bites, etc.,
are all made safe by Ledum ; i.e.. Ledum prevents the shooting pains
that naturally come and the nerves will never be involved. We will
have no trouble if we can give it at once. Again, if the pain is a dull
aching in the part that was injured, in the wound Ledum is still
the remedy ; if it shoots from the wound up the nerve of the arm it is
more like Hypericum.

A sensitive nervous women steps on a tack during the day, and
she feels all the day where the tack went in, lies down in bed and it
aches so violently she cannot keep it still. Ledum will prevent any
further trouble, but if that goes on until the morning the pains will
be shooting up the leg, calling for Hypericum. I mentioned the use
of Ledum when a horse picks up a nail. Now, if a nail goes through
the thin part of the hoof and strikes the coffin bone that horse is
almost sure to die with tetanus ; the veterinarians know nothing for
it ; though they paultice it and put on liniments, etc., that horse will
die with tetanus ; but if a dose of Ledum is given before the tetanus
comes on it will save the animal from tetanus ; after the jerking comes
on it will save the animal from tetanus ; after the jerking comes on
Ledum will not do, but Hypericum must be given. Hypericum belongs
to lacerated wounds and when there is laceration of pans that are
full of small nerves, sentient nerves, give it at once. Do not waste
time with Arnica because there is soreness, for the soreness is of
much less importance than the danger from nerves in lacerated wounds.
In punctured wounds give Ledum at once. Whatever sequences come
on, of course, have to be met in accordance with the state and symptoms
of the case.

Injuries of the spine give us another class of troubles requiring
Hypericum. I remember a case such as has been met with quite
often and such as we read of and hear about, one, however, that
was not saved. A sudden lurch of the car caused a man who was
standing on the rear end of the car to be hurled back on his
coccyx. He did not think much of it, went home, had pains in
the head and various parts of the body. Several physicians were
called ; nobody could find out what was the matter with him, and
at the end of ten days he died. They turned him over and found
that his coccyx was black and an abscess was threatening in the
muscular region. If it had been known Hypericum would have
saved his life. Many times I have seen Hypericum cure similar
conditions. Injuries of the coccyx are among the most serious and
troublesome injuries that the physician comes in contact with ; injuries
just like that, falling back and striking a stone, or something that
bruises the^ coccyx. Very little is found immediately in the coccyx ;
close examination reveals nothing more than soreness upon pressure.



HYPERICUM


5*3


but mRny times we do have the description of pains shooting up the
spine and down the extremities, shooting pains over the body and
often convulsive movements. When such symptoms are present any
physician ought to be wise enough to find out an injury, but even
very astute physicians are blinded over injuries of the coccyx.
Many a woman sustains an injiuy of the coccyx during labor, and
however, slight, soreness remains for years afterwards, and she is
always in trouble, always hysterical and nervous, from this injury of
the coccyx. Such injuries, if taken early, can be cured by Hypericum.
It is in the remedy. Slight inflammation or irritation of the lower
part of the cord ; it feels lacerated, and sore, and aches and never
passes over until the results of the injury right in the spot have been
removed. These injuries have (been cured in after years by Carbo
animalis, Silica and Thuja and other remedies as indicated.

It is related also to injuries of the spine higher up. It is not
an uncommon thing for a man. while going down stairs, to fall
backward, his feet to slip from under him and he strikes his back
upon one of the steps and undergoes a sharp injury. Some will
at once give Rhus tax; I have known others to give Arnica. Hyperi-
cum is to be given at once to prevent the kind of inflammation that
may come from such an injury. Then there will be other tendencies,
such as drawings and rheumatic symptoms, that will come on, calling
for Rhus and finally Calcarea. Old weakness of the back, with
painfulness on rising from a seat, arc often cured by Rhus, followed
by Calcarea, but Hypericum must first of all take care of the condition
of the fibres of the cord and menhtges. Meningeal troubles are com-
mon from injuries of that class, with drawing of the muscles of the
back, a feeling of contraction or tightening. Stitching, shooting
pains in the back in various directions ; they shoot down the limbs.
Injuries of the back are not so likely to end in tetanus as the injuries
of the sensory nerves ; but they are sometimes even more troublesome
because they linger so long.

Persons who have been injured in the spine or about the coccyx
linger along for years with symptoms that would lead to many
remedies. We ‘find in the provings such symptoms as occur after
these injuries, and, of course, this remedy will cure anything that its
proving justifies. Its action is upon the nerve sheaths and meninges,
with stitching, tearing, rending pains along the nerves, wherever
there are injuries. Now, there is another remedy that we want to
know. If you have a clear-cut or incised wound made with a sharp
instrument, or if you have made such an opening with your knife
while practicing surgery, if you have opened the abdominal cavity
and the walls of the abdomen take on an tmhealthy look, and there are
B fin ging, burning pains, Staphisagria is the remedy that will make



5^4


ICNAltA


granulation come immediately. Staphisagria is also a wonderfully
useful remedy where the sphincter stretchers have been. Staphisgria
is the natural antidote to stretching. When the urethra of a woman
has been stretched for stone in the bladder, Staphisagria is useful,
I remember a case of stretching of the urethra ; after the operation
the patient was in great distress, screaming and crying, bathed in
a cold sweat, head hot and body in cold sweat. Staphisagria was
given to her, and in a few minutes she went to sleep. She had been
six hours in that suffering without any relief whatever. Where
coldness, congestion of the head, and rending, tearing pains occur
from stretching sphincters, or from tearing parts, for the purpose of
operation, death is likely to occur, and Staphisagria is closely relate^
to that tearing, lacerating and stretching of fibres which causes such
suffering.

After a surgical operation, where there has been much cutting,
a great stare of prostration, coldness, oozing of blood, almost cold;
breath, of course the Materia Medica man, if there is one around,
will say, ‘‘Why, give him Carbo veg,, of course.'’ Yes, you will,
but it will not help him. It may disappoint you. But if you are a
surgeon, know your surgical therapeutics better than a Materia
Medica man, you will say, “No, Strontium carb. is what I want." It
relieves that congestion all over the body ; he gets warm and has a
comfortable night. Strontium carb, is the Carbo veg. of the surgeon.

Lastly, we sometimes have to antidote chloroform, and because
there are pains and aches you will get no action from these medicines ;
you can antidote your chloroform almost instantly by a dose of
Phosphorus, because it is the natural antidote of chloroform. Phos-
phorus will stop the vomiting. Phosphorus has vomiting like that
of chloroform. Phosphorus likes cold things, cold water in the stomach,
and vomits as soon as water has become warm in the stomach. So
does chloroform. Why should they not antidote each other ?

IGNATIA

Ignatia is frequently required and is especially suited to sensitive,
delicate women and children ; to hysterical women. You will not
cure the natural hysterics with Ignatia. but you will cure those gentle,
sensitive, fine fibred, refined, highly educated, overwrought women
in their nervous complaints with Ignatia when they take on complaints
that are similar to such symptoms as come in hysteria. The hysterical
diathesis is one that is very singular and difficult to comprehend.
But a woman, when overwrought and overexcited and emotional,
will do things that she herself cannot account for. She will do
things as if she were crazy in her excitement. Will do things she



ICNATIA


5*5


regrets, while the hysteric is always glad of it. No matter how raudi
foolishness there is in it she has only made an exhibition that she is
proud of. But our efforts go out for those who imitate them uncon-
sciously. Those who will to do well.

A woman has undergone a controversy at home. She has been
disturbed, is excited, and goes into cramps, trembles and quivers.
Goes to bed with a headache. Is sick. Ignatia will be her remedy.
When she has great distress ; unrequited affections. A sensitive,
nervous young girl finds out that she has misplaced her affections ;
the young man has disappointed her ; she has a weeping spell, head-
ache. trembles, is nervous, sleepless ; Ignatia will make her philo-
sophical and sensible. A woman loses her child, or her husband.
A sensitive, delicate woman, and she suffers from this grief. She has
headaches, trembles, is excited, weeps, is sleepless ; unable to control
herself. In spite of her best endeavors, her grief has simply tom
her to pieces. She is unable to control her emotions and her excite-
ment. Ignatia will quiet her and tide her over the present moment.
In all of these instances where all of these conditions brought on
from such troubles keep coming back, where your patient dwells
upon them, dwells upon the cause, and the state keeps recurring,
Natrum mur. will finish up the case. It will nerve her up and help
her to bear her sufferings. Especially useful in constitutions that
have been over wrought at schoeff, in science, music, art. Of course,
it is natural for very sensitive girfs to go into the arts, such as music,
painting, etc. A daughter comes, back from Paris after a number of
years close application to her music. She is unable to do anything.
She flies all to pieces. Every noise disturbs her. She cannot sleep
nights. Excitable, sleepless, trwnbles, jerks, cramps in the muscles ;
weeps from excitement, and from every disturbing word. Ignatia
will tone her up wonderfully. Sometimes it will complete the whole
case. But especially in these oversensitive girls is Natrum mur.
very commonly the chronic. It is the natural chronic of Ignatia.
When the troubles keep coming back, and Ignatia comes to a place
when it will not hold any longer.

Another place where Ignatia and Natrum mur. run close together.
A sensitive, overtired girl, after she has been working in music, and
in !at, and in school, and has tired herself out, is unable to control
her affections. Her affections rest on some one whom she would
despise. That may be a singular thing, one may not be able to
understand it, A sensitive girl, though she would not let anyone but
her mother know of it, falls in love with a married man. She lies
awake nights, sobs. She says, "Mother, why do I do that, I cannot
ke^ that man out of my mind.” At other times a man entirely out
her statitm, that die is too sensible to have anything to do with.



5^8 IGNAHA

No one can do things rapidly enough. The memory is untrustworthy*
The mind flies all to pieces. It is a sort of confusion. No longer
able to classify the things that have been classically put into the
mind. Cannot remember her music, and her rules, and her scholastic
methods. They have all vanished, and she is in a state of confusion.
She is a worn-out, nervous person.

Then come fancies, vivid fancies, that arc like delirium. With-
out fever, without chill. Just after excitement. She comes home
from some great disturbance of her emotions, and goes into a state
that, if looked upon, per se, would appear to be a delirium such as ap-
pears in a fever. But upon close examination it is not a delirium. It is
a momentarily hysterical excitement of the mind, in which the balance
is lost, and she talks about everything. Sees every manner of thing ;
it is a hysterical insanity, because after she rests or the next morning
it has vanished. But these spells come oftener and oftener after they
have once begun, and she gives way to them easier and easier, and,
if they arc not remedied, she becomes a lunatic, a confirmed mental
wreck, so that excitement, grief, insanity, all intermingle together
as cause and effect. These come first at the menstrual period, and
then they come at other times, until they come from every little
disturbance. Whenever she is crossed or contradicted. ‘'She desires
to be alone and to dwell on the inconsistencies that come into her
life. Sits and sobs. At times she is taciturn ; again, she prattles
and is loquacious, and talks to herself.*’ She comes into a state
in a little while where she delights to bring on her fits and to make
a scare. The natural hysteric is bom with that, and Ignatia will do
her no good. But when this is brought on from conditions described,
Ignatia is of the greatest benefit. It runs closely along by the side of
Hyoscyamus, “A feeling of continuous fright, or apprehensiveness
that something is going to happen.”

With all these mental states she has a feeling of emptiness in the
stomach and abdomen. Emptiness and trembling. “Melancholy after
disappointed love, with spinal symptoms.” “Great grief after losing
persons or objects very near. Trembling of the hands disturbs her
very much in writing. Dread of every trifle.” She goes into a state
where she is utterly unable to undertake anything, even to write a
letter to a friend.

The Ignatia patient is not one that has been a simpleton, or of
a sluggish mind or idiotic, but one that has become tired, and brought
into such a state from over-doing and from over-excitement. From
going too much. If rather feeble in body, from too much social
excitement. Our present social state is will calculated to develop
a hysterical mind. The typical social mind is one that is always in a
state of confusion. Asks questions, not waiting for the answer. A



IGNATIA


P9


good many remedies have this state ; a lack of concentration of mind,
that is what it is, but this is a peculiar kind of lack of concentration
of mind. Dread, fear, anxiety, weeping, run through the remedy.
‘‘Sensitive disposition ; hyperacute.” Overwrought ; intense.

Ignatia has another thing : “Thinks she has neglected some duty.”
That is very much like Puls,^ Hell and Hyos,, only Aurum be-
lieves that she has committed a great wrong. “Thinks that she
has neglected some duty.” Dwells upon that much. “Melancholy
after great grief.”

It is full of headaches, and they are all congestive, pressing
headaches, or tearing headaches, or headaches as if a nail were
sticking into the side of the head or temple ; ameliorated from lying
upon it. The headaches are all ameliorated by heat. The patient
generally is ameliorated by warmth and aggravated by cold. Wants
cold things in the stomach, but warm things externally. Jerking
headaches, throbbing headaches, congestive headaches. Headaches in
nervous and sensitive temperaments. Those whose nervous system,'
has given way to anxiety, grief or mental work. “Headaches from
abuse of coffee, from smoking, from inhaling smoke, from tobacco
or alcohol.” Headache from close attention. “Headache ameliorated
by warmth and rest ; worse, from' cold winds and turning the head
suddenly ; worse when pressing at stool, or from jar, from hurrying,
from excitement.” Looking up increases the pain ; moving the eyes ;
worse from noise, from light. ‘Yain in the occiput ; worse from
cold, better from external heat. Headache better while eating, but
soon after it is worse.”

“Disturbance of vision. Zigzags. Confusion of vision.” Exces-
sively nervous eyes. “Acrid tears. Weeping.”

The face is distorted, convulsed, pale and sickly. Pains in the
face. “Violent rending, tearing pains in the face.” Let me put it
this way: Some of these overwrought girls that come back from
Paris, that I described, overworked in their music, will have violent
face-ache, pains in the face, or some other hysterical pains. Others
will come back with violent headaches ; others with the mental state
and confusion ; others with all the hysterical manifestations. Pro-
longed excitement. Musical excesses. Yes, other girls come back
fairly crippled with painful menstruation, overian pains, hysterical
conditions, displacement ; prolapsus of the vagina and of the rectum.
“Tearing, shooting pains upwards from the anus and vagina up intO'
the body towards the umbilicus.”

Strange antipathies run through the remedy. It will be impossible
for you to ever form any conclusion what one of these sensitive
women will think of any proposition that is presented. You cannot
depend upon her being reasonable or rational. It is best to say as

67



IODINE


Sio

little as possible about anything. Make no promises, listen, look wise,
take up your traveling bag and go home after you have prescribed,
because anything you say will be distorted. There is not anything
you can say that will please.

Thirst when you would not expect it. Thirst during chill, but
none during the fever, if she has a feverish state. It is suitable in
intermittent fever. Excitable, nervous children and women with
intermittent fever.


IODINE

This remedy, in all of its complaints whether acute or chronic, has
a peculiar kind of anxiety that is felt both in mind and body. It
seems also that this state of anxiety is attended with a thrill that goes
throughout his frame unless he removes it by motion or change of
position. The anxiety comes on when trying to keep still, and the
more he tries to keep still the more the anxious state increases. While
attempting to keep still, he is overw^helmed with impulses, impulses to
tear things, to kill himself, to commit murder, to do violence. Ho
cannot keep still and so he walks night and day. This remedy carries
the same feature with it into the Iodide of Potassium, so that it makes
the Iodide of Potassium patient walk. But there is this difference,
the Kali iod, patient can walk long distances without fatigue, and the
walking only seems to wear off his anxiety, whereas in Iodine there
is great exhaustion ; he becomes extremely exhausted from walking
and sweats copiously even from slight exertion. Iodine corresponds
to those cases in which it seems that there is some dreadful thing
coming on ; the mind threatens to give out. Insanity threatens, or
the graver forms of disease are threatening, such as are present in
the advanced stages of suppressed malaria, in old cases of chills, in
threatened phthisis, especially abdominal.

Hypertrophy runs through the remedy. There is enlargement of
the liver, spleen, ovaries, testes, lymphatic glands, cervical glands, of
all the glands except the mammary glands. The mammae dwindle
while all other glands become enlarged, nodular and hard. This
enlargement of the glands is especially observed among the lymphatic
glands of the abdomen, the mesenteric glands.

There is this peculiar circumstance also in Iodine, viz., that while
the body withers the glands enlarge. That is peculiar and will enable
you to think of Iodine, because the glands grow in proportion to the
dwindling of the body and the emaciation of the limbs. We find this
state in marasmus. There is withering throughout the body, the
muscles shrink, the skin wrinkles and the face of the child looks like
that of a little old person, but the glands under the arms, in the groin



IODINE


53 *

and in the belly are enlarged and hard. The mesenteric glands can
be felt as knots. We see the same tendency in old cases of malaria
coming from the allopaths in which Quinine and Arsenic have been
extensively used and the chills have kept on ; the face and the upper
part of the body are withered, the skin looks shrivelled and yellow ;
a diarrhoea has come on, the liver and spleen are enlarged and the
lymphatic glands of the belly can be felt. Even in the earlier stages,
when these states are only threatening, we may look forward and see
that the case is progressing toward an Iodine state.

Now take a patient that is suffering from intermittent fever brought
on from malaria, or damp cellars. The patient grows increasingly
hot ; it is not always a febrile heat, but a sensation of heat ; he wants
to be bathed in cold water, wants the face and body cooled by cold
sponging ; he suffocates and coughs in a warm room, dreads heat,
sweats easily and easily becomes exhausted. It is in this kind of a
constitution that acute complaints will come on, such as acute inflam-
matory conditions of the mucous membranes and gastritis, inflamma-
tion of the liver, inflammation of the spleen, diarrhoea, croup, inflam-
mation of the throat. The throat even becomes covered with white
spots and is tumid and red, and this extends down into the larynx ;
it may even have a deposit upon it like diphtheria. Iodine has cured
diphtheria, when the exudation resembling the diphtheria exudations
was present in the stool. A constitution tending this way may bring
on croup with an exudate, and we; can see that it is going towards
Iodine. In every region of the body peculiar little things come out.
If we do not see to the full extent the constitution of the remedy, we
will not recognize the tendency of the patient when progressing un-
favorably.

The mental state of this patient is that of excitement, anxiety, im-
pulses, melancholy ; he wants to do something, wants to hurry ; he has
impulses to kill. In this it is very closely related to Arsenicum and
Hepar, The Arsenicum and Hepar patients also have impulses to
commit murder without being offended and without cause. The
sensitiveness to heat will at once decide, for while Iodine is warm-
blooded the Arsenicum and Hepar patients are always chilly. The
impulse to do violence is sudden. There are remedies that have pecu-
liar impulses, impulses without any cause. These impulses are seen
in cases of impulsive insanity ; an insanity in which there is an impulse
to do violence and strange things, and when the patient is asked why
he does these things he says he does not know. The patient may not
be known to be insane in anything else ; he may be a good business
man. Remedies also have this. These things are forerunners. It
is recorded under Hepar that a barber had an impulse to cut the throat
of his patron with the razor while shaving him. The Hux vomica



53 ^


IODINE


patient has an impulse to throw her child into the fire, or to kill her
husband whom she dearly loves. The thought comes into her mind
and increases until she becomes actually insane and beyond control
and the impulse is carried into action. A Natrum sutph. patient will
say, "‘Doctor, you do not know how I have to resist killing myself.
An impulse to do it comes into my mind.” Iodine has the impulse to
kill, not from anger, not from any sense of justice, but without any
cause. An overwhelming anger is often a cause for violence but the
impulses are not of that sort in Iodine. While reading or thinking
placidly at times a patient may have an impulse to do himself violence,
and this finally grows until the end is a form of impulsive insanity.

The Iodine patient becomes weak in mind as well as in body ; he
is forgetful, cannot remember the little things, they pass out of the
mind. He forgets what he was about to say or do ; goes off and
leaves packages he has purchased. The forgetfulness is extensive.
But with all these states, do not forget one thing, that the patient is
compelled to keep doing something in order to drive away his im-
pulses and anxiety. The anxiety is wearing and distressing unless
he keeps bmsy. Though mentally prostrated, he is compelled to keep
busy and to continue the work, which increases the prostration of
mind. You tell a man who is threatened with softening of the brain,
from overwork, from anxiety and labor in literary work, “You must
stop working, you must rest.” “Why,” he will say, ‘If I do I would
die or go mad.” Such a state comes under Iodine and Arsenicum,
but there is one grand distinction by which the two remedies are seen
to part company at once. The Iodine patient is warm-blooded, wants
a cool place to move in, and to think in, and to work in, whereas the
Arsenicum patient wants heat, wants a warm room, wants to be
warmly clothed, and suffers from the cold. Iodine suffers from the
heat. So that while the restlessness and anxiety, which arc both of
body and mind in each remedy, loom up before the mind as one, if
the patient is a hot-blooded patient we would never think of Arsenu
cum; if a cold-blooded and shivering patient we would never think
of Iodine.

Among the generals we first mentioned was the tendency to enlarged
glands. Iodine has often cured a group of symptoms coming in the
constitution that I have named, viz. ; enlargement of the heart, en-
largement of the thyroid and protruding eyeballs. Now, if you have
one of these patients (suppose it has been sent to you by somebody
who knows no better than to call it exophthalmic goitre), those things
that are so essential to the name of the disease, as they call it, would
not be an indication for the remedy, but the indications would be
found among those circumstances that I have given you that are out-
side of the projection of the eyes, the enlargement of the thyroid, the



IODINE


533


hypertrophy of the heart and the cardiac disturbances. If the patient
is emaciated, is sallow, suffers from heat, has enlarged glands, and
the other symptoms of this medicine, you may expect after its admin-
istration an ultimate cessation of the group of symptoms that are
selected to name the disease by.

Brain troubles, acute and chronic, sometimes call for Iodine. The
head throbs, the body throbs, there arc pulsations all over, and the
throbbing extends to the finger ends and the toes ; throbbing in the
pit of the stomach, heavy pulsations felt in the arms, pulsations in
the back, throbbing in the temporal bone. There are congestive head-
aches with violent pain. The head pains are aggravated from motion,
but the patient is relieved from motion. The patient moves because
his anxiety is relieved by motion, but every motion increases the head
pains and the pulsation. Such distinctions arc necessary. To dis-
tinguish between what is predicated of the patient and what is predi-
cated of a part is an essential in the study of the Materia Medica.
Everything that is predicated of the patient is general, everything
that is predicated of a part is particular. The two may be opposite,
and hence the student of the Materia Medica will sometimes be
worried because he will find aggravation from motion and relief from
motion recorded under the same remedy. It is only from the sources
of the Materia Medica, L c., the provings, and from the administra-
tion of the remedy that we may observe what is true of a part and
what is true of the whole. We find at times a patient wants to be in
a hot room with the head out of the window^ for relief of the head.
In that case the head is relived fibm cold and the body is relieved
from heat. This is a typical symptom of Phosphorus, which has
relief from cold as to the head and stomach symptoms, but aggrava-
tion from cold as to its chest and body symptoms. Eo, if the Phos-
phorus patient has vomiting and head symptoms, he says: 'T want
to go out in the open air and I want to take cold things into my
stomach but if he has chest symptoms and pain in the extremities,
he says: “I want to go into the house and keep warm.” And just
as we see this in patients it is so in the study of a remedy ; we must
discriminate.

As you may except, all sorts of eye troubles are present in this
debilitated constitution. The so-called scrofulous affections of the
eyes, with ulceration of the cornea, catarrhal troubles, discharge from
the eyes, enlargement of the little glands of the lids, come along with
the emaciation and yellow countenance in the constitution described.
Optical illusions in bright colors. An oedematous state is in keeping
with Iodine. There is oedematous swelling of the lids and oedema-
tous swelling of the face under the eyes. Iodine has also oedema of
the hands and feet, and carries this tendency with it into the Iodide



534


IODINE


of Potassium^ which has oedematous swellings like those we find in
kidney affections. It is capable of putting a stop to cases of Bright's
disease in the early stages.

Another grand feature that runs through the complaints of Iodine
is hunger. He is always hungry. The eating of the ordinary and
regular meals is not sufficient. He eats between meals and yet is
hungry. Moreover the complaints are better after eating. All the
fears, the anxiety and distress of Iodine increase when he is hungry.
There is pain in the stomach when the stomach is empty, and he is
driven to eat. While eating he forgets his complaints, because it is
like doing something, it is like moving, his mind is upon something
else. He is relieved while eating and he is relieved while in motion.
In spite of the hunger and much eating he still emaciates, “Living
well yet growing thin," was one of Hering’s key-notes of Iodine. As
in Natr. mur. and Abrotanum, he emaciates while he has at the same
time an enormous appetite. The nutrition is so disturbed that there
is no making of flesh, and hence the emaciation.

The catarrhal condition of the nose is worthy of notice. The Iodine
patient has loss of the sense of smell. The mucous membrane is
thickened ; he takes cold upon the slightest provocation ; is always
sneezing and has from the nose a copious watery discharge. Ulcera-
tion in the nose with bloody crusts ; he blows blood from the nose.
The nose is stuffed up so that he cannot breathe through it. This
increases every time he takes cold, and he is continually taking cold
hence he becomes a confirmed subject of catarrh. I have described
the general state. The patient is the first to be thought of. His
constitution is the first thing to know, i. e,, what is true of the patient
as a whole. After that we can find out what is true of each of his
parts. The mucous membrane of the nose is constantly in a state of
ulceration, or has a tendency to ulceration. Sometimes these little
ulcers are deep.

There are aphthous patches along the tongue and throughout the
mouth. The whole buccal cavity is studded with aphthous patches,
I have mentioned already the tendency to exudation ; white velvety,
or white-greyish or pale ash-colored exudations come upon the sore
throat, all over the raucous membrane of the nose and all over the
pharynx. The pharynx seems to be lined with the velvety, ash-
colored appearances. With these throat symptoms and the tendency
to ulceration it has a wide range of usefulness in throat affections.
It is useful in enlargement of the tonsils when the tonsils are studded
with exudations and in the constitution described. Enlarged tonsils
in hungry, withered patients. We often see one who is subject to
quinsy progressing toward the Iodine state. He is always suffering
from the heat like a Pulsatilla patient ; at times in the earlier stages,



IODINE


535


before any organic changes have taken place, you may mistake Iodine
for Pulsatilla, But if you watch the patient you will observe the
tendency to emaciation and see that the two remedies soon part com-
pany. They are both hot, they are lx>th irritable, they are both full
of notions. The Pulsatilla patient is far more whimsical, more tear-
ful, has greater sadness, and has constant loss of appetite, while the
Iodine subject wants to eat much. The Pulsatilla patient often in-
creases in flesh, although growing increasingly nervous. The Iodine
patient becomes thin, has a ravenous hunger, cannot be satisfied,
suffers from his hunger ; he must eat every few hours and feels better
after eating ; he has also great thirst. If he goes long without eating,
no matter what the complaints arc, the suffering will increase. Any
of the complaints of Iodine will likely be increased by fasting.

Iodine has also an indigestion that comes from overeating. The
food sours, he is troubled with sour eructations, with much flatulence,
with belching, with undigested stools, with diarrhoea, watery, cheesy
stools, and he digests less and less. The digestion becomes more and
more feeble until he digests almost nothing of what he eats, and yet
the craving increases. He vomits and diarrhoea comes on and so he
increasingly emaciates ; because it is like burning the candle at both
ends. It is not surprising that he is extremely weak because he is
assimilating very little of what he takes. The articles of food act
as foreign substances to disorder his bowels and stomach. Now, with
this trouble going on, the liver and (spleen become hard and enlarged,
and the patient becomes jaundiced* The stool is hard, lumpy and
white, or colorless, or clay colored, sometimes soft and pappy ; there
seems to be little or no bile in it. This stage gradually increases until
hypertrophy of the liver comes on. Finally the abdomen sinks in
and reveals this enlargement of the liver and the enlarged lymphatic
glands. These are very knotty and as hard as in tabes mesenterica.
Iodine is indicated in the tubercular condition of the mesenteric glands
with diarrhoea, emaciation, great hunger, great thirst, withering of
the mammary glands, a dried bcef-Iikc or shrivelled appearance of
the skin and sallow complexion. If the remedy is given early enough,
before the structural changes have occurred, it will check the progress
of the disease and cure.

This is a very useful remedy in the chronic niorning diarrhoea of
emaciated, scrofulous children.

When the constitutional state is present it is primary to the varying
kinds of stools that it is possible for the patient to have. So if you
have a marked state of the constitution, a case in which there are a
great number of general symptoms for you to associate the remedy
with, the little symptoms of the diarrhoea cease to be important. The
constitutional state in that patient is that which is ‘'strange, rare and



536


K)DIN&


peculiar.” Almost any kind of diarrhoeic stool will be cured if the
constitutional state is. covered by the remedy. When it is an acute
diarrhoea and it occurs in a vigorous constitution, and there is nothing
but the diarrhoea, then it is necessary to know all the finer details, and
the characteristics of the diarrhoea become the rare, ‘^strange” and
“peculiar” features.

Incontinence of urine in old people. In the male with all these con-
stitutional symptoms Iodine is especially suited when the testes have
dwindled, when there is impotency, when there is flowing of semen
with dreams, when there is loss of sexual instinct or power, or with
an irritated stale, an erethism of the sexual instinct ; also when the
testes are enlarged and hard, indurated and hypertrophied like the
other glands, or when there is an orchitis, an inflammation and en-
largement of the testicles.

Swelling and induration of the uterus and ovaries. Iodine has
cured tumors of the ovaries in such a constitution as I have described.
It has cured the dwindling of the mammary glands and caused them
to grow plump with an increase of flesh upon dwindling patients.

Its nature to produce the catarrhal state is illustrated in the leticor^
rha*a that it produces. Uterine leucorrhoea with swelling and indura-
tion of the cervix. Uterus enlarged, tendency to menorrhagia.
Leucorrhoea rendering the thighs sore. The discharges of Iodine are
acrid. The discharges from the nose excoriate the lip, the discharges
from the eyes excoriate the cheek, the discharges from the vagina
excoriate the thighs. The leucorrhoea is thick and slimy and some-
times bloody ; “chronic leucorrhoea, most abundant at the time of the
menses, rendering the thighs sore and corroding the linen.”

This remedy has a cough that is violent ; it has grave and severe
difficulties of respiration, dyspnoea, with chest symptoms. Croupy,
suffocating cough in this delicate constitution. Again we say if you
do not hold in mind the constitutional state while reading these very
numerous respiratory symptoms, you will not be able to apply them
because they are extensive and include a great many so-called com-
plaints and would give you difficulty in individualizing them.

Now, there is one more complaint that I wish to call your attention
to. In old gouty constitutions, with enlargement of the joints, the
history is that the patients were once in a good state of flesh, but they
have become lean, and although they are hungry, the food does not
seem to do them good. The joints arc enlarged and tender. Many
gouty constitutions want a warm room, but the Iodine patient wants
a cool room. His joints pain and are agggravated from the warmth
of bed. He cheers up in a cool place and likes to be in the open air.
He is growing increasingly we^ ; he is generally ameliorated on
moving about and eating, he has the anxiety of body and mind.



IPECACUANHA


537


Iodine will put a check on his gouty attacks and cause him to go on
comfortably for a while.


IPECACUANHA

Ipecac, has a wide sphere of action among acute sickness. Most
of its acute complaints commence with nausea, vomiting. The febrile
conditions commence with pain in the back between the shoulders,
extending down the back, as if it would break, with or without rigors,
much fever, vomiting of bile and seldom any thirst. This is the
general aspect of the beginning of an Ipecac, fever or gastric trouble
or chill in intermittents or bilious attacks.

The stomach is disordered. There is a sense of fulness in the
stomach, cutting pains in the stomach and below the stomach, going
from left to right. The cutting pain in colic goes from left to right.
The patient is unable to stir or breathe until that pain passes off. It
holds him transfixed in one position, coming like the stabbing of a
knife in the region of the stomach, or above the navel, going from
left to right, and is attended with prostration and nausea.

All the complaints in Ipecac, are attended more or less with
nausea; every little pain and distress is attended with nausea. The
sufferings seem to centre about the stomach, bringing on nausea.
There is continuous nausea and gagging. The cough causes nausea
and vomiting. It is a dry, hackmg, teasing, suffocative cough, ac-
companied by nausea and vomiting. He coughs until his face grows
red, and then there is choking and gagging. With every little gush of
blood from any part of the body there is nausea, fainting and
sinking. Hence its value in uterine haemorrhages ; bright, red blood
with nausea ; a little blood is attended with fainting or syncope, but
the great overwhelming nausea runs through the complaints of this
remedy. Though there is sometimes thirst, it is usually absent.
When Ipecac, docs its best work, there is thirstlessness. With the
Ipecac, fever, or with the chill, there is likely to be pain in the back of
the head, a bruised pain through the head and back of the neck and
sometimes down the back, and drawing in the muscles of the back
of the neck. A congestive fulness in the head, a crushed feeling in
the head and back of the head ; the whole head aches and is full of
pain.

Ipecac, is sometimes as restless as Arsenic, but the Ipecac, pros-
tration comes by spells, whereas the Arsenic prostration is continuous.
You will see Ipecac, patients tossing over the bed as much as they do
when they need Rhus, turning and tossing, and moving the hands
and feet, with restlessness. This is especially the case when the spine
is somewhat involved. Ipecac, has symptoms that look like tetanus ;

68



538


IPECACUANHA


it has opisthotonos, and it has been a useful remedy in cerebro-spinal
meningitis with vomiting of bile, with pain in the back of the head
and neck, and drawing of the muscles of the back, retracting the
head. When cerebro-spinal meningitis has gone on until the patient
is emaciated, when remedies have seemed but to palliate momentarily,
and the whole body is inclined backwards, and there is vomiting
of everything, even the simplest article taken into the stomach, the
tongue is red and raw, and there is constant nausea and vomiting of
bile, Ipecac, will cure. Ipecac, cures inveterate cases of gastritis
when even a drop of water will not stay down ; everything put in the
stomach is vomited, continuous gagging, sharp pain in the stomach,
pain in the back, below the shoulder blades, as if it would break,
vomiting of bile, continuous nausea and great prostration. Irritable
stomach. It also cures when the abdomen is distended, and sensitive,
a tympanitic state, when there is vomiting of bile. Ipecac, has
proved a useful remedy in epidemic dysentery, when the patient is
compelled to sit almost constantly upon the stool and passes a little
slime, or a little bright red blood ; inflammation of the lower portion
of the bowel, the rectum and the colon, I'hc tenesmus is awful,
burning, and continuous urging with the passage of only a little
mucus and blood. With this there is constant nausea ; while straining
at stool, the pain is so great that nausea comes on, and he vomits bile.
At times, whole families are down with it. It runs through a whole
valley and may be epidemic : but it commonly relates to endemics. In
infants it is indicated when a cholera-like diarrhoea has been present
and it ends in a dysenteric state, with continued tenesmus, and the
expulsion of a little bloody mucus, the child vomiting everything
it takes into the stomach ; nausea, vomiting, prostration and great
pallor. It is also useful in such conditions when the stool is more or
less copious, and is green, and the child passes, frequently, copious
quantities of green slime. Much crying when at stool, much straining,
with passages of green slime, vomiting of green slime, and vomiting
of green curds ; milk turns green and is vimited.

The chest complaints of Ipecac, are interesting. Ipecac, is especially
the infant’s friend and is commonly indicated in the bronchitis of
infancy. The usual bad cold that ends in chest trouble in infants
is a bronchitis. It is very seldom that an infant gets a true pneumonia,
it is generally a bronchitis with coarse rattling. The child coughs,
gags and suffocates, and there is coarse rattling which can be heard
throughout the room, and the trouble has come on pretty rapidly.
The child is pale, looks dreadfully sick, and sometimes looks very
anxious. The nose is drawn in as if dangerously ill, and the breath-
ing is such as appears in a dangerous case. Ipecac, will sometimes
modify this into a very simple case, break up the cold, and cure



IPECACUANHA


539


the child. In the old books, the pneumonia of infancy had a distinct
and separate description, and the typical symptoms were those of
Ipecac. You will see a great similarity of symptoms when you
study Ipecac, and Ant. tart, together in chest troubles. If you have
been studying them together, you will say, “How do you distinguish
them ; they both have rattling cough and breathing, and both have the
vomiting?” Well, the Ipecac, symptoms correspond to the stage of
irritation, while the Tartar emetic symptoms appear in the stage of
relaxation. That is, the Ipecac, symptoms come on hurriedly, coma
on as the acute symptoms, whereas the Tartar emetic complaints
come on slowly. The latter is seldom suited to symptoms that arise
within twenty-four hours, or at least the symptoms of Tartar emetic
that arise in twenty-four hours are not of this class. Tliis group
comes on many days later, comes on at the close of a bronchitis
when there is threatened paralysis of the lungs ; not in the state
of irritation, not the dyspnoea from irritation, not the suffocation
of that sort, but the suffocation from exudation, and from threatened
paralysis of the lungs. When the lungs are too weak to expel the
mucus, the coarse rattling comes on. "J'hen there is the great exhaus-
tion, deathly pallor of the face and sooty nostrils. We see now that
these two remedies do not look alike. If we observe the pace of the
two remedies, we see that the complaints differ. It is not so much
that they belong to stages, althou^ they do, but rather that Ipecac,
brings on its symptoms rapidly and effects a crisis speedily, and that
Ant. tart, brings on its symptonis slowly and effects a crisis after
many days.

You can readily see the value of Ipecac, in whooping cough, for
it has the paroxysmal character, the red face, and vomiting and
gagging with the cough. The red face, thirstlessncss, violent whoop-
ing, with convulsions, with gagging and vomiting of all that he eats
are the symptoms that you will generally find.

I have hinted at the ha;morrhages, and these open out a great
field for Ipecac. I could not practic medicine without Ipecac., be-
cause of its importance in haemorrhages. When I say haemorrhages,
I do not mean those from cut arteries, I do not mean haemorrhages
where surgery must come in ; I mean such as uterine haemorrhages
haemorrhages from the kidneys, from the bowels, from the stomach,
from the lungs. You must know your remedies in haemorrhages ;
if you do not, you will be forced to use mechanical means ; but the
homoeopathist who is well instructed is able to do without them. In
the severest form of uterine haemorrhages the homoeopathic physician
is able to do without mechanical means, except when mechanical
means are causing the haemorrhage. This does not relate to hour-
glass contractions, it does not relate to conditions when the after



540


IPECACUANHA


birth is retained, or when the uterus has a foreign substance in it,
because under such circumstances manipulation is necessary. A dis-
tinction must be made. But when we have simply the pure dynamic
clement to consider, simply and purely a relaxed surface that is
bleeding, the remedy is the only thing that will do the work properly.
When the uterus is continuously oozing, but every little while the flow
increases to a gush, and with every little gush of bright red blood
the waman thinks she is going to faint, or there is gasping, and the
quantity of the flow is not sufficient to account for such prostration,
nausea, syncope, pallor, Ipecac, is the remedy. When with the gushing
of bright red blood there is an overwhelming fear of death. Aconite.
If your patient while going through the confinement has had a hot
head, an uncontrollable thirst for ice cold water, and after the confine-
ment, everything has gone on in an orderly way, and the placenta has
been delivered, and although you have no reason to expect such
haemorrhage it comes on. Phosphorus will nearly always be the
remedy. In those withered women, lean and slender, who are al-
ways suffering from the heat, who want the covers off and want to
be cool, who have had a tendency to ooze blood from the uterus, and
now have a haemorrhage that is alarming either with clots, or only
an oozing of dark liquid blood, you can hardly do without Secale.
A single dose of any one of these medicines on the tongue will check
a haemorrhage more quickly than large doses of strong medicine.
The haemorrhage will be checked so speedily that in your earlier experi-
ences you will be surprised. You will wonder if it is not possible that
it stopped itself. In copious menstruation Ipecac, is often indicated
when the woman has taken cold, or has a shock. In cases where she
is not especially subject to copious uterine flow at the menstrual
period, she is naturally alarmed, for it is something she has never
had before, and the flow is likely to continue for many days, attended
with this weakness. All her power seems to go with a little gush of
blood. Ipecac, will cure and end the menstrual flow normally. A
fortunate thing in nature is the tendency to check haemorrhage, which
is always good. There are a large number of medicines that control
haemorrhage, and these you must keep at your finger’s ends. They
belong to emergencies. You must know the remedies that correspond
to violent symptoms and violent attacks. Ipecac, is full of haemor-
rhage. Vomiting of great clots of blood, continuous vomiting of
blood in connection with ulceration. In persons who are subject to
violent attacks of bleeding, who bleed easily, who have a haemor-
rhagic tendency, Ipecac, will control temporarily the haemorrhage when
the symptoms agree.

Severe pain in the back in the region of the kidneys, shooting
pains, frequent urging to urinate, and the urine contains blood and



IPECACUANHA


54 ^

little clots of blood. The urine is extremely red with blood, which
settles to the bottom of the vessel, and lines the whole commode with
a layer of blood the thickness of a knife blade. Every pint of urine
that it contains will have that coating of blood in the vessel ; every
attack of pain in the kidney is attended with that condition of the
urine. Ipecacuanha will stop that bleeding. It is true that when
patients have bled until they have become anaemic, and are subject to
dropsy. Ipecac, ceases to be the remedy ; its natural follower then k
China, which will bring the patient in a position to need an antipsoric
remedy.

Then there are the “colds.” Simple, common coryzas among the
children. When a cold settles in the nose, and the nose is stuffed
up at night or when the adult has a coryza, with much stuffing up
of the nose, blowing of mucus and blood jfrom the nose, much sneez-
ing, and the cold goes further down and is followed by hoarseness,
extending into the trachea with rawness, and finally into the bron-
chial tubes with suffocation and settling in the chest, think of Ipecac.
The Ipecac, colds often begin in the nose and spread very rapidly
into the chest. With these colds in the nose there is copious bleeding
of bright red blood. Every time he takes cold in the nose he has
copious bleeding; a tendency to nosebleed with the colds. The in-
flammation that comes upon the mucous membrane in Ipecac, is
violent. The irritation comes on suddenly, and the mucous membrane
inflames so rapidly that the parts become purple, turgescent, and
bleeding seems to be the only natural relief. Stoppage of the nose
and loss of smell ; the nose becomes so stuffed up that he cannot
breathe through it.

With the head symptoms, with the colds, with the whooping
cough, with the chill, and with many of the inflammatory com-
plaints, the face becomes flushed, bright red, or bluish red, and
the lips blue ; with the chill the the lips and the finger nails are blue.
The chill is violent, sometimes congestive in character and often
a rigor. The whole frame shakes, and the teeth chatter.

There are old incurable cases of asthma that are palliated by
Ipecac, and carry around a bottle of it from which they say they
get much relief. It is useful in cases of humid asthma, in cases of
asthmatic bronchitis, when they suffer from the damp weather and
from sudden weather changes ; every little cold rouses up this bron-
chial attack, and he suffocates and gags when he coughs, or spits up a
little blood. He has to sit up nights to breathe, and the attacks are
common and frequent. These patients say they get relief from
Ipecac., and it is not surprising that Ipecac, relieves that state of
asthmatic breathing, because it has such symptoms. Some of these
cases are incurable, they are people advanced in life. This remedy.



542


KAU BICHROMICUM


more wisely administered, will give more relief. A powder of Ipecac,
will break up the attack, so that the patient is comfortable, and then
will go on in an ordinary sort of asthmatic way, until catching another
cold. The cough is rattling and asthmatic.

As a convulsive medicine Ipecac, is not well enough known. Con-
vulsions in prenagney. Convulsions in whooping cough ; frightful
spasms, affecting the whole of the left side, followed by paralysis ;
clonic and tonic spasms of children and hysterical women. Tetanus,
rigidity of the body, with flushed redness of the face. These are
strong features of Ipecac., and they have not been sufficiently dwelt
upon, and the remedy is not sufficiently known as having these states
so prominently. Medicines like Belladonna are more frequently spoken
of in the books and in treatises of spasms, yet Ipecac, is just as im-
portant a remedy to be studied in relation to spasms, and its action
upon the spine.

In suppressed eruptions, the symptoms will very commonly point
to Ipecac. When the eruption does not come out, or an eruption has
been driven back by cold, sometimes acute manifestations of stomach
and bowels lollow and colds settle in the chest from suppressed
eruptions. Ipecac, will also cure erysipelas, when there is the vomit-
ing, the chill, the pain in the back, the thirstlessness and the over-
whelming nausea.

Ipecac, is often sufficient for the nausea and vomiting when the
scarlet fever rash is slow to come out. Instead of the rash coming
out as it should. Ipecac, symptoms come on in the stomach with
nausea and vomiting. Ipecac, will check the nausea and vomiting,
will bring out the eruption, and the disease will run a milder course.

KALI BICHROMICUM

This remedy is recognized by most physicians by the copious ropy
mucous discharges from all mucous membranes, but it is also a most
important remedy in rheumatic affections of th e joints with swelling,
heat and redness, whenever these, conditions wandey around from
joint to joiiit . The bones all over the body feel bruised, and caries is
recEoned^mong its symptoms. A marked feature of this remedy
is the alternation between catarrhal symptoms and rheumatic pains.
Exudations from mucous membranes, somewhat like croup, are found
in the larynx, trachea and in the rectum. It is not surprising, there-
fore, that it has proved a very effective remedy in diphtheria. It
emaciates, like the rest of the Kali salts. We have running through
it the cachectic conditions, or malignant diseases with ulceration ; and
especially is it indicated when the ulceration period is present. Ulcera-
tion is a striking feature of this remedy. Its ulcers are deep ; are



KALI BICHROMICUM


543


said to be as if punched out and are very red. Gouty conditions are
as common in this remedy as in the other Kalis. It is especially like
Causticum with its cracking in the joints. Syphilitic conditions have
been cured in the most advanced stages. It has the sharp stitching
pains like Kali carh. It has one feature quite its own — very severe
pain in small spots that could be covered by the end of the thumb.
It has wandering pains from place to place, and wandering rheu-
matism from joint to joint. There arc pains in all parts. Pains are
sometimes very violent ; sometimes shooting ; sometimes stitching
stinging ; again aching. Burning is a very marked symptom of the
remedy. The pains appear rapidly and disappear suddenly.

The patient is sensitive to cold. There is a lack of vital heal. In
fact, he wants to be wrapped up and covered warmly, and many of
his complaints are much better when he is perfectly warm in bed.
All the pains and his cough are relieved from the warmth of the bed,
and yet there are other complaints, like rheumatic conditions, that
come on in hot weather. The cough is better in warm weather and
worse in winter. Catarrhal conditions of the larynx and trachea are
worse in winter, especially in the cold, damp weather, like Calc. phos.
when the snow melts. Sensitive to cold winds. Causticum, it will
be remembered, is sensitive to cold^ dry winds. The Kalis generally
are sensitive to cold, dry weather, but Kali bichromicum throat troubles
are continuous in the winter and during cold, damp weather, and are
worse in cold, damp winds. It is most useful remedy in septic and
zymotic fevers. Many of its symptoms are aggravated about 2 or
A. M., like Kali carb. Most of the symptoms are worse in the morn-
ing, yet some come on in the night. A marked feature of Kali bi-
thromicum is a feeling of great weakness and weariness. When the
pain has passed off, if in the limbs, the limbs are felt very weary.
Great prostration and cold sweat. It has neuralgia ^very day at the
same hour, showing its periodicit y. Like the rest of the Kri/w it has
cured eqilepsy. Ropy saliva and mucous discharges from the mouth
during the convulsion has led to its use in epilepsy. The symptoms
generally, especially jthcL pains^ arc worse from motion , e xcept t he
sciati c and some of the pains in the lo wer limbs, which re bet ter frmTr.
moUgnT The patient pulsates all over the body.

TTiere are very few mental symptoms owing to the fact that the
remedy has been proved only in crude form. It needs to be proved
in potencies to bring out the mental symptoms.

It has violent headaches and its headaches are mostly associated
with catarrhal conditions. A Kali bichromicum patient always suffers
more or less from catarrh of the nose, and if he is exposed to cold
weather the catarrhal condition will turn to dryness ; then will come
on violent headache ; also headaches during coryza. Headaches during



544


KALI BICHROMICUM


coryza when the discharge of the coryza slacks up a little. Headaches
often l ^gin w ith dim visio n. Pains are violent. Headaches are
better JroffSJinnth, especially war m drin k ; better from pressure ;
worse from stooping ; worse fro m motion anHj^valking ; worse at night
and still much worse m the morning. Pain is pulsating, shooting and
burning. Headaches come on with vertigo. H eadaches are often
one-sided . — It has been a very useful remedy in syphilitic head pains.
I ^ins over the cy e^ar^ in the forchc^^^^ It is very useful when the
fieadachcs are with retching and vomiting ; when the pain is confined
to a very small spot that could be covered with the thumb and is
violent; iyhcn _ the headaches come periodically and with dizziness.
Headaches are somewhat ameliorated in open air if it is not too cold.

It has cured eczema of the scalp with thick, heavy crusts from
which ooze a yellow, thick, gluey substance.

Daylight brings on photophobia. There are sparks before the
eyes ; dim vision before the headache, as mentioned above. Rheu-
matic conditions affecting the eyes, hence it is said rhematic affec-
tions of the eyes. Granular lids. Ulceration of the cornea. The
ulcer is deep with pulsation in it. The eyes are much inflamed and
red. The lids are red and swollen. Eyes and lids are injected.
Croupous inflammation of the eyes. Burning and itching in the eyes.
Inflammation of the mucous membrane of the eyes with copious flow*,
of thick mucus. Margins of the lids are red and swollen. It has
cured polypus on the conjunctiva, swelling of the lids and stringy
mucus.

There are yellow, viscid discharges from the ears, with stitching
pains and pulsating in the ears. Chronic suppuration of the middle
ear with perforated tympanum ; eczematous eruptions on the ears ;
itching of the whole external ear.

The symptoms of the nasal passages are very numerous. The most
prominent are the catarrhal symptoms. It has catarrhal symptoms
both acute and chronic, with copious, thick, viscid, yellow or white
mucus. Foetid odor from the nose. Troubled much with a sensation
of dryness in the nose. Loss of smell, and the nose is obstructed
nights with thick yellow mucus, too viscid to be blown out. Accom-
panying this catarrhal condition there is a hard pain at the root of
the nose. Ulcers form all over the nasal mucous membrane. There
are ulcers, crusts, mucous plugs ; must blow the nose constantly with-
out success, but finally blows out large green crusts or scabs from high
up in the nose. Sometimes they are drawn into the posterior nares.
There is burning and pulsating in the nasal cavities, \^en the nasal
cavity is in this state of ulceration and catarrh there is shooting pain
from the root of the nose to the external angle of the eye through the
whole forenoon. Extreme soreness inside of the nose. Expired air



KALI BICHROMICUM


545


feels hot and causes a sensation of burning. He has snufiElcs and
increased catarrhal conditions in damp weather. There are also
burning, excoriating, watery discharges from the nose, as in acute
catarrhal conditions. • Coryza is fluent, excoriating, with loss of smell.
With the chronic condition there comes perforation of the septum
and pressing pains of the frontal sinus. A very strange condition
then is observed. Scabs form upon the nasal septum ; when these are
removed there comes photophobia, then dimness of vision, followed
by hard frontal headache. The septum is sometimes destroyed by
ulceration. Much thick blood is blown out of the nose. Now, it has
cured these conditions when they w^ere syphilitic. It has cured nasal
polypus. It has cured lupus of the nose.

The bones of the face are often very sore, with shooting pains in
the malar bones. Pain in the malar bones on coughing. With the
catarrhal conditions there is much suffering from the malar bones,
like Merc. It has cured lupus exedens. It has cured ulceration of
the lip. Swollen parotid is quite a common feature in its proving.
It has cured impetigo.

The tongue is smooth, shiny, sometimes cracked. This is especially
observed in low forms of fever, like typhoid. The tongue is often
coated, thick and yellow at the base. Papillae raise on the dorsum
of the tongue, making it look like strawberry tongue. Again, the
tongue is coated a thick brown. The provers seemed to be much
annoyed by a sensation of a hair on the base of the tongue. It has
produced and cured ulceration of : the tongue ; even when syphilitic
it is a useful remedy. Ulcers deep as, if punched out, with stinging pains.

There is great dryness of the mouth ; ropy saliva and mucus ; ulcers
anywhere in the mouth ; aphthous patches ; ulcers of the roof of the
mouth ; even when these are syphilitic it is a most useful remedy ;
deep punched out ulcers.

The throat symptoms are very numerous. I will only mention a
few of the most characteristic ones. Inflammation of the thioat in
general, involving all the tissues in it, extending up into the nose, and
down into the larynx, even with a high degree of ulceration with
copious, ropy mucus. It has cured diphtheria exudation in the throat
when it is confined To the throat, and also when it has extended to the
larynx. A marked feature of the Kali bichromicum throat is its
oedematous uvula. This symptom is also found in Apis, Kali i., Lack,,
Mur. ac., Nit ac,, Phos., Sulph. ac., and Tab. Deep ulcers in the
throat and ulcers on the tonsils. Ulceration so extensive that it
has destroyed the whole soft palate. Inflammation of the tonsils
when they are swollen and very red, when the neck is swollen ; in-
flammation of the tonsils with suppuration. In this sore throat there
is quite commonly a shooting pain extending to the ears. There are

69



546


KALI BICriROMICUM


also enlarged veins in the throat. Like the sensation of the tongue
as if a hair in various places in the fauces and nose. Dry, burning
sensation in the throat is very common. Quite a characteristic symp-
tom of Kali bichromicum is the intense pain in the root of the tongue,
when putting the tongue out. It has much exudation in the throat
that is not diphtheria, but resembles it.

The stomach symptoms are also very numerous. There is aversion
to meat, and, strange to say, he craves beer, which makes him sick,
brings on diarrhoea. Food lies like a load in the stomach ; digestion
seems suspended : there is a pressure as of a load after eating and
much foetid eructation. Nausea comes on very suddenly, sometimes
while eating, soon after eating : vomits all food and it is sour as if it
had turned sour very rapidly ; so that there is vomiting of sour, un-
digested food, bile, bitter mucus, blood, yellow mucus and royp mucus.
It is a very useful remedy in nausea and vomiting of drunkards and
beer drinkers. When a beer drinker has arrived at a point where
he can no longer tolerate his beer but it makes him sick, Kali bichro-
micum is a useful remedy. In the stomach there is also soreness and
coldness. It is a very useful remedy in ulceration of the stomach ;
and when such ulc«r is cancerous it relieves the pain, stops the vomit-
ing, makes the patient comfortable for a long time. In other words,
it palliates him. There are some pains in the stomach that are ameli-
orated by eating ; nausea sometimes is ameliorated, but such is the
exception. He has a faintness in the stomach which drives him to
eat often. Chronic catarrh of the stomach is a strong feature and
perhaps is a condition that is generally present with Kali bichromicum.
patients.

There is pain in the liver, hard contracting pain extending lo the
shoulder, resembling Crot, h. Pain in the liver from motion. Dull,
aching pain in the liver. It is a useful remedy in liver conditions
associated with gall stones. It corrects the action of the liver so that
healthy bile is formed and the gall stones are dissolved. Stitching
pain in the liver, and also in the spleen, on motion.

The abdomen is very tympanitic, with tenderness. There arc stitch-
ing, cutting pains. Sinking in the abdomen with nausea after eating,
then comes vomiting, then comes diarrhoea. This is the order in
which these symptoms generally appear. It is a very useful remedy
in gastro-intestinal cases. Ulcers of the intestines in typhoid condi-
tions. This remedy has also a morning diarrhoea like Sulphur. It
has diarrhoea in phthisis. It has diarrhoea in typhoid fever. Watery
stools. Stools are brown and watery, or may be blackish watery.
There is often much tenesmus at stool. Chronic diarrhoea in the
morning. Diarrhoea after beer like Aloe, China, Gamb., Lyc., Mur.
ac., and Sulph.



KALI BICHROMICUM


547


Frequently there are clay colored stools. Again there are bloody
stools, as in dysentery. It has both diarrhoea and dysentery after
rheumatism has disappeared. It seems rheumatic conditions are in-
clined to alternate with diarrhoeic conditions. In hot weather it has
diarrhoea and dysentery ; in winter it has chest troubles and catarrh
of the air passages. There is pain in the abdomen before the stool ;
much pain during the stool, cramping and tenesmus. After stool it
has tenesmus like Merc. It has constipation with hard, knotty stool,
followed by severe burning in the parts. Burning in the anus after
stool. Prolapsus of the rectum. After dry hard stool there is burning
in the rectum. Patient suffers from a sensation of a large plug in the
rectum and there is great soreness in the anus. He suffers much
from haemorrhoids which protrude after stool and are very painful.

Pain in the back with bloody urine. Shooting pains in the region
of the kidneys, also aching in the region of the kidneys with urging
to urinate in the day time. There is suppressed urine with aching in
the kidneys. Ropy mucus in the urine. Pain in the coccyx before
urination, relieved afterwards. Burning in the fossa navicularis dur-
ing urination.

In the male the sexual desire is generally absent. There is a strong
constricting or contracting pain in the end of the penis and much itch-
ing of the pubes. Deep punched out chancres, very hard. Stitching
in the prostate gland when walking. Ropy, viscid, mucous discharge
from the urethra.

As there is much relaxation ilk the remedy during hot weather it
especially affects the woman. She suffers from prolapsus in the sum-
mer time, during hot weather. It is a very useful remedy in the
woman for subinvolution. In the menstrual flow there are often
membranes that cause her to suffer. The menstrual flow is too soon,
excoriates the parts, causes the labia to swell and itch. Like the
catarrhal conditions of other mucous membranes, there is Icucorrhoea
that is yellow and ropy.

It has been a most useful remedy in the vomiting of pregnancy
when the other .symptoms agree and also where the milk becomes
stringy.

There are numerous symptoms connected with the larynx and as
is usual copious, thick, ropy mucus. Chronic hoarseness, rough voice,
dry cough, swollen feeling in the larynx and sensation as if there was
a rag in the larynx. Catarrh of the larynx, croup, cough when
breathing, membranous croup, diphtheria, burning, smarting and
rawness of the larynx, rattling in the trachea. Now these symp-
toms come in the cold, damp weather, in the winter. They arc as-
sociated with much coughing and uneasiness. Sometimes these
symptoms are entirely relieved and he is comfortable in a warm bed



548


KAU BICHROMICUM


at night ; and he is worse always in cold weather ; they come on
when the cold weather comes in the fall and last all winter. He has
much wheezing when breathing ; tightness at the bifurcation of the
trachea. Quite a characteristic pain in the chest is the pain from the
sternum to the back, associated with catarrhal conditions and with
cough. Cough is caused from tickling in the larynx and at thei
bifurcation ; dry, frequent, hard cough ; great soreness in the chest
when coughing and breathing deep. Cough with pain in the sternum
through to the back. Cough with stitching pain in the chest. Loud,
hard cough. When he wakes up in the morning he begins this hard
coughing. He is often ameliorated by lying down and is ameliorated
by the warm bed ; is worse undressing, from exposure to the air,
worse after eating, aggravated by taking a deep breath, ameliorated
by getting warm in bed. The irritation and the cough is increased
very much exposure to cold air. The cough is also a choking cough
at times ,* sometimes a hoarse cough. It is sometimes much like whoop-
ing cough, spasmodic and constrictive.

The expectoration connected with the chest cough is ropy, yellow,
or yellowish green, sometimes bloody ; sometimes expectorates quantities
of clotted blood. There is much rattling in the chest, catarrhal condi-
tions in the winter, last all winter, with rattling catarrhal conditions
in old people, rattling in the chest.

It is a most useful remedy in phthisis and haemorrhages from the
lungs and cavities in the lungs. There is a cold sensation in the chest
which is generally felt in the region of the heart. There is a pressure
in the chest after eating also near the heart or supposed to be about
the heart and there is palpitation. It has cured and been a very useful
remedy in hypertrophy of the heart with palpitation.

In all parts of the body there is chilliness, in the back, especially in
the back of the neck. Stabbing pains in the neck and in the dorsal
region. Sharp pains in the region of the kidneys. Dull ache in theJ
back. Many of the symptoms in the back are of a rheumatic character
and wander from place to place. The rheumatic pains are worse
stooping, and, like other pains, worse from motion. An exception
to this is in the sacrum where there is an aching pain at night when
lying and is better in the day time on motion. There is pain in the
sacrum on straightening up from sitting. Pain in the coccyx from
rising after sitting ; pain in the coccyx on first sitting down and in
the act of sitting down.

The limbs are stiff in the morning on rising and the pains wander
about, especially in the joints. Rheumatic pains that wander about.
Pains in the limbs are worse from cold and worse from motion.
They are better from heat and better in rest. Periodical pains, coming
at regular times. The bones feel sore to the touch or on deep pressure.



KALI CARBONICUM


549


There is cracking in the joints. Rheumatic pains are very common
in the shoulders ; lameness ; there is burning in the forearms ; rheu-
matic pains in the elbows ; weak feeling in the hands and fingers with
much clumsiness ; spasmodic contraction of the fingers. Bones in the
hands and fingers feel bruised and very tender to hard pressure.
Rheumatic pains of the fingers are very common to this remedy. In
the lower limbs we have marked rheumatic pains through the hips and
knees, worse walking and on motion. Then comes the exception:
pains ixi the sciatic nerves very severe, worse in hot weather ; these
are better in motion, better in the warmth of the bed, worse from
changes in the weather and better on flexing the leg. Drawing pains
in the tibia are very common. It has cured ulcers on the legs, deep
as if punched out. Burning on the ankles, soreness of the heels. It
has cured ulcers on the heels.

The sleep is most restless. Starting in sleep and turning and toss-
ing. Its chest symptoms are worse on walking.

Upon the skin we have pustules, boils, eczema, blisters, herpes,
shingles, ulcers on the skin, tubercles, suppurating tubercles and crup
tions that are syphilitic in character.

KALI CARBONICUM

The Kali carb. patient is a hard patient to study, and the remedy
itself is a hard one to study.

It is not used as often as it sl^ould be. and the reason is that it
is a very complex and confusing remedy. It has a great many opposite
symptoms, changing symptoms, and thus it is related to patients that
withhold their symptoms and have many vague symptoms.

The patient is whimsical, irascible, irritable to the very highest
degree, quarrels with his family and with his bread and butter.
He never wants to be alone, is full of fear and imaginations when
alone, ‘Tear of the future, fear of death, fear of ghosts.'' If com-
pelled to remain alone in the house he is wakeful, sleepless, or his
sleep is full of horrible dreams. He is never at peace, is full of
imaginations and fear. “What if the house should burn up I " “What
if I should do this or thatl" and “What if this and the other thing
should happen I"

He is oversensitive to everything, sensitive to every atmospheric
change ; he can never get the room, at just exactly the right tempera-
ture ; he is sensitive to every draft of air and to the circulation of air
in the room. He cannot have the windows open, even in a distant
part of the house. He will get up at night in bed and look around
to see where that draft of air comes from. His complaints are worse
in wet weather, and in cold weather. He is sensitive to the cold and



550


Rau carbonicum


is always shivering. His nerves feel the cold ; they arc all painful
when it is cold. The neuralgias shoot here and there when it is cold,
and if the part affected be kept warm the pain goes to some other place.
All his pains change place and go into the cold part ; if he covers up
one part, the pain goes to the part uncovered.

This remedy is full of sticking, burning, tearing pains, and these
fly around from place to place. Of course Kali carb. has pains that
remain in one place, but usually the pains fly around in every direction.
Pains cutting like knives. Pains like hot needles, sticking, stinging
and burning. These pains are felt in internal parts and dry passages.
Burning in the anus and rectum, described as if a hot poker were
forced into that passage ; burning as with fire. The haemorrhoids burn
like coals of fire. The burning of Kali carb. is like that of Arsenicum.

Again from studying the text it will be seen that it is a common
feature of this medicine to have its symptoms come on at 2, 3 or
5 o^clock in the morning. In Kali carb. the cough will come or
have its greatest < at three or four or five o’clock in the morning.
The febrile state will occur from 3-5 in the morning. The patient,
who is subject to asthmatic dyspnoea, will have an attack at 3 o’clock
in the morning, waking him out of sleep. He will wake up with
various symptoms and remain awake until 5 o'clock in the morning,
and after that to a great extent they are relieved. Of course, there
are plenty of sufferings at any time in the twenty-four hours, but this
is the worst time. He wakes up at 3 o’clock in the morning with fear,
fear of death, fear of the future, worries about everything and is kept
awake for 2-3 hours and then goes to sleep and sleeps soundly.

His body is cold and requires much clothing to keep it warm,
but in spite of the fact that he is cold he sweats copiously : copious,
cold sweat upon the body. Sweats upon the slightest exertion, sweats
where the pain is, sweat over the forehead ; cold sweat on the forehead
with headache.

Neuralgia of the scalp and the eyes and the cheek bones in associa-
tion with the nervous shooting pains. Violent pains here and there in
the head, as if the head would be crushed. Cutting and stabbing in
the head. Violent congestive headaches as if the head were full. Head
hot on one side and cold on the other ; forehead covered with cold
sweat.

It has catarrhal congestive headache. Whenever he goes out in the
cold air, the nose opens up and the mucous membranes become dry
and burn ; when he returns into a warm room the nose commences
to discharge, and the nose stuffs up so that he cannot breathe through
it, and then he feels most comfortable ; so that it has stuffing up of the
nose in a warm room, and opening up of the nose iii the open air.
When the nose is open so that he can breathe through it, that is the



KALI CARBOMCUM


551


time the head is most painful ; it is painful to the cold air and the cold
air makes it burn. The cold air feels hot. All these patients suffer
from a chronic catairh and when they ride in the wind the catarrhal
discharge ceases and then will come on a headache, and thus he has
headache from riding in the cold wind. Whenever the discharge
ceases from taking cold in a draft on comes headache, and as the
discharge becomes free again the headache is relieved. Neuralgic
pains in eyes and scalp and through the cheek bones from a cessation
of chronic catarrhal discharge, and when the discharge starts up
again, these pain cease.

With the chronic catarrh of the nose there is a thick, fluent, yellow
disef^arge ; dryness of the nose, alternating with stuffing up. The one
who suffers from a chronic catarrh wDl also have the discharge in the
morning, which will fill up the nose with yellow mucus. In the
morning he blows out and hawks up dry, hard crusts that fill up the
nasal passage, clear over into the pharynx and down into the throat.
These crusts become dry as if they were partly formed upon the
mucous membrane and when they are blown out there is bleeding.
The bleeding starts from where the crusts are lifted up.

He is subject to sore throat, is always taking cold, and it settles
in the throat. He is also subject to enlarged tonsils and with these
has enlargement and chronic hardness of the parotid glands — one or
both. Great knots below the car, b^ind the jaw. These grow and
become hard, and at times, painful ; ^looting, darting pains when he is
moving about in the open air. air strikes these enlarged glands

they are sore and painful, and he it iirneliorated by going into a warm
place. The acute colds extend into the chest, but Kali carb. has been
found most suitable in the chronic catarrh of the chest, chronic bron-
chitis.

The chest is very often affected in just the same way as the nose.
There is the dryness and dry barking, hacking cough in cold air, but
a copious expectoration of mucus when it becomes warm, and that is
the time he is most comfortable, for the expectoration seems to
relieve him. He suffers mostly from a dry, hacking cough with
morning expectoration. The cough begins with a dry, hacking, in-
creases gradually and sometimes very rapidly to a violent, spasmodic
cough with gagging or vomiting, and when coughing it feels as if his
head would fly to pieces. The face becomes puffed, the eyes seem to
protrude and then there is seen that which is commonly present in Kali
carb., a peculiar sort of a swelling between the eyelids and eyebrows
that fills up when coughing. Your attention is called to that peculiar
feature, for although there may be bloating nowhere else upon the
face that little bagging will appear above the lid and below the eye-
brow. It fills up sometimes to the extent of a little water bag. Such



552


KALI CARBONICUM


a swelling has been produced by Kali carb., and sometimes that
symptom alone guides to the examination of the remedy for the
purpose of ascertaining if Kali carb. does not fit all the rest of the
case. Bcenninghausen speaks of an epidemic of whooping cough in
which the majority of cases called for Kali carb., and this striking
feature was present. No remedy should ever be given on one symp-
tom. If you are led to a remedy by a peculiar symptom, study the
remedy and the disease thoroughly to ascertain if the two are similar
enough to each other to expect a cure. Any deviation from that rule
is ruinous and will lead to the practice of giving medicines on single
symptoms.

Dry, hacking incessant, gagging cough with whooping, blowing
of blood from the nose, vomiting of everything in the stomach, and
expectoration of blood-streaked mucus, is a whooping cough that will
be commonly cured by Kali carb., but especially if there is present that
peculiar and striking feature of a bag-like swelling below the eyebrow
and above the lids, pufliness of the eyes.

There are some cases of pneumonia that need Kali carb., in the
stage of hepatization (like Sulph,), Again, when pneumonia has
passed away think of Kali carb. if every time the patient takes a
little cold it settles in the chest with these symptoms that I have
described. There is sensitiveness of the body to weather changes,
to cold air and to wet, a continuous dry, hacking cough, with gagging,
the aggravation from three to five in the morning, and the patient has
flying neuralgic pains. These symptoms gradually increase and the
patient dates them back to his pneumonia. He says : ‘‘Doctor, I have
never been quite well since I had pneumonia.'* The catarrhal state has
.settled in his chest and there is a chronic tendency to take cold. These
cases are threatening to go into phthisis and will hardly be likely to
recover without Kali carb. In this tendency for catarrhal states to
locate in the chest, Kali carb. should be thought of as well as Phos-
phor,, Lycopod, and Sulphur.

Another general state that belongs to this remedy is a tendency
to dropsies. It has dropsies all over the body. The feet bloat and
the fingers puff ; the back of the hands pit upon pressure, the face
looks puffy and waxy. The heart is weak. I can look back upon
quite a number of cases of fatty degeneration of the heart in which
I could have prevented all the trouble with Kali carb. if I had known
the case better in the beginning. These cases are insidious, and the
indications calling for Kali carb. must be seen early or the patient
will advance into an incurable condition. That peculiar state of
weakness and feeble circulation that finally ends in dropsy and many
other complications has its likeness in Kali carb. There is an
insidiousness about Kali carb. in the approach of all of its complaints.



KALI CARBONICUM


553


He has a sort of nondescript appearance, he is withered, has much
dyspnoea upon going up. hill or even walking on the level. Examina-
tion of the lungs shows them to be in very fair condition, but finally
complications come on, there is a break down and organic changes
and you look back over these cases and say, if I had only seen in the
beginning of this case what I see now it seems as if the patient ought
to have been cured. We learn the beginnings of remedies as we learn
the beginnings of sickness. It is a prudent thing for a homoeopathic
physician to glance back over a case that he has failed on, or someone
else has failed on, to study its beginnings and see what the manifesta-
tions were. This kind of study to the homoeopathic physician is as
delightful as post mortems are to the old school.

The teeth present a peculiar state. The gums take on a scorbutic
or scrofulous character. The gums separate from the teeth and the
teeth decay and become discolored and loose, so that they have to be
extracted early in life. He suffers from pain in the teeth whenever
he takes cold from riding in the wind and raw weather. The pains
come on even when the teeth arc not yellow or decayed : stitching,
tearing, rending pains in the teeth. Offensive smell from the teeth ;
pus oozing out from around the teeth. The mouth is full of little
ulcers, little aphthous patches. The mucous membrane is pale and
ulcerates daily. The tongue is white with offensive taste ; coated gray,
with sick headaches.

While many of the symptoms of Kali carb, are aggravated after
eating, some symptoms are relieved] after eating. There is throbbing
in the pit of the stomach when the stomach is empty. There is also
throbbing all over the body, pulsation to the fingers and toes ; there is
no part that does not pulsate, and he is kept awake by this pulsation.
Pulsation even when there is often no feeling of palpitation in the
region of the heart. It has also violent palpitation of the heart.

Kali carb. fits many old dyspeptics. After eating he feels as if he
would burst, ,so bloated is he. Great flatulence ; belches wind up-
wards and passes flatus downwards ; offensive flatus. The belching
up is also attended with fluid eructations, sour fluids that set the teeth
on edge ; they excoriate, or cause smarting in the pharynx or mouth.
Pain in the stomach after eating ; burning in the stomach after eating.
Gone feeling in the stomach, that is not even relieved by eating. A
peculiar condition in Kali carb. is a state of anxiety felt in the
stomach, as though it were a fear. One of the first patients I ever had
expressed it in a better way than it is expressed in the books ; she
said, ‘‘Doctor, somehow or other I don't have a fear like other people
do, because I have it in my stomach.’' She said when she was fright-
ened, it always struck to her stomach. “If a door slams, I feel it right
here" (epigastric region). Well, that is striking, that is peculiar. It

70



554


KALI CARBONICUM


was not long before I developed another feature of Kali carb. By
a little awkwardness on my part my knee happened to hit the patient’s
foot as it projected a little over the edge of the bed, and the patient
said, “Oh 1 “ Sure enough that was Kali carb. again, for you will find in
Kali carb. a patient that is afraid and everything goes to the stomach
and when touched upon the skin there is an anxiety or fear or appre-
hension felt in the region of the stomach. You might imagine that it
is connected with the solar plexus, but the symptom is the all in all
to the physician. A Kali carb. patient is so sensitive in the soles
of the feet that the mere touch of the sheet brings a sensation of
thrill throughout the body. Hard pressure is all right, it does not
disturb, but something that comes unawares excites. The Kali carb.
patient is over sensitive to all the surrounding things, over sensitive
to touch ; shivering from the simplest and lightest touch, even when
hard pressure is agreeable. Violently ticklish in the soles of the feet.
1 have often examined the feet when a patient would shiver and draw
up the feet and scream out, “Don’t tickle my feet.” I had probably
touched it so lightly that 1 did not know that I had touched it at all.
In Lack, also gentle touch is painful, while hard pressure is agreeable
but here it is not so much the ticklishness. In Lack, the abdomen is
so sensitive that the touch of the sheet is painful. I have seen Lach^
patients using a hoop to keep a light sheet from touching the abdomen.
You may know then that you are in the realm of Lachesis, and that
it is like those persons who are unable to bear the slightest touch upon
the neck and suffer from uneasiness on wearing a collar. All that,
however, is different from this state of ticklishness. I have seen
patients who are really so sensitive in the skin that I would not dare
touch it, unless they knew just where I was going to touch. “Now
I am going to feel your pulse, hold still.” If I were to touch thei
hand, or reach out to feel the pulse without warning there would be a
thrill. Such a state is in keeping with Kali carb. These things often'
have to be dug out by observation in studying the nature of provings,
and associating things. These things that run into the oversensitive-
ness of patients are of great value clinically. The capabilities of our
Materia Medica are something wonderful, but they could be developed
much more rapidly if a number of homoeopathic physicians would
make application of the Materia Medica with accuracy and intelligence,
observing what they see and relating it literally. At the present day
there is only a very small number of homoeopathic physicians that can
come together in a body and say things that are worth listening to,
a shamefully small number when we consider the length of time
Hahnemann’s books have been before the world.

There are many old chronic liver subjects who talk about nothing
else but the liver. Every time they go to the doctor’s office they talk



KAU CARBONICUM


555


about the liver, and about a condition of fullness in the region of the
liver and pain through the right shoulder blade and up through the
right side of the chest, with a good deal of oppression and distension ;
vomiting of bile and a good deal of stomach disorder, fullness after
eating ; attacks of diarrhoea, alternating with constipation lasting for
many days with great straining at stool. Periodical bilious attacks,
when a constipated state is present ; cannot lie down at night ; difficult
breathing at night or at 3 o'clock in the morning, especially when it is
in a patient over-sensitive to cold, damp weather, one who wants to
sit by the fire all the time. These liver subjects are often thoroughly
cured by Kali carb. Sometimes they have been resorting to all sorts
of liver tappings, taking such medicines as purge or cause vomiting,
drugs that really aggravate the trouble. Kali carb. goes to the bottom
of these cases, and roots out the evil.

In the abdomen we have many Kali carb. symptoms. Persons sub-
jected to repeated attacks of colicy cutting pains, with distension, with
pain after eating, constipation or diarrhoea. Colic, with cutting, tear-
ing pains, doubling him up, coming on every little while. Tre-
menclous flatulence. Wlien the attack of colic is on it might remind
you of Colocynth or of some other of the acute remedies that cure
colic in two or three minutes, but you will find that these acute
remedies that relieve colic so speedily when given the second or
third time do not produce so marked an effect. You will find it
necessary to hunt for an antipsdric, a remedy that will control the
whole case. In the study of the colic alone during its attack you
only get a one-sided view of the case, and after the colic is over
(say he has been cured by Colocynth) you now study the patient and
go over the case, and behold all the symptoms are covered by Kali
carb. After giving that remedy you may expect that the patient
will not have another attack. Such is the nature of Kali carb. It is
deep-acting, long-acting, goes deep into the life. It cures conditions
due to psora, or to the suppression of eruptions in childhood, or to
the closing up of old ulcers and fistulous openings with a history
of troubles ever since. All these wandering pains and the chilliness
are again relieved by eruptions, by the outbreak of discharges, by
haemorrhages, by ulcers that eat in deep and flow freely and fistulous
openings.

'"Cutting in abdomen, as if torn to pieces/* "Violent cutting, must
sit bent over pressing with both hands, or lean far back for relief ;
cannot sit upright." "Cutting and drawing like false labor pains."
There is great coldness with the pains, with the cutting in the abdo*
fnen ; he wants heat, hot drinks, hot water bags. A chronic coldness
is felt in the. abdomen, cold externally and internally. It would some-
times be cruel to give a dose of Kali carb. when the colic is on,



KAU CARBONICUM


556

because if the remedy fitted the case constitutionally, if all tht
symptoms of the case were those of Kali carb., you would be likely
to get an aggravation that would be unnecessary. There are plenty
of short acting remedies that would relieve the pain speedily, and at
the close of the attack the constitutional remedy could then be
givem If the patient can bear the pain to the end, it is better to
wait until it passes off without any medicine. That sometimes is
cruel, and then the short acting medicines should be given. All
recurrent troubles, those that come periodically, or after eating cer-
tain articles, or from exposure, or with a periodicity that belongs
to time — all these states are chronic ; they are not acute troubles.
They are simply a small portion of a chronic miasm, a side view,
and all such cases must have a constitutional remedy sooner or later.
You can, it is true, relieve violent pain at the first visit, but then
you must look deeper and prevent your patient having more trouble.
Otherwise, if you should give Bell, or Colocynth or any medicine
that simply fits the colic, the trouble will come back again ; you
have not cured your patient ; you have only palliated. But, on the
other hand, you take such a colic as is described here and Kali
carb. fits just these symptoms alone and does not fit the whole con-
stitution of the patient. Then it is that a constitutional and long-acting
remedy like Kali carb. acts in fullness. It does not take the usual long
time to act and is not attended with an aggravation.

'‘Abdominal muscles painful to touch ; swelling of glands,'’ In
the abdomen, also following troubles in the bowels, or following
peritonitis, we have effusion into the peritoneal sac, which is usually
associated with dropsy of the extremities, but not always. In liver
dropsies especially is that remedy useful.

It has a great many complaints of the rectum and anus and of
the stool. It has most persistent and enormous hcemorrhoidal tumors
that burn, that are extremely sensitive to touch, that bleed copiously,
that are extremely painfuf, making it impossible for him to sleep. He
is compelled to lie upon the back and hold the nates apart, because
the pressure is very painful to the external piles. The piles cannot
be put back ; there is great distension and swelling inside. Haemorrhoids
that come out after stool and bleed copiously and are very painful ;
they must be pushed back, and long after going to bed they bum like
fire. There is great aggravation from stool, which is hard and
knotty and requires great straining to expel. Fistulae of the anus.
Burning temporarily relieved by sitting in cold water.

It has chronic diarrhoea and also diarrhoea alternating with consti-
pation. Many times where there are numerous particulars, we have
to rely upon the generals that are characteristic of the remedy. The
text gives , much less of diarrhoea than has been developed by clinical



KAU CARBONICUM


557


uses. “Diarrhoea painless, with rumbling in the abdomen and burning
at stool, only by day ; chronic cases with puffiness under the eyebrows.”
It gives few symptoms, but it is a large and extensive remedy in
diarrhoeas that are chronic. In old, broken down subjects, in weakly,
pallid subjects, with poor digestion, with great flatulence, with much
distension, with disordered liver.

Then the kidney, bladder and urethra come in for their share
of trouble, which is of a catarrhal nature. Discharges from the

bladder, purulent discharges of a thick, tenacious, copious mucus
deposited in the urine. In keeping with this there is much burn-
ing; burning in the urethra, during and after micturition. “Urine

flows slowly with soreness and burning.” Kali carb. runs very close
to Natr. mur. in many of its old, long-standing bladder troubles.

In old cases of gleet and long-standing cases of urinary troubles that
follow gonorrhoea these two medicines are useful, both suitable in -the
scanty, white, gleety discharge that remains. In both the urination
is painful. In Nat. mur. the burning is after urination. Where there
is scanty, gleety discharge and the burning is very marked and only
after urination, and the patient is extremely nervous and fidgety,
Natrum mur. will cure. If the burning is during and after urination
and you have the broken down constitution we have described
then the remedy may be Kali carb. Some of these old cases are
entirely painless, having no pain cither during or after micturition.
Then you get an entirely different class of remedies. The old chronic
discharges following a gonorrhoea; are as troublesome for the young
doctor as anything that will evear fall into his hands. The remedies
are numerous, the symptoms are scanty, and many times the patient
has not been long under the doaor’s care, therefore he does not know
the patient’s constitutional state well and the patient can only tell
him of the discharge. “Nothing but the discharge, doctor.” You
cannot get his mind on his symptoms ; he has forgotten that he wakes
at 3 o’clock in the morning and cannot get to sleep until 5 o’clock,
he has forgotten all the nervous manifestations. With the patient
you have had under control, whose constitutional state you get before
this condition comes, you ought not to have much difficulty.

One of the evidences that the Kali carb. patient is of a weakly
constitution and is on the road to a break-down is that all of his
symptoms are aroused and brought into action after coition, after
sexual excitement. Now you will take notice in practice and remember
it, that coition is a natural thing with man, when it is carried on in
order, and when that which is natural is followed by prostration, and
this has been so for a long time, there is a break in the constitution,
there is something radically wrong. All the symptoms are likely to be
worse after coition in Kali carb. He has weak vision, weakness of



558


KAU CAltBONlCUM


the senses, tremulousness, and is generally nervous ; he is sleepless,
and weak, and he shivers and trembles for a day or two after coition.
Similar symptoms arc observed in the woman. In spite of the fact
that the patient is weak, the sexual desire is excessive. It is not
orderly. There is a sexual erethism, which is not under the command
of the will, and in the male he is subject to copious and frequent
pollutions, nightly dreams, sexual prostration. Young men who have
abused themselves, or who have indulged excessively in sexual pleas-
ure, go into marriage with weakened genitals, incapacitated ; and
then there comes a disgust, and it is not strange that there are so
many divorces in the world. When the patient is young, some of this
trouble can be overcome by living an orderly life and correct Ho-
moeopathy.

In Kali carb. there are many complaints affecting the male genital
organs ; uneasiness and sensitiveness of the testicles. One is in a
state of swelling and hardness. Itching and smarting and annoying
sensations in the scrotum and sensations that constantly remind the
patient that he has genital organs. Constant irritation calling his
attention to the genitals, brought on from abuse, from vice, from
excesses. Phosphorus is a medicine that is abused in this sphere.
Many physicians look upon it as one of the great remedies for the
weakness of the genital organs. In Phos, the genital indications are
extreme excitement, too active erections, a disorderly strength of the
genital organs. Beware of giving it in impotency or in weakness,
as this is often associated with very feeble constitutions, and P/ios.
not only fails to cure, but seems to add to the weakness. It is a
weakness that you will learn is a vital weakness. Phos, will set
patients to running down more rapidly who are suffering from a
vital weakness, who are always tired, simply weak, always prostrated
and want to go to bed.

The female has a great friend in Kali carb. It is full of her
complaints and has many symptoms likely to be found in a sick
woman. It is useful in cases of uterine haemorrhages that have
been incessant in pale, waxy, haemorrhagic wamen ; incessant haemor-
rhage following an abortion. She has been curetted and has had
all sorts of treatment, but still that oozing keeps right on. At the
menstrual period the flow is very copious and clotted, and then aftei^
prolonged menstruation of ten days or so, during which she has
had a copious flow, she settles back into a state of oozing and flowing
until next month and then it rouses up into another ten days of copious
menstruation. Kali carb. has cured a number of cases of fibroid
tumor long before it was time for the critical period to cure. You
must remember that there is natural tendency for a fibroid to cease
to grow at the climacteric period, and afterwards to shrivel and



KALI CARBONICUM


559


that this takes place without any treatment, but the appropriate
remedies will cause that haemorrhage to cease, will cause that tumor
to cease to grow and after a few days there will be a grand shrinkage
in its size.

Kali carb. is often a remedy for vomiting in pregnancy, but to
find out when it is the remedy for vomiting of pregnancy we have
to go to the whole constitutional state. Vomiting of pregnancy
is not cured, although it may be temporarily relieved, by Ipecac,,
as this is a medicine that corresponds merely to the nausea itself.
In a large number of instances gagging and nausea are only a second
or third grade symptom in the remedy that will cure. The condition
really depends upon the contitutional state, and the remedy that
is to cure must be a constitutional remedy. Sulphur, Sepia and Kali
carb. are among the remedies commonly indicated. Sometimes Arsenic
is needed. Of course, if a pregnant woman has simply disordered
her stomach and has vomited bile a few times the remedy might be
Ipecac. When a pregnant woman has no constitutional symptoms
at all, and upon examining the case you find nothing but the nausea,
overwhelming deathly nausea, with continuous vomiting day and
night, a single dose of Symphoricarpus rac. will help. That is pre-
scribing upon very limited information, and should only be done
in circumscribed or one-sided cases. It is not a long acting remedy,
it is not a constitutional remedy and acts very much like Ipecac.

At times you will go into the eonfmement room when the woman
has pains in the back below the wkist line. The pains in the uterus
are very weak, they are not sufiidaitly expulsive to make progress in
the labor, the kind of pain that makes the woman utter the cry, ‘'My
back, my backl” The pains extend down the buttocks and legs. Pains
in the back as if the back would break. Under good prescribing these
pains are changed into contractions, which prove sufficient to expel
the contents of the uterus. When you hear such things you will look
back over the history of the case. You will look back for weeks as the
woman has been drawing near the end of gestation and see that
the vague things, the chilliness and other features in her constitu-
tional state for which you have been trying to find a remedy now
culminate at the time of her confinement into a class of pains.
Had you seen that six weeks before and given her Kali carb. you
would have prevented the severe labor. It is a severe labor, a pro-
longed labor ; the uterus appears to be weak, and the pains are feeble ;
they are all in the back, and do not go to the centre of operation as
they should. Now, this same kind of a pain may deceive you in
taking another form. The pains begin in the back, and appear to go
to the uterus and then run up the back, which would turn you aside
entirely from the Kali carb. pain into a pain that would indicate



KAU CARBONICUM


S6o

Gehemium. Sometimes these pains are so severe that they actually
seem to prevent rather than encourage the contractions of the uterus ;
when the contractions of the uterus cease, and the woman screams
out and wants her hips rubbed, and screams out with pain in each
side of the abdomen rather than in the centre, pains in the region
where the broad ligaments ought to be, Actaea racemosa will make
the pains regular. Puls, is the medicine for absence of marked con-
traction, in cases inclined to do nothing ; in a case that is inactive
when the os is sufficiently dilated and the parts relaxed, and the pre-
diction is an easy and simple labor, but the patient does not do any-'
thing. It is a state of mildness or inactivity. Puls, will very often cause
in live minutes a very strong contraction of the uterus, sometimes al-
most in a painless way.

The back aches so badly while she is walking that she feels
as if she could lie down on the street,’' etc.. The pain seems
to take the force and vigor all out of the patient. After delivery
there is a tendency to prolong the flooding, rousing up at every men-
strual period, as descibed.

Weakness of the heart, cardiac dyspnoea ; the breath is short and the
patient cannot walk or must move very slowly. It is the coming on of a
fatty heart. With the suffocation and dyspnoea the breathing is so short
that the patient cannot stop to take a drink or eat ; the breathing is
rapid, not deep, but weak. Dyspnoea with violent, irregular palpitation
of the heart, throbbing that shakes the whole frame, pulsation that can
be felt to the ends of the fingers and toes. Violent pulsations ; patient
cannot lie on the left side ; accompanied by stitching pain through
the chest, and cough. In old asthmatic patients with weak pulse, with
the same pulsations and palpitation and cannot lie down. The only
position it seems that he can find any comfort in is leaning forward,
with his elbows resting upon a chair. The attack is violent and con-
tinuous, especially worse from 3 to 5 a.m,; and worse from lying in
bed. He is aroused at 3 o’clock in the morning with these asthmatic
attacks. Asthmatic dyspnoea, when the state is that of humid asthma
or filling up of the chest with mucus, course rattling in the chest, loud,
rattling breathing.. In patients who always have rattling in the chest,
rattling cough, stuffy breathing ; with every rainy spell or misty
spell, or in cold, foggy weather, the condition becomes that of a
humid asthma ; asthmatic breathing, with much weakness in the chest,
worse from 3 to 5 in the morning. The patient is pale, sickly and
anaemic, and complains of stitching pains in the chest.

The cough of this medicine is one of the most violent coughs of
all the medicines in the Materia Medica. The whole frame is racked.
The cough is incessant, attended with gagging and vomiting, comes
on at 3 o'clock in the morning, a dry, hacking, hard, racking cough.



KALI CARBONICUM


5^1

'‘Suffocative cough and choking cough at 5 a. m. Great dryness in
the throat between 2 and 3 a. Think of Kali carb, when, after
troubles like measles, a catarrhal state is left behind, due to lack of
reaction, the psoric sequelae. The cough following measles is very
often a Kali carb. cough. Kali carb. Sulphur, Carbo veg, and Drosera
are perhaps more frequently indicated than other medicines in such
coughs as follow measles of pneumonia.

The expedHoration is copious very offensive, tenacious, lumpy,
blood-streaked or like pus, thick yellow or yellowish-green. Very
often it has a pungent, cheesy taste, strong taste, as of old cheese.
Catarrh of the chest. Dry cough day and night, with vomiting of
food and some phlegm, worse after eating and drinking and in the
evening.

Nothing is more striking in Kali carb. than the wandering stitching
pains through the chest, and the coldness of the chest. The great
dyspnoea, the transient stitclies, the pleural stitches are important
features of this remedy. A great number of the cases in which Kali
carb. is suitable are those where the trouble has spread from catarrhal
origin and from the lower portion of the lungs upwards. It is not so
commonly indicated in those cases where the dullness has begun at
the apex of either or both lungs. It will very often ward off future
sickness where the family history if tuberculous. Do not be afraid
to give the antipsoric remedies whClj there is a histoy of tuberculosis
in the family, but be careful whei| the patient is so far advanced
with tuberculosis that there are cavides in the lung, or latent tubercles,
or encysted caseous tubercles. Ydur antipsorics might rouse him;
into a dangerous condition. Do not suppose, however, that it is
dangerous to give Sulphur because one’s father and mother have
died of phthisis. Sulphur might be just the remedy to prevent the
child from following the father and mother. Kali carb. is often
suitable, and will act as an acute remedy in the advanced stages of
phthisis in cases in which it was not indicated primarily as a con-
stitutional remedy. In such instances it will act as a palliative in
phthisis, whereas if it were indicated primarily as a constitutional
remedy it would do damage in the last weeks. The fortunate thing is
that a great many homoeopaths are not able to find the homoeopathic
remedy. If the patient has yet lung space enough to be cured. Kali
carb. will do wonders where the symptoms agree.

I want to warn you in one respect concerning Kali carb. It is
a very dangerous medicine in gout. When you get an old gouty
subject who has big toe joints and finger joints, and they are sore
and inflamed every now and then, you might think that Kali carb.
covers the case very suitably ; he is disturbed in just such weather, he
is pallid and sickly, his complaints come on at 2 to 3 o’clock in the

71



56a tLAU IODATt^M

morning, he has the shooting pains. But these gouty patients are
nften incurable, and, if so, to undertake to cure them would be a
dreadful calamity, because the aggravations would last so long. If you
give Kali carb. to one of these incurable patients in very high potency
it will make your patient worse, and the aggravation will be serious
and prolonged, but the 30th may be of great service. Kali iod., when
it is indicated in the gouty state, acts as a sootliing and palliative
remedy. But Kali carb. seems to be a dreadful medreine to handle,
it is a sharp and a two-edged sword. Do not undertake to give medicine
with a view to curing these old cases of gout when the nodosities are
numerous. Do not give tliat constitutional medicine that should have
been administered to these patients twenty years ago, because there is
not reaction enough in the life of the patient to turn him into order,
and he will be destroyed. It seems paradoxical to say it, but to cure
him is to kill him. The vital action that is necessary to restore him to
health would practically tear his framework to pieces. You need not
believe these things, you are not obliged to. But think about them,
and some day after practicing awhile and making numerous mistakes
in attempting to cure incurables you will admit the awful power of
homoeopathic medicines. They are simply dreadful. In old gouty
cases, in old cases of Bright’s disease, in advanced cases of phthisis
where there are many tubercles, beware of Kali earb. given too high.

While studying the text book, look over the sensations. They are
very numerous. Of course, those most striking arc the stitching,
and tearing pains, shooting, sticking and wandering pains.

KALI lODATUM

This remedy is an antipsoric and antisyphilitic. It has been used
very extensively by the old school as an antisyphilitic, but in the
very large doses which they used it became to a great extent allopathic
to the disease, because of the tremendous effect it produced upon the
economy, and implanted its own miasm, and thereby in a measure it
suppressed many cases of syphilis. The medicines that arc the most
powerful substances are really those that sustain in homoeopathic rela-
tion to the disease in general, and of these the very smallest dose will
cure when similar. When the remedy is not similar enough to cure in
such a form the increasing of the dose does not make it homoeopathic.
There is an idea in vogue that increasing the dose makes the remedy
similar. That is going away from principle. If the remedy is not
similar there is no form of dose that can make it similar.

It affects the glandular structures and the periosteum after the
manner of syphilis. It produces catarrhal inflammations. It is a
deepacting medicine and closely related to Mercurius, It has ulcera-



KALI lODATUM 563

tions and catarrhal states and glandular affections like Mercurius. It
is similar in its action to Mercurius and is an antidote to it.

The old subjects who have always been taking Calomel or Blue^
Mass for their bilious complaints will in time become subject to fre-
quent coryzas, constipation, pains and aches, and disturbance of the
liver, and disordered stomach, and must have another dose of Mercury,
Some of these cases need this remedy. If you practice medicine in a
neighborhood where there is a very poor homa'opath you will find
that he is giving the Biniodidcy or some other preparation of Mercury,
for almost all of the colds or sore throats. This establishes upon all
of these patients an over-susceptibility to the weather changes, and
they keep taking these red mercurial powders. Some of them carry
them around in their pockets. But the more they take of these red
powders the more frequently they have sore throats and colds. Many
times they will not get over these troubles without Kali iod. in
potentized form, or Hepar. Hepar and Kali iod. are the two principal
medicines that such patients need. Individuals with this susceptibility
to colds and sore throats and weather changes, that is, from the effects
of Mercury^ who have been led into a Mercurial state, run two wayvS*
Those who are invariably shivering and cold, and want to hover
around the fire, and cannot keep warm, will need Hepar, and those that
are always too warm, that want the covers off, and want to be in con-
stant motion, extreme restlessness, ' very tired when keeping still, will
have their Mercury antidoted by. I^^Yi iod. The Mercurial state will
be antidoted, but it sometimes takes several prescriptions and some-
times a series of carefully selected remedies. The psora, that is, his
chronic state, will not manifest itself until you have lifted off this mias-
matic state, which has been caused by Mercurius. It is astonishing
what a great number of men, women and children are bowed down by
the miasm that Mercury produces, and yet those prescribers go on
giving this form of Mercury and say it is practicing Homoeopathy.
I am led to remark that there is yet much to be learned about the art of
prescribing.

This remedy has a peculiar mental state. There is a very strong
degree of irritability, cruelty, and harshness of temper. He is harsh
with his family and with his children ; abusive. It will take all the
sense of refinement out of his mind and then he will become sad and
tearful. Extremely nervous, and must walk and be on the go. If he
remains in a warm room he becomes weak and tired, and feels as if he
could not stir, docs not want to move, and does not know what is the
matter with him. He is worse in the warmth of the house, but as
soon as he goes into the open air he feels better, and as soon as he
begins to walk he feels still better and can walk long distances without
fatigue ; goes into the house again and becomes weak and tired and



564 KAJ-I iodatum

exhausted. A nervous and mental exhaustion comes on from resting.

The head manifests some peculiar things, such as we sometimes see
in syphilis, which the remedy controls when the other symptoms agree.
Bi-parietal head pains of nerve syphilis, old, long standing cases. Pains
through the parietal bones, through the side of the head, as if crushed
in a vise; awful crushing, pulsating, pressing, rending pains on both
sides of the head. These are worse in the house, and better from
warmth and from motion, better walking in the open air. All through
the head there are pains like knife stabs, like nails driven in ; lanci-
nating pains, cutting pains in the scalp, in the temples, over the eyes
through the eyes. The pericranium becomes sensitive and filled with
nodules. The scalp breaks out with nodular eruptions, tuberculous
eruptions, syphilitic eruptions. ‘‘Scalp painful on scratching as if
ulcerated.” “Great disposition for hair to change color and fall out.^’
Coldness of the painful parts.

In watching a syphilitic case, there is often noticed disturbance of
vision, and finally iritis. They can be treated homoeopathically. I
have seen syphilitic iritis of the most severe character cured with
Staphisagria, Hepar, Nitric acid, Mercurius, Kali iod, and many other
remedies. The inflammatory process stops at once, there are no adhe-
sions, no deformity, and no troubles remaining behind. If you con-
sider that a case of inflammation must run its course, and will be asso-
ciated with fibrinous exudations, and adhesions most probably follow,
of course you must adopt the plan of dilating with Atropine, and hold
the iris so until the disease has run its course. But the disease does
not run its course after a proper remedy, and as that is the last symp-
tom to appear, it will be the first to go, and you may expect the eye
symptoms to disappear within twenty-four hours after the administra-
tion of the homoeopathic remedy.

This remedy has marked conjunctival trouble, with green catarrhal
discharges from the eyes. This green character applies whenever you
can find discharges. There is copious, thick, green expectoration, green
discharges of muco-pus from the nose, from the eyes, from the ear,
thick, greenish leucorrhoea, green discharge from ulcers. These thick
green or yellowish-green discharges are sometimes very foetid.

At times when you examine the conjunctiva it seems to puff out as
though water were behind it, a chemosis. Iodide of potash, produces
that state, “Chemosis, purulent secretion.” In olden times when I
used to give Iodide of potash to rheumatic patients, according to the
prevailing craze, I would notice, after a day or two, chemosis coming
into the eyes and the patient beginning to ache in his bones all over,
while the rheumatism of the joints would disappear. An allopathic
effect was taking root upon that patient which would last for years.

I have noticed that a large dose of Kali iod. in syphilitics would make



KALI lODATUM


5^5


the patient get up the next morning with difficulty in opening the lids,
and upon opening the eyes the conjunctiva would form water bags,
as though water were behind them and they were bagged out. Kali
iod. also produces oedema of the lids and injection and tumefaction of
the conjunctiva. The mucous membrane becomes red, raw and bleed-
ing. The vessels are enlarged and the surface is very sore, inflamed
and smarting. He is compelled to hold the eyelids during winking ;
the winking is painful and causes scratching, as from sand. Acute
conjunctivitis, especially when it occurs in patients who have rheu-
matism, who have been abused with Mercury, or those afflicted with
syphilis. Syphilitic and rheumatic affections of the eye.

Old gouty subjects who must keep in motion, and must keep in the
open air, who are always too warm, and cannot endure any degree
of warmth in the room, who suffer more from their gouty pains when
keeping quiet, those who are fatigued when keeping quiet and can
walk and move without fatigue in the open air, especially when it is
cold, with enlarged joints, with restlessness, anxiety, nervousness,
harshness of the temper and great irritability, alternating with weep-
ing. This relief from motion will make the routinist give Rhus in
many instances, but Rhus would have no relation to the case whatever.
Remember, Rhus is a cold patient, who is always shivering and wants
to be by the fire, whose complaints are > by the heat, he is > in a
warm room and becomes fatigued from motion, whereas Kali iod.
does not become fatigued from continued motion.

The nose comes in for much t|o|ible. In old syphilitic catarrhs they
blow out great crusts and pieces of’ bone ; syphilitic ozaena ; the bones
of the nose are very sensitive to touch and become necrosed, and the
nose flattens down and becomes soft. It is deprived of the bony
framework that holds it in shape and settles down flat, leaving only
the red tip. Extreme pain at the root of the nose like Hepar, Thick,
yellowish-green, copious discharge from the nose. Every change of
the weather brings on catarrhal states. He is constantly taking cold,
sneezing continuously. Copious, watery discharge from the nose, ex-
coriating the passage, and causing burning in the nose. This coryza
is < in the open air, but all the rest of the patient is > in the open
air. Consequently, when a patient has two such conditions that
operate against each other he suffers much, because he cannot find
quarters for relief. In a warm room his nasal catarrh, or his coryza,
is >, but in the open air he feels > as to the rest of his complaints.
'‘R^eated attacks of violent, acrid coryza from the least cold.'’ With
the coryza the frontal sinuses become involved, and there is great pain
through the forehead ; pain in the eyes, pains through the cheek-bones.

In the throat, as you might suppose from its relations to syphilis
and Mercury, there is much trouble. Deep ulcers in the throat, old



566


KAU lODATUM


syphilitic ulcers ; perforating ulcers, eating away and destroying all
the soft tissues, the uvula and the soft palate. Ulceration upon the
tonsils ; enlarged tonsils ; very painful sore throat. Knots and knobs
in the throat upon the mucous membranes. “Dryness of throat and
enlarged tonsils.” “Terrible pain at the root of the tongue at night.”
The whole pharynx, larynx, trachea and bronchial tubes suffer from
catarrhal conditions. Inflammatory conditions with greenish discharge.

While all the external symptoms and the rest of the body symptoms
are relieved in the cold air and by the contact of external cold, in-
ternally cold things aggravate. Cold milk, ice cream, ice water, cold
drinks and cold food, cold things in the stomach •< all the symptoms.
Though he has an excessive thirst and will drink large quantities of
water, if very cold it will make him sick.

Kali iod. has all the flatulence and belching of Carbo veg. and Lyco-
podium.

The glands all over the body become tumid, enlarged and hard. It
has cured enlargement of the thyroid gland ; it may take this from
Iodine.

Very characteristic is the chronic inflammation of the urethra, fol-
lowing gonorrhoea, where the discharge is thick and green, or greenish-
yellow, without pain. Inflammation of the testicles, syphilitic in char-
acter.

Pain and rawness in the larynx, with hoarseness ; awakens from con-
striction of the larynx. It is very useful in phthisis of the larynx.
Cough from constant irritation in the larynx. Dry, hacking cough,
hoarse cough with copious greenish expectoration. Catarrhal phthisis
with thick, copious, greenish expectoration. Pleuritic effusion. Flut-
tering of the heart. Palpitation on slight exertion or when walking.
Rapid pulse.

Not only in old gouty troubles, but in patients threatening phthisis,
and in old malarial troubles this medicine will be of great service.

It cures sciatica when the pain is sharp from the hip down, worse
lying, sitting or standing and better walking.

You may go to the bedside of a patient who is suffering from what
she calls “hives you will find she is covered from head to foot with
an eruption that forms great nodules ; she is fairly burning up from
head to foot. She cannot endure any covering ; the heat of her body
is intense, yet she has no rise of temperature. Rough nodular mani-
festations all over the skin; a condition that will go away in a few
hours, but in a few days, weeks or months come back again. A single
dose of a very high potency of Kali iod. will turn things into order
in persons subject to these hives and they will not come again.



KAU PliOSPHORICUM


567


KALI PHOSPHORICUM

The symptoms of this remedy are worse morning, evening, and
during the night. The over-sensitive, nervous, delicate person, worn
out from long suffering, much sorrow and vexation, and prolonged
mental work ; also such as are broken down from sexual excesses and
vices. It is a long-acting antipsoric. Anaemic and chlorotic patients.
Most complaints are worse during rest, and ameliorated by gentle
motion and slowly walking about. The patient in general, and his
pains, are aggravated in cold air, from becoming cold, alter becoming
cold, from entering a cold place, and in cold, wet weather. He takes
cold easily. Aversion to the open air. Draft of air aggravates, and
open air aggravates. Numbness in the extremities. Great lassitude.
Aggravated by ascending stairs, and by physical exertion. Glands
dwindle. Choreic movements. Complaints are worse after coition.
The weakness, emaciation, and amemia and tubercular tendency are
strong features of this wonderful antipsoric remedy. Gidema of the
limbs and dropsy of serous sacs. Complaints aggravated after eating.
Emaciation, wasting diseases with putrid discharges and putnd stools.
Fainting spells. Fasting ameliorates. Fatty tendency of muscles and
organs. Aggravated alter cold drinks, milk. This remedy has been
used in gangrenous condition. Parts become black. Septic, putrid
hemorrhages, and great prostration All forms of nervous weakness.
Hypochondriasis and hysteria. of glands. Complaints

from loss of fluids. Orgasm of biebd. The pains are aching, press-
ing, stitching, tearing, tearing downwards, paralyzing. Chronic neu-
ralgia, ameliorated by gentle motion, aggravated from cold. One-
sided paralysis from a gradually increasing weakness. Paroxysms of
pain followed by exhaustion. Pulsation felt all over the body and in
the limbs. Symptoms are often one-sided. Many symptoms come
during and after sleep. Twitching of muscles, and jerking of limbs.
Ulcers with putrid discharges. Offensive catarrhal discharges. Walk-
ing fast aggravates ; walking in open air aggravates. Warmth of bed
ameliorates. Complaints wonse in winter. Too many cures have been
made by the followers of Schuesslcr to permit this remedy to remain
unexplained. Good provings are found in our literature. The high
and highest potencies have served the best, and it should be used in
the single dose.

Flies into a passion and can hardly articulate. Aversion to answer-
ing questions. Apprehensive anxiety, in the evening in bed, and during
the night ; anxiety after eating, about the future, about his health,
about his salvation. Whenever he wakens it oppresses him, and he
becomes hypochondriacal. She takes an antipathy to her husband.
She is cruel to her baby and husband. Perverted affections. Broods



568 KALI PHOSPHORICUM

over his condition. Aversion to company. Complaints come on from
bad news. Confusion of mind morning and evening. Contrary humor.
Low form of delirium in typhoid and septic fevers. Delirium tremens.
Imaginations. Sees dead people. Sees figures, frightful images.
Discontented and sad. Dullness of mind in the morning. Discouraged.
He refuses to eat., He is very excitable and greatly wrought up from
bad news ; then follows palpitation and many nervous symptoms. Ex-
haustion after exertion of mind. He dwells much in fancy. Fear in
the evening. Fear of a crowd, of death, of disease, of evil, of people,
of solitude. He is easily frightened, which increases his many nervous
and mental symptoms. Weak memory. Forgetful, Cannot recall
words. Homesickness. Effects of grief and prolonged sorrow. A
nervous hurry is noticed in action and speech. Nervous excitement
has increased until hysterical conduct is present. It is a great remedy
for imbecUity. She is impatient and impetuous. Indifference to sur-
roundings, to joy and to her family. Indifference to his business
matters, and then comes indolence and lassitude. Insanity ; melan-
cholia ; thinks she has sinned away her day of grace and refuses to
eat. She does not recognize her surroundings. Shrieks and acts like
one insane. Quarrels with her family. The irritability is very marked,
in morning on waking, in the evening, after coition, during headache,
during menses, when spoken to, on waking at any time, after becoming
exliaustcd from a diarrhoea. There is laughing and crying, lamenting
and wringing the hands. There is loathing of life ; moaning during
sleep. Dullness of the senses. Weakness of memory for words, and
great prostration of mind. Sadness in morning ion wjaking, in the
evening, and also day and night. Obstinate ; morose ; mood change-
able. Mistaken in speaking and WTiting. In many cases cured a mild
mental state was noticed. Over-sensitive in general, and especially to
noise. Restlessness during menses. The numerous cases of nervous
prostration from mental work, prolonged anxiety, much sorrow, and
sexual excesses and vice are likely to require this remedy. Incoherent
speech. Starting ; easily startled from fright, during sleep, from touch
and from noise. Stupefaction and suspicious. He is indisposed to
talk, or to be talked to. Talking in sleep. Vanishing of thought.
Becomes timid and bashful. Vexation brings on many complaints.
Weeping and weary of life.

Vertigo afternoon and evening, ameliorated in open air, aggravated
after eating, with a tendency to fall forward ; aggravated on looking
upwards, compelling him to lie down ; with nausea and with headache ;
objects turn in a circle on rising up, when standing, when stooping, on
turning the head, when walking in open air.

The head is cold, and sensitive to cold air. Congestion ; fullness of
the head felt on coughing. Heat in head evening, flushes of heat in



KAU PHOSPHORICUM


569


the forehead. The head inclines to fall forward. Tension of scalp
Heaviness of the head, morning on rising, in forhead and occiput.
This has been a useful remedy in hydrocephalus and many brain affec-
tions, when associated with putrid diarrhoea. Itching of the scalp
morning on waking, in the night in bed, aggravated 3 to 5 a. m.
Movements felt in the head. It has much pain in the head. Pain
morning in bed, on rising, on waking, and passes off on moving about.
Pain afternoon, evening and night. Worse in very cold air, but ameli-
orated in open fresh air. She must let the hair hang down. The
headache comes with coryza, comes from taking cold. The pain is
worse on coughing, and ameliorated by eating ; aggravated from be-
coming overheated, from disordering the stomach, from excitement,
and from physical exertion. Weight in occiput with exhaustion. Must
lie down and shun the light, lying on back ameliorates ; aggravated
from jarring and stepping, aggravated before and during menses.
The headaches from mental work, in students, brain-fag from over-
work are cured by this remedy — when the symptoms agree. Nervous
headache during menses. Paroxysmal headaches. The pains in head
are ameliorated by gentle motion ; aggravated from noise, riding in a
carriage, after sleep, sneezing, stepping, stooping, touch, pressure,
walking and writing. Headache comes from eye-strain, and is amelior-
ated by wrapping up the head. Violent pulsating pains. Pain in
forehead before menses, above the i eyes extending to occiput ; across
forehead into both temples. Pam in occiput lasting all night ; fre-
quent waking, with pain on rising} wakens with pain in occiput and

loins ameliorated lying on back, p^ses off after rising. Pain in occiput
as if hair were pulled ; must let hair hang down. Violent headache in
sides of head. Neuralgia of left mastoid process, aggravated by

motion and in open air. Pain in temples. The pains are aching,
boring, burning. Burning in forehead during stool. Bursting in

forehead. Drawing in forehead, sides of head and vertex. Jerking
pain, pressing pain. Forehead as though bored, ameliorated by eating.
Pressing outward in forehead, over eyes as if brain would expand.
Pressing in occiput, ameliorated by eating. Pressing in temples and
vertex. Soreness in occiput. Stitching in the head, forehead, over
eyes, in occiput, sides of head, right frontal eminence and in temples.
Stunning pains. Tearing pains in the head, in forehead before menses,
ameliorated lying and on appearance of the flow. Tearing in occiput,
sides of head, temples, and vertex. Perspiration on mental exertion,
of the forehead ; cold sweat. Pulsation, forehead and temples. The
brain is very sensitive to jar, and to sounds. Shocks felt in the head.
Softening of the brain. Complaints come on from uncovering the head.

Anaemia of the optic nerve. Lids agglutinated in the morning and
a discharge of mucus, aggravated in the evening. Dryness and dull-
72



57 °


KAU PHOSPHORICUM


ness of the eyes. Falling of the lids. Inflammation of the conjunc-
tiva, injected blood-vessels and lachrymation. Paralysis of the optic
nerve. Photophobia. Redness of the eyes. Staring, restless, excited
look. Strabisms following brain diseases. Sunken eyes. Swollen
oedematous lids. Twitching of eyes and lids. Weak eyes. Pain in
eyes on motion of eyes, on reading, on waking ; aggravated in sunlight.
Aching. Smarting of eyes and margins of lids. Drawing, pressing.
The balls are sore to touch. Sharp pains from eyes to temples in the
morning. Stitching. Sticks. ^nsation of sand. Tearing pains.
Blurred vision. Colors before the eyes, floating black spots, dark
colors ; halo around the light. Dim vision after coition. Vision is
foggy. Exertion of vision brings on eye troubles and headaches.
Vision weak.

Discharge from the car, bloody, offensive, putrid, purulent. Erup-
tions on the ears. Pimples in the canal. Fullness in ears. The ears
are hot. Itching in the ears, aggravated lying. Noises from nervous
exhaustion and cerebral anaemia, with vertigo. Buzzing, fluttering,
humming, ringing, roaring, rushing, singing, whizzing. Pain deep in
ear. Cramping, drawing, pressing. Stitching in left ear down to
cheek, and behind the ear. Stinging in ear, aggravated lying. Tear-
ing in ear. Pulsation in ear. Stopped sensation. Singing in ear.
Ears swollen. Twitching. Hearing acute to noises and voices, but
impaired as to the articulation of the human voice. Deafness.

Coryza, fluent or dry, with cough, with headache. Hay-fever with
great nervous weakness. Obstinate catarrh. Discharge bloody, ex-
coriating, greenish offensive, purulent, stringy, thick, watery, white,
yellow, worse in the morning. Yellow crusts, worse in right nostril.
He suffers much from dryness in the nose. Epistaxis in the morning,
on blowing the nose, in low fevers. The nose is obstructed. Itching,
and burning in the nose. Pressing pain at the root of the nose. Much
soreness inside of the nose, with yellow crusts and dark blood. Smell
at first acute, later wanting. Sneezing frequent ; violent at a a. m.,
from slight exposure. Ulceration in Ae nose. The nose is swollen.

Brown patch from the edge of the brows to the eyebrows, three
inches wide, lasting three months. Chlorotic face. Dark circles under
eyes. Cracked lips. Face pale, sickly and dirty. Circumscribed red
cheeks. Jaundiced face. Herpes on the lips. Sore crusts on lips.
Vesicles on lips. The expression is haggard, sickly and suffering.
Flushes of heat in face. Inflammation and swelling of the parotid
gland. Itching of the face, in the whiskers, on right cheek, on temples.
There are drawing, stitching, tearing pains in the face, aggravated in,
cold air. Cold applications ameliorate pain in right side of face from'
a hollow tooth. Pain in jaw bones, ameliorated after eating, speaking,
waking and toudi, Neuralgia of face followed by great weakness,



KAU PHOSPHORICUM


57 *

Neuralgic stitch riding in cold air, ameliorated by heat of hand. Par-
alysis of one side of face {Caust.y The face perspires. Swollen
lips, parotid and submaxillary glands. Tension of the face. Ulcera-
tion of lips.

The tongue is dark coated and bleeding. The gums bleed, and are
covered with sores. The typhoid mouth, tongue and teeth in septic
fevers when there are putrid odors. Redness of gums and edges of
the tongue. The tongue is white, slimy, greenish yellow. Dry mouth
and tongue in the morning. Inflamed mouth and gums. Offensive
odor, putrid morning, like spoiled cheese. Sore burning mouth and
tongue. Receding gums. Thick salty saliva. Scorbutic, spongy
gums. The roof of the mouth swollen in ridges, feels as if lined with
grease. Taste bad, bitter, insipid, putrid, sour ; bitter in the morning.
Grinding teeth in sleep. Nervous chattering of teeth. Pain in teeth
from taking cold, aggravated by cold things, aggravated masticating,
aggravated after sleep. Pulsating, aching, jerking, pressing, sore,
stitching, tearing.

This remedy has been used with some success in diphtheria with
putrid odor. Dryness in throat in evening. Fullness and constriction
of the throat. Inclination to clear the throat by hawking. Mucus in
the throat in the morning, sometimes tasting salty. Lump in throat.
Pain in throat on swallowing. Pain in right tonsil. Burning, raw-
ness, soreness. Stitching on swdlowing. Stitching pain from left
tonsil to ear, while driving in forenbon. Inflammation and swelling of
throat and tonsils, with white deposits like membrane.

The appetite is increased and sometimes ravenous, but goes on the
sight of food. Hunger soon after eating, from nervous weakness.
Hunger during menses. Aversion to food, to bread, to meat. Sensa-
tion of coldness in the stomach. Desires cold drinks, sour things,
sweets. The stomach is commonly disordered. Fullness and disten-
sion. Emptiness with nausea, during menses, after eating. Eructa-
tions, after eating, ineffectual, of bile, bitter, empty, of food, sour ;
waterbrash. Heartburn. Weight in stomach after eating. Loath-
ing of food. Nausea on coughing, after eating, during headache,
during menses, during pregnancy ; ameliorated by eructations. Retch-
ing. Pain in stomach after eating and during menses. Burning,
cramping, cutting, soreness. Stitching. Gnawing pain at 5 a. m. on
waking. Pressing after eating. Sensation of a stone in the stomach.
Extreme thirst for cold water. Thirst during heat. Thirstlessness
sometimes. Vomiting in the morning, on coughing, after eating,
during headaches, during menses, during pregnancy. Vomiting bile,
blood, food, mucus, sour.

The abdomen feels cold, and is sensitive to uncovering. Distension
after eating, during menses. Tympanitic with great pain, in typhoid



fcAU PMOSPHORICUM


57^

fever. Distended with dropsy. Sensation of emptiness. Fermenta-
tion with distress in heart. Flatulence, obstructed, noisy. Sensation
of fullness after eating. Heat in abdomen and heaviness. Inflamma-
tion of intestines, peritoneum, and liver. Pain in abdomen aggravated
at night ; across the abdomen left to right ; bending double ameli-
orates ; during cough, during diarrhoea, after eating, before and during
menses ; paroxysmal ; before stool. Pain in region of liver. Bearing
down, ameliorated sitting, aggravated lying on left side, aggravated
after drinking. Seems as though sides of abdomen would burst when
sneezing. Burning. Cramping after eating. Cutting. Griping in
hypogastrium with ineffectual urging to stool. Soreness in abdomen
and liver. Stitching in abdomen and liver. Stitching, catching in
spleen, aggravated from motion. Rumbling and tension.

Constipation with very difficult stool ; hard, large, knotty. Diar-
rhoea, moniing, 6 a. m., evening, night, during or after eating; colliqua-
tive ; from fright or excitement, during menses, painless, with vomit-
ing and cramps, with great exhaustion, in typhoid. Dysentery. Offen-
sive flatus which ameliorates the symptoms. Formication of the anus.
Haemorrhage from intestines in typhoid. Haemorrhoids, external and
internal, itching, painful with burning and swelling. Inflamed piles
with offensive moisture. Inactivity of the rectum. Involuntary
stools. Pain in rectum during and after stool. Burning during and
after stool. Soreness and pressing pains. Stitching pain. Tenesmus
after stool. Paralysis of the rectum. Relaxed anus. Ineffectual
urging to stool. The stool is excoriating ; bloody mucus or pure blood,
brown, clay colored, watery stool ; putrid flatus followed by tenesmus
after breakfast. Stool copious, dark, frequent ; large, light colored.
Lienteric stools. Stools offensive, putrid, purulent, watery, like rice
water, yellow or yellowish green mucus.

Chronic catarrh of the bladder in old people and nervous wrecks.
Pressing and stitching in the bladder. The urging to urinate is fre-
quent, or ineffectual, and worse at night. The urine dribbles. Drib-
bling after urination ; feeble stream, frequent, copious at night.
Stream stops and starts. Involuntary at night, in old people, in typhoid,
in nervous prostration. In obstinate cases of enuresis, in excitable
sensitive children. Unsatisfactory urination. Inflammation and
stitching in the kidneys. Burning in the urethra during and after
urination. Stitching in the urethra. The urine is albuminous, burn-
ing, cloudy, copious, offensive, scanty, watery, yellow like saffron.
Sediment is flocculent, mucous, red and sandy. Specific gravity in-
creased, Sugar in the urine.

Erections very troublesome in the morning and during the night
without sexual desire ; violent in the morning. Impotency. Frequent
seminal emissions with erections. Inflammation of glans penis.



KAU PHOSPHORICUM


573


Sexual passion obliterated.

In tired out nervous women who are subject to abortion. Aversion
to coition. Desire increased, intense for four or five days after menses.
Inflammation of uterus. Itching from Icucorrhoea. It cured a
chronic abscess discharging periodically through the vagina and
rectum a copious orange-colored fluid. Leucorrhoea acrid, burning
copious, greenish, yellow, offensive, putrid ; after menses ; in young
girls. Menses absent, black, copious, dark, delayed, frequent, irregular,
late, offensive, painful, pale, protracted, scanty, short, suppressed,
thick. Uterine haemorrhage. Pain in ovaries, in left, ameliorated
lying on the back and bending double, during menses. Pain in ovaries
on going to sleep. Stitching pain in ovaries. Pain in uterus and
ovaries at night during pregnancy. Labor-like pains. Prolapsus of
uterus^ J

Irritation of the larynx and trachea in cold air. Catarrh of the air
passages, with thick, yellowish white mucus. Soreness and scraping
in the larynx. Tickling in larynx and trachea. Voice hoarse, lost
from paralysis of the vocal cords; hoarse from over-exertion of vocal
cords.

Respiration difficult at night ; rattling, short ; difficult on going up
stairs. Nervous asthma, aggravated after eating.

Cough in daytime, morning, evening in bed and during the night.
Dry cough at night during fever. Hacking cough. Cough from
irritation in larynx and trachea. Ijoosc cough. Paroxysmal cough.
Racking cough. Rattling cough. Short, spasmodic. Cough in cold
air, from deep breathing, during chill and fever, after eating ; aggra-
vated lying. Asthmatic cough. Cough from tickling in larynx and
trachea. Whistling cough. Whooping-cough with great nervous
exhaustion.

Expectoration in morning, bloody, frothy, greenish, mucous, offen-^
sive, purulent, putrid, salty, thick sweetish, viscid, yellowish white.

This remedy has been favorably mentioned in angina pectoris.
Anxiety in the chest in the morning. Catarrh of the chest. Spas-
modic constriction. Constriction of the heart. Fatty degeneration of
the heart. Haemorrhage from the lungs. Hepatization of the lungs.
Inflammation of the bronchial tubes, lungs, pleura. Oppression of
the chest. Itching of the skin. Pain in chest during cough, on in-
spiration, on motion, on breathing. Pain in lower part of chest on cough-
ing, inside of chest, in heart. Aching in left side of chest through
to scapula. Burning in chest. Cutting under right breast. Soreness
in chest. Stitching in chest on coughing, during respiration, in
mammae, sides of chest, in heart. Tearing pains in chest. Palpita-
tion, anxious, ascending steps, aggravated by motion. Violent. Per-
spiration like onions in axilla. It is a very useful remedy in catarrhal



574


KALI PHOSPHOKICUM


phthisis. Suffocation of lungs. Swelling in axilla ; abscess. Weak-
ness of chest. Weak heart. Pulse iniermittent and irregular ; feeble
circulation.

The back feels cold. Eruptions on the back, pimples. Weight in
lumbar region. Ihe nape and back lame. Itching. Pain in the back
during rest, ameliorated by motion, respiration aggravates, during
menses. Pains in occiput and loins morning on waxing, ameliorated
lying on back, passing off after rising. Pam in back ot neck. Pain
in dorsal region. Pam in scapulae morning on waking, had to sit up
to ,turn over. Pain hrst in right, then left scapula. Pain between
scapulae. Pain in lumbar region during menses, while sitting, amelior-
ated by motion. Pain in sacrum during menses. Intense pain along
spine. Pain in coccyx. Aching between scapulae. Sore, bruised
spine. Burning in back, in lumbar region. Drawing in back, lumbar
region. Lameness and stiffness of whole back, ameliorated by gentle
motion. Stitching pains in the back, in dorsal and lumbar regions,
Stitching toward Iront of chest with dyspnoea, ameliorated leaning
back against chair, aggravated lying on the back, sitting or walking.
Tearing pains in the back, in lumbar region. Softening of the spinal
cord. Weakness with stumbling when walking. Swollen glands of
neck. Weak back. Cannot sit erect without a chair back to lean
against, This remedy cures many nondescript spinal affections.

Cold hands and feet. Feet cold and damp. Cramps in thighs,
calves and soles. Eruptions on limbs, pimples. The hands are hot.
Heaviness of limbs, of lower limbs and feet. It has been of great
service in hip joint disease. Itching of the limbs, of palms and soles.
Numbness of the limbs, upper and lower ; hands and finger tips, feet
and legs. Rheumatic and gouty pains in limbs and joints, ameliorated
by motion and warmth. Pain in back and limbs, ameliorated by
motion. Pain in shoulders and arms, in arms when raising them.
Sciatica, ameliorated by gentle motion. Pain in hip and knee. Pain
in legs j A. M. on waking, ameliorated by gentle motion. Bruised
knees and legs. Burning feet, soles and toes. Paralytic drawing
in limbs, ameliorated by warmth and gentle motion. Drawing in upper
limbs, in the thighs, knees and legs. Drawing laming pain in soles-
Pressing pain in shoulder and thighs. Stinging in soles. Stitching
in joints, shoulders and knees. Tearing in the limbs ; shoulders, upper
arm, elbow, forearm, hand, fingers. Tearing in lower limbs ; hip,
knee, legs, feet. Paralytic tearing in limbs, ameliorated by motion.
Paralysis of limb. Hemiplegia, The feet perspire. The lower
limbs and feet are restless. Rheumatic stiffness after resting. (Edema
of hands and feet. The hands tremble. The limbs twitch. Weak-
ness in all the limbs, especially the lower.

Ptofoimd sleep. Dreams anxious amorous, of falling, frightful,



KAU SULPHURICUM


575


of being naked, nightmare, vivid; night terrors in children {Borax).
Restless, nervous and hot in sleep. Sleeps on the back. Sleepiness
early in evening, after eating. Sleepless after midnight, after mental
exertion, after excitement, after vexation. Sleepless with sleepiness.
Waking early, as from fright. Walking in sleep. Very troublesome
yawning.

Chill, morning, forenoon, noon, afternoon, evening. Chilliness in
the open air, in bed. Could scarcely get warm in bed. Chilliness
ascending spine in evening. Cold all day. Chilliness after eating.
External and internal chill. Nervous shivering and shuddering.
Shaking chill. One-sided coldness.

Fever in afternoon and evening. Heat all night, with hunger,.
Fever alternating with chill. Fever at night in bed. Typhoid fever,
low, putrid type. Dry heat. Flushes of heat. It has been a very
useful remedy in hectic fevers when there is putrid sweat and putrid
expectoration and great nervousness and excitement. Internal heat.
Fever with no sweat. Scarlet fever, skin dusky and throat putrid and
dark red. Sweat mornings and nights, when eating and drinking,
and on slight exertion, during sleep offensive ; profuse night sweats.

Dusky spots on calves. Burning after scratching. The skin is
cold, jaundiced, dry. Eruption moist, and the moisture is bad smell-
ing. Herpes. Eruptions, itching, pimples, psoriasis, scabby, urticaria ;
vesicles, bloody, ichorous. It has cpred erysipelas that was almost
gangrenous with putrid odor. Inactivky of the skin. Itching, crawl-
ing, stinging in the skin. Very sensitive skin. Sticking in skin-
Ulcers, burning, offensive, even putrid, with yellow discharges.

KALI SULPHURICUM

Two very deep acting remedies unite to form this one. It was
left to Schuessler to show its first curative powers. Dewey’s work
on the '’Tissue Remedies” gives the best presentation from the
biochemic view. The writer gathered the symptoms from reported
cures for many years, and found that they were justified by the
study of the two remedies entering into the formation. Many of
these symptoms come out upon the sick as aggravations. Some of
these are only cured symptoms. This arrangement could be improved
upon much by provings. If the reader will carefully use this remedy
as herein directed he will be astonished at its depth of action, and
if he uses it high he will be surprised at the length of action of every
dose. It has cured epilepsy, lupus and epithelioma, and many desqua-
mating skin affections. It has cured most obstinate case of chronic
intermittent fever. It is useful in catarrhal affections with thick
yellow or greenish pus, viscid or thin yellow^ watery discharges. Most



576


KAU SULPHUBICUM


symptoms are aggravated in the evening. The patient craves fresh
and even cold air, and he is ameliorated in open air and cool air.
Aggravation by exertion and becoming heated. Complaints come on
during rest, and are ameliorated by motion. Complaints aggravated
in warm room. Takes cold from being overheated. When once
healed he cannot cool ofiE without taking cold. Predisposition to
phthisis. It is frequently indicated after Tnberculinum, Epileptiform
convulsions. Jerking of the limbs and twitching of muscles. Dropsical
condition of the extremities. Loss of flesh, and complaints aggravated
after eating. Fasting ameliorates many symptoms. Flabby muscles.
Fatty degeneration of glands, liver and heart. Heaviness of limbs
and weariness of the body. Hysterical symptoms. Sluggishness of
the body and lack of physical irritability. Well selected remedies fall
short in action. Wants to lie down, but lying in bed aggravates ; he
must walk about to ameliorate his sufferings. Surging of blood in the
body. Pain in the limbs, bones and glands. Wandering pains. Pains
ameliorated by motion, ameliorated walking, ameliorated in open air ;
aggravated in a warm room, aggravated sitting or lying, or rest in
any form. The pain are burning, cutting, jerking, stitching and
Tearing. Ulcerative pains. Tearing downward in the limbs.
Tearing in glands and muscles. Pulsation all over the body.
Touch aggravates many symptoms. Many symptoms appear on wak-
ing, Trembling and quivering. Walking ameliorates. Warm cov-
erings aggravate, warm room aggravates, warm bed aggravates,
warm wraps aggravate ; bathing aggravates. Complaints dating back
to suppressed eruptions. Post scarlatinal nephritis. One does not
need to reflect to perceive this is Pulsatilla somewhat intensified.
It takes up the work and finishes as a complement of Pulsatilla, unless,
as in some instances, the patient becomes a cold and chilly subject
and is better during rest, and then Silicea often will be found to have
what symptoms remain It is usual for a patient under a deep acting
remedy to go to opposite modalities, and hence Puls, is so often
followed by Silicea ; but this is not always true. When Puls, has acted
well for a time and because of opposite modalities Silicea does good
work for a while, and then the patient swings back to the original
state, symptoms and modalities, then it is that Kali sulph. is of great
usefulness. What occurs is the same as when Sulph,, Calc, and Lyc,
have rotated in a given case too deep to be cured by a single remedy
and a series of remedies has been what was required because the
symptoms changed in such a manner that such a series was homoeo-
pathically suited.

Quite unlike Pulsatilla, this patient is easily angered and obstinate
and VERY IRRITABLE. Sccms to be thinking of something far away.
Anxiety in evening in bed, during the night and on waking. Aversion



KAU SULPIIURICUM


577


to work, to business and to company (like Pub,), Concentration of
mind difficult, and want of self-contidence. Conlusion in the evening
and in the morning, in a warm room, ameliorated in open air*
Dullness of mind, discouraged and discontented with everything. Ex-
tremely excitable, and mental exertion aggravates. Fear at night
of death, of tailing, and ot people. Frightened at trifles, and forgets
what he was going to do and to say. He is always in a hurry, as if
excited. Impatient and impetuous. Hysterical and excited in the
evening, and mind active. Cannot make up his mind to do and act-
Very irritable in. the morning on waking, m the evening and during
menses. Misplaces words in writing. Alternating moods. Changeable
disposition. Restlessness during menses. Low spirited morning and
evening. Oversensitive to noise. Mental symptoms from sexual
excesses. Walking in sleep. Shrieking. Easily startled, from fright,
on falling asleep, and during sleep. Indisposed to talk. He talks in
sleep. General timidity. Weeping.

The vertigo is a i^romincnt feature in the evening, in a warm
room, aggravated after eating, aggravated during headache, aggra-
vated looKing upwards ; with nausea ; must lie down ; objects turn!
in a circle ; aggravated sitting, aggravated rising up, and standing ;
ameliorated in open air. Feels he is falling forward. He staggers.

Boiling sensation in the head, and coldness of vertex. Hypersemia
in bed, on coughing, and in a warn® room. Constriction like a band
or close fitting cap. Constrictionf of forehead. Much dandruff
Eruptions on scalp, crusts, eczema# moist, sticky, pimples, scaling.
Fullness in head and hair falls out. Heat in head in a warm room.
Heat in forehead. Flushes of heat. Heaviness of head, morning, in
forehead, in occiput. Itching of the scalp in the morning. The brain,
feels loose. Sensation of movements in head on moving the head.
There are numerous headaches. Pain morning on waking evening
and night, aggravated from a draft, during chill, taking cold, during
coryza, on coughing, after eating, when heated, from warm room,
jarring, during menses, motion of the head, pressure. It is ameliorated
in open air, in cold air, lying. Rheumatic headache in evening,
aggravated in warm room, aggravated moving head from side to side
or backwards. Catarrhal headaches. Gastric headaches. The aggrava-
tion of headaches by motion is an exception, and it will be interesting
to learn what further provings and observations bring fonh. The
pains are pulsating, aggravated shaking head, after sleep, sneezing,
standing, stepping heavily, stooping, straining the eyes ; aggravated
in a warm roorn. The pains are violent. Walking in open air amelior-
ates. Pain extends to eyes and forehead. Pain in forehead, morning,
evening ; aggravated after eating. Pain over eyes. Pain in occiput,
sides of head, temples. The pains are boring, burning, bursting,

78



57® StJLPHURICUM

drawing, jerking, pressing, stitching in head and sides of head,
^tunning. Tearing. Pulsating in occiput, sides of head, temples,
vertex. Shocks in head, in sides of head, mostly in right side.

The eye symptoms are numerous. Lids agglutinated. Dryness,
Discharge, yellowish, greenish. Inflammation of conjunctiva, of lids.
Dark veins. Eruptions about the eyes and on the lids. Lachrymatioa
and itching. Opacity of the cornea. It is recommended for cataract.
Pain, burning, pressing and tearing. Photophobia, redness of eyes
and edges of lids. Spots on the cornea ; ulceration of the cornea.
Swollen lids. Dark colors, variegated colors, yellow. Halo around
the light. Black floating specks. Dazzling. Dim vision. Exertion of
vision brings on many complaints. Foggy vision. Sparks before the
eyes. Weak vision.

Catarrh of Eustachian tubes and middle ear. Dryness of the middle
ear. Discharge from ear, yellow, thin, bright yellow or greenish,
bloody, offensive, purulent. Eruptions, eczema, excoriated, pimples.
Eruptions behind ears. Itching in ears. Noises ; buzzing, chirping,
cracking, crackling, humming, ringing, roaring, rushing, whizzing.
Flapping sensation in the ear. Pain in ear, evening, aching, boring,
cutting, pressing, stitching, tearing. It has cured polypus. The ears
feel stopped, and pulsate. The hearing is impaired.

Fluent coryza. Catarrh with discharge, bloody, burning, excoriat-
ing, greenish, offensive, purulent, thin, yellow, slimy, or thick and
viscid. Dryness in the nose. Bleeding in morning on blowing.
Itching in nose. Obstruction. Pain, burning. Soreness in nose, of
septum. Smell acute, later lost. Sneezing. Swollen nose.

Sickly, yellow, chlorotic face. Cracked lips. Sometimes pale.
Sometimes circumscribed redness. Drawn face. Suffering, sickly
expression. Eruptions on face, lips and nose. Herpes, pimples and
scales. Desquamating face. Flushes of heat. Itching. Inflammation
of the submaxillary gland with swelling. Prosopalgia, aggravated
when the room becomes too warm, and in the evening ; ameliorated
in the open air. The pains are drawing, stitching and tearing. Per-
spiration of the face. Swollen glands of jaw, swollen lips. Twitching
face. It has cured a wart on the lip, and will cure epithelioma when
the symptoms agree.

Aphthae in mouth. Dryness of mouth and bleeding gums. Mucus
in mouth and on the tongue. Sore burning tongue. Salivation. Taste
insipid, putrid, sour, sweetish, wanting.

Coated yellow silmy tongue, mostly at the base. Toothache aggra*
vated in a warm room, ameliorated in cool fresh air.

Dryness and constriction of throat. Frequent hawking of mucus.
Heat and inflammation of throat. Sensation of a lump in the throat.
Mttcus in the throat in the morning. Painful sore throat. Pain on



KAU SULPHURICUM


579

swallowing. Rawness, burning and sticking. The tonsils much
swollen. Swallowing difficult.

Great anxiety and distress in the stomach. Appetite is increased,
ravenous, or wanting^ Aversion to bread, to eggs, to food, to meat, to*
hot drinks and warm food. Coldness in stomach. Catarrh of stomach.
Desires sour thing, sweets, cold drinks and cold food. Distension
of stomach. Irritable, easily disordered stomach. Sensation of empti-
ness and faintness in stomach. Eructations, after eating, bitter, empty,
of food, SOUR, waterbrash. Eructations ameliorate. Gastroduodenal
catarrh with janudice. Fulness after eating ever so little (Lyc.).
Heartburn, heaviness and flushes of heat. Hiccoughing. Loathing
of food. Nausea during chill, during cough, after cold drinks, after
eating, with headache, on motion. Pain in stomach after eating and
drinking. Burning, cramping, cutting, pinching, pressing, soreness,
stitching. Pulsating in stomach. Retching when coughing. Burning
thirst. Vomiting on coughing, after eating, during headache, during
menses. Vomiting bile, food, mucus, sour.

Coldness in the abdomen. Distension after eating. Dropsy. En*
larged liver. Obstructed flatulence. Sensation of fullness after eat-
ing. Sensation of emptiness in lower abdomen after stool ameliorated
by displacing flatus. Heat and heaviness. Complaints of the liver*
Itching of the skin. Pain in abdcHnen at night. Cramping during
diarrhoea, after eating, before the menses, during menses, aggravated
by motion. Pain in inguinal region ind in the liver. Burning, cutting,
pressing. Pressing in hypogastrium and liver. Soreness in abdomen
and in the liver. Stitching in the abdomen, in the sides of the
abdomen, in the inguinal region, in the liver. Pulsating. Rumbling
before stool. Trembling in abdomen. Tympanitis.

Constipation that is very obstinate, alternating with diarrhoea. Stool
difficult, soft or hard, insufficient, during menses, from inactivity of
the rectum. Diarrhoea in the morning, evening, night, after midnight,
painless, or with cramps, during menses. Chronic diarrhoea. Offen-
sive, putrid flatus which ameliorates many abdominal symptoms.
Haemorrhage from the anus. Haemorrhoids, external, internal, large and
bleeding. Involuntary stool. Violent itching of the anus. Pain in
the rectum and anus, during stool after stool ; burning during diar-
rhoea, during stool, after stool. Cutting, pressing, smarting and great
SORENESS. Parts excoriated Shtciung in anus. Tenesmus after
stool. Urging to stool, ineffectual, absent in constipation.

Stool is excoriating, black, thin and offensive. Stool bloody, fre-
quent, offensive, purulent, watery, yellow slime. When constipated
the stool is dry, hard, knotty, large, like sheep dung, small. The stool
is light colored and bileless.

Chnmic catarrh of bladder. The pain is pressing, sticking* It has



580


KALI SULPHURICUM


urging to urinate aggravated at night, constant or frequent, ineffectual.
Urination is painful, frequent at night, dribbling when walking. In-
flammation of the kidneys witli stitching pains.

Gonorrhoea in the advanced stage, with green or yellow thin or
viscid discharge. Haemorrhage from the urethra. Burning during
urination, and in the meatus. Cutting.

The urine is albuminous, and this remedy has been especially useful
in albuminuria following scarlet fever. The urine burns and is cloudy*
high colored, copious^ or scanty, offensive, with red and purulent
sediment. Copious viscid mucus in the urine.

Impotency. Induration of testes. Inflammation of glans penis.
Orchitis after suppressed gonorrhoea (Puls,). Itching of genitalia
and scrotum. Drawing in testes. Sexual desire diminished or entirely
lost. Swollen testes.

It builds up women who have been subject to abortion. Aversion
to coition. Excoriation of the genitalia, with itching, Leucorrhosa,
burning, excoriating, greenish, yellow, purulent, thick or watery.
Menses absent ; bright red, copious, too soon, or too late, offensive,
painful, protracted, scanty, suppressed. Haemorrhage from the uterus.
Pain in uterus, during menses. Bearing down in the pelvis. Burning
in the genitalia. Labor like pains during menses. Prolapsus of the
uterus.

Catarrh of the air passages with thick greenish, yellow or white
mucus. Dryness in the larynx. Rawness in the larynx. Soreness
and roughness. Almost constant scraping in the larynx, aggravated
after eating, at night in bed, until midnight ; almost driven to distrac-
tion by the necessity to clear the larynx and gets up only white thick
mucus. Tickling in the larynx. Hoarseness. Recurrent coryza
with irritation in larynx. Voice lost. Every cold settles in the larynx.

Asthma aggravated in a warm room, ameliorated in open air.
Dyspnoea evening, night, with cough, when lying, walking, ameliorated
in open air. Rattung breathing. Short, suffocative breathing in a
warm room. Wheezing in a warm room. Whistling.

Coughing in morning, evening, in bed, night ; ameliorated in cold
air, ameliorated in open air, ameliorated by cold drinks. Cough with
coryza, aggravated lying. Dry, hoarse, croupy cough at night. Cough
aggravated after eating, during fever. Exhausting cough. Hacking
cough. Loose cough. Paroxysmal, racking cough. Rattling
cough. Suffocating cough. Tickling in larynx, trachea and deep in
chest. Warm room aggravates cough. Whooping cough with yellow
slime or yellow watery expectoration. Expectoration bloody, difficult,
must be swallowed, or slips back, purulent, yellow or greenish, slimy,
watery, viscid.

Anxiety in the chest. It is one of the most surprising remedies in



KALI SULPHURICUM


581

catarrh of the chest. Rattling in chest from every cold change in the
weather. Constriction of the chest. The last part of pneumonia and
pleurisy will bring out symptoms for tliis remedy. Itching of the skin
of the chest. Eruptions, eczema, pustules. Oppression of chest and
haemorrhage. After bronchitis in children, when every cold causes
rattling in chest and there is no expectoration. Burning, cutting,
stitching and soreness in chest. Pain in heart. Stitching in the
heart. Palpitation with anxiety of heart. Tumultuous palpitation.
Perspiration in axillae. Weak chest. This remedy has saved many
people from phthisis. It has cured swollen sensitive mammae coming
every month before menses.

Coldness in the back. Pain in the back on breathing, during menses,
periodical, aggravated sitting, aggravated standing ; ameliorated walk-
ing ; aggravated in a warm room. Wandering pains. Pain in cervical
region, dorsal region, between the shoulders. Pain in lumbar region
during menses, while sitting, and walking. Pain in sacrum. Aching,
bruised, burning, drawing, stitching. Tension in the cervical region.
Weakness in the lumbar region.

Arthritic nodosities. Coldness of upper limbs and hands. Cold
FEET evening in bed, and during fever. Cracked hands. Cracking
in joints. Pimples and vesicles on limbs. Desquamation on legs
above the shoe tops in a young woiman. Heat of hands. Hip joint
disease. Heaviness of lower limbs. Itching of the skin. Jerking of
the limbs. Numbness of hands, lower limbs and feet. Pain in the
limbs during chill. Rheumatic pains in limbs. Cramps in muscles.
Drawing in knees and legs. Rheumatic pains aggravated in a warm
room : ameliorated walking in open air ; aggravated sitting ; ameli-
orated moving about. Sore bruised pain in tibia. Stitching in (he
joints, in lower limbs, knees, legs; wandering stitching. Tca.iug
pains during chill, in joints, upper limbs, lower limbs, thighs, 'cgs.
Wandering tearing pains, ameliorated by motion, and walking in open
air. Perspiration of palms, of feet. Cold sweat of feet. Restless
legs. Stiffness of joints. Swelling of knees, legs, feet. Trembling
of limbs, hands and feet. Twitching thighs. Ulcers on legs. Weak-
ness of joints, upper limbs, of kness.

The sleep is full of dreams. He has nightmare. Dreams anxious,
of death, of being in an accident and nearly killed, of robbers, of sick-
ness, frightful, of ghosts. Late falling asleep. Restless sleep. Sleepi-
ness in afternoon and evening, and after eating. Sleepless before!
midnight. Waking early, and frequently.

Chill EVENING and night. Chilliness in the evening. Chilliness
after exertion. Coldness of the skin. Quotidian chill. Shaking chill
EVENINGS, 5 >. M., 6 p. M.' Fever without chill, evening until mid-
night Fever, dry heat, flushes. Hectic fever. Intermittent. Per-



58 a


KALMIA LATIFOUA


spiration in morning, night, after midnight. Perspiration on slight
exertion ; copious.

Sensation of burning in the skin ; burning after scratching. The
skin is often cold. Desquamation, Discoloration ; liver spots ; red
spots. Dry skin ; inactivity of skin. Dry, burning skin. Epithelioma.
Eruptions, blisters, burning, dry, moist; eczema with yellowish green,
watery, discharge, herpetic. Itching and stinging eruptions. Rash
like measles. Eruptions painful, pimples, psoriasis, pustules, red
eruptions. Scabby erupions. Scabby after scratching. Scaly erup-
tions on a moist base. Smarting, suppurating eruptions. Tubercular
eruptions. Urticaria, nodular. Vesicular eruptions. Erysipelas with
blisters. Eeasy excoriation of the skin. intertrigo. Formication.
Itching, burning, crawling, stinging; aggravated when warm in bed;
ameliorated scratching. Moisture of the skin after scratching.
Neuritis. The skin is very sensitive: a sore feeling in the skin. Stick-
ing after scratching. Skin swollen and dropsical. Sensation of ten-
sion. Ulcerative pain. Ulcers, bleeding, burning, bloody discharge,
stabbing, yellow discharge, indolent, pulsating, suppurating, tubercu-
lous. Painful warts.


KALMIA LATTFOLIA.

The symptoms that indicate this remedy show themselves especially
in the muscles, in the tendons, in the joints, along the course of the
nerves, in rheumatic complaints. The pains change about, wandering
pains, and they are aggravated from motion. The sharp pains spread
from the centres to the extremities, the wandering pains go down-
wards, down the arms, down the back and down the legs ; from the
shoulder to the fingers, and from the hips to the toes. These pains
sometimes shoot like lightning, again they tear along the nerves, along
the sciatic and crural nerves, down through the calves. In rheumatic
constitutions the pains are dull, tearing, crushing and pressing, and
are aggravated by motion and go from the lower to the upper limbs.
Motion will bring on the pain or aggravate it when it is present. The
head pains are very severe. They often begin in the back of the neck
or back of the head, and extend to the top of the head. There are
also pains in the front of the head, pains over one or both eyes, tear-
ing neuralgic pains aggravated by heat and motion.

Pains come and go with the sun, that is, they begin in the morning
at the rising of the sun and increase till noon, then gradually decline
and disappear at sunset. He is incapacitated for mental work when
in motion and even when sitting up, but, when lying upon his back
perfectly quiet, making no motion, the mind works well and with
clearness ; with the slightest motion, however, even of the hand, on



kajlmia xj^hfoua


583


comes vertigo and confusion of mind. Moving about disturbs him
makes him incompetent. The pains are also worse the first half of
the night.

With these symptoms there is cardiac trouble of rheumatic origin.
The condition has increased until organic disease has come, even
hypertrophy of the heart and valves. This remedy has cured that
state. Palpitation very marked when lying on the left side, > when
lying on the back, sometimes > when sitting erect, < when bending
forward. These symptoms alone cause this remedy to stand out in
relief. It is useful in rheumatic patients where syphilis is at the bot-
tom, syphilitic rheumatism that has taken the course described until
finally the heart has become affected and there is thickening of the
valves. Shooting pains through the heart, pains in the chest, inter-
mittent pulse, pulse skipping a beat now and then. Either the arterial
or venous system, or the valves of the heart, or both, may be affected.
Dyspnoea from any kind of exercise, cardiac dyspnoea. You have in
this a remedy for such complaints. It goes to the bottom in old cases
of rheumatic syphilis, and has cured many a cardiac complaint that
was the result of syphilis. You will be guided to it especially if the
pains wander from place to place, and if they go from above down
wards, if they go from the shoulder down toward the fingers, from
the hips toward the feet, or down the spine. It is also suitable in old
cases of gonorrhoeal rheumatism when the symptoms agree.

The slightest motion, the slightelt effort or exertion brings on the
vertigo, and this is due to disturbance of the circulation. The heart is
so susceptible to any exertion that disturbance of the circulation of
the blood in the brain comes on from the slightest motion. “In a re-
cumbent posture mental faculties and memory perfect, but, on attempt-
ing to move, vertigo.” If the patient persists in moving, nausea and
vomiting will follow. It has palpitation, shaking the whole frame,

audible, vehement palpitation. He cannot lie on his left side.

It is suitable in old, troublesome, recurrent headaches associated
with cardiac affections. A headache will come on daily if the sun
comes out, but it will not come on if the day is clouded. He is aggra-
vated from the light of the sun and the increasing brightness of the
sun’s rays.

In addition to these there are paroxysms of pain that are nightly.
These are the bone pains, pains in the shin bones as if the periosteum
would be torn off ; these pains come on at night, or the first half of
the night. It is well known in syphilis that the < is at night. It is
an antipsoric, antisycotic and antisyphilitic, it can be selected when the
symptoms agree with any of the three miasms. Pains in the peri-
cranium,, pains in the bones nearest to the surface. In bed at night
the pains become very severe and last all night. This night aggrava-



5^4


KALMU LATIFOUA


tion is especially true of the marked antisyphilitic medicines. It is
found under Hepar and Mercurius ; but in none of the remedies do
we find it so strikingly manifested as in the disease, or miasm, syphilis
itself. In syphilis the < comes with the setting of the sun. It is one
of man's enemies that does its work in the night. Many of the com-
plaints of sycosis conform to the day hours, and the pains are < from
the rising to the going down of the sun. Medicines also have such
queer whims. We must study remedies as we would human char-
acter. Some of them seem to be extremely whimsical, and it is by
knowing these whimsical, strange and peculiar things that we are able
to mark the character of the remedy. When we know these peculiari-
ties we have found tlie circumstance under which the remedy works
l■)est.

There are kidney affections. All the organs are related to each
oihcr but especially the heart and kidneys. When the kidneys are
not working well, the heart is very often troublesome. All through
ilic varying forms of Brights disease the heart is troublesome. Dnti-
Gulties of breathing, difficult heart action, with albuminuria. It will
relieve the breatliing. Again, associated with kidney affections, we
have many eye complaints, difficulties of vision, and these also espe-
cially call for this remedy. It is often indicated in Bright's disease,
with disturbance of vision, occurring during pregnancy. For the
pains in the eyes, the stitching, tearing pains that occur during kidney
disturbance in pregnancy, or during albuminuria, Kalmia ‘becomes a
remedy. This remedy is useful in neuralgia ; neuralgia, of the eye,
neuralgia of the face, violent, tearing pains in the face. Sometimes
it takes the form of a nightly < and sometimes it takes the form of
daily <. The aggravation in the daytime comes and goes with the
sun. The < at night time comes with the lying down. “Anxious
expression of countenance" associated with rheumatism of the heart.
“Flushing of the face, with vertigo."

After the disappearance of a herpetic eruption, violent neuralgic
pains, shooting, tearing pains in those nerves that supply the part
where the eruption was. When shingles, ring-worm, cold sore, or
isolated vesicular eruptions disappear, suddenly from some violent
cause or inappropriate treatment, or from catching cold, violent neu-
ralgias come in their place and continue until the eruption comes out
again. This remedy becomes suitable if the symptoms agree ; that is,
if the whole patient is in agreement with the state of the remedy. The
pains are stitching and tearing, very severe, sometimes cutting and
shooting when this remedy is most useful. The pain will seem to
take hold of a nerve and will hold on to it for many minutes, coming
with violence, coming suddenly and letting loose suddenly. Pains
come in the extremities in the same way, taking hold as if the nerve



KALMIA LATIFOLU


585


were being pinched by nippers, or as if it were being torn to pieces.
‘There, now it is gone 1” says the patient. Pretty soon, again, you
will see his face in a state of horrible distress. The pain is there
again and he cannot move a muscle, and “there, it is gone 1” he says,
and it remains away for some minutes and sometimes for hours.

The heart has many symptoms which should be studied. “Flutter-
ing of the heart, palpitation of the heart.'* “Palpitation up into the
throat, after going to bed, trembling all over." Very stow^ pulse, I
remember a patient, an old syphilitic, who was told if he ever made
a violent move he would die, the valves of his heart were so badly
affected. He had all the murmurs that it seemed possible from the
heart valves. He had travelled all over and had taken large doses of
Mercury, and his syphilitic condition had to a great extent been sup-
pressed, until finally the whole trouble had located in the heart.
Kalmia removed all the dyspnoea and palpitation in a few months, and
it was nearly two years before there was a 'marked return of the
symptoms and a repetition put him in a state of health, so that he
needed no more medicine. This shows what a deep-acting remedy
Kalmia is, how long it may act, what wonderful changes it may effect.
A remedy must be capable of going deep into the life to do such things.

“Wandering rheumatic pains in the region of the heart." “When/
articular rheumatism has been treated externally and cardiac symp-
toms ensue." Rheumatism that goes from the lower to the upper
limbs. Not uncommonly you will m^t such things. These “rubbers"
that go around the streets with a Strong liniment and considerable
magnetism frequently do cause a rheumatism to leave the knee joint,
and, when it does that, the heart is likely to be the organ that suffers.
Then Kalmia, Aurum, Bryonia, Rhus tox,, Ledum, Calc, and Abro-
tanum, and sometimes Cactus, are remedies that prove suitable for
such cardiac affections. Rlieumatic affections that are driven away
in this manner are changed without being cured. The people cannot
realize the danger of merely removing symptoms. Every removal
that is not in accordance with cure affects the centres of man, that is
the heart and brain. Rubbing is a dangerous thing. When you are
importuned with the question, “Doctor, will it hurt me to have this
rubbed?" you reply, “If rubbing does not affect any change in the
symptoms, it will do no harm." In proportion as it ‘mitigates the
symptoms or relieves, just in that proportion it does the patient harm,
for the whole vital economy is weakened. There are instances where
rubbing is of benefit, but not in rheumatism. In paralyzed muscles
it is a beneficial exercise, for then rubbing can take the place of exer-
cise of the patient himself, of the muscles. But rubbing is not admis-
sible if it is used to reduce pain. The more agreeable it is, the worse
it is for the patient. In a Phosphorus patient you would be aston-

74



586


KREOSOTUM


ished what wonderful relief they can get from rubbing. There is no
person more inclined to be weak in the vitality, in the internal
economy, than the Phosphorus patient. He is an excitable, weakly
patient, and feels better by rubbing and craves it, but if he has rheu-
matism in the knees and the knee is rubbed the rheumatism may go
to the heart. The Phos, patient loves to be rubbed, because rubbing
relieves the symptoms ; he loves to be magnetized.

“Weariness of all the limbs ; shuns all exertion.'’ “Weakness the
only general symptom with neuralgia." This weakness is a state that
you can glean something from. When severe pain is fatiguing the.
economy the heart is threatened. A general weakness, prolonged
weakness after confinement, or from the pain, as wc find in Hepar,
but with the weakness, these pains are threatening to leave their parts
and go to the heart. He is perfectly exhausted and continuously
tired.

The text speaks only of Aconite and Belladonna as the antidotes.
Spigelia follows this remedy very well and antidotes it. Benzoic acid
is a natural complement to it. Calc,, Lith, carb,, Lye., Nat, mur,, and
Puls, are the remedies that are closely related and should be compared.

KREOSOTUM.

There arc three things that stand out mOwSt prominently in Kreo-
sotum, and when they appear together the symptoms in minor degree
will be likely to be associated. These three characteristics are:
I. Excoriating discharges ; 2, Pulsations all over the body, and
3. Profuse bleeding from small wounds.

When these three things are associated in a high degree Kreosote
should be examined. A prick of a pin will cause the oozing of bright
red blood, and mucous membranes bleed easily. Any pressure upon
the mucous membranes will cause oozing. Bleeding here and there
about the body. The lachrymation is excoriating. It excoriates the
margins of the lids and cheeks, and they become red and raw, and
smart. If there is a purulent discharge it is acrid. The corners of
the lips and mouth are red and raw, and the saliva burns and smarts.
The moisture about the mouth, whatever it may be, excoriates and
the mouth is raw. The eyes smart and burn as if raw. The leucor
rhoea causes smarting and burning about the vulva, so that the mucous
surfaces of the labia are red and raw, sometimes inflamed, but always
burning. The vagina bums during coition, and there is bleeding after
coitioh ; granulations of the vagina and os uteri, so that the pressure
of the act of coition brings on bleeding and burning, smarting and
excoriation. And the male organ will smart and burn after coming
in contact with the secretion of tb^ vagina during coition. The uriw



KREOSOTOM 587

bums and smarts. This tendency to excoriation from the excretions
and secretions applies to all the tissues of the body.

Every emotion and exciting circumstance is attended with throb-
bing all over the body, pulsations to the ends of the fingers. Every
emotion is attended wdth tearfulness. Music that will in the slightest
way excite the emotion, minor strains and music that strikes home to
the heart, pathetic music, will bring out tears that are acrid, and pal-
pitation and pulsations that are felt to the extremities.

When the Kreosote sore throat is present the least pressure of the
tongue depressor will establish oozing, little drops of blood will appear.
During the coryza there is nosebleed. When the eyes arc red and raw^
and inflamed, they will bleed easily. If an individual pricks the finger
the blood will not merely be a single drop, but a good many will flow.
Prolonged haemorrhage from the passages ; haemorrhage from the
kidneys, from the eyes, the nose, the uterus. Haemorrhage after
coition. Tumors bleed easily.

These are the most marked features of Kreosote. If these arc fixed
in your mind, we have what may be known, as a Kreosote constitution,
out of wdiich may come all the rest of the symptoms in all their
minutiae, and little symptoms and fragments in every organ. You
have in this one group the strong features of Kreosote. No matter
how many particulars you may have in a case, if you do not have
something of these general features you need not expect to find your
patient constitutionally cured or relived by Kreosote. These may be
considered essentials.

Mentally the patient is so irritable that there is nothing that will
suit him. The wants are so numerous that nothing satisfies. The
patient wants everything and is satisfied with nothing, that is, he
wants something and when he has it he does not want it. That is
the state of irritability and lack of satisfaction in a chronic condition.
You see the child in the mother’s arms. It wants a toy, and when
given it throws it in the face of somebody ; it wants this and that and
is never satisfied, alw^ays wanting something new — a new toy which
it throws away the moment it gets it and then calls for something,
else. The lips are red and bleeding, the corners of the mouth are
raw, the eyelids red and the skin excoriated. If it has, in connection)
with all this, loose passages from the bowels and you examine the
fissure between the nates, you will find it is red and raw. If the child
be old enough to make such motions he will put the hands upon the
sore genitals and fissures and cry out in a most irritable way, because
of the smarting. Such is the Kreosote baby. It may be suffering
from cholera infantum ; it may be subject to wetting the bed ; it may
have spells of vomiting, in which it vomits all its food ; it is a Kreo-
sotc baby. Kreosote has attacks of diarrhoea and vomiting; all sorts



i^reosotum


sd8

of disturbances of the urine ; great distension and trouble with the
bowels ; abdomen distended from flatus. You look over the whole
case at once as a Kreosote case, because of these general features that
can be summed up in the aspect of the child.

The Kreosote face has a yellowish pallor ; it is a sickly countenance,
semi-cachectic, intermingled with blotches that are reddish looking,
as if erysipelas were going to set in. In olden times this countenance
was called a scorbutic countenance.

Take a woman with this kind of countenance ; at every menstrual
flow she complains of much swelling and rawness of the genitals ; the
flow is copious, clotted, stops and then starts again, comes too soon
and lasts too long ; at times it is black, very foetid, produces rawness
upon the thighs and the genitals, with much swelling ; at every men-
strual period there is rawness of the lips and fissures in the corners of
the mouth ; the tears become acrid ; at the menstrual period all the
fluids of the body seem to be acid and they burn wherever they touch.
Very often there is a loose stool, which is also acrid and smarts the
anus at the menstrual period. All the symptoms are worse at the
menstrual period, sometimes in the early part, sometimes at the middle,
sometimes all through, and sometimes at the close. Something more
about the scorbutic constitution is brought out in relation to the gums ;
the gums become puffed and red and tumid and settle away from the
teeth. They become spongy and bleed easily. In the mouth there is
much ulceration and little ulcers spread from aphthous patches, smart-
ing and burning ; the tongue has ulcers upon it, which bleed easily
upon touch.

Ar the close of a typhoid fever haemorrhage from the bowels, bleed-
ing from the mucous membranes. The mouth becomes raw, and
wherever there is a mucous membrane there is a rawness, and the
fluids that ooze continue to eat and cause ulceration. If at the close
of a typhoid fever, when the time comes for convalescence, vomiting
comes. Vomiting, bleedings, diarrhoeas. The fluids vomited front
the stomach are so acrid that they seem to take the skin off from the
mouth, set the teeth on edge, make the lips raw. So excoriation from
acrid fluids, as well as throbbing all over the body, are features that
you must bear in mind with Kreosote.

The discharges from the body are offeUssive ; offensive, bloody, acrid-
discharges from the nose; offensive, watery discharges from any part
of the body ; sometimes even putrid ; the leucorrhoea is very offensive
Rapid emaciation, with spongy, burning ulceration, pus acrid, ichor
ous, foetid and yellow. Sometimes the inflammatory condition will
run so high in an ulcer, only a small ulceration, that gangrene will set
in, and hence we have a gangrenous ulceration ; gangrene of parts that
are inflamed. Very low formations occur upon the margins of mu-



KREOSOTUM


589


cous membranes ; crusts form. Indurations under the crusts, and the
crusts continue to form. The circulation is so poor, so feeble in the
parts all about the margin of the lips and the corners of the mouth,
and corners of the eyes, and eyelids, and upon the genitals, and there
is so much venous engorgement that crusts form and ulcerate and
bleed and pile up, and this continues until a phagedenic spot comes.
This condition is so much like epithelioma that Kreosote has cured
epithelioma.

The next striking thing in Kreosote is its stomach symptoms. Soon
after eating there comes a burning pain in the stomach, and then a
sense of fulness and an increasing nausea, ending in vomiting of the
food, which looks as it did when taken ; it looks undigested, but it is
sour and acrid, coming up an hour or two after eating. Vomiting,
the stomach seems unable to digest, and after the patient empties it
there is constant nausea. After a swallow of water a prolonged bitter
taste remains in the mouth. There is aggravation from eating cold
things and relief from warm diet. In malignant diseases of the stomach
when this symptom is present, Kreosote becomes a great palliative ;
it relieves the burning and improves the digestion for a while, but the
trouble comes again. Many times our remedies furnish us the greatest
known palliation in cancerous affections. Homoeopathy should at all
times furnish a degree of palliation in cancerous and other incurable
malignant diseases of the stomach.. This palliation will bring more
comfort to the stomach than can possibly be brought about by Mor-
phine, I have watched patients iJitder Morphine and under homoeo-
pathic medicine, and as a mere matter of comfort I will take thei
homoeopathic medicines. This ]has been the experience of many.
When you hear a homoeopath say that he prefers anodynes in cancer-
ous affections of the stomach and in other painful affections, it is
pretty sure evidence that he is not able to find the medicines that are
suitable for the patient. These cases test the ability of the physician.

Kreosote is a great remedy for diarrhoeas in the summer, especially
for infants. The infant that I described as to his temper may be the
infant suffering from the worst form of summer complaint, or having
a light attack of cholera infantum. Or he may be ‘‘teething,'' and
suffering from the troubles that arc sometimes associated with teeth-
ing. Infants have troubles at the time of teething only because they
are sick, and if the child were not in disorder he would not have
trouble when teething. Teething is a crisis, and the things that are
within will come out at the time, just as there are troubles that are
likely to come out at the time of puberty and at the climacteric period.

A marked feature of the Kreosote constitution is that when the
desire to urinate comes he must hurry or the urine will escape. The
urine is passed during sleep. Bloody urine ; clots in the urine ; acrid



590


LAG CANINUM


and excoriating urine ; weakness of the bladder ; inability to hold the
urine. Smarting and burning in the pudenda, during and after mic-
turition. “Sugar in the urine.” It has cured diabetes. Generalize
the symptoms given and you will see what kind of a diabetic patient
will need Kreosote.


LAC CANINUM.

A beginning in this remedy was made by Dr. Reisig, and after
Reisig it was used by Bayard. After Bayard's death Dr. Dyer gave
me a vial of the 30th potency, made by Reisig, from which the poten-
cies have mostly been made.

All the milks should be potentized, they are our most excellent
remedies, they are animal products and foods of early animal life and
therefore correspond to the beginning of our innermost physical
nature. If we had full provings of monkey’s, cow’s, mate’s and
human milk they would be of great value. Lac defloratum has done
excellent work, and so has this remedy. I.,ac caninum is in its begin-
nings yet, although it has made some marvelous cures, but many of
its symptoms are doubtful and it would take a century to confirm
them. Some may think because the milk are only food for the young
they are not medicine, but let one w^ho is made sick from milk take it
in potenized form and report the result. Provers who dislike milk
will become sick from taking it in potencies in a few days, and their
symptoms are very numerous.

This remedy abounds in nervous symptoms, although it has no doubt
tissue changes as well. It is deep and long acting ; the provers felt
its symptoms for years after the proving was made. The mental
symptoms are prolonged and distressing. It has cured enlarged glands.
It makes ulcers very red, and it has cured such ulcers. Ulcerated
areas have a dry, glistening appearance as if coated with epithelium.
It is an important remedy in complaints following badly treated diph-
theria, in paralysis and other conditions dating back to diphtheria.
The greater number of its symptoms belong to the nervous system.
An oversensitive state prevails, a general hyperaesthesia of the skin
and all parts. In makes women violently hysterical, and causes all
sorts of strange and apparently impossible symptoms. For example,
a woman lay in bed for days with the fingers abducted and would go
wild if they touched each other. The fingers were not aggravated
from hard pressure, but she would scream if they touched. This
state is difficult to cure outside of Lac can. and Lack. Loch, has pro-
duced a similar condition. The sensitiveness of the abdomen so that
the sheet cannot be permitted to touch the skin belongs to both.

Another strange state is a peculiar vertigo, a condition, when walk-



LAC CANINUM


59*

ing, in which she seems to be floating in raid-air, or, when lying, as
if she were not on the bed. Other remedies have this. The sensation
as if floating, or not touching the bed, or sinking down, belongs to
Loch. The sensation of gliding while walking is strong under Asarum
Europdsum.

The complaints, almost regardless of kind or quality, change sides.
The rheumatism is first found in one ankle and then in the other, and
then back again to the original site. If in the knee or hip or shoulder
the rheumatism alternates sides. The headaches and neuralgias do
the same thing. The ambulating erysipelas first attacks one side,
then the other. Inflammation and neuralgia of the ovaries the same
alternation is observed. Sore throats affect alternately the sides of
the throat or tonsils. Many cases of this sort have been cured by this
remedy. The trouble commenced on the right and went to the left
and Lyc. failed, but when it returned to the right the alternation was
noticed and the remedy revealed. Only a limited number of remedies
have alternating sides.

One or two provers had many symptoms, and so not all are reliable ;
but this remedy 5o intensifies the imagination and senses that it would
be easy for them to imagine symptoms, and that itself is suggestive.
Full of imaginations and harassing, tormenting thoughts. Wander-
ing features in the mental sphere, wandering and alternating states.
Cannot collect the thoughts. She wants to leave everything as soon
as it is commenced, a condition <tf irresolution common to quite a
number of remedies. She is impressed with the idea that all she says
is not so, thinks everything she says is a lie, as if there is no reality
in the things that be. In this it is somewhat analogous to Alumina
in which the patient feels as if someone else and not himself were
saying everything, a lack of consciousness of the reality of things.

Every time a symptom appears she thinks it is a settled disease ;
fear and anxiety that some horrible disease has come upon her, a
delusion that she was suppurating and in a loathsome state ; infested
with snakes. Horrible sights are presented to the mental vision, nor
always snakes, and she fears the objects will take form and present
themselves to her eyes. This is analogous to Lack., which has the
feeling that the atmosphere is full of hovering spirits, although he
never sees them.

Imagines he wears someone rise’s nose. Imagines she is not her-
self and her properties not her own. Imagines she sees spiders, snakes,
vermin. She cannot bear to be alone. In Lack, the patient wants
to be alone to indulge the strange fancies, and when alone she feels
as if she were floating out of the window and over the grassy plains,
but a sound will bring her back to the world again. This is on the
borderland of insanity or delirium.



59 ^


LAC CANINUM


Although the patient has all these strange feelings, yet she goes
around all day about her business, and no one knows them unless she
confesses them. Chronic sadness, everything so dark ; irritable, ugly,
hateful. Full of vertigo, but it is a sensorial symptom, unusually
refined ; not the vulgar swaying or tossing or feeling as if things were
going round. It affects the whole body, as if she were swimming or
floating in the air, spirit-like.

The headaches are violent and are mostly frontal, but it has also
occipital headaches. Headache above the eyes from riding in the
cold wind, ameliorated in a warm room. Both the frontal and occipital
headaches are aggravated by turning the eyeballs upwards and using
the eyes for fine work. Pains in the head during the day, first on one
side then on the other, either side being first affected. Pains in the
face or eyes, alternating sides, perfectly unbearable, ameliorated going
into the open air. The rheumatic symptoms arc ameliorated by cold
and cold applications, thus classifying it with Puls, and Led. Some
headaches are noted as relieved by warmth.

Sensitiveness is marked ; sensitive to light and noise. The page
is not clear when reading. She sees faces before her in the dark.
Old, troubled, distorted, disagreeable faces come to the vision or
imagination. Dark, hideous faces she has seen come up, and she is
tormented by them. This is not really a symptom of the vision, but
a state of the brain.

Sounds seem far off. Paralysis of the throat with diphtheria ; fluids
return by the nose when drinking. Coryza, with sore throat and
sneezing. Stuffed nose ; discharge of thick white mucus. Faceache ;
pain aggravated by exertion, ameliorated by warm applications, but
only cold applications relieve the soreness.

Putrid mouth is a strong feature. The mucous membrane and
teeth are coated with a fuzzy, shining, silvery substance, somewhat
like milk. In the throat there is a felt-like exudation, ashy gray or
silvery shiny deposit. It has been used in diphtheria for the class of
cases taking alternate sides, and it has also cured paralysis following
diphtheria. The pain in the throat pushes toward the left ear. Pains
take alternate sides. The throat is ameliorated by cold or warm drink-
ing, and aggravated by empty swallowing. It is indicated especially
in a glazed, shiny, red appearance of the throat like Kali bich. The
diphtheritic membrane is also white like silver. Lac c. has cured most
alternating cases, with patches first on the right tonsil, then on the
left. Membranous croup. Wherever there is mucous membrane
there will be exudate, a gray, fuzzy coating, like that piling up on the
tongue. I once cured with Lac c. a chronic affection in which the
whole buccal cavity had a white exudate without inflammation or
ulceration, an apparent infiltration which dipped down everywhere.



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM


593


extending under the tongue. It was white and silvery, looking as if
a mouthful of carbolic acid had been swallowed, and the mouth was
so sensitive that the patient could not swallow anything but milk.

The abdomen is full of distress. Pressive pain in the pelvis ; acute
pain in left groin. Constant urging to urinate. Irritable bladder.

The female sexual organs furnish a mass of symptoms. Severe
pain in the region of the right ovary, ameliorated by the flow of bright
red blood, is again somcwlnat like Lacli. These pains take alternate
sides. Zinc, also has pain in the ovaries ameliorated by the flow ; she
never feels well except when menstruating ; hysterical at all other times
but well at the menstrual period, is Zinc, Membranous dysmenorrhoea
is another example of the exudative tendency of Lac c. Sore throat
beginning and ending with the menstrual period. Mag, carb, has
sore throat before the menstrual period and Calc, c, has cured painful
throat when menstruating.

Escape of gas from the vagina. The fermentation of mucus and
other substances in the bladder causing the escape of gas when uri-
nating is found only under Sars', ; the urine flows with a loud noise.
It is not uncommon for a child to break wind when urinating, and the
urine is passed with a gnrgling noise ; this is cured by Sars,

Much trouble with the mammal ; they feel as if they would sup-
purate. When a mother has lost her infant and it is necessary to
dry up the milk. Lac c. and Pulit. arc the best remedies for this
purpose, when no symptoms are present. They will do it speedily.
The Lac c. patient is imaginative and sensitive to pain and her
surroundings, hyperarsthesia and touchiness. Puls, will be called
for in the Puls, constitution.

Rlicumatism with swelling of the lower extremities, especially when
it affects the limbs alternately ; aggravated by motion and heat, ante-
Horated by cold. Pains in the limbs as if beaten. Rheumatic swelings
of joints.


LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM.

The untrained mind naturally rebels at the idea of giving skimmed
milk to sick people as a remedy, but when potentized like any other
substance it becomes one of the most useful remedies. Every physician
has seen a few cases in his practice ; men, women and children who
cannot drink milk. They say they are made sick by drinking or using
milk, and that milk is poison to them.

It is the work of the true physician to study cases and ascertain
in each case what symptoms arc observed after taking milk. These
symptoms constitute a proving of it and it is the best kind of a
proving as it is produced upon sensitive persons.

75



594


LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM


The writer has made it his duty to study each and every one of these
cases until the image of the sickness produced by milk has dawned upon
him both from the individual symptoms and from a collective view.

Much can be learned by meditating upon the milk constitution ;
some may think there is a difference of importance between milk
skimmed and new milk, but for all practical purposes the skimmed
milk is sufficient and cures the oversensitiveness to milk, if used in a
high potency. It is useless in low potency.

It is a useful remedy as it may demonstrate to the unbeliever the
wonderful power of the high potency. It has aggravation during the
whole twenty-four hours ; some cases manifest symptoms only during
the daytime, and amelioration comes with the going down of the sun —
but this is uncommon.

The chronic milk subject is very cold and bloodless and cannot get
warm even in a warm room and by warm clothing ; she is so chilly and
so sensitive to cold that she feels the air blowing on her in the room,
as if she were fanned, even wliere there is no possible draft and others

feel the room to be very warm. She is very sensitive to wet weather.

She is subject to neuralgic and rheumatic pains all over the body but
more especially in the head. The pain in the head is better from cold
applications, but the pains elsewhere are better from heat. The suf-
ferings are all worse by motion and better by rest ; pains are better
by pressure. The bones are sore to touch. Great lassitude and even
weakness, can endure no exertion. There is marked restlessness and

she is unable to hold up after loss of sleep ; extreme weariness from

a short walk. She looks and acts as though she had been suffering
long or as if she were going into a decline. The skin all over the body
is violently sensitive to cold objects and touch of cold sponge. There
is marked periodicity in the nature of the remedy, most noticed in the
recurrent headaches. This remedy has had a reputation for curing dia-
betes and this is not to be wondered at when it is known to have cured
the weakness, anaemia and copious, watery urine and great thirst ; also
copious, dense urine. Many invalids cured by this remedy have ap-
peared to the WTiter much like the typical diabetic patient ; but it can
cure only where the peculiar symptoms agree. It will not cure simply
when the common symptoms are present. Let all observers faithfully
and minutely study all patients who have an aversion to milk ; all who
have diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting, sick headaches, eructations, foul
stomach after drinking milk and in time the general idea of the milk
sickness will be known.

It is a most useful and frequently needed remedy for infants and
children who cannot take milk, not always as their specific remedy,
but as one of the remedies that will help many infants to grow up ;
some grow morbidly fat and others become lean when fed on milk.



LAC VACCINUM DEFLORATUM


595


It has been useful in dropsy from weak heart ; from liver complaints
and from suppressed malaria. People who drink milk habitually
become anaemic and catarrhal ; fatty degeneration of muscles, of heart
and liver. Malassimilation is the most marked feature of milk poison.

The pains become violent in many parts ; in the spinal cord ; in eye-
balls ; in supra-orbital nerves ; in forehead and through the head ; in
the stomach ; in lower part of the abdomen. Many people arc made
sick by milk who use cream with safely and delight. Lac defloratum
is often the remedy for such patients and after a careful examination
their symptoms appear like the proving of skimmed milk.

Loss of memory, listlessness and aversion to mental work ; sadness,
desires death and meditates upon the easiest method of self-destruc-
tion ; sadness with weeping and palpitation ; aversion to seeing and
talking to people ; weakness and vacillating mind. He is sure he is
going to die. She imagines that all her friends will die and that she
must go to a convent ; a horror when in a small closet lest the door will
be closed and she will suffocate. She becomes faint and dizzy when
raising her hands high to thread her needle ; vertigo on turning in bed ;
on moving the head from the pillow ; on opening the eyes when lying ;
in the act of lying down. Faintness and nausea when stepping upon
the floor in the morning. Vertigo when reaching up with the hands ;
tendency to fall to the right when standing or walking.

In sickly, pale, careworn women, when the headache is over the eyes
and through the frontal region and the pain is violent ; is better from
pressure and tight binding up, is better lying down in a dark room ; is
better from cold applications ; is better from perfect rest ; is worse
from least motion, worse from light, noise, and conversation ; when
the headache comes on from drinking milk and is attended with
copious, pale urine ; with nausea and vomiting of food, mucus and bile.
Violent pain in occiput, vertex and sides of the head ; marked pulsa-
tion in the head with all headaches ; during the headaches the face
is pale and cold. There is also marked congestion with heat of the
head and flushed face ; the headache often comes with marked period-
icity though sometimes not with regularity. Weekly headaches are
the most common. Great soreness all over the head on jarring or
coughing ; sensation as if top of head was lifted off ; pain first in the
forehead extending to occiput, making her nearly frantic. Intense
headache in forehead and through head, worse in vertex — afterwards
head felt bruised. With all the"* frontal headaches there is strong pul-
sation in temples. It has cured many violent, periodical, sick-head-
aches, that have been present since childhood and said to be inherited.
During these violent headaches there is sometimes a sensation as though
the head were expanding ; it has cured headaches that come before and
after menses. Morning sickness during pregnancy.



59^ lac vaccinvm defloratum

Dim vision before the headaches ; can only see light, not objects ;
sensation as if eyes were full of stones ; extreme photophobia ; dull
pain in eyes, worse in left, even while lids are closed ; better by cold
applications, better by closing eyes, in a dark room ; drawing pain in
eyes when reading — could only read a few minutes at a time ; great
pain in eyes on first going into the light ; pain in and above eyes, worse
by heat and motion. Lids feel heavy, sleepy and dry. Pain most
marked over left eye with lachrymation.

Painful pressure or tightness at the root of the nose.

Deathly paleness of the face ; wasted, thin and excessively sallow,
with dark stains beneath the eyes. Sallow complexion with eczema.
Flushes of heat in left side of face ; sensation as if flesh was off the
bones of the face, and edges were separated and slicking out.

Grinding teeth during sleep, with pain in stomach and head, with
vomiting.

Taste insipid, sour ; mouth dry ; breath offensive ; mouth clammy
and frothy, especially during conversation.

Globus hystericus ; sore throat, worse when swallowing. The
mucous membrane of the throat is very pale.

Entire loss of appetite ; great thirst for large quantities of water ;
eructations empty or sour; distension from gas; nausea after drinking
cold water in the evening — worse after lying down ; nausea from a
recumbent position or from motion or on rising in the morning ; deathly
nausea, but cannot vomit, with groans and cries of great distress ;
great restlessness and sensation of coldness although the skin was hot
and pulse normal. Vomiting, first of undigested food intensely acid,
then of bitter water and, lastly, of a brownish clot which in water
separated and looked like coffee grounds. Incessant vomiting which
has no relation to her meals ; vomiting of bile, with headaches ; violent
pain in stomach. It is a very useful remedy for vomiting in pregnancy
in women who loath milk. Cramping in the stomach.

Chronic gastro-enteritis with chronic diarrhoea and vomiting ; ten-
derness of abdomen ; flatulence and distension. Heaviness and feeling
of stone in abdomen. Severe pain across the umbilicus, with headache.

Chronic constipation where rectum seems paralyzed and injections
and cathartics have failed ; the stool is large, hard and difficult ; after
prolonged straining the stool recedes. It has cured after Silica failed.
Constipation in very chilly patients ; constipation with periodical head-
aches and vomiting ; frequent but ineffectual urging to stool ; diarrhoea
from drinking milk.

Frequent scanty urination ; profuse, pale, watery urine with head-
ache ; urine very dark and thick ; albuminous urine. It cured involun-
tary urinations when walking in cold air, or when riding on horseback



LECHESIS


597


it cured a lack of sensation when the bladder was full.

It cured a yellow-brown leucorrhoea, worse before and after menses ;
it cured a profuse yellow leucorrhoea. Bearing down in ovarian region ;
menses too late and scanty ; menses too late, pale and watery. Pain
in back and ovarian region during menses ; sudden suppression of
menses after putting hands in cold water ; pains all over, especially in
head ; when the milk is diminished or fails it is of great service. The
breasts are dwindling.

Asthma with bloating of stomach ; cardiac dyspnoea.

Short, dry cough ; worse in a cold room or in cold air.

Soreness of chest with oppression ; rheumatic pains in chest in cold,
damp weather ; tubercular deposits in apices of both lungs.

Pressure in the region of the heart with dyspnoea and a feeling that
he must die ; cutting as with a knife apex of the heart. Pulsation of
the heart and flashes of heat in the left side of face and neck ; palph
tation from least exertion or excitement.

Heat up and down the back and across from shoulder to shoulder ;
extreme sensitiveness of hack to cold sponge. Herpes on side and
neck ; itching and burning after scratching ; hard pressive pain at
fourth cervical vertebra ; chills creeping along back between scapulfe ;
intense burning pain in small of back and sacrum ; constant pain in
small of back.

Ends of fingers icy cold — rest (rf hand warm ; numbness and loss of
sensation over outer and anteridi: surface of thighs ; pain pressing
down sciatic nerve and heel ; morning on rising, with nausea and faint-
ness ; weakness and aching in the swollen ankles. Skin thickened on
edges of foot ; feet cold as ice. Aching pains in wrists and ankles ;
cold hands and feet during headache.

Great restlessness ; extreme and protracted sulfering from loss of
sleep at night ; sleepy all day ; extreme insoimiia.

Fever at 9 a. m,, until morning ; wakes in profuse sweat, which
stains linen yellow. Hectic fever. Sensation as if sheets were damp.

The skin is so very sensitive to the touch of a cold hand or sponge
that the prover could bathe only in very warm water. The skin is
cold and pale and venis look blue and very prominent. Herpetic
eruptions ; itching of the skin ; burning, after scratching.

LACHESIS.

Lachesis is a frequently indicated remedy, and one that you will
need to study much in order to know how to use. Lachesis seems
to fit the whole human race, for the race is pretty well filled up with
snake as to disposition and character and this venom only causes to
appear that which is in man.



59 ^


LACHESIS


We will first give a survey or the general symptoms, those which
characterize the remedy and are of greatest importance, and the cir-
cumstances under which the symptoms appear, arc brought out, or are
aggravated. i |

One who is a constitutional Lachesis patient will find himself suffer-
ing from an agg ravation of his sym ptoms in the Spring , . when he
goes out from the cold weather into the milder weatKer, and especially
is that so if it mild and rainy, or cloudy weather. Or if he goes
from a cold into a warmer climate the symptoms of Lachesis will
come out. The warm south winds excite the Lachesis symptoms.

Th e. syniptoiYj is of Lachesis are worse on entering may

have felt nothing of his symptoms when awake, hut when sleep comes
on they arc aroused, and tliey gradually increase as the sleep is pro-
longed, so that a very long sleep will aggravate all the state and con-
dition of a Lachesis patient, and wlien awakening from sleep he looks
hack on that sleep with sorrow\ The slee p h as been ciistuii^ed 1^^^
attacks of suffocation and by ^awful^ dreams, and now, after having
slept a long time, he arouse s with dr eadful he^laches, w ith palp i tanon,
with m^iaruJioly, with sqrrow^s from head to foot. Ilis body is full
oT^llering and his mind sees^ho briglifncss in anything. There is a
cloudy st ate, sadness, melan choly, ins ane not ions, whims, jealousy and
" ^us^ciorT. WTieinaking a warm ba th, or applying^variiTlivatcf to
places that arc inflamed, his mental symptoms are aggravat^. After
a warm bath or after getting Ivarnied “iipT or, if he becomes chilled
from being out on a cold day and then goes into a warm room the
symptoms come on. After going into a warm bath, palpitation comes
on ; it seems as if his head would burst, his feet become cold, and he is
shocked all over, pulsation all over, or feeble heart. Fainting in a
warm bath. Girls sometimes faint when going into a warm bath. The
patient may be cold and chilly yet the warm room increases or brings
out the symptoms.

The general aspect of the patient and the localities will point some-
times to Lachesis. Upon the face there is an appearance of anxiety,
of unrest and distress. The face is spotted or purple and the eyes
are engorged. The eyes look suspicious. If there is an inflamed
spot, it is pu rple. If there Js an inflamed gland, and Lachesis is full
of inflammation of the glands and cellular tissues, there is a purple or
mottled appearance. If there is an ulceration the ulceration bleed s
])lack blo od, which soon coagulates and looks lik*e charred stra\v.
From tKc wounds there is much bleeding. Small wounds bleed much
like Phosphorus and Kreosote. A prick of a pin will ooze great drops
of blood. Ulcers eat in, have false granulations, arc putrid, bleed
easily, and the blood is black, and all round the ulceration there is a
purple, mottled appearance, looking as if about to become gangrenous.



LACHESIS


599


Often gangrene docs come ; gangrene of parts that have been injured.
Sloughing with great ofEensivcncss. The parts tiu*n black and slough.
The veins become varicose. These are found upon the limbs, having
the appearance of the varicose veins that come after gestation. En-
largement of the veins is a prominent condition of Lachesis.

* From tbe ^i^test exertion of the mind or from the slightest
emotion the extremities become cold, the heart becomes very feeble,
the skin is covered with sweat and the head is hot. Warmth docs
not seem to relieve the coldness of the feet and hands ; they arc so cold.
They may be wrapped up in flannels and still they remain cold, but
suffocation is brought on. He cannot breathe and wants the windows
open. It is weakness of the heart ; sometimes so weak that it can
hardly be heard or felt, and the pulse is feeble and intermittent. At
other times there is audible palpitation of the heart.

As we go over the symptoms of the text we will notice something
singular about the complaints, that is, their tendenc y to_ affect the
left sid e, or to be gin on the left and e xtend to the right. The pa ralysis
Te ginT [) y ffa^ua lly appearing weakness upon the left side. Which
extends to tFe“ righ t side. Tt baa a strong affinity for the ovaries,
and in this it will be found that the l eft ova ry is affected lirs^t. So, in
inflammation of the ovaries, the left will be affected first, and later the
right. The inflammation begins on the left side of the th roat and
gradua lly goes to the right. The i left ^dc of the head is commonly
most affected. The left eye hecqnies painful and the pain extends to
the right. The left side of the back of the head, in the occipital head-
ache, will be more affected than the right. This does not always follow,
and if the reverse is true it docs not contra-indicate Each., but such is
the common feature of it. Left upper and right lower has been
observed.

In many symptoms of Lachesis, thcrc ^is jnor nin^ aggravation. This
is the well-knowm Lachesis aggravation after sleep ; the patient will
sleep into the agravation. In the milder symptoms this aggravation
is mild and is not felt until after ^e patient wakes up from a long
sleep, Jmt if the ag gravation i^ one that is of^ considerab le \ ioIgnce,
the patient may feel irimmedi atcly on go ing to sleep , a nd it aro uses
h inT; foFTnstahce, the heart sym ptoms,. As soon as he goes into a
slee p he rouses up with palpitation, with ayspnoca, with suffocation,^
with exhaustion, with vertigo, with pain in the back of the head, and
n iany other circulator y disi urbanccsT ‘

The next most important tiling to be studied is the mental state.
Nothing stands out more boldly than the self-consciousness, the self-
conceit, the envy, the hatred, the revenge and the cruelty of the man.
These things, of course, are matters of self-consciousness, an improper
love of self. Confusion of the mind to insanity. All sqrts of impul-



6oo


LACHESIS


sivc insanity. The mind is tired. The patient puts on an appearance
like the maudling of a drunkard, talks with thick lips and thick tongue,
blunders and stumbles, only partly finishing words ; the face is purple
and the head is liot. There is choking and the collar is uneasy about
the neck ; and the more uneasiness about the neck, the more choking,
the ntore confusion of mind and the more appearance of intoxi-
cation. You will sec if you talk with one who is intoxicated with
whiskey symptoms like Lachesis, he stumbles through, hardly re-
alizing what he says, half finishing his sentences and his words,
leaving his '‘g’s” off all the present participles : he stumbles and blun-
ders, he mutters, and tells you first one thing and then another. These
symptoms are increased under the circumstances mentioned in the
Spring ; in the warm weather following a cold spell ; in rainy weather ;
alter a warm bath ; after sleep. The mental state is large. Jealousy
without an y re ason. Unwarranted jealousy and suspicion. Many
times this m^iclnc has cured suspicion in girls, when they were simply
suspicious of their girl friends. She never sees a whispered conversa-
tion going on but they arc talking about her, to her detriment. Sus-
pects that they are contriving to injure her, and she will resort to any
scheme to see if they were not talking of her to her detriment. A
woman imagines that her friends, husband, and children are trying
to damage her ; that her friends arc going to put her in an insane
asylum. Apprehension of the future. Thinks she is going to have
heart disease, and is going insane ; and that people are contriving to
put her in an insane asylum. Imagines her relatives are trying to
poison her and she refuses to eat. She thinks sometimes that it is
only a dream and she can hardly say whether she dreamed it or
whether she thinks it. She thinks she is dead, or dreams that she is
dead, and in the dream preparations are being made to lay her out.
or that she is about to die.

Thinks she is somebody else, and in the hands of a stronger power.
She thinks she is unde r superhuman contro l She is compelled to do
things by spirits. She hears a cbnimand, partly in her dream, that she
must carry out. Sometimes it takes the form of voices in which she
is commanded to steal, to murder, or to confess things she never did,
and she has no peace of mind until she makes a confession of some-
thing she has never done. The torture is something violent until she
confesses that which she has not done. Imagines she is pursued.
Imagines that she has stolen something, or that somebody thinks she
has stolen something, and fears the law. She hears voices and warn-
ings, and in the night she dreams about it. The state of torture is
something dreadful, and it then goes into a delirium with muttering.
The delirium is carried on like one muttering when drunk. This state
increases until unconsciousness comes on and the patient enters into a



LACHfiSIS


6oi


coma from which he cannot be aroused. The patient also goes through
periods of violence and violent delirium.

It is full of relig ious insan ity. You will find a dear, sweet old lady,
who has always lived what w^ould be called an upright and pious life,
yet she is not able to apply the promises that are in the Word of God!
to herself ; these things seem to apply to somebody else, but not to her.
She is full of wickedness and has committed the unpardonable sin.
She is compelled to say these things ; she is overwhelmed by these
things and she is going to die and going to that' awful hell that she
reads about. The physician must listen to this with attention. The
physician might make the mistake in this instance of making light of
such feelings. If he does, the patient will not return, and he will be
deprived of the chance of benefiting her. No matter what her , whims
arc, no matter what her religious opinions are, her state of mind must
be treated with respect. It must be treated as if it were so.

She must have sympathy and kindness. It is an unfortunate thing
for a doctor to get a reputation of being an ungodly man, among pious
people, as he will be deprived of doing these people an immense amount
of good. He must be candid with all the whims and notions of the
people that he visits in the world. He must be everybody s friend,
and he can be such without any hyprocrisy if he is simply an upright
and just man.

The state of religious melandhply, with religious insanity, is not
uncommonly attended with muc^ Ipq uacity. with talkativeness, which
Lachesis is full of. It is commonly among women, very seldom among
men, that we find this religious niclancholy. Now, this woman is im-
pelled to tell it ; she will annoy her intimate friends, day and night,
with this story of the damnation o£ her soul and her wickedness and all
the awful things she has done. If you ask her what things she has
committed she will say everything, but you cannot pin her down to the
fact that she has killed anybody. If you allow her to go through with
her story she wall tell you all the crimes in the calendar that she has
committed, although she has been a well-behaved and well-disposed
woman. There is another kind of loquacity belonging to Lachesis.
T he patient is impelled to talk continuau&ly. It is found in another
state in which the patient is compelled to hurry in everything she does,
and wants everybody else to hurry. With that state of hurry is brought
out the loquacity, and this is something far beyond comprehension
until you have once heard it. There is no use attempting to describe
it, it is so rapid, changing from one subject to another. Sentences are
sometimes only half finished ; she takes it for granted that you under-
stand the balance and she will hurry on. Day and night she is wide
awake, and with such sensitiveness to her surroundings that you would
naturally think, from what things she hears and how sh^ is disturbed

76



6o3


LACHESIS


by noise, that she can hear the flies walk upon the walls and the clock
striking upon the distant steeple. You do not get all these things in the
text, you have to sec them applied. But the Aings I give you that are
brought out clinically are those things that have come from applying
the symptoms of the remedy at the bedside to sick folks. “Most extra-
ordinary loquacity, making speeches in very select phrases, but jumping
off to most heterogeneous subjects.” “One word often leads into the
midst of another story.” These states may come on in acute diseases
like typhoid, when it will take the usual typhoid delirium, or they may
come on in conditions like diphtheria, or in any of the diseases that are
characterized by blood poisoning ; they may come on in the puerperal
state, or may take the form of insanity. It is a long acting remedy, and
if it has been abused its effects will last a life time.

In many cases a close co nnection between the mental symptoms and
the h eart symptoms will be noticed, especially in young w omeiT and
girls who have met with dTsappointment, who have been Ipng’awake
nigSte~Because of disturbance of the affections, or from disappoint-
ment, or from shattered hopes, or from grief. Prolonged melancholy,
mental depression, hysterical symptoms, weeping, mental prostration
and despair, with pain in the heart, with a gone sensation or sensation
of weakness in the heart, with difficult breathing. She meditates upon
suicide, and finally settles back into an apathetic state, in which there
is an aversion to everything, to work, and even to thinking.

I might impress upon your mind the head symptoms if I related the
case of a patient who described her symptoms probably more typically
than you can find in the books. She was sitting up in bed and unable
to lie down ; she was worse from lying down, her face was purple, her
eyes were engorged, the face puffed and tumid and the eyelids bloated.
She sat there perfectly quiet in bed and described the pain as a surging
sensation, which came up the back of the neck and head and then over
the head. That is a typical feature of Lachesis. A surging in waves.
Waves of pain that are not always synchronous with the pulse. They
■may not relate to the flow of blood at all. Tbe surging is aggravated
by motion, not so much in the act of motion, but after moving. It is
sometimes felt after walking or changing to another place, and sitting
down again ; that is, a few seconds after the motion is completed the
pain begins, and it comes to its height instantly and then gradually
subsides into a very steady surging or a more steady ache. In the head
there is a continuous steady ache, which may be aggravated or aroused
into a surging which is so violent that it seems as if it would take the
life of the patient.

The headache be^ns in the morning on waking. The milder
Lachesis headaches begin in the morning on awaking a nd wear off
after moving abouTa while. With ttic hea4acbo9 and omiplaints in



LACHESIS


603


general there is a momentary vanishing of thought ; all sorts of vertigo*
Vertigo v^^ith nausea and vomiting. The vertigo inclines the patient
to turn to the left.

Lachesis burstiti f r pains in the head: congestive pains with a
feeling as if allthe blood in the body must he in the head, because
the extremities are so cold and the head pulsates and hammers. This
pulsating headache is part of a general pulsation from head to foot.
In all arteries and inflamed parts, there is pulsation. The inflamed
ovary pulsates, and it feels at times as if a little hammer were hammer-
ing upon the inflamed part with every pulsation of the artery. Lachesis
has a number of times cured fistula in ano when associated with this
feeling as if a hammer continually hammered the little fistulous pipe.
It has cured fissure of long standing when it felt as if the inflamed part
were being hammered. Haemorrhoids have been cured when this sen-
sation of hammering was present. So that we see this pulsation in the
head is not a special symptom, but is a general symptom, brought out
in relation to the head.

Some symptoms are valuable because of the frequency of their
association, and when such is the case their concomitant relation
becomes important. The cardiac symptoms are frequently connected
with the headache symptoms in Lachesis. It is seldom that you will
see Lachesis headaches without catdiac difficulty. A weak pulse, or
the pulsation felt all over the bo4y> is more or less associated with
violent Lachesis headaches. ^

In the text we find weight add pressure as a strong feature of the
Lachesis head symptoms. With almost any complaint of the body,
with typhoids, at the menstrual period, during the congestive chill,
it seems that the body becomes eold, the extremities become cold, the
knees are cold, the feet are cold, and it is impossible to keep them
warm, while the face is purple and mottled, the eyes are protruding and
engorged, and this awful pain in the head, with a tendency to become
unconscious, incoherent speech, difficulty of articulation, and finally
actual unconsciousness.

In relation to the head symptoms and mind symptoms and the
sensorium in general, the o vers^iisiiheneiJSi^JiL^ ^ found in Lachesi s
ought to be mentioneef hlis symptoms become very intense. The
vision becomes very intense : the hearing becomes intense ; the sense
of touch especially is overwrought. The touch of the clothing becomes
very painful, while hard pressure may be agreeable. The scalp becomes
so sensitive to the touch of the hand that it is painful, while the press-
ure from a bandage is agreeable. Oversensitive to noise, oversensitive
to motion in the room, to conversation and to others walking over the!
floor. By these circumstances the pains are increased. The patient
becomes extremely sensitive throughout all the senses of the body^



LM:H£5IS


604:


The oversensitiveness to touch is probably extensively in the skin,
because of the fact that hard pressure often gives relief. In one who is
suffering from peritonitis, from inflammation of the ovaries or uterus,
or any of the abdominal viscera, the skin is so sensitive to the clothing)
that contrivances are sometimes necessary to relieve the* suffering from
the touch of the bed clothing. Something in the form of a hoop will
be found in the bed, or the patient will have the knees drawn up, or
with the hands will hold the clothing from touching the body. Tha
ordinary weight of the hand may bring out the soreness that is in the
abdomen, which is an entirely different soreness, whereas the cloth-
ing touching the abdomen only brings out the oversensitiveness of thei
skin. The mere touch of the skin with the finger or hand is unbearable.

There are many inflammatory and congestive conditions of the eyes.
The eye symptoms are worse after sleep, and the eyes are oversensi-
tive to touch and light. With the eye symptoms we have headaches,
because the brain and eyes arc so closely associated. In the sore,
throats, when the spatula or tongue depressor happens to touch the
wall of the throat, the tonsil, or the root of the tongue, there is a feeling
as if the eyes would be pressed out. Violent pain in the eyes fromi
touching the throat. Lachesis is a great jaundice medicine, because
it produces much disturbance in the liver. Yellowness of the skin and
whites of the eyes, and thickening of tissues about the eyes. “Fistula
lachrymalis,’' which is accompanied by long standing eruptions about
the face.

Oversensitiveness of the meatus auditorus externus. Anything in-
troduced into the canal of the ear will cause violent, spasmodic cough-
ing and tickling in the throat. So sensitive is the mucous membrane
of the ear that a violent cough, like whooping cough, will come on £rom>
touching the mucous membrane of the ear. This only shows the over-
sensitiveness of reflexes, and the oversensitiveness in general. With
the hearing there is the same oversensitiveness that we have spoken
of elsewhere. The Eustachian tube becomes closed with a catarrhal
thickening, stricture of the Eustachian tube.

The catarrhal symptoms of the nose are prominent. F requent
bleeding of the nose ai^ b ody, wa te ry discharge from the nose. Always
taking cold tiT the nose. St uffing up of the nose, with disturbance of
smell. O ycrsensitiy en^.s to sm ell, and^pver^sit ive ness to odors.
finally loss of smell. Lachesis has inflammatory conditions, very
'eftronte^ with crusty formations in jdie nose, sneezing,

watery disc harges from the nose and catarrhal headac hes. S ometimes
tEe“liea3acEe goes off when th e catarrhal discharge comes. a ndT when the
"cafaifh^'disc^^^ headache comes on. Violent headache

with dischafigeT mth sneezing and coryza. Congestive headaches with
coryza. This catarrhal condition has led to the use oT Lachesis in



lACHESlS


605


syphilis. It is sufficiently similar to cope with the severe forms of nasal
syphilis ; syphilis where it has affected the nasal mucous membrane,
producing crusts and finally affecting the bones. Focid ozcena ; very
offensive discharges from the nose. Bleeding from the nose need not
surprise you, because Lachesis is a hai^morrhagic remedy. The blood
from the nose or any part, when it dries or clots, looks like charred
straw or becomes black. Parts bleed easily. Copious and prolonged
uterine haemorrhage, copious and prolonged menstruation, bleeding
from the nose, vomiting of blood, haemorrhage from the bowels in
typhoids. ‘'Great sensitiveness of the nostrils and lips, swelling of
the lips, great swelling and tumefaction of the nose in old cases of
syphilis."' The nose swells up and becomes purple. The nasal bones
are very sore, soreness upon sides of the nose. Lachesis is an espe-
cially useful medicine in old drunkards who have red nose, and in
heart affections with red nose. A red knob on the end of the nose, a
strawberry nose.

The face is purple and mottled, the eyelids are tumid, very much
puffed ; not bloated as in oedematous subjects, but puffed. There is not
the pitting upon pressure that we find in cedema, although Lachesis
has that, but there is a puffiness peculiar to Lachesis, fhe f ace loo ks
swollen and inflamed , due to a venous stasis, so that the face is purple
and mottled. Thc^no se is tumid, je t i t will not reniain pitted upon
pre ssure. The lips feel as if inflamed, yet are not inflamed, simply
sensitive to pressure. The face has also an oedematous appearance in
which there is pitting upon pressum, in cardiac affections, in cases of
Bright’s disease. On the other hmd the face becomes very pale, pale
and cold ; the skin covered with scaly eruptions. Eruptions that bleed
easily, with crusty eruptions, with vesicular eruptions. Eruptions that
fill with blood, bloody vesicles and large blood blisters, such as occur
sometimes in burns, with burning. The face becomes jaundiced and
very sallow. At times it takes on the appearance also of a chlorosis.
If you have once seen the chlorotic color, it need not be described. It
is a condition of anaemia, with yellowish pallor, ash colored or grey,
intermingled with a sort of greenish color, so that the ancients often
referred to it as green sickness. Again the face becomes livid and
puffed like the bloated aspect of drunkards, the mottled purple appear-
ance of drunkards who have been drinking for years, until they are
bloated and broken down and have a besotted aspect. You see that in,
Lachesis.

In Lachesis we have a remedy for erysipelas and gangrenous affec-
tions, and about the affected part there is the Lachesis appearance,
that is the mottled, purplish appearance. Lachesis has become clinically
a marked remedy for erysipelas and for gangrene. As provers do not
follow up remedies until they produce these things, we have to gather^



6o6


tACH£StS


them from the poisonous effects and clinical observation.

In Lachesis there is oozing of blood around the teeth) the gums
bleed easily. Dry crusts appear upon the teeth in zymotic diseases,
often black formations, sordes, and the tongue takes part in the appear-
ance of the mouth and becomes slick. This occurs in typhoid condi-
tions when there is a total loss of assimilation, the appetite is entirely
gone, the stomach will not take food, and when food is put into the
stomach it is rejected. There is also paresis of the tongue. The
tongue seems to be like leather in the mouth, it is moved with great
difficulty. And the speech is like that of one half intoxicated :
he is unable to articulate. The tongue swells and is protruded very
slowly. It is dry and catches on the teeth and seems to have lost its
stiffness. Seems like a rag, or as if the muscles did not act upon it so
that it cannot be protruded, or if it is protruded it trembles and quivers
and jerks and catches on the teeth. Again it is swollen, it is denuded
of its papillae, and smooth, shiny and glassy as if varnished. In the
mouth there is a soapy appearance of the saliva. The saliva runs into
the mouth copiously and the patient will often lie with the head over
the side of the bed, and the saliva dripping into a pan or commode.
The saliva is stringy and can be pulled out of the mouth in strings ;
white mucus or saliva. This is not an uncommon feature in diphtheria,
in sore throat, in inflammation of the tongue and mouth and gums, and
in inflammation of the salivary glands. When this mucus is thick,
tough, yellow, stringy and ropy it is like Kali bichromicum. You will
often find in severe sore throat that the patient will lie and gag, and
cough, and attempt with difficulty to protrude the tongue to expel the
saliva from the mouth. Very often the pain is so severe in the root of
the tongue that he cannot expel the saliva by the tongue and he will lie
with the open mouth over a commode, or with a cloth over the pillow,
to receive the thick, ropy saliva. In such a state with sore throats,
especially those that commence on the left side and go to the right,
you hardly need to question longer, for it is the aspect of Lachesis.
This state of affairs would lead to Lachesis in ordinary inflammatory
conditions of the tongue and in cancerous affections of the tongue.
Lach. has in its nature the tendency to formation of malignant scabs
and malignant ulcers, such as we find in epithelioma. It has cured a
number of cases of epithelioma. It has been a very useful remedy in
lupus. It is an important remedy in syphilitic sore throat, in syphilitic
ulceration of the throat, tongue and roof of the mouth with this
copious, stingy saliva.

The muscles of the pharynx become paralyzed and will not act, and
hence the food will collect in the pharynx, that is, the bolus to bo
swallowed goes to the pharynx and stops, and then a tremendous effort
at swallowing, with gagging and coughing and spasmodic action of the



LACHESIS


607


chest, takes place in order to carry on respiration, and he will not again
attempt it. This state often occurs with diphtheria. I have a number
of times seen it brought about by the physician, who has, instead of
giving just enough Lachesis, high enough and similar enough to the
disease to cure, given it as low as he could get it, the 8th or loth, dis-
solved it in water and fed it all through the diphtheritic state. When
you come across cases that have been treated in this way you need not
be surprised if a post-diphtheritic paralysis comes on, because Lachesis
will produce it. It may cure the diphtheria, but it will leave its poison-
ous effects which will last that patient a lifetime. Every spring the
symptoms of Lachesis will crop out. In all the circumstances of aggra-
vation described the symptoms of Lachesis will crop out if he has once
been poisoned by it.

In the sore throat we have a combination of symptoms. Lachesis
has produced this state, going from left to right : but with the sore
throat there is a sensation of fulness in the neck and throat, difficult
breathing, pallor or plethoric appearance of the face, choking when
going into sleep, the peculiar kind of saliva and aggravation of the
throat symptoms from warm drinks. There is not always an aggrava-
tion of the pain itself from warm drinks, but the patient is often unable
to swallow warm fluids. The swallowing of warm fluids often causes
choking, and after a swallow of warm tea is taken the patient will
clutch at the throat and it seems if he would suffocate. He says,
“Ohl do not give me any more w*rra drinks.” Something cold will
relieve. The dyspnoea and the distress about the throat is increased
by swallowing something warm. Now, in the sore throats of Lycopo*
dium, warmth often benefits, but it is also true in some cases of Lyco-
podium sore throat, they want ctfld drinks and cold feels good to the
throat.

Very often in the more acute symptoms of Lachesis a warm drink in
the stomach is hurtful and causes nausea and suffocation and increases
the choking and palpitation and the fulness in the head, whereas in the
chronic cases of Lachesis, those that have been poisoned years before,
there will be a sensation of nausea and tendency to vomit from taking a
drink of cold water and then lying down. The nausea comes on after
lying down, that is, let the patient take a drink of ice cold water and go
to bed and nausea will come on. Such a state is peculiar to Lachesis.
It has been a later observation of those who have long before proved
lachesis. The symptoms of Lachesis have sometimes to be taken'
years after.

Lachesis has ulcers in the throat. It has aphthous patches, it has red
and grey ulceration, it has deep ulceration. The tendency to ulceration
upon the margins of mucous membranes is peculiar to Lachesis. Also
ulceration upon the skin, where the circulation is feeble. It seems that



6o8


LACHESIS


the pain in the throat is particularly marked between the acts of swal-
lowing, and the pressure of the bolus going over the inflamed tonsils
relieves the pain. Always choking when swallowing, choking and gag-
ging in the throat. The cough is a choking cough and produces a sen-
sation of tickling. This is like the Bell cough. Bell antidotes a Lach.
cough, it has a cough so much like Lach. that no one can tell them apart.
Again the throat takes on extreme dryness in Lach., and this dryness is
without thirst, dryness with aversion to water. Much inclination to
swallow ; the tendency is to continuously swallow, yet it is painful.
Empty swallowing is more painfull than the swallowing of solids. Some
Lach. patients suffering from cardiac affections are annoyed with con-
striction of the throat, choking in the throat when anything warm is
swallowed, and sometimes when going into a warm room, choking and
palpitation of the heart. Tendency to chronic sore throat or recurrent
sore throat and ulceration with every recurring sore throat. Liquids,
of course, you will see, arc analogous to empty swallowing, and empty
swallowing causes more pain than the bolus which presses upon the
sore throat, because it is of the nature of a slight touch. The slight
touch increases the soreness and pain in the throat. Slight pressure of
the collar increases the pain in the throat. With the sore throat the
muscles and glands about tlie neck become painful, inflamed and swoll-
en, and very tender to the touch. With the sore throat, very com-
monly, there is pain in the base of the brain or in the back of the head,
and soreness of the muscles of the back of the neck, which is often re-
lieved by lying on the back and aggravated by lying on either side. If
you look into the throat it has a mottled, purplish appearance. Put all
these things together, with the copious flow of tenacious saliva, and
you will be able to manage cases of diphtheria that commence on the
left side and spread to the right, whether the membrane is scanty or
copious. Tonsilitis with suppuration of the tonsils, when the left tonsil
becomes inflamed and after a day or two the right one becomes inflamed
and swollen, and they both finally go on to suppuration, or when one
swells and suppurates and the other swells and suppurates. Diphther-
itic appearances of the throat, spreading from left to right. The
pharynx is full of thick, white, ropy mucus in the morning ; must hawk
out a mouthful of mucus in the morning.

The abdomen is distended with flatus. The abdomen is tympanitic
in typhoid condition, much rumbling in the distended abdomen. The
clothing cannot be tolerated, not even the slightest touch of the clothing,
and yet it may require hard pressure to bring out soreness that is deep
in the abdomen. This state is as it is in inflammation of bowels, ovaries
and uterus, the patient lies on the back with the clothing lifted from the
abdomen. Violent, labor-like pains, menstrual colic, present in typhoid,
in puerperal fever, in malignant scarlet fever, in the more malignant



LACHESIS


609


afPcctions of zymotic forms of the continued fever.

Lach. has a series of liver troubles with jaundice ; congestion of the
liver, inflammation of the liver, enlarged liver and the nutmeg liver.
Cutting like a knife in the region of the liver. Vomiting of bile ; vomit-
ing of everything taken into the stomach. Extreme nausea ; continuous
nausea witih jaundice. White stool. It has cured cases with gall stone.
“Cannot endure any pressure about the hypochondria.” In the chronic
state the sensitiveness of the skin is so great over the abdomen, and
about the waist and hips, that the wearing of the clothing creates pain,
great restlessness and uneasiness, the patient grows increasingly ner-
vous and finally goes into hysterics. Sensitiveness over the lower
abdomen ; can scarcely allow her clothes to touch her.

It seems strange at first reading that Lachesis can be such a common
remedy at the menstrual period. It is also laid down as a remedy for
the climacteric period. Now if you will study the cases of many
women at the climacteric period you will find that many of them have
the flushes of heat and the surgings in the head and the great circula-
tory disturbances that are found under Lachesis. This is also true of
the complaints, the headaches, etc., that come in women at the climac-
teric period and at the menstrual period. The Lachesis symptoms are
strong in women during menstruation. There is ^olent hj^ache,
jjoring pa in in the vertex, nausea and vorni ting during menses^

.Thg^J^scharge in the femaTe, either as a menstrual .flow or as a
hag morrhag e , ^ is black blood. Pain in the left ovarian region, or going
from left .to right. Induration of oiic or both ovaries. It has cured
suppuration of the ovaries. The uterine region, is very sensitive to
touch, to the slightest contact of the clothing ; in inflammation of the
ovaries, pains in the ovaries and uterus going from left to right. Pains
in the pelvis going upwards to the chest, sometimes a surging of pain
going upwards, grasping the throat. Labor pains surge up, with
clutching at the throat, or the labor pains cease suddenly, with clutching
at the throat, Ih<^jmcnstrual pains^ increase violently until reUeyed
by the flow . The menstrual sufferings are before and after the flowr
with a meliorati on during the flow. Tfle menst rual flow intermits one
day and then g oesln fr for 7^^ during..ihe.Jn^termissiQn^

is likely to be pain or headache .- Menorrhagia with chills at night and
flushes of heat in the daytime. During the menstrual period violent
headache, especially at such times as the flow slackens up. It is a
general featu re of Lachesis to be relieved by discharges. Catamenia^
flot^TButohe hour every day ; on stopping, violent pains follow in region
of left ovary, alternating with gagging and vomiturition.

It is especially useful at the menopause, because of the flushes of
heat. Uterine haemorrhage, fainting spells, suffocation in a warm
room ; orgasm of blood most violent. Complaints during pregnancy.

77



6io


LAUROCERASUS


Inflammation of the veins of the leg. Varicose veins, blue or purple,
extreme sensitiveness along the veins ; sensitive to the slightest touch,
though relieved by pressure.

The study of Lachesis is only a commentary on some of its important
parts.


LAUROCERASUS

The many strange constitutional symptoms indicate feeble circulation
and weak heart. Great general coldness, that is not ameliorated by
external warmth. It is like wrapping up a dead man. Yet if he ap-
proaches a warm stove nausea comes on. If he is in a warm room the
sweat breaks out on the forehead and the forehead is cold ; but if he
moves about slowly in the open air the sweat ceases and the forehead
warms up. Want of animal heat. Want of reaction. Remedies act
(Only as palliatives, act only as short acting remedies in constitutional
disease, or the symptoms partially subside but the patient does not react.
The patient docs not convalesce. It often cures the heartfailure due
to Digitalis in Old School hands, or when convalescence is attended
by weak heart if there is cold skin and external heat is objectionable.
It should be compared with Camph,, Am, c, and Secale, A prolonged
fainting spell ; twitching of the limbs, gasping for breath. Complaints
after deep sorrow or fright. Chorea after every excitement. Spells
of profound sleep, with snoring or stertorous breathing.. In the .spells
of .suffocation he must lie down (Psor.) but . the dry, hacking cough
com£s„ on as soon as he lies down.

Weakness of body and mind. Fainting. Motionless. Apprehensive-
ness.

Vertigo in the open air ; he must lie down.

Coldness of the forehead in a warm room, ameliorated in the open
air. Stupefying pains in the head, with pulsation. Stitching pains in
the head. Periodical paroxysms of aching pain under the frontal bone.
Sensation as if brain fell forward on stooping. Tension in the brain.
Headache is sometimes ameliorated by eating. The scalp itches.

Dim vision. Veil before the eyes. Objects larger.

The face is blue, sunken, bloated, and expressionless ; jaundiced ;
yellow spot. Formication of the face. Lockjaw.

Mouth and tongue dry. The tongue is dry, cold and numb ; stiff and
swollen.

Spasmodic contraction of throat and oesophagus ; drink rolls audibly
down the oesophagus and through the intestines.

Emptiness in stomach after eating {Dig) as if he were still hungry.
Violent thirst. Loathing of food. Nausea on coming near a warm
stove. Vomiting of food with the cough. Eructations, tasting like



LEDUM PALUSTRE


6u


bitter almonds. Violent pain in stomach, with cold skin. Coldness in
stomach and abdomen. Contractions like cramps in stomach and cut-
ting in abdomen. Pain in liver as though an abscess were forming.
Stitching pain in liver on pressure. Rumbling in bowels.

Diarrhoea, with green mucus, and green watery stools, with tenesmus.
Constipation, with difficult stool. It cures cholera infantum with green
watery stools when drinks gurgle down the oesophagus and there is
general coldness, blueness, and fainting spells.

The whole urinary apparatus is in a paralytic state. Suppression of
urine or retention, or urine passed in a very feeble stream. Involuntary
urination. Pain in stomach when passing urine. These urinary symp-
toms sometimes come with palpitation and suffocation, and fainting
spells, or other cardiac symptoms and Laurocerasus must be consulted.

Menses too frequent, profuse, thin, with tearing in vertex at night.
Uterine haemorrhage, with flow dark and clotted during climaxis.
Fainting spells with coldness during menses. Pain in sacrum during
menses.

Heart patients that often suffer much from constriction of the larynx
are helped by this remedy. Laryngismus stridulus.

Difficult breathing. Suffocation, oppression of chest, gasping in
heart complaints, ameliorated by lying down. Clutching at the heart
and palpitation. It has cured mitfal regurgitation many times.

Short, hacking, dry, nervous cdugk. Cardiac cough. Whooping-
cough in puny children when there is a history of feeble heart, blue
cold skin, and laryngeal spasm. Paralytic chest symptoms.

Irregular action of the heart, slow pulse, fluttering heart. Sitting
up causes gasping ; lying araeliorates the oppression. Feeble pulse,
cold blue surface, twitching of muscles of face and limbs. Slight exer-
tion aggravates all the vsymptoms, Cyanosis neonatorum. Burning in
chest on inspiration.

The veins of the hands are distended. Cold clammy feet and legs.
Painless paralysis of limbs. Stinging and tearing in limbs. Feet numb
from lying with limbs crossed,

LEDUM PALUSTRE

This remedy comes up well after the .study of Lachesis, for we find
in the pathogenesis many features similar to those in Lachesis, It
has the mottled aspect and the same puffed and bloated appearance
of the face. It is antidotal to Lachesis, to the poison of insects, to
the poison of Apis and to animal poisons.

Ledum is a remedy for the sui'geon, and is closely associated in
traumatism with Arnica and Hypericum, The sjnmptoms very much
resemble such as follow certain kinds of injury, for instance an injury



6|2


LEDUM PALUSTRE


from stepping on tacks, from puncturing with needles, wounds that
bleed scantily but are followed by pain, puffiness and coldness of the
part. Stepping on a nail and it pierces the sole of the foot or the
heel, or he receives such a wound in the palm of the hand from a
splinter, or he runs a splinter under the nail. If, after such punctured
wounds, the part becomes cold and then pale, paralyzed and mottled
think of Ledum. The horse sometimes steps on a nail. If that nail
goes through and strikes the margin of the coffin bone, tetanus will
follow. It is known to be almost sure death. Put Ledum on the
tongue of that horse and there will not be any trouble, for it prevents
such conditions.

When tetanus comes on from punctured wounds in the palms or
soles, or in other parts, think of Hypericum, or when you have a punc-
tured wound to treat, give Ledum at once and you will prevent
tetanus. When the finger nails have been torn, or the nerves in sentient
parts like the ends of the fingers have been torn and lacerated, Hyper-
icum becomes the remedy. For bruising of various parts, and when
the patient feels as if bruised all over, no matter how extensively he
is bruised. Arnica is generally the remedy. It may be said, for punc-
tured wounds study Ledum ; for lacerated wounds of sentient nerves,
study Hypericum; for bruises, study Arnica; for open lacerations and
cuts, study Calendula. The conditions that come from the external,
ought to be remedied to a great extent by external means. A solution
of Calendula is excellent in conditions that come from the external,
and it should be applied externally. When you have lacerated wounds
and cuts with knives or other sharp instruments, apply Calendula,
because the injury is external without internal effects. The symptoms
that arise from internal cause, treat with internal remedies, and symp-
toms that arise from external cause, when all that there is of the case
is external, treat locally ; in other words, for local causes use local
means, and for internal or dynamic causes, use internal means. Let
internal wrongs be treated by the homoeopathic remedy and external
or local conditions be treated by such soothing dressings as are most
comfortable. Always protect surfaces that are exposed, and raw, and
bleeding with something of a bland and superficial character. Wounds
must be dressed with as simple a means as possible, and there is no
simpler dressing than Calendula, one part to four or six of water.
The tincture will smart too much. Your open wounds will granulate
most beautifully under Calendula, and you will have no constitutional
effects. When the constitutional state is orderly and there is an open
injury let the constitution alone, but put on some soothing application
externally. In doing this there is no law to govern the action of the
physician. Air is an irritant to a raw part and will keep up an im-
necessary discharge of pus, even from a perfectly healthy sore.



LEDUM PALUSTRE


613


U*!. *>

Calendula will keep it protected. The sides of a cut must be drawn
together, and if it is perfectly tight it will heal itself by first inten-
tion. If it does not, then you may know there is a constitutional con-
dition that you must ferret out and find the remedy for. Local treat-
ment must then be suspended. These remedies that I have mentioned,
to a great extent, cover the management of wounds, and it is simple.
Anyone has sense enough to draw together and close up a yawning
wound, and to properly dress it. The muscles that naturally draw a
wound open have to be overcome by stitches or by strappings. They
do not belong to prescribing, they belong 10 the surgeon.

The Ledum patient is very often subject to what may be called con-
stitutional coldness, coldness to touch, coldness in the body and cold-
ness in the extremities with hot head, and again we see the other ex-
treme, where the whole body is overheated, and the head also is in a
state of great heat. There is throbbing and pulsating all over the
body ; the skin is purple or is too highly colored ; he wants the covers
all oflE at night. It is not uncommon to hear a patient, who has a
Ledum headache, say that she wants the head out in the cold air,
wants to put it out of the window, does not want any covering upon
the head ; delights to bathe it with very cold water.

Ledum has a bloated condition of ;he hands, face, and feet ; bloated
and purple from the knees down in certain dropsical conditions. With
this purple, mottled, bloated condition from the knees to the feet the
swelling as big as the skin will allow, and the pain excruciating. The
only relief that patient gets is by sitting, with the feet in a tub of ice
cold water. I remember the first time I ever saw this in a patient.
He was an old syphilitic, whose nasal bones had been eaten out by
syphilis, and his nose was a flabby piece of skin ; it had no stiflening
in it. He was a drunkard, and was extremely abusive to his family
when drunk. He had been for several years unwilling to work, hav-
ing lost his ambition, and he would sit in the house and allow his wife
to wait upon him. He had practically become a tramp, only he could
not tramp, for tliis dropsical condition had come on and his feet were
so badly swollen and sensitive that he sat in the house day after day.
When I first saw him he had before him a good-sized old-fashioned
wash-tub, and there he sat with the ice water two-thirds up to his
knees and pieces of ice floating around on the top of the water, which
he liked to have coming in contact with the skin. When that ice was
out he would put in more. The wife described his sufferings by say-
ing he '‘suffered agonies something dreadful.” Ledum took his feet
out of the ice water so that he never used it afterwards. It caused
the purpleness to disappear, the bloating went out of his feet, and he
quit drinking. Ledum cured him of his syphilitic trouble, and ho
never had a return of that original state. Pulsatilla and Ledum are



6i4 ledum palustre

the two principal remedies that want the feet in very cold water. But
Ledum suited that man.

Where there are inflamed surfaces the tendency in Ledum is to
bleed, and the blood is black. Ledum patients are full-blooded and
plethoric, of a robust character. Such plethoric patients bleed easily,
have red faces ; they are fleshy, strong and of robust constitution.
Haemorrhages sometimes occur in the chamber of the eye, haemorrhage
of the nose, haemorrhage in cavities, bloody urine.

Old painful ulcers that spread, that are mottled round about, in a
constitution that always wants to be cold. The ulcers are relieved by
cold.

This remedy is of a rheumatic nature, rheumatic and gouty. It is
a gouty medicine, having complaints in persons who suffer from gout,
and have chalk stones in their joints, deposits in the wrists, fingers and
toes. The deposits go from below upwards. The gouty joints be-
come suddenly inflamed and are relieved by cold. Ledum especially
singles out the knee ; it is suitable in old prolonged cases of inflamma-
tion of the knee-joint, of rheumatic knee-joint. You will find such
patients sitting with the joint exposed to the cold, fanning the joint,
or putting evaporating lotions upon the joint, such as chloroform, or
ether, which give relief to the joints while evaporating to dryness.
Rheumatic and gouty extremities with pain and swelling ; pain worse
from motion, worse at night and from warmth of bed ; better from
cold applications with copious pale urine. The pains and swelling go
upwards and the heart becomes affected.

The face I have already described as puffy or bloated like the Lache-
sis face. It is a besotted face and looks very much like the face of an
old drunkard. Ledum counteracts the effect of whiskey, and takes
away the appetite for whiskey. Ledum is to whiskey what Caladium
is to the smoking habit. You can break patients from the habit of
smoking so that they go to the other extreme, and have an aversion
to it.

It has ei^sipelas, as you might expect. It has a blue, mottled and
puffed and sometimes oedematous appearance. It takes on an acute
character and becomes burning. Phlegmonous erysipelas of any part
of the body, but particularly of the face, or the injured part.

You might naturally suppose that a medicine that has such a gouty
nature in it would have more or less kidney symptoms. '‘Urination
frequent, quantity diminished or increased, stream often stops during
the flow.” “Burning in the urethra after urinating.” “Itching red-
ness and discharge of pus.” It has red sand in the urine as marked
as Lycopodium, It has great quantities of sandy deposit of various
colors. When the patient is feeling at his best, there are great quan-
tities of sandy deposits passing away. When there is little deposit in



UEDUM PALU8TRE


6iS

the urine, the gouty deposits in the joints become marked, and he does
not feel so well. It has another symptom that was verified by Lippe:
Copious clear, colorless urine, light in specific gravity and from its
being light or deficient of salts in the urine we have an aggravation
of the gouty manifestations. Remember, that the rheumatic tendency
spreads upwards from the lower extremities, from the circumference
to the centre.

“Menstruation too early, too profuse, bright red ; absence of vital
heat.” Great coldness of the body at this time, yet the patient wants
the cold air. Copious menstrual flow. Old gouty subjects, with mot-
tled face with the puffincss that is not cedema, simply a venous stasis,
with copious menstrual flow, with great pain during menstruation.
The uterus is extremely sensitive to touch, and the pelvic organs are
so sensitive that any deep touch becomes painful to the patient, Dys-
mcnorrhoea in gouty subjects. It turns the constitution into order
and prevents the after-formation of gout. When such cases are very
deep-seated, the uterine troubles will be cured in middle life, and the
gouty appearance will come separately. The better the internal is, in
an incurable disease, the worse the external becomes, and, when tlris
is so the external trouble is essential to health, and so long as the ex-
ternal manifestations arc in the extremities, and the joints are being
increasingly affected, so long the internal is in a state of order. When
the remedy works in that way, do not change it and try to get some-
thing that will drive the external hway. So long as the patient is im-
proving. and the external is growing worse, that is the right direction.
Ledum acts in this direction. Its tendency is to make complaints go
away from the centre, for its complaints begin in the circumference
and go towards the centre. It is sometimes impossible to manage a
gouty patient without giving him some sort of explanation. Lycopo-
diunl also keeps conditions coming to the surface. It will send them
back to their own place in the externals when they have a tendency to
go in. Lycopodium often causes a return of the red sand in the urine.

“Emaciation of suffering parts.” A nerve is injured by a puncture
and a slight infection takes place, so that the wound becomes con-
gested, with a mottled, cedematous appearance, and the part becomes
cold, just such a condition as Ledum will cure. The nerve that sup-
plies that part takes on an ascending neuritis, pains shoot along the
nerve, the muscles that are supplied by that nerve dwindle and the
part withers. We have in Pulsattlla a similar state. “The diseased
limb withers.”



6i6


LILIUM TIGRINUM


LILIUM TIGRINUM

So far as proved Lilium tigrinum has shown itself adapted to the
complaints of women. It is especially suited to hysterical women,
who suffer from uterine troubles, cardiac troubles and various nervous
manifestations ; suitable to a woman who is extremely irritable, full
of fanciful notions, insanity, religious melancholy and imaginations,
with cardiac affections and prolapsus. These conditions often alter-
nate ; when the mental symptoms are most marked the physical symp-
toms are relieved. The “dragging down'* that is associated with pro-
lapsus seems to be a draging down ficm the region of the stomach,
and even sometimes from the throat. A bearing down, as if all the
interior organs w'cre dragging dowm. With this state of extreme re-
laxation there is great fidgetiness and most marked of all, palpitation.
She can lie only on the back, and is aggravated from lying on either
side. From every emotion the heart flutters, and is irregular and ex-
citable. These mental symptoms and heart symptoms and uterine
symptoms often rotate or alternate, and constitute the principal fea-
tures.

She can hardly speak a decent w'ord to anybody. She will snap
even when spoken to kindly. She is so irritable that her friends can-
not pacify her. Even consolation aggravates. When spoken to she
is irritable. She lies awake nights, and is tormented either by fanat-
ical religious ideas, or a religious melancholy, and seems inclined to
dwell upon insane ideas concerning religion and modes of life, un-
reasonable, illogical and fanciful. Has wrong ideas concerning
everything. Receives wrong impressions and everything i4 inverted.
It is impossible to please her. Now these states are present with a
state of irritability of the sexual organs, nymphomania ; violent sex
ual excitement associated with spasms, with palpitation, with sweats,
with periods of exhaustion. She sits alone and broods over imagi-
nary troubles, and when spoken to is crabbed. “Ideas not clear ; they
become more so if she exercises her will." ‘‘Makes mistakes in writ-
ing, in speaking, cannot apply the mind steadily ; tormented about her
salvation."

The patient tries to describe an indescribable feeling by saying she
has a “crazy feeling" in the head, as if the ideas scattered, and the
more she attempts to think rationally the more irrational she becomes.
The more she attempts to think of something the less likely she is to
recall it. When putting the mind upon something else it comes back
again. This remedy has all kinds of symptoms from sexual excesses
in overwrought and nervous women, from sexual excitement, causing
confusion of mind with palpitation.

It says in the text: “Listless, inert, yet does not want to sit still/'



LILIUM TIGRINUM


617


This patient will sit still and brood and think over the past, and when
spoken to will jump up and run hastily and excitedly and slam the
door without any cause ; when spoken to kindly by members of the
family, or a friend, it seems that she will go wild. A patient once
under an aggravation from this remedy said to me: “I was spoken to
to-day in a street car, and I was so mad I wanted to fling something
at his head.’" She was thinking over something about herself, and did
not want to be disturbed. It is a violent state of temper, a violent
state of irritability, a loss of balance. She says: ‘Tt seems as if I
must fly when spoken to or disturbed.” When coming in contact with
her friends she has these feelings. The contact seems to arouse her
out of a state of lassitude and quietness. Strange things occur in this
remedy. The sensations described in the text are so vague and so
varied that you can see that it is an effort on the part of the provers
to describe what they feel. The sensations are numerous and inde-
scribable.

This patient very commonly is a warm-blooded patient. She is like
the Pulsatilla patient ; warm-blooded, wants a cool room, likes to walk
in the open air, except at times when the prolapsus is aggravated by
walking. The head is generally relieved by moving about in the open
air, > when walking in the open air. The headache and most of the
complaints are relieved from cold, or from a cool room, and aggra-
vated from a warm room. The dyspnma comes on in a warm room.
The patient suffocates in a crowded room, in the theatre, in church,
like Apis, Iodine, Kali i,, Lyc, and Puls.

A crazy feeling comes up from the back of the head to the top of
the head. What that is only one that feels it can describe. It is de-
scribed sometimes as a tingling, or an electric sensation. A slight
tingling comes up the back of the head and goes to the top, and is
associated with vertigo. When you come to sift that thought it really
brings nothing to mind. Very often you have to get those things
clinically, and think about them to get at the idea. The pains in the
forehead arc very marked, and they are associated with great disturb-
ance of vision, a loss of vision, the room looks dark, or the eyes are
unable to focus. Nervous disturbance of vision, photophobia, twitch-
ing of the lids, jerking about the eyeballs, and inflammation of the
mucous membrane of the eyes, of the lids and balls, conjunctivitis.
Very often with the complaints of the head the eyes are turned in, a
convergent strabismus, or there is threatened syncope, with the pain
in the forehead. By all these things mentioned it may be known what
an over-sensitive, extremely nervous, hysterical person the Lilium tig.
patient must be. These things are commonly associated with patients
who are extremely nervous, who have fluttering of the heart, who
have pain down the spine, and more or less prolapsus, with a great

78



6i8


LILIUM nCRINUM


sense of dragging down. When one condition is present, the other
is commonly absent ; they alternate, or they may exist all together.

‘‘Wild feeling in the head, as tho' she would go crazy, with pain in
the right iliac region.’' These provers seemed to like the expression,
“crazy feeling in the head, as if she would go crazy.” That crazy
feeling is a confusion of mind, as if the mind were quite unable to
concentrate itself. That is what is interpreted by this crazy feeling
the patients have. It is sometimes like a vertigo, as if things were
going round, or as if she would lose her mind. Then it comes again
as a terrible, tearing headache, described as a crazy headache in the
forehead. Headache in which there is confusion of the mind, or as
if the mind would go crazy.

The abdomen, stool, urinary and sexual organs, furnish us a field
for the use of this medicine. The whole abdominal viscera seem to
be dragging down from the stomach. The patient wants to hold up
the abdomen, pendulous abdomen. It seems as if the pelvic organs
would protrude. The patient must lie down, wants to wear a T band-
age. Wants to grasp the abdomen from the sides and lift up for
support. It is a sensation of weakness or bearing down in the pelvis
as if everything were coming into the world through the vagina.

This remedy has a very urgent diarrhcea, driving out of bed in the
morning ; he must make great haste. You may get this confused with
Sulphur, because Lilium tig. has great heat in the head, emptiness in
the stoniach, and great burning of the palms and soles. It has also
a dysentery that you will hardly be able to distinguish from Merc,
cor., so marked is the tenesmus, mucus and blood. The .stool is merely
mucus mingled with blood, and the tenesmus is as great and the burn-
ing in the anus as marked as in Merc. cor. It is especially suited for
those attacks of dysentery that come on as an occasional chronic mani-
festation in nervous patients such as I have described. Now, do not
think that because this patient is nervous that she is weak, or lilipu-
dan, or lean ; for it is especially suitable for those with full veins ;
apparently plethoric, full blooded, fleshy, rotund women who are very
nervous, and especially at the change of life. Recurrent dysenteric
attacks with every cold in those who suffer from pelvic and abdom-
inal relaxation, mental irritability as described, palpitation and flutter-
ing of the heart, with nervous constitutions. You do not see Merc,
cor. in such a picture. If it were a dysentery alone I would not be
able to tell which it was. All of these dysenteric manifestations have
been left out of the Guiding Symptoms, yet I have seen them verified
over and over. Again, it has a most inveterate and troublesome con-
stipation.

It has also a tenesmus of the bladder and rectum. Teasing to urin-
ate, as well as urging to stool. Sits a long time with much urging.



LYCOPODIUM


6ig


and after long straining no stool. Frequent urging, with a sensa-
tion as if a ball were in the rectum. When the fundus of the uterus
is turned back to the rectum it gives a sensation as if the rectum were
full of faeces ; it brings on urging to stool and the patient will sit and
strain, and the tenesmus of the bladder and rectum is unbearable.
Constant urging to stool, and no stool in the rectum. You will be
astonished to know that the remedy that is indicaied with such symp-
toms will relieve the patient of all distress in a short time. But you
ask, will this remedy put the uterus right again ? Well, the patient
will get relief of her sufferings and will not feel this uncomfortable
state after the administration of the remedy. The bowels become
regular, the disturbance of micturition is relieved and the patient
gradually returns to health and later the uterus will be found in place.

“Pressure in the rectum, with almost constant desire to go to stool.’'
Lilium tigrinum has cured the most inveterate protruding haemor-
rhoids with burning. “Haemorrhoids after deliveiy, sore to touch,
bearing down after stool as if all would protrude from the vagina.”
It does not mean that we shall apply that simply to haemorrhoids that
come after delivery, but it has cured haanorrhoids in such a constitu-
tion, and not only haemorrhoids, but relaxed uterus and vagina.

A paralytic relaxation is present in all the abdominal tissues. I
have mentioned the uterine symptoms incidentally in connection with
other parts. “Menses scanty, flow only when moving about.” This
will make you think of Puls,, the menses being so scanty, and because
the Puls, patient is of similar - nervous temperament. Puls, has
scanty menstruation and relief in the open air. It has also much
dragging down in the pelvis, though not so extreme as a rule as in
this medicine. But there is much in this medicine quite different from
Puls,

The come the heart symptoms. “Seems as if the heart were
grasped or squeezed in a vise, hard, as if violently grasped.” “Con-
strictive pain in the heart.” “In fresh air, chilly, but vertigo is >.”

Pain in the back and down the spine ; irritable and sensitive spine
with trembling. It competes very closely with Platina,

LYCOPODIUM

Lycopodium is an antipsoric, anti-syphilitic and anti-sycotic, and its
sphere is broad and deep. Though classed among the inert sub-
stances, and thought to be useful only for rolling up allopathic pills,
Hahnemann brought it into use and developed its power by attenua-
tion. It is a monument to Hahnemann. It enters deep into the life,
and ultimate changes in the soft tissues, blood-vessels, bones, liver,
heart, joints. The tissue changes are striking; there is tendency to-



620


LYCOPODIUM


necrosis, abscesses, spreading ulcers and great emaciation. There is
a predominance of symptoms on the right side of the body, and they
arc likely to travel from nghj to i^ft or from abo ve downward,
from Jhead to chest. The patient emaciates above, especially about the
neck, while the lower extremities are fairly well nourished. Exter-
nally there is sensitiveness to a warm atmosphere when there are head
and spine symptoms. The head symptoms also are worse from the
w^armt h of the be d . and^frmn^heatT and wors e from getting he a ted by.
exertion. The patient is sensitive to cold and there is a marked lack
^oF^aT heat, aiiT worse in general from cold and cold air and from
cold food and drinks. The pains arc ameliorated from warmth except
of the head and spine. Exertion aggravates the Lycopodium patient
in general. lie becomes puffed and distressed, and dyspnoea is in-
creased by exertion. He cannot climb, he cannot walk fast. The
cardiac symptoms are increased as well as the dyspnoea by becoming
heated from exertion. The inflamed parts are sometimes relieved
from the application of heat. The throat symptoms are generally
relieved from the application of heat, from drinking hot tea or warm!
soup. The stomach pains arc often relieved by zvarm drinks and tak-
ing warm things into the stomach. Nervous excitement and prostra-
tion are marked.

In the rheumatic pains and other sufferings the Lyc. patient is
ameliorated by motion. He is extremely restless, must keep turning,
and if there is inflammation with the aches and pains
better from. of ^e bed and relieved from motion, and he
will keep tossing all night. He turns and gets into a new place and
thinks he can sleep, but the restlessness continues all night. He wants
cool air, wants to be in a cool place with head symptoms. It is true
that the headache is worse from motion enough to warm the patient
up, but not from the motion itself. The headache is worse from lying
down and from the warmth of the room^ and better in cold air and
from motion until he has moved and exercised sufficiently to become
heated, when the headache becomes worse. That is quite an impor-
tant thing to remember concerning Lycopodium, because it may con-
stitute a distinguishing feature. The head symptoms are worse from
warm wraps and warm bed.

The complaints of Lyc. are likely to be worse at a fixed time, viz.,
^rom four till ei^ht o^clock i n the, evening. An exacerbation comes
on in the acutFconipIaints and often in the chronic complaints at this
time. The Lyc. chill and fever is worse at this time, and in typhoid
and scarlet fever the patient is especially worse from 4-8 p. m. In
gouty attacks, in rheumatic fevers, in inflammatory conditions, in
pneumonia, in acute catarrhs, which are complaints especially calling
for Lycopodium, it is always well to think of this remedy when there



LYCOPODIUM


621


is a decisive aggravation from 4-8 p. m.

T he. Lycop odium patient is flatulent, distended like a drum, so that
he can hardly brelitFe. TEe^dla^Ti'ragm is pushed upwards, infring-
ing upon the lung and heart space, so that he has palpitation, faint-
ness and dyspnoea. It is not uncommon to hear a Lycop. patient say,
‘‘Everything I eat turns into wind.” After a mere mouthful he be-
comes flatulent and distended, so that he cannot cat any more. He
says a mouthful fills him up to the throat. While the abdomen is dis-
tended he is so nervous that he cannot endure any noise. The noise
of the crackling of paper, ringing of bells or slamming of doors goes
through him and causes fainting, like Ant. crud., Borax and
mur. These general conditions go through all complaints, acute and
chronic. There is an excitable stage of the whole sensoriiim in which
everything disturbs. Little things annoy and distress.

The Lyc. patient cannot eat oysters ; they make him sick. Oysters
seem to poison the Lyc. patient, just as onions are a poison to the
Thuja patient. The Oxalic acid patient cannot eat strawberries. If
you ever have a patient get sick from eating strawberries, tomatoes or
oysters, and you have no homoeopathic remedies at hand, it is a good
thing to remember that cheese will digest strawberries or tomatoes or
oysters in a few minutes.

The skin idcerates. There are painful ulcers, sloughing ulcers be-
neath the skin, abscesses beneath the skin, cellular troubles. The
chronic ulcerations are indolent ivith false granualtions, painful, burn-
ing, stinging and smarting, ofteA relieved by applying cooling things
and aggravated by warm poultices. It is somewhat a general in Lyco-
podium that warm poultices and warmth ameliorates ; warm applica-
tions ameliorate the pain in ihc knee, the suppurating condition and
the gouty troubles. In an unusually warm bed, and in a warm room
hives come out. The hives come out cither in nodules or in long and
irregular stripes, especially in the heat, and itch violently. Lyc.
has eri^tions upon the skin, with violent itching. Vesicles and scaly
eruptions, moist eruptions and dry eruptions, furfuraccous eruptions,
eruptions about the lips, behind the ears, under the wings of the nose
and upon the genitals ; fissured eruptions, bleeding fissures like salt
rheum upon the hands. The skin becomes thick and indurated. The
sites of old boils and pustules become indurated and form nodules that
remain a long time. The skin looks unhealthy, and it wdll slough eas-
ily ; wounds refuse to heal. Surface wounds suppurate as if they had
contained splinters, and this suppuration burrows along under the skin.
Ulcers bleed and form great quantities of thick, yellow, olfensive,
green pus. Chancres and chancroids often find their simillimum in
Lyc.

The Lyc. state when deciphered shows feebleness throughout. A



622


LYCOPODIUM


very low state of the arteries and veins, poor tone and poor circula-
tion. Numbness in spots. Emaciation of single members. Dead-
ness of the fingers and toes. Staggering and inability to make use of
the limbs. Clumsiness and awkwardness of the limbs. Trembling of
the limbs.

The mental symptoms of Lyc. are numerous. He is tired. He has
a tired state of the mind, a chronic fatigue, forgetfulness, aversion to
undertaking anything new, aversion to appearing in any new role,
aversion to his own work. Dreads lest something will happen, lest he
will forget soirfefliing. A continually increasing dread of appearing
in public comes on, yet a horror, at times, of solitude. Often in pro-
fessional men, like lawyers and ministers, who have to appear In” puh-
lic, there is a feeling of incompetence, a feeling of inability to under-
take his task, although he has been accustomed to it for many years,
A lawyer cannot think of appearing in court ; he procrastinates, he
Relays until he is obliged to appear, because he Jias a Tear “IHat he will
smmble ,fhat Ke will make mistakes, that he^ill forget, and yet when
he uncKH^H Jil^^ through with ease ~and comfort. Ihis is a

"stnEhg feature also of Silicea. No medicines have this fear so
marked as these two.

Lyc. also has a religious insanity, which has a mild and simple be-
ginning, a matter of melancholy. This religious melancholy grows
greater and greater until he sits and broods. He has very often aver-
sion to company, and yet he dreads solitude. -*^Dread of men and
dread of solitude ; irritability and melancholy.’' This dread of men
is not always a state of dread in women. It is a dread of people, and
when that is fully carried out in the Lyc patient you see that she
dreads the presence of new persons, or the coming in of friends or
visitors ; she wants to be only with those that are constantly surround-
ing her ; does not want to be entirely alone ; wants to feel that there
is somebody else in the house, but does not want company ; does not
want to be talked to, or forced to do anything ; does not want to make
any exertion, yet at times when forced to do so she is relieved. "Taci-
turnity, desires to be alone.” Now, let us follow that out a little
further. The taciturnity is because the patient does not want to talk,
wants to keep silent, yet, as I have said already, very glad to feel there
is somebody else in the house and that she is not alone. She is per-
fectly willing to remain in a little room by herself, so that she is prac-
tically alone, yet not in solitude. If there were two adjacent rooms
in the house you would commonly find the Lyc. patient go into one
and stay there, but very glad to have somebody in the other.

The Lycopodium patient often weeps in the act of receiving a friend
or meeting an acquaintance. An unusual sadness with weeping comes
over this patient on receiving a gift. At the slightest joy she weeps,



LYCOPODIUM 623

hence we see that the Lyc. patient is a very nervous, sensitive, emo-
tional patient. Here it is: ‘'l^nsitive, even cries when thanked/'

When lying in bed suffering from the lower forms of fevers, there
is delirium and even unconsciousness. He picks at imaginary things
in the air, sees flies and all sorts of little things flying in the air. “Ex-
cessively merry and laughs at simplest things.” A condition of in-
sanity. “Despondent.” The Lyc. patient wakes up in the morning
with sadness. There is sadness and gloom. The world may come to
an end, or the whole family may die, or the house ^^ay burn up.
There seems to be nothing cheering, the future looks black. After
moving about a while, this passes off. This state precedes conditions
of insanity, and finally a suicidal state comes, an aversion to life. Sec
how this remedy takes hold of the will and actually destroys man’s
will to live. That which is first in man is his desire to be, to exist,
and to be something, if ever so small. When that is destroyed, we
see what a wonderful thing has been destroyed. The very man him-
self wills then not to be. It is a perversion of everything that makes
the man, the destruction of his will. “Apprehcnsivencss. difficult
breathing and fearfulness.” “Anxious thoughts as if about to die.”
“Want of self-confidence, indecision, timidity, resignation.” Loss of
confidence in himself and in everything. “Misanthropic, flies even
from his own children.” “Distrustful, suspicious and fault finding.”
“Oversensitive to pain ; patient is beside himself.”

Lyc. is subject to periodical headaches, and headaches connected
with- gastric troubles. If be goes beyond his dinner hour a sick head-
ache will come on. He must eat with regularity or he will have the
headache which he is subject to. This is somewhat like a Cactus
headache. Cactus has a congestive headache which becomes ex-
tremely violent with flushed face if he does not eat at the regular
rime. One distinguishing feature is that with the Lycopodium head-
ache, if he eats something, the headache is better while the Cactus
headache is worse from eating. Lyc. and especially Phos, and Psor-
inum have headaches with great hunger. At or about the beginning
of the attack there is a faint all-gone hungry feeling which eating does
not satisfy. Such is the nature of Phosphorus and Psorinum when
the appetite and headache are associated. The Lycopodium headaclie
is < from heat, from the warmth of the bed, and from lying down,
> from cold, from the cold air. and from having the windows open.
Lean, emaciated boys are subject to prolonged pains in the head.
Every time this little fellow takes cold he has a prolonged, throbbing,
congestive headache, and from day to day and from month to month
he becomes more emaciated, especially about the face and neck. This
same trouble is present when a narrow-chested boy has a dry, teasing
cough, without expectoration, and emaciates about the neck and face.



624


LYCOPODIUM


This remedy is especially suitable in these withered lads, with a dry
cough or prolonged headache. In children who wither after pneu-
monia or bronchitis, emaciate about the face and neck, take cold on
the slightest provocation, suffer with headache from being heated,
have nightly headaches, and a state of congestion that affects the mind
more or less, in whicli they rouse out of sleep in confusion. The
little one screams out in sleep, awakes frightened, looks wild, does not
know the father and mother, or nurse or family until after a few
moments, when he seems to be able to collect his senses and then
realizes where he is and lies down to sleep again. In a little while
he wakes up again in a fright, looks strange and confused. That re-
peats itself. The headaches are throbbing and pressing, as if the head
would burst ; but this is not so important as the manner in which they
come on, the circumstance of their cause, the things that the child
docs and the fact that they arc better from cold, worse from noise and
talking, worse from 4 to 8 p. m., and he emaciates from above down-
ward. These are more important than the (juality of the pain that tho
patient feels, but if he describes the quality of the pain it is spoken of
as a throbbing, pressing, bursting or as a fulness.

Upon the scalp we find eruptions mj)atchcs, smooth patches with
the hair off. Patches- on the face and eczematous eruptions behind the
cars, bleeding and oozing a watery fluid, sometimes yellowish watery.
The eczema spreads from l>ehind ihc cars up over the ears and to tl\Q
jicaip. Lyc is a vciy important remedy to study in eczema of the
ipfant. Eczema in a lean, hungry, withering child with more or less
head trouble, such as has been described, with a moist oozing behind
the ears, red sand in the urine, face looking wrinkled, a dry teasing
cough, in a child that kicks the covers off, a child whose left foot is
cold and tlic other warm, with capricious appetite, eating much, with
unusual hunger at times and great thirst, and yet losing steadily, will
often be cured by Lyc. It will throw out a greater amount of erup-
tion at first, but this will subside finally and the child will return to
health. The head in general is closely related to one symptom, viz.,
red sand in the urine. A long as the red sand is plentiful, the patient
is free from these congestive headaches, but when the urine becomes
pale and free from the red pepper deposit ; then comes the bursting,
pressing headache, lasting for days. It might be said that this is a
uraemic headache ; but it does not matter what you call it, if the symp-
toms are present the remedy will be justified. In old gouty constitu-
tions, when the headache is most marked, the gout in the extremities
will be > and vice versa. The headaches is present only in the absence
of pain in the extremities. Again, when there is a copious quantity
lof red sand in the urine the gouty state, either in the head or extremi-
ties, will be absent, but whenever he takes cold the secretion seems to



LYCOPODIUM


625


slacken up with an < of the pain. There is another feature of the
Lyc. headache related to catarrhal states. The headache is < when
the catarrh is slacked up hy an acute cold. The Lyc subject often
suffers from thick, yellow discharge from the nose. The nose is filled
with yellow, green crusts, blown out of the nose in the morning and
hawked out of the throat. Now, when the patient takes cold the thick
discharge to a great extent ceases, and he commences to sneeze and
has a watery discharge. Then comes on a Lyc. headache, with great
suffering, with pressing pains, with hunger, and finally the coryza
passes away, and the thick yellow discharge returns and the headache
subsides.

We have many eye symptoms in Lycopodium, but most prominent
are the catarrhal affections of the eyes. The symptoms are so numer-
ous, they describe almost any catarrhal condition of the eyes, so that
you cannot discriminate upon the eye symptoms alone. Inflammatory
conditions with copious discharge, with red eyes, ulceration of the con-
junctiva and lids, and granular lids.

For the ears Lyc. becomes an important remedy, because this self-
same emaciating child, with the wrinkled countenance and dry cough,
has had, since an attack of .scarlet fever, a discharge from the ears,
thick, yellow and offensive, with loss of hearing. If the suitable
remedy be given in a case of scarlet fever, there will be no ear trouble
left, because ear troubles do not .necessarily belong to scarlet fever.
They are not a part of scarlet fev#r, but are dependent on the consti-
tutional state of the child. Lyc. has also most painful eruptions of
the ears, otitis media, abscess in the ear, associated with eczema about
the ears and behind the ears.

The nose .symptoms I have only partly described in association with
the head. The trouble often begins in infancy. The little infant will
lie at first with a peculiar rattling breathing through the nose, and
finally it will breathe only through the mouth, as the nose is obstructed.
This goes on for days and months. The child breathes only through
the mouth, and when it cries it has the shrill tone, such as is found
when the nose is plugged up. If you look you will see the nose is
filled up with a purulent matter and hanging down the throat is a
muco-purulent discharge. Much stuffing up of the nose is a chronic
state of Lyc. The child will go on with this trouble until it forms
into great crusts, yellow, sometimes blackish, sometimes greenish, and
the nose bleeds. It is most useful in those troublesome catarrhs asso-
ciated with headaches ; in such patients as lose flesh about the neck.
It may seem strange and unaccountable that Lyc. can cause emaciation
about the neck and shrivelling of the face when the lower limbs are
in a very good state of preservation. In old chronic catarrhs of adults
they must keep continually blowing the nose. He cannot breathe

79



628


LYCOPODIUM


burning in ulcers and cancer ; pains immediately after eating ; vomit-
ing of bile, coffee ground vomit, black, inky vomit. Under Lyc. ap-
parently malignant cases have their life prolonged. The case is so
modified that, instead of culminating in a few months, the patient may
last for years. Right hypochondrium swollen as in liver troubles.
Pain in liver, recurrent bilious attacks with vomiting of bile. He is
subject to gall stone colic. After Lyc. the attacks come less fre-
quently, the bilious secretion become normal and the gall stones have
a spongy appearance as though being dissolved. '^Tjyc. pati'^htS^ are
Hways helching ; they have eructations that are sour and acrid like
strong acid burning the pharynx. “Sour stomach,'’ ^sour vomiting,
flatus, distension and pain after eating, with a sense of fulness. Aw-
ful goneness,'' or weakness, in stomach, not relieved by eating
(Digit,), The stomach is worse by cold drinks, and often relieved
by warm drinks. In the stomach and intestines there is a great com-
motion, noisy rumbling, rolling of flatus as though fermentation were
going on. Lyc., China and Carbo veg, are most flatulent remedies
and should be compared. The stomach symptoms are worse or
brought on from cold drinks, beer, coffee or fruit, and a diarrhoea fol-
lows. Old chronic dyspeptics, emaciated, wrinkled, tired and angular
patients, everything eaten turns to wind. Lycopodium is useful in old
tired patients with f^ble reaction and feebleness of ^all the functions,
with a tendency to run down and not convalesce.

This patient has most troublesome constipation. He goes for days
without any desire, and although the rectum is full there is no urging.
Inactivity of intestinal canal. Ineffectual urging to stool. Stool hard,
difficult, small and incomplete. The first part of the stool is hard and
difficult to start, but the last part in soft or thin and gushing following
by faintness and weakness. Lyc. patients have diarrhoea and all kinds
of stool. So you will see from reading the text that the character-
istic of Lyc. is not in the stool. Any kind of diarrhoea, if the other
Lyc. symptoms are present, will be cured by Lyc. It has troublesome
haemorrhoids, but they are nondescript. Any kind of haemorrhoids
may be cured by Lyc. if the flatulence, the stomach symptoms, the

mental symptoms, and the general symptoms of Lyc. are present, be-

cause the haemorrhoidal symptoms are numerous.

The kidneys furnish any symptoms and may be the key to Lyco-
podium in many instances. There seems to be the same inactivity in
the bladder as in the rectum. Though he strain ever so much, he
must wait a long time for the urine to pass. It is slow to flow, and

flows in a feeble stream. The urine is often muddy with brick dust,

or red sand deposits, or on stirring it up it looks like the sediment of
fermenting cider. We find this state in febrile conditions. In acute
stages of disease; where the red sand appears copiously, Lyc. is often



LYCOPODIUM


629


the remedy. This is a very prominent symptom. In chronic symp-
toms when the patient feels best the red sand is found in the urine
Lyc. has retention of urine and suppression of urine. It has ‘‘wetting
of the bed’’ in little ones, involuntarily micturition in sleep, involuntary
micturition in typhoids and low fevers. A marked feature of Lyc.
and one of the most prominent of all remedies, is polyuria during the
night. He must arise many times at night and pass large quantities
of urine, although in the daytime the urine is normal. Enormous
quantities of urine, very clear and of light specific gravity,

Male sexual organs. One of the most prominent remedies in inv
potency. Persons of feeble vitality, overwrought persons, overtired
persons, with feeble genital organs, seldom need Phosphorus, but
Lycopod. is a typical remedy where the young man lias abused him-
self by secret vices and has become tired out in his spine, brain and
genital organs. If this patient makes up his mind that he will live a
somewhat decent life and marries, he finds that he is impotent sexu-
ally, that he is not able to obtain erections, or that the ereciions arc
too feeble, or too short, and that he is not a man.

Lyc. has inflamation of the mucous membrane of the urethra, with
a gonorrhoeal discharge. It is anti-sycotic and has troublesome
fig warts upon the male and female genitals. ‘ Moist condylomata on
the penis, enlargement of the prostate gland.”

It is a great friend of the woipan in inflammation and neuralgia of
the ovaries) and in inflammation , of the uterus. The neuralgia espe-
cially affects the right ovary, with a tendency to the left. Inflamma-
tion of the ovaries, when the right is more affected than the left. It
has cured cystic tumors of the right ovary.

Lycopodium produces and cures dryness in the vagina in which
coition becomes very painfid. Burning in the vagina during and after
coition. It has disturbance of menstruation. Absence or suppression
of menses for many months, the patient being withered, declining,
pale and sallow, becoming feeble. It seems that she has not the vital-
ity to menstruate. It is also suitable in girls at puberty when the time
for the first menstrual flow to appear has come, but it does not come.
She goes on to 15, 16, 17 or 18 without development, the breasts do
not enlarge, the ovaries do not perform their functions. When the
symptoms agree Lyc. establishes a reaction, the breasts begin to grow,
the womanly bearing begins to come, and the child becomes a woman.
It has a wonderful power for developing, and in that respect it is ^'el7
much like Calc, phos, '‘Discharge of flatus from the vagina.” “Va-
rices of the genitals.'’

In the respiratory organs Lyc. furnishes a wonderful remedy
Dyspnoea and asthmatic breathing in catarrh of the chest. The colds
settle in the nose, but nearly always go into the chest, with much



630


LYCOPODIUM


whistling and wheezing, and great dyspnoea. The dyspnoea is worse
from walking fast, after exertion and from going up a hill. Throb-
bing, burning and tickling in the chest. Dry, teasing cough. Dry
cough in emaciated boys. After coming out of pneumonia, the dry,
teasing cough remains a long lime, or there is much whistling and
asthmatic breathing. The extremities are cold while whistling and
face are hot, with much coughing and troubles in the chest. He wants
to go about with the head uncovered, l)ccausc there is so much con-
gestion in the head. 'Jliis patient has a feeble reaction. There is no
tendency to repair and the history of the case is that the troubles have
existed since an attack of bronchitis or pneumonia. Besides the dry,
teasing cough, Lyc. goes into another state in wliich there is ulcera-
tion, with copious expectoration of thick yellow or green muco-pus,
tough and stringy. Finally night sweats, with fe\cr in the afternoon
from 4 to 8 o’clock, come on. Its use in tk»e advanced stage of pneu-
monia, in the period of hepatization, with the wrinkled face and brow,
the flapping wings of the nose and scanty expectoration, we have al-
ready spoken of. Then it has marked catarrh of the chest with much
rattling, especially in infants. Rattling in the chest flapping of the
icings of the 'nose and inability to cxpcciorale. "Hie right lung is most
affected, or more likely to be affected than the left, or it is affected
first in double pneumania and troubles that go from one side to the
other. Think of Lyc. among the remedies for neglected pneumonia,
in difficult breathing from an accumulation of serum in the pleura and
pericardium.

I have mentioned sufficiently the gouty tendencies of the limbs and
the nerve symptoms. But there is a restlessness of the lower limbs and
which comes on when he tliinks of going to sleep and this prevents
sleep until midnight. Much like Arsenicum. Jt is often a very dis-
tressing feature. Numbness of the limbs. Drawing, tearing in the
limbs at night ; better by warmth of bed and motion. These pains are
sometimes found in chronic intermittent fever and arc cured by this
remedy. I^iatica that comes on periodically^ better by heat and walk-
ing..., Varicose veins of ilie legs. One foot hot the other cold.
(Edema of the feel.

It has all manner of fevers, continued intermittent and remittent.
It is especially suitable in old age, and in premature old age, when a
person at 60 years appears to be 80 years, broken down, feeble and
tired. It is eminently suited in complaints of weakly constitutions.
It is suitable in various dropsies, associated with liver and heart affec-
tions. Scabs remain upon the skin, do not separate ; they crust over
and the crust does not fall, or may become laminated like rupia. Sul-
phur, Graph, and Calc, are not longer acting or deeper acting than
Lyc. These substances that seem to be so inert in their crude form



MAGNESIA CARBONICA 63 1

come out strongest when potentized and form medicines of wonder-
ful use.


MAGNESIA CARBONICA

This remedy has only been partially proved, and conics to ns now
as Hahnemann left it. The mental symptoms r?nd symptoms of some
portions of the body and particulars have not been fully brought out.
The remedy really needs reproving with high potencies upon sensitive
provers that the liner shades may be understood. 1 would not speak
of it but for the fact that it relates to a class of cases so very impor-
tant that you will not be able to get along without it. It is related to
the older and deeper psoric sickness. It is deep acting and long act-
ing and permeates the economy as thoroughly as Srilphur.

Some of the most striking general features arc; Amelioration Irom
motion ; desire for open air, yet very sensitive to cold air : wants to-
be covered during all stages of fever ; daily evening fevers ; symptoms
Incurring every twenty-one days. Senvsation of Iieat and even sweat
from eating and drinking warm things ; evening thirst.

lake other Magnesias it has most violent neuralgic pains, pains
along tiie course of nerves, pains so violent that he cannot keep still,
and he moves about and is relieved hy motion. The provers felt these
pains mostly in the head and facet, hut clinical experience has demon-
strated that it has violent neuralgia everywhere. We arc justified,
from the proving, in considering it as especially related to the left side
of the face; neuralgia in the night; driving him out of bed, keeping
him in constant motion. As soon as he stops moving the pain becomes
very severe, shooting, tearing and cutting.

Jt has v^aried eruptions upon the skin : dry scaly, dandrud-like erup-
tions upon the skin, very unhealthy hair and nails. Particularly does
it affect the teeth and roots of the teeth. In evory change of the
weather the roots of the teeth become violently painful, burn, shoot
and ache continuously. Tcxuliachc l)eforc and during mcnsiriiation.
During pregnancy she suffers all the time with toothache, tearing pains
in the left side of the face, although the roots of the teeth are per-
fectly sound. The hollow teeth arc unusually sensitive, and painful.
The teeth are so sensitive that they cannot be manipulated by the den-
tist. This is like Ant, crud„ but Magnesia carb. especially affects the
roots of the teeth, while Ant. crucL affects the dcntiTie more particu-
larly. Sensitiveness of the teeth, sf^ that he cannot bile i!pf)n ihe teeth,
and the teeth feel too long. Magnesia carb, and China, when no other
symptoms are present, are prominent remedies among the affections of
the teeth during pregnancy.

There is a kind of marasmus that you will puzzle over if you do
not know this remedy. If we analyze the remedy in general, we will



632


MAGNESIA CARBONICA


see that it produces a state of the body like that prior to tuberculosis.
He does not undergo, repair, he loses flesh, and the muscles become
flabby as if some serious divsease were coining. In children of
tuberculous parents there is that tendency to go into marasmus. The
child’s muscles are flabby, the child will not thrive in spite of feeding
and medicines. It seems to be laying the foundations for some serious
trouble. Finally, it emaciates and the back of the head begins to sink
in, as if from atrophy of the cerebellum. The appetite increases for
milk and meat and animal broths, and yet they are not digested, and
when the milk is taken it continually passes the bowel in the form of
white potter’s clay, or like putty. The stool is soft and of the con-
sistency of jiLitty. If you go through a china factory where the men
are forming with their hands, in such wonderful manner, all sorts of
beautiful dishes, and moulds, you will sec that the original clay, as
they are manipulating it, is white. It is a perfect picture of the Mag-
carb. stool, composed of putty-like undigested milk.

I have observed, especially among illegitimate infants, those that
have been conceived by clandestine coition, that they have a tendency
to sinking in the back of the head. The occipital bone will sink
in, and the parietal bones jut out over it. and there will be a depres-
sion. That is not an uncommon thing in children that go into maras-
mus. They are very likely to have a potter’s clay stool. It does not
run, and it is not hard. The white, hard stool is quite another symp-
tom, and the soft semi-fluid white stool leads to another class of rem-
edies, but this pasty stool, looking as if it could be moulded into any
kind of shape, is a Magnesia carb. stool. I once had in charge an
orphanage, where we had sixty to one hundred babies on hand all the
lime. The puzzle of my life was to find remedies for the cases that
were going into marasmus. A large number of them were clandes-
tine babies. It was a sort of Sheltering Arms for these little ones.
The whole year elapsed, and we were losing babies every week from
this gradual decline, until I saw the image of these babies in Mag-
nesia carb., and after that many of them w^ere cured.

The Mag. carb. baby smells sour like the Hepar baby. Wash it as
you will and it smells sour ; the perspiration is sour, and the whole
baby smells sour. It is not especially the stool. The stool smells
strong and pungent, putrid, and very often the whole child has a
pungent odor, like an unclean baby, though it be well washed.

The Magnesias produce inactivity of the rectum and anus — a pare-
sis. The stool is large and hard, icquiring great straining to expel.
It is dry, hard and crumbling. The stool will remain partly expelled
and then crumble, breaking up in many pieces. Another stool that
is laid down in the books as a most striking condition of Magnesia
carb. is green ; it is the diarrhoeic stool, and the green part floats upon
the watery portion of the stool. The stool is often lumpy, and liquid.



MAGNESIA CARBONICA


633


The lumps lie in the bottom of the vessel, but floating upon the liquid
portion of the stool is the green like the scum of the frog pond. This
is recognized as one of the most striking features. “Stools green,
like scum on a frog pond ; sour, frothy ; with white floating lumps like
tallow, bloody, mucous." Floating like lumps of tallow, is more char-
acteristic of Phosphorus, and many a time has Dulcamara cured it.

The face of the chronic adult case is pale, waxy, sickly and sallow,
and you wonder why this patient will not right up, and will not thrive.
She has a sickly countenance, her muscles are lax, she becomes so*
tired and sweats upon little exertion. She is disturbed in every
change of the weather, and is worse at the beginning of menstruation.
She seems to take cold whenever menstruation is coming on. She
says: “I know my menstrual period is coming on, because I have a
cold in my head." Magnesia carb. has coryza every month before
the monthly period. These patients take on an appearance as if going
into decline, and yet they go on year after year unable to do anything,
not able even to keep house, have a violent craving for meat and an
aversion to vegetable food, grow thin and increasingly flabby, muscles
relaxed, and with tendency to prolapsus. The walls of the abdomene
have a tendency to fall down and to be relaxed, and the rings favor
the formation of hernia. That is the kind of relaxation. The nerves
are painful, and the muscles are tired. When you have such a case
and have prescribed, and they persist in spite of every remedy, you
know that the case does not weti indicate a remedy, that the condi-
tions are latent and there is a tendency to some grave internal dis-
order. The organs are threatening to break down ; the kidneys, the
heart, the lungs, or the brain arc about to undergo organic change.

We have a catarrhal state in this remedy, but it is a dry catarrh,
not much discharge. An old ulcer will dry up and become shiny and
discharge almost nothing. The nose is dry and the eyeballs are so
dry that the lids stick together and it is difficult to open the eyes. Tha
skin becomes dry and itches and burns. Tendency to dryness of the
mucous membranes and dryness of the skin. Dryness is a marked
feature of this medicine.

“Inordinate appetite for meat in children." The stomach is a
troublesome organ. The Magnesia carb. patient is always complain-
ing of a sour stomach ; sour eructations. Food comes up sour. There
is nausea and coming up in the throat of sour food. Pains in the
stomach after eating an ordinary amount of food ; bloated after eat-
ing ; much flatulence after eating. The stomach digests the food
slowly and it becomes sour.

This remedy is especially useful if the history has been a tuber-
cular one. Losing flesh and craving for meat in those who are tuber-
cular or in those that arc from tubercular parents. Patients suffer-

80



magnesia I^ktAtltiA


<S34

ing from a dry cough. Dry cough before the evening chill like Rhxts
tox. There are persons who have simply this tendency who go along
year after year in this withered state, with the little hacking cough,
not rousing up into much. Finally some favorable circumstance arises
and the tuberculosis comes on rapidly after it has remained in a slug-
gish state for a long time. There are a few remedies more likely to>
be associated with that condition than any others, Arsenicum, Calc,
carb., Lycopodium, Magnesia carb. and Tuberc. They fit into this
lingering state, this prelude to active phthisis. They sometimes set a
patient thriving, but, mind you, these cases are hard cases to manage.
They are difficult to find remedies for. Their trouble is so latent, the
symptoms do not come out, and sometimes you have to read between
ihc lines. They are the one-sided cases spoken of by Hahnemann.

In addition to this dry, tickling cough, which is not mentioned in
the books, we find “Cough, spasmodic at night from tickling in the
larynx.” “Sleepiness during the day and sleeplessness at night.”
When you have seen many of these cases that are threatening to go
into phthisis, you will notice that it is a general feature with all of
them. “Doctor, I am so tired in the morning ; while I sleep some in
the night, in the morning I feel as if I had not slept.” Always tired;
and relaxed. Most of these subjects are cold and chilly. This state
has not been bought out yet in the remedy, but clinically it relates to
cold and chilly patients. Patients who say that they have not much
blood.


MAGNESIA MDRIATICA.

It would seem rather strange that the two remedies to which Hahne-
mann gave such a good start by proving and use should be so neglected
and forgotten as Magnesia carb. and Magnesia mur. have been. These
two, if used, would cure many of the liver troubles that are not now
cured. Magnesia mur. could cure many conditions in nervous, excit-
able women that now go uncured. These remedies are neglected,
while Phosphorus and Sulphur are prescribed for almost everything.

Magnesia mur. is a deep-acting antipsoric suited to nervous patients
with stomach and liver troubles. It has enlarged glands and irrita-
tion of the nerve centres and brain. This patient is often sensitive
to cold, chilly, but he desires fresh air and <^n air. Many of the
complaints are ameliorated by the open, fresh air, but some head
symptoms are an exception. The head niust be covered, as it is so
sensitive to the open air. He is extremely restless ; only with ^eat
difficulty can he keep sfill, and if forced to keep still he becomes
anxious. Anxiety is the msirked future. Restlessness, fidgetiness
throughout the body, coupled with anxiety. This comes on at any



MAG^(ESU MUBIATICA


^35


•time, but it is \vor8e at night in bed and still wocse on closing the eyes
■to go to sleep. When he closes the eyes he becomes so anxious, rest-
less and fidgety that he must throw the covers off, take a long breath
or do something. He is kept awake at night by the anxious feeling.
It was described originally by the provcr as an uneasiness, but in the
Guiding Symptoms it is spoken of as a restlessness in bed. If you
study the hysterical nature, the anxiety and restlessness, you will see
it is throughout the whole economy and should be classed under mind
and nerves. Some remedies have vertigo on closing the eyes, some
have anxiety on closing the eyes. Conium has sweat on closing the
eyes. These were the points used by keynote prescribers and some
times good results were obtained. I remember once curing an organic
stricture, which had been dilated but was no better. The patient de-
setribed his symptoms and the stricture was all he could think of. I
did not see his remedy and gave everything without relief. One day,
however, he told me he could not close his eyes to go to sleep without
having a profuse sweat. I gave him Conium on that keynote alone,
but it cured him of the sweat and the stricture, brought back an old
gonorrhoeal discharge and resorption of the inflammatory material
took place. A scientific prescriber would not do that ; but when he
heard that symptom he would not know it was in the nature of Cotiium
to have the stricture, and in ai^other case he would see that Conium
did not suit, and he would know when and when not to give it.

Anxious in the room, amelit^ated in the open air. Anxiety at night
in bed on closing the eyes, i^^ile reading she felt as if some one
were reading after her and sfee must read faster and faster. That
occurs in patients who are tired from being worked up to the highest
pitch and it seems as if they would fly to pieces. Any thought that
comes into the mind tends to repeat itself.

Vertigo, ameliorated walking in the open air. Vertigo in the morn-
ing on rising. The head symptoms are troublesome. Silicea will be
given in cases where this rem^y should be given, because the Silicea
headache is ameliorated from wrapping up the head. This remedy
has it also. Soreness of the hair follicles. Sensation as if the hair
were pulled. Headache ameliorated from tying a bandage tight
around the head or wrapping up the head.

Yellowness all over the body. Yellow eye in jaundice and liver
troubles. Eyes inflamed. Margins of lids and eyelashes crusty ; fine
pimples and eruptions. After leaving the head symptoms, which are
relieved by warmth, we find many symptoms worse in the warm room.

Pulsatitm in the ears. Ulceration of the edges of the nostrils.
Tongue has the appearance as if it • had been burnt, excoriated and
cracked in various directions. Fissures bum like fire. Hunger, but
knows not for what. Ravenous hunger followed by nausea. Aggra-



636


MAGNESIA MURUTICA


vation from salt things, from eating salt food, from salt baths, frQii>
sea bathing, and at the seashore from inhaling sea air. Chest com-
plaints, liver complaints and constipation at sea. Bromine has com-
plaints of sailors when they come on shore. Magnesia mur. has com-
plaints from going to sea. When a patient has urticaria at the sea-
shore, Arsenic will cure in Arsenic cases and will often mitigate when
it is the only symptom.

Foul eructations tasting like rotten eggs. Disordered stomach.
Stomach easily disordered. Waterbrash, vomiting. Like Magnesia
carb., it has inability to digest milk. Milk causes pain, and it is passed
undigested — lienteric stools. Fainting at the dinner table in hysterical
women.

It has many liver troubles. Enlargement and induration of the
liver, with jaundiced skin. Right lobe of liver sore, painful while
lying on it and when he turns over to the left he is uncomfortable,
as it feels as if the liver dragged over to the left. Natrum Sulph.
often cures that symptom, and Ptelea has a somewhat similar condi-
tion. These two symptoms, aggravation from lying on the right, that
is, the soreness, and aggravation from lying on the left, that is, the
dragging, come separately or together. It has much liver trouble from
lying on the liver.

Tenderness in the region of the stomach and over the bowels. At-
tacks of gastralgia in the evening. A strong feature in this remedy
is indigestion. The stomach becomes less and less able to digest and
finally he cannot take a mouthful of food without distress. Abdom-
inal dropsies. Colic, cramps, tearing pains. Great flatulence. With
this kind of digestive disturbance we have a good home for tapeworm,
it hatches out easily in this patient. The most troublesome patients
I have are those who come after having had a tapeworm removed by
violent drugs. It takes a long time to restore them. If a patient will
come with his worm and all his symptoms, I will give him relief, and
he will soon be turned into order and the taj>eworm will cause no
trouble.

Constipation of infants, as in Magnesia carb. Chalky stools like
Magnesia carb. When the patient is an adult and yellow with jaun-
dice, the stools are light colored, bileless and there is no expulsive
power.

No power to expel the contents of the bladder, so he presses with
the abdominal muscles on the full bladder and passes a little. T,q rk
of sensation in the bladder, so that sometimes he cannot tell whether
he has to urinate or not until the bladder is so full that it causes press-
ure. The inability to feel extends to the urethra, and he cannot tell
in the dark whether he is passing urine or not.

Metrorrhagia, with backache which is ameliorated by pressing hard



Magnesia phospHorica 637,

back in the chair or lying on a hard pillow. Bearing down pains in
the pelvis, especially in hysterical women and girls.

Congestion of chest from sea bathing. Chest troubles and colds on
the chest at the seashore and from salt baths. Palpitation of the
heart, with anxiety. Anxiety and restlessness come on at rest ; he
must do something, must hurry. These symptoms are likely to come
on again in the evening when he tries to go to sleep.

Shocks through the body, like electric shocks, when wide awake,
jerking the whole frame ; twitching and jerking. Numbness in the
extremities. Tearing pains in the upper limbs and marked restless-
ness in lower limbs. Cramps in calves at night. Paralytic drawing
and tearing in all the limbs. Burning of the soles at night in bed.
Foot-sweat is another symptom like Stlicea. Numbness of the arms
in the morning on waking.

Hysterical and spasmodic complaints. Weakness from sea bathing
or salt baths. It is the aggravation from salt. Sleep unrefreshing,
anxious dreams. Bodily state sensitive to cold, and great disposition
to take cold. Some complaints are ameliorated by fresh air, if not
too cold.


MAGNESIA PHOSPHORICA.

Magnesia phos. is best known >for its spasmodic conditions and neu-
ralgias. The pains are very viofent and may affect any nerve. A
pain localizes itself in a nerve and becomes worse and worse, sometimes
coming in paroxysms, but becoming so violent that the patient becomes
frantic. The pains are ameliorated by heat and pressure. The patient
feels better in a warm place ; and his neuralgias are also better, he is
miserable, and his pains are brought on when he becomes cold or is in
a cold place. Pains arc brought on from riding in the cold, and in
cold, damp weather. Exposure for a long time to cold winds causes
neuralgia of the face.

The pains arc felt everywhere. Pain in the bowels, enteralgias,
cramps in the stomach and bowels, with the same modalities. Pains
in the spinal cord under the same rule — amelioration from heat. There
are times when a nerve, in which there is considerable pain, becomes
sensitive to pressure, becomes sore. The spinal cord becomes sore.
Convulsions, with stiffness of the limbs. Convulsions in adults or
children, followed by extreme sensitiveness to touch, to wind, to noise,
to excitement, to everything. Such convulsions as children have dur-
ing dentition. Colic ; three months’ colic, cramps, bilious colic. But
the special feature is its power to debilitate, to cause irritation of the
nerves and muscles. Cramps from prolonged exertion. Stiffness
numbness, awkwardness and deadness of a nerve from prolonged ex-



6^8 iviACNEsxA pBoseHcmiCA

«rtion. Thus it applies to long use of the hands and fingers in .wi;it*
ing, and gives a fair sample of writer’s cramp. It is .especially iwe-
ful in the cramps that come in the fingers, from .writing, playing in-
.struments and piano practice. Pianists suddenly break down, with
■stiffness of the fingers, after several hours’ labor every day for years.
The fingers give out. In playing the harp a cramp comes on and tho
fingers cannot perform their use. Other parts are affected in the same
way from prolonged exertion. A laborer’s hand will sometimes cramp
and become almost useless. As soon as he undertakes to do that par-
ticular thing his hand cramps and he clutches the implement or loses
hold. The carpento: after prolonged use of a tool has a cramp. This
is a strong feature of the remedy in all sorts of over-exertion.

Violent cramps in dysentery and cholera morbus, that make him
scream out. Twitching of the muscles all over the body, as in chol-
era. It was Schuessler's main remedy for chorea, but we can only use
it by its proving. Schuessler prescribed it in all nervous conditions,
but its proving justifies its use in neuralgia ameliorated by heat and
pressure, cramps and twitchings. Shooting pains along the nerves,
but these are not so common as violent pains in paroxysms — a tearing
pain as if the nerve were inflamed and put on a stretch. Shaking as
in paralysis agitans and complaints resembling it. Amelioration front
heat and pressure, and aggravation from cold, cold bathing, cold winds,
cold weather, lack of clothing. Pains all over, but more likely pain
located in one part.

The mental symptoms have not been brought out to any extent. It
has been used clinically when diarrhoeas have ceased suddenly and
brain troubles have come on. Congestion of the brain, but this is
clinical. Neuralgia and rheumatic headaches ameliorated by heat.
Excruciating pains. Violent attacks of headache ameliorated by hard
.pressure, heat and in the dark. I liave seen this mitigation of the
symptoms in chronic congestive headache, when the face was red and
there was throbbing, almost like Bell.; those headaches give way to
Magnesia phos., when there is relief by heat and pressure. He wants
the head bandaged with a tight-fitting doth, a warm room, and he is
aggravated by cold.

Spasms and jerking about the eyes, or prolonged tonic spasms pro-
dudng a strabismus. Violent supra- and infra-orbital pains with
amelioration from heat and pressure. It has cured more face-aches
than other pains. Neuralgia of the face, worse on the right side, and
ameliorated by heat and pressure, and aggravated by cold. Tic dou-
knireaux. Glmmic jerkings of the face. It favors rheumatic said
, -gouty sul^ects -who suffer with neuralgia. It is -a wonderful remedy
^ior spasmodic 'hiccoughing. I have sometimes given Magnesia phos.
'for hkm^jhmg whenT gouM not get rmy other ^nnptoms to desezibo-en.



Mancanum


639

Psin at thfc pit of tht stoinach. Spasms of the stomach with clean
tongue. Colic ameliorated by doubling up, like Coloc., and amelior-
ated by heat. The colic is not so markedly relieved by heat in Coloc.,
but is relieved by pressure. Distension of the abdomen and flatulence,
with much pain. Radiating pains in the abdomen. Compelled to
walk and groan from pain. Meteorism. It is said to cure cows of
this condition. Colchicum will cure cows when they are distended
with gas after being turned into clover patches.

Cutting, darting pains in haemorrhoids. If well proved we would
probably have many liver symptoms, because both Magnes. and Phos.
have liver symptoms.

Violent pains in acute rheumatism, ameliorated by heat. Neuralgic
pains in the limbs. Rest relieves many complaints, and the least mo-
tion brings them on. Pains changing place.

MANGANUM.

Manganum is pre-eminently a drug that causes a species of chloro-
sis, and it is suitable for chlorotic girls, in broken down constitutions,
waxy, anaemic, pallid, sickly, threatening phthisis, with necrosis and
caries of bone and organic affections. There is the history of a long
period of scanty menstruation, or the menses have been delayed until
the patient was eighteen or twenty years of age.

A strong feature is the great soreness of the periosteum, and espe-
cially of the shin bone. Tendency to ulceration and eruptions, and*
around these there is thickening and infiltration. Chronic eruptions ;
inveterate like psoriasis. Small ulcers suppurate and infiltrate with
purple hardness. It has a deep action, breaks down the blood cor-
puscles and lays the foundation for tuberculosis, especially in the lar-
ynx. Repeated attacks of laryngitis, each leaving the patient in a
worse state than before. Tuberculosis that begins in the larynx.
Aversion to food, no appetite, nothing will tempt him. This, with
great soreness over the body, lays the foundation for some deep com-
plaint. It is not an acute periostitis, but a passive soreness all over.
Inflammation of the joints and swellings go on to suppuration and
necrosis. Ulcerations and suppurative processes take on a quality of
semi-malignancy and do not heal, presenting an erysipelatous appear-
ance. Everywhere there is soreness to touch and soreness from jar-
ring. The bones are sore from walking. Arnica relieves only a day
or two ; but in this remedy it is deep-seated and prolonged, and we
would not think of Arnica or Baptisia, which would only give relief
for a day or so. Vesicular eruptions, infiltrating, deep-seated, with
tendency to crack atnfd bleed. Roughness of the skin and psoriasis.
Corhplaints worse in cold, danip weather and before a storm.



640


MANGANVM


And now wc will take up some of the mental symptoms. There are
only a few of them, but they are striking, and these go deeper into
the nature of the man himself, even than those we have been speaking
about. Anxiety and fear. Great apprehensiveness. Something awful
is going to happen. Restless and anxious. He walks the floor, and
the more he walks the floor the more anxious he becomes. He attempts
mental occupation ; tries to occupy his mind, and the more he does
this, the more anxious he becomes. He is tired and careworn. He
cannot think ; he cannot meditate. He has difficulties in his business
because he cannot do good thinking. Anxious restlessness.

The queerest part of all is just how he gets relief. He lies down
and it all passes away. You cannot find that in every medicine ; that
is rare, strange and peculiar. And yet, sec how general it is ; it defines
the whole nature of the sick man. His very life is excited, tired and
anxious. Great sadness and distress. He lies down and says, “Why
did I not think of that before ?” Perfectly comfortable now. He gets
up, and the anxiety and restlessness come over him again, and he is
fairly driven to distraction. See how unlike Rhus that gets relief fromi
motion. See how unlike Ars. that is, the patient goes from one bed
to another, from bed to chair and back again ; he cannot sit still, or lie
still, for his anxiety is worse keeping still. See how striking these
symptoms are, and see what a contrast we have. The very innermost
life of the patient is talking to us and asking for remedies. We must
now read the signs and inner expressions of the disordered economy.

Then, he has these tormenting fears. Anxiety in the day time while
moving about, belter while lying down. Sad, weeping and silent. Can
think of nothing to console him but to lie down and get peace. Is it
any wonder, then, that some of these patients are driven to a bedridden
state ? And Manganum is a wonderful remedy for bedridden women
who love to keep still, and it is said of them that they love to lie in bed.
As far as we have gone we see that everything brings out that very
idea and the nature of things that Hahnemann talks about in his first
paragraph, that the sole duty of the physician is to pay his attention
to the sick, to the patient himself ; and who is this patient himself ?
This is what we have been talking about, this is what wc have been
trying to bring out here; and all the particulars that I shall take
up corroborate these very things. These particulars are so linked with
these generals talked about that they make a grand unity of thought,
and we cannot separate them.

Irritability and low-spirited, like Sulph. and Graph. It is similar
to Arg. met., Phos., Graph, and Snlpfi., in its underlying tendency to
tuberculosis. Fretfulness from small things.

Headaches as in anasmia. Dreadful headaches ; head feels heavy ;
sticking pains; pressmg, boring pains. Stitches like needless. Aggra-



MANGANUM


641


vation from jarring on stepping. Soreness in the brain and skull.
Skull sensitive to touch and pressure. Red, sore spots here and there
on the scalp (like Phos.), as if erysipelas would develop. Drawing,
stinging headache in the open air, ameliorated in the house. Other
headaches are ameliorated in the air. Aggravation from a jar, motion,
and change of temperature and in cold, damp weather.

Agglutination of the eyelids. It is a suppurative and catarrhal rem*
edy. The eyelids are swollen. Aching of the eyes on looking at near
objects, especially a near light. I have used this medicine often with
that symptom and cured when there was pain in the eyes from sewing,
reading fine print and doing anything that would concentrate vision.
Ruta in nervous, gouty constitutions, when there is pain in the eyes
and complaints from sewing and reading fine print for a long time,
Ruta is especially a remedy for artists who work with a magnifying
glass.

Offensive discharges from the ear. Dullness of hearing ameliorated
by blowing the nose. Stopped sensation ameliorated by blowing the
nose. Catarrh of the Eustachian tube. The external ear is painful to
touch.

The ear symptoms are numerous. It seems to many patients that
all their troubles settle in the ears. All the pains and aches in the up-
per part of the body settle in the ears. The pains in the throat shoot
to the ears. There are pains in the throat, and pains in the teeth that
go to the ears. Pains in the cyci that centre in the ears. That is
strange. The ear is a centre of much tribulation. “Catarrhal condi-
tions, with increasing deafness.” From cold, damp weather. He is
deaf whenver the cold rains come in the fall. Then there is a sore-
ness, rawness and burning in the auditory canal, with much itching
Silica and Kali carb. are the two principal remedies for the parox-
ysmal cough that comes on from scratching the auditory canal. I have
seen them choke and gag and vomit when they needed Kali carb. after
scratching the auditory canal. Spasmodic cough from scratching the
auditory canal belongs principally to Silica and Kali carb. but Man-
ganum has cured it. Itching in the ears from talking, from^ swallow-
ing, from laughing, or doing anything that brings the throat into oper-
ation. From talking, which is using the larynx. When the bolus
passes down behind the larynx is when it takes place. It is sometinies
present in laryngeal phthisis, in chronic ulceration of the larynx, with
burning, stinging pains in the larynx that shoot to the ears. In the
proving of Manganum it is astonishing how many ear symptoms are
recorded. And all these car symptoms, like the others, are brought
on, or increased, in cold, damp weather. “Catarrh of the Eustachian
tube.” Obstruction. Feels as if the cars were obstructed. ‘‘Feels as
if there were a leaf before the car,” In cold? rainy weather.

81



643


MANCANVM


A Strong feature running through the remedy is similar to Dulc., in
that it is worse from cold, cold air, and cold, damp weather. His ca-
tarrh rouses up in cold weather. Every cold, damp spell causes hoarse-
ness and the formation of mucus in the throat. All of its complaints
respond to the weather.

Wherever there is irritation there is great soreness. The eyes are
red and sore. The throat is red and raw. Ear discharges are fol-
lowed by great tenderness. Soreness and tenderness run all through.
Chronic catarrh. Nose stopped up. Discharge yellow, lumpy and
green in the morning. Bloody discharge. The nose and cartilages
are sore. He avoids handling the nose.

No medicine will give you a sicklier face. When persons have bled
out and have become waxy and pale the routinist thinks of China, but
when there has been no bleeding and this same state is present from,
breaking down of the blood corpuscles Manganum is to be thought of.
Chlorosis and pernicious anaemia would make one think of Manganum,
and also Picric acid and Ferrum, Small wounds suppurate ; every
bruise remains sore for a long time. There is not much bleeding, for
there is not much blood.

Infiltration is in keeping with this remedy. I have seen it cure in-
veterate ulcers, indurated and purple, in anaemic patients. Old “fever
sores” can be cured with this remedy. Squamous eruptions.

All sorts of stomach disorders. Indigestion. Want of appetite.
Drawing in the region of the stomach. Colic. All of these are worse
from cold, damp weather. The pains are ameliorated from bending
double. It is a very useful remedy for warding off tabes mesenterica,
anaemic constitution, no appetite, diarrhoea, pain in the bowels, and, as
the patient emaciates, the glands are felt. Useful in women who have
been anaemic for some time from loss of blood, but it is not so great a
remedy for anaemia following haemorrhage as for that condition result-
ing from destruction of the blood corpuscles. Dreadful flushes of
heat like Psor. Lack., Sulph. and Graph., coming on in women who'
have been anaemic for some time.

It is also a great liver remedy. There is congestion and tumefaction
of the liver. It has cured a tendency to fatty degeneration. It has
cured jaundice ; it has cured many cases of gall stone ; which means
that the liver goes into such a sluggish state that the bile is unhealthy,
the flow is impeded, and then little nodules form in it, and from gall
stones. It establishes a better working order of the stomach — a better
working basis of the liver, the bile becomes healthy, and gall stones are
dissolved in healthy bile. Gall stone colics are likely to occur along
with gall stones.

The abdomen may be said to be full of rumblings, and there are
frequ^t griping pams.^'^.^^d these come on in cold, damp weather.



MANGANUM


643


They come on from eating cold food, like iced foods. Cold things
create much distress in the region of the liver. Distress in the stom-
ach, and distress through the bowels. “Pain and contraction at the
navel f something like Plumbum, although it is not said to draw like
a string at the navel, like Plumbum and Platinum,

“Passes much flatus with the stool. Irregular action of the bow-
els.'* There may be periods of constipation, interrupted with every in-
digestion, causing diarrhoea — so that the bowels are always irregular.
He is never quite safe, he has constipation or diarrhoea. As we might
suppose, the stomach is the faulty organ.

“Cramps in the anus while sitting. Better lying down.'*

It is a useful remedy for those flashes of heat that occur at the
climacteric period. The chlorotic state mentioned is closely related to
the menstrual state. Disorders of the uterus, and of the stomach.

Very scanty menstrual flow. It lasts but a day or two, and it comes
too soon. Tliis is unusual in anaemic conditions, unusual in chlorosis.
In women past the turn of life, every little while there will come a
little haemorrhage, a little watery flow. Anaemic old ladies, with a
little watery flow from the uterus. We have had in the past to rely
mostly on Calcarea for the old ladies with haemorrhages of the uterus.

Wc are not surprised with all these weaknesses if we have muscular
relaxation, and it is true in Manganum with these tired, weakly, anaem-
ic women ; and also there is preiapsus of the uterus and prolapsus of
the rectum. A dragging down dff the intestines, and the whole abdo-
men feels heavy from a state of relaxation.

The region most threatened is the larynx, trachea and lungs. If
this anaemic girl does not improve and get up a better reaction some-
thing serious will happen. Menstruation is merely a pale fluid or a
little leucorrhoea. Rawness of the larynx. Hoarseness and loss of
voice in a chronic state. It is suitable in recurrent cases coming with
every spell of damp weather until finally tuberculosis starts. Every
cold starts up additional trouble in the larynx, causing a laryngitis. It
is a wonderful remedy in speakers and singers, as useful as Argentum
met. Constant accumulation of mucus, more forms as soon as he
clears it. Hemming all the time and annoying everybody. Arg. met.,
Sil., Sulph., Phos. and Manganum all do that. Each hem brings up a
mouthful of mucus. Tubercular laryngitis. Rawness in the larynx.
Expectoration of green mucus, great anaemia. Every spell of cold
rouses up a bronchitis, like Dulc. Cold, dry weather sometimes re-
lieves, but the patient is sensitive to cold ; he is chilly and anaemic.

The cough is ameliorated by lying down. Most coughs are worse
from lying down, and few remedies have amelioration from lying. In
Euphrasia there is a cough coming from coryza, especially acute coryza
in vigorous persons, and the cough is better while lying. Again there



M£DORRHtNtJM


is a nervous spinal cough in spinal subjects, nervous girls, who have a
cough as soon as they lie down, which is cured by Hyos. This rem-
edy has a day cough — no cough at night because he is lying. Arg.
met, has a day cough ; like Manganum it refers to the larynx, and is
ameliorated by lying down. Cough worse from talking, laughing,
walking, deep inspiration and cold, damp weather.

This remedy is most useful in recurrent complaints, and is hardly
ever seen in first attacks. It is of great use in patients who arc gradu-
ally declining. Ulceration and bleeding in the lungs. The haemor-
rhage is watery, like bloody saliva or bloody mucus. The patient grows
nervous, tremulous and has palpitation.

The limbs are full of distress, even to gout. Sore bones, burning in
soles, arthritic enlargements, painful periosteum, some joints. It has
not rapid inflammatory rheumatism, like Puls, and Bell,, but tenderness
of the joints, with not much swelling and aggravation from damp
weather, like Rhod,, Rhus and Dulc.

This remedy does not usually come up in fevers, but in cases of low
typhoid, after the fever has somewhat abated, the bones are sensitive,
sore all over, the patient does not rally, there is prolonged convales-
cence, especially in badly treated cases, who have been drugged until
the blood corpuscles are ruined. You would think if he could only
start up a big abscess he would be better, but he has not vigor enough
for that. Some of these patients have '"fever sores,'’ and this acts as
a seton and relieves them ; but this patient cannot develop one, only the
{>eriosteum is sore and infiltrated.

MEDORRHINUM.

One of the many uses of this remedy is in the inherited complaints
of children. The physician of long and active experience meets many
obstinate cases in children. The infant soon emaciates and becomes
marasmic, or a child becomes asthmatic, or suffers with vicious
catarrh of nose or eyelids, or has ringworm on the scalp or face, or
is dwarfed ; and after some waste of time it comes to mind that the
father was treated for gonorrhoea that was obstinate and perhaps had
condylomata on the genitalia. This remedy will cure, or begin the
recovery. The woman married several years desires to become a
mother. She was healthy when she married, but now she has ovarian
pains, menstrual troubles, she has lost all sexual response, is growing-
pale and waxy, and becoming violently sensitive and nervous. The
husband's history gives the cause, and this remedy will cure. The
pale waxy young men, who crave stimulants and tobacco, who are
sensitive to drafts, become stiff after exertion and walking, who per-
spire easily and are extremely senstitive to cold, who have never been



MEOORRHtNUH


645

weH since having a gonorrhoea cured by injections. Rheumatic symp-
toms in every part of the body. Some symptoms are worse in the
daytinoe. The usual comparison with Syphilinum, which reads, “Med.
in daytime and Syph. at night,” does not hold good as a sweeping
statement. It is true that many Syph. pains are worse nights. It is
true that some sycotic and Medorrhinum symptoms are worse day-
times. It is also true that many sycotic symptoms are violent day and
night. It is also true that the mental symptoms of Med. are most
violent at night. It will not do to be too sweeping with circumstances
of this nosode. The rheumatic inflammations are worse from motion,
but where swelling is not present these patients act like Rhus patients ;
they are sensitive to cold, suffer from aching and torturesome pains,
and &id relief only in motion — like Rhus. Most sycotic patients suffer
from cold, some are sensitive to heat. Sore, bruised and lame, as if
he had taken a deep cold and was coming down with a fever. Tha
pains come on with a feeling of general tension. Obstinate cases of
rheumatism. Losing flesh. Walks stooped, becoming clumsy.
Stumbles. Looks as if he were going into quick consumption.
Intense nervous sensibility, respecting touch of garment or a lock of
hair by any one not en rapport.

Trembling and quivering ; growing steadily weaker. Intense formi-
cation all over the body. Starts from the slightest noise. Feels faint
and wants to be fanned. Wains open air. Cold and pulseless, with
cold sweat. (Edema of the limik with great soreness and dropsy of
serous sacs. Externally sensitive to cold damp weather. Subject to
neuralgias. Stitching, tearing pains. The pains are ameliorated by
heat. Drawing pains in back and limbs. The patient is extremely
sensitive to pain. The remedy should never be used low.

Forgetful of facts, figures and names ; of what he has read. Makes
mistakes in writing, of spelling, and words. Time move too slowly ;
everybody moves too slowly. He is in a constant hurry, in such a
hurry that he gets out of breath. She is in such a hurry that she
feels faint. Confusion of mind, dazed ; fear of sensation ; loses the
idea when speaking. Great difficulty in stating her symptoms, loses
herself and must be asked over again. Thinks some one is behind
her ; hears whispering. Sees faces that peer at her from behind the
furniture (Phos.). Everything seems unreal (Alum.). Wild des-
perate feeling as if incipient insanity. Weeps when talking. Ex-
hilaration in evening. Changeable state of mind ; one moment sad, the
next mirthful. Presentiment of death. Frightened sensation on
waking as if something dreadful had happened. Fear of the dark.
Anxiety about her salvation.

Vertigo when stooping ; ameliorated lying ; aggravated on motion.'
Fear of falling.



MEDOftRHINUM


(S46


Wandering neuralgia of head, worse in cold damp weather* Sharp
pains come and go suddenly. No part of head is free from pain.
Pain aggravated from light, and on coughing. Burning pains deep
in, as if in brain. Extreme tension of scalp. Band across forehead.
Pain in occiput and nape, aggravated on motion. Intense itching of
scalp. Herpetic eruptions on scalp ; ringworm. Copious dandruff.
Hair dry and crispy.

Flickering before the eyes. Blurred vision, and black or brown
spots in the field of vision. Objects look double, or small. Sees
imaginary objects. Eyes feel drawn. Tension in the muscles. Pain
in eyes on turning them. Sensation of sand in eyes. Sensation of
sticks. Inflammation of conjunctiva with ulceration of the cornea.
Blepharitis with much swelling. Lids stuck together in the morning*
Margins red and excoriated. Ptosis. Smarting of lids. Eyelashes
fall out. Swelling under eyes, as in Bright’s disease.

Impaired hearing and total deafness. Imagines he hears voices or
people in conversation. At first the hearing is very acute. Pain along
Eustachian tubes into ears. Crawling in ears. Itching in ears.
Stitching pains in cars.

This remedy cures obstinate nasal catarrh, also post nasal obstruc-
tion with loss of smell. Mucus, white or yellow. A middle aged
man was cured of an obstinate nasal discharge by Med. very high
and a discharge from the urethra which had been suppressed many
years before came back and acted like a chronic gleet, and finally sub-
sided without other treatment. Bleeling from the nose, and bloody
nasal discharge. Nose sensitive to inhaled air. Itching and crawl-
ing in nose.

The greenish yellow, waxy, sickly face of the sycotic patient looks
like that of the Arsenic patient, but strange to say, Arsenic docs not
otherwise correspond to the symptoms, but may be mistaken for it.
The skin shines, and is often covered by blotches and there are fever
blisters about the mouth. Herpes on the face. Epithelioma of wing
of nose, or on lip. Rheumatic pains and stiffness of face. Swelling
of the submaxillary glands. The teeth are always sensitive when chew-
ing. The taste is perverted, and the tongue is foul and white at base.
The mouth is full of canker sores. Ulcers in the mouth and on the
tongue. The breath is foul. Stringy mucus in mouth and throat.
Mouth dry and feels burnt. Catarrh of throat, and thick white mucus
is constantly drawn from posterior nares.

Ravenous hunger, even after eating. Unquenchable thirst. Craves
stimulants, tobacco, sweets, green fruit, ice, sour things, oranges, ale,
salt. Nausea after eating, and after drinking water. Vomiting of
mucus and bile. Sour and bkter vomiting. Violent retching. Vomit-
ing without nausea.



MEDORRHINUM


647


Gnawing in stomach, not relieved by eating or drinking. Trembl-
ing in stomach. Clawing in stomach, aggravated by drawing up the
knees. Sinking in stomach. Agonizing pains in stomach.

Terrible pains in liver. Grasping pains in liver and spleen. It has
cured ascites. Pulsation felt in abdomen. Pain and swelling of the
inguinal glands. A young man who had been in good flesh and health
took gonorrhoea. He was treated by injection. Soon he began to lose
flesh. He suffered from pain in the groin, which compelled him to
walk bent. He became pale and waxy ; stiff and lame all over, and
was very sensitive to cold. Took cold frequently, which seemed never
■ to get quite well. After Med. very high the discharge returned, and
he seemed quite well. Pain in spermatic cords.

This remedy has cured many cases of marasmus in infants that had
inherited sycosis from a parent. Children of a sycotic father are espe-
cially subject to attacks of vomiting and diarrhtea, and emaciation.
They resist well selected chronic remedies, or are only palliated by
well selected remedies. After Med. high they thrive, and remedies
act better. Constipation. Can pass stool only by leaning far back
when straining at stool. Inactivity of the rectum. Round balls, and
hard lumpy stool. Oozing of moisture at the anus, smelling like fish-
brine.

Scanty, high-colored, strong-smdling urine in a patient suffering
from rheumatic lameness and stiffness. Sensitive to cold, with tender-
ness of the soles. In albuminous ^rine with hyaline casts when the
patient is waxy and there is oedema of feet and ankles, and the soles
so tender he can scarcely walk on them, the skin of soles is bluish and
hot ; also when the swollen legs are so sore he cannot have themi
touched, or endure the pressure to ascertain whether the swelling will
or will not pit on pressure. In the above conditions Med. W'ill act
promptly if there has been gonorrhoeal history. Inflammation of blad-
der, prostate gland or kidneys. Copious mucus in urine. Renal colic.
Parenchymatic inflammation of the kidneys. Copious pale urine.
Frequent urination at night. Loses urine in bed. Inactivity of the
bladder and feeble stream of urine. It has cured many cases of poly-
uria.

Nocturnal emissions and impotency in young men who have had
gonorrhoea several times, especially if treated by injections. Prolonged
glecty discharge with rheumatic symptoms and declining health. For
gonorrhoeal rheumatism it is a most important remedy. It controls the
rheumatic symptoms and restores the discharge. It has cured indura-
tion of testes, and pain in the spermatic cords. Pain in left spermatic
cord, left sciatic nerve and lumbago from every exposure to a draft in
one who suffered from gonorrhoea several years ago and was cured bv
Med. 10 m. at long intervals.



648


MEDORKHINtTM


Chronic pain in ovarian region. Sterility. Painful menstruation.
Obstinate leucorrhoea. Enlarged ovaries. Violent itching of vulva
and vagina. Profuse menses. Drawing in sacrum as if menses would
come on. Cutting like knives in whole pelvic region. Burning in
scrotum and hips during menses.

Respiration is difficult. Suffocation and short breath on slight ex-
ertion. Asthma in children of sycotic parents (Nat, s.). Spasms of
the glottis with clucking in the larynx ; air expelled with difficulty, but
inhaled with ease. Several cases of asthma have been cured by this
remedy. Dryness of the larynx causes spasms and cough on falling
asleep. Most obstinate catarrh of air passages with copious viscid
expectoration has been cured by this remedy. Cannot cough deep
enough to reach the phlegm (Caust.). The cough is ameliorated by
lying on the abdomen, is aggravated at night. The expectoration is
yellow, white or green, viscid, difficult to raise. Cough worse in a
warm room.

Many of the patients that need this remedy look sick, pale, and walk
stocked as if about to go into phthisis. Dry cough, with rattling in
chest. Great heat, even burning in chest. Many pains in chest.
Rheumatic, sharp pains through chest on exposure to damp cold air.
When patients who have suffered from gonorrhoea seem to be taking
on a phthisical complex of symptoms and the paucity of individualizing
symptoms makes the remedy doubtful, this remedy will bring better
reaction, and sometimes be the remedy for many months. Intense pain
in chest on coughing. Sensation of coldness in chest and mammae.
Stitching pain in chest. The chest is sore to touch, and aggravated
by the motion of breathing.

The heart manifests all the symptoms usual to rheumatic constitu-
tions. Dyspnoea ; fluttering heart ; palpitation. The pains arc acute,
cutting, stitching; aggravated by motion. Burning in heart, extend-
ing to left arm.

“Lame back” is the common complaint of these patients. It is gen-
erally a lumbago, or it is a lumbo-sacral pain, and often extends into
the lower limbs. Crural or sciatic pains. Drawing in nape and back.
Pain across the back, from left to right shoulders. Great heat in the
upper part of spine. Stiffness in the back on rising, or beginning to
move. Pains all aggravated in cold damp weather. Tender spine.
Soreness in region of kidneys.

Chronic rheumatic pains in limbs in cold damp weather. The limbs
are lame and stiff. Stitching pains all over the body, and in limbs.
Sharp pains. The patient is extremely sensitive to pain, and feels pain
as sharp and stitching. Some of the pains come on during motion, and
some are better from continued motion. Cold extremltks. Burning
palms and soles. Trembling of the limbs. Rheumatic pains in should-



MILLEFOLIUM


649


ers aggravated from motion. Numbness of arms and hands, worse
left. Trembling hands and arms. Burning palms, wants them fan-
ned. Right hand cold, then left. Cold hands. Heat and numbness
of back of hands.

Trembling weakness and numbness of lower limbs. Awkwardness
of legs, they do not go where they are willed to go. Numbness of
thighs. Must stretch the lower limbs constantly. Drawing pains and
tension in legs. Rheumatic pains. Stiffness and soreness in flesh and
periosteum. Shooting up the legs during a thunderstorm. Restless-
ness in legs, must move them constantly. Aching, drawing in legs
and thighs, in sciatic and crural nerves, ameliorated by continued mo*
tion. Legs numb and heavy, like wood. Legs cold up to the knees.
Contraction of muscles of posterior part of thigh down to knee. Cramps
in soles and calves. Weak ankles. Burning feet, wants them uncov-
ered and fanned. Legs swollen to knees, and pit upon pressure. Sore
bruised legs, ankles and soles. Soles sore and bruised, look blue. He
cannot walk on the soles. Swelling and itching of the soles. It cures
the tenderness in the soles so common in chronic gonorrhoeal rheuma-
tism. Tenderness of soles so that he had to walk on his knees. Cold
sweaty feet.

Can sleep only on the back with hands over head. Sleeps on her
knees with face forced into the pillow. Terrible dreams of ghosts and
dead people ; she dreads the nights. Sleepy but cannot sleep. Sleep-
lessness fore part of night. Copious night sweats.

millefolium

This is a most useful remedy in varicose veins ; especially are the
capillaries spongy and enlarged. Veins break easily when congested.
Wounds bleed easily and much. It favors apoplexy. Ecchymoses of
the skin and eyes. It favors local congestions. Haemorrhage from
any part, from wounds, from ulcers. Atony of the blood vessels.
Haemorrhage from the lungs, stomach, rectum, nose, after extraction
of teeth. The blood is generally bright red. Varicose veins on the
limbs during pregnancy when painful. Hjemorrhage in malignant ul-
ceration. After an operation and the wound has been properly closed
the skin forming the edges of the wound continues to ooze a bright red
blood. When a general haemorrhagic condition prevails. These fea-
tures are often associated with heart troubles that will be expected. If
there has been a history of bleeding it should be given before a surgical
procedure {Lack.). Violent congestion after haemorrhage. No tend-*
ency to repair of vascular tissue. Hyperaemia of the brain and red
face. Fullness and heat in head, but no fever. A rush of blood from
chest to the head like a siigring. Violent headache. Dull occipital

82



6jO MERCimiUS

pain. Pain in head aggravated by stooping.

Blood-shot eyes. Sharp pain in eyes and root of nose. Eyes red
and congested. Foggy vision.

Noise in left ear startles her ; later when laughing. Sensation as of
cold air passing out of ear. Sensation as though ears were stopped.
Sharp pain in ear. Earache.

Epistaxis^ with congestion to head and chest.

Face red, without fever. Venous face. Flushes to face.

Pain in teeth from hot things. A haemorrhagic patient should have
a dose of Mill, or Lack, before having teeth extracted. The throat is
red, ulcerated and bleeds easily.

Empty hungry feeling in morning. Burning in stomach, aggravated
bending forward. Burning in stomach and abdomen extending to chest.
Vomiting blood.

Abdomen distended with flatus. Haemorrhage from intestines and
rectum. Haemorrhage in typhoid fever. Internal haemorrhage from
lifting and from injuries. Prolonged buildings. Bleeding piles. Bleeding
condylomata of anus.

The urine is bloody, clots in the urine after standing. Pain in
kidneys followed by bloody urine lasting many days. Incontinence of
urine.

Want of ejaculation in coition. Haemorrhage from bladder and ure-
thra. Bleeding wounds.

Profuse menses, protracted, with cramps in uterus and abdomen.
Uterine haemorrhage after slight exertion from abortion, or during
labor ; continuous, bright red blood. Varicose veins of legs ulcerate
and bleed in pregnant women. After hard delivery prolonged obsti-
nate bleeding. A woman predisposed to haemorrhage should have a
dose of Millefolium before going into confinement. Suppressed lochia.
No milk in breasts. Inflammation of the uterus after a uterine haemor-
rhage.

Oppression of the chest ; palpitation ; surging of blood from chest
to head. Haemorrhage from lungs. Congestion of lungs following
bleeding of lungs. Bleeding from lungs from suppressed menses.
Expectoration of blood 4 p. m. daily. Bleeding from the lungs in
phthisis. Bleeding from lungs after exertion. A man thrown from a
carriage had continued to cough up blood for many weeks was cured
by this remedy very high. Orgasm of blood about heart.

MERCURIUS

The pathogenesis of Mercury is found in the provings of Merc. viv.
and Merc, sol., two slightly different preparations, but not different
enough to make, any distinction in practice.



MERCURIUS


651

Mercury is used in testing the temperature, and a Merc, constitution
is just as changeable and sensitive to heat and cold. The patient is
worse from the extremes of temperature, worse from both heat and
cold. Both the symptoms and the patient are worse in a warm atmo-
sphere, worse in the open air, and worse in the cold. The complaints
of Mercury when sufficiently acute to send him to bed are worse from
the warmth of the bed, so that he is forced to uncover ; but after he
uncovers and cools off he gets worse again, so that he has difficulty in
keeping comfortable. This applies to the pains, the fever, ulcers and
eruptions and the patient himself.

He is an offensive patient. We speak of mercurial odors. The
breath especially is very foetid, and it can be detected on entering the
room ; it permeates the whole room. The perspiration is offensive ; it
has a strong, sweetish, penetrating odor. Offensiveness runs all
through ; offensive urine, stool and sweat ; the odors from the nose and
mouth are offensive. When Merc, is used in large doses and the
patient is salivated he gives off these odors. One who has once smelt
a salivated patient will remember the mercurial odor. I remember
when I was a student, almost every room had the mercurial odor.
Mercury was given till the gums were touched and salivation was pro-
duced. That odor is often an index to the use of Mere.

He is worse at night. The bone pains, joint affections and inflam-
matory conditions are all worse at f night and somewhat relieved during
the day. Bone pains are univers^, but especially where the flesh is
thin over the bones. Periosteal pains, boring pains, worse at night
and from warmth of the bed.

The glands are inflamed, and swollen; the parotids, sub-linguals,
lymphatic glands of the neck, groin and axilla are all affected ; the
mammae swell and there is inflammation and swelling of the liver. It
is pre-eminently a glandular remedy. Induration is also a general ;
inflamed parts indurate. If the skin is inflamed it is hard. Inflamed
glands are hard. There is induration with ulceration.

A tendency to ulcerate runs through the remedy. Ulcers are found
everywhere, in the throat, nose, mouth, and on the lower limbs. Ul-
cers sting and burn and have a lardaceous base, an ashy-white appear-
ance looking as if spread over with a coating of lard. It looks like a
diphtheritic exudate, and Merc, has diphtheritic exudations on inflamed
surfaces. Ulcers in the throat have this appearance. The mucous
membrane sometimes inflames without ulceration, but with exudation,
and hence it is useful in diphtheria. It has the same condition in
ulcers ; when the system is run down they exude a grey lardy or ashy
deposit. Chancres take on that form, a whitish cheesy deposit on the
base. When you realize that the complaints of Merc, are worse at
night, and think of the bone pains, periosteal inflammations, etc., it is



652


MEKCtmiUS


not surprising that Merc, sometimes cures syphilis. It is wonderful
that the allopath hit upon it for this disease, and he cures or suppresses
enough cases by similarity to justify its continued use. When given
suitably it cures.

Another marked feature is the tendency to the forniation of pus.
With inflammation there is burning and stinging and the rapid forma-
tion of pus and the part is aggravated by both warmth and cold. Ab-
scesses burn and sting ; inflammation of joints is attended with pus
formation ; in inflammation of the pleura the cavity fills up with pus.
The discharges of pus are yellow-green. The Merc, gonorrhoeal dis-
charge is thick greenish-yellow, with stinging and burning in the urethra.

Rheumatic inflammation of joints and catarrhal inflammation of
mucous membrane are features running through the remedy, and these
are attended with sweat, and an astonishing feature is that the sweat
does not relieve, and there is even an aggravation while sweating.
Rheumatism in old syphilitic, gonorrhoeal and gouty patients. It is
similar enough to relate to some cases of psora, syphilis and sycosis.
It partakes of the nature of all three miasms.

After a prover has taken Merc, a long time he emaciates. This is
seen in old mercury takers and in syphilitics who have been mercurial-
ized. It is a great remedy in this condition — steady emaciation with
trembling, worse at night and from the warmth of the bed, great rest-
lessness, can’t find peace in any position. These miserable wretches,
who are breaking down, are great sufferers, whether psoric, syphilitic
or sycotic.

A strange feature is repeated swelling and abscess formation with-
out any heat. An abscess or swelling in a joint forms, and he sweats
from head to foot, is worse at night, loses flesh, trembles and is weak,
but there is no heat while the abscess goes on. Abscesses form when
the life force is so low that there is no tendency to repair ; a slow and
prolonged pus formation, no irritability in the abscess, no tendency to
granulate, it opens and keeps on discharging and seems dead. Merc,
will warm it up, stop the sweat and favor granulation.

The superficial ulceration is inclined to spread and become phage-
denic ; it is not deep but grows larger. These open ulcers are especially
seen in old syphilitics ; lardaceous base ; not much irritability, they are
even numb, and if pus is discharged it is greenish-yellow ; false granu-
lations appear. Merc. cor. is a greater remedy for the superficial, eat-
ing, phagedenic ulcer. At times Merc, takes on a gangrenous condi-
tion This may be seen anywhere, but especially on the lips, cheeks
and gums. Cancrum oris. Gangrenous chancre, foetid and black; a
sphacelus forms in the chancre and the part sloughs off. All these
conditions are aggravated by heat. A patient with a typical Merc,
kbscess rebels at times against the poultice, for it makes the trouble



MERCVRIl^S


^53


worse.

Trembling runs through the remedy, quivering all over. It has been
used wirh benefit in paralysis agitans. Tremor of the hands so that
he cannot lift anything or eat or write. Merc, is a great remedy in
children with epileptiform fits, twitching and disorderly motions. It
will help children to grow out of these incoordinate angular movements
of the hands and feet. Jerking, twitching and trembling, The mo-
tions of the tongue are disorderly and the child cannot talk. Convul-
sions. Involuntary motions which can be momentarily controlled by
volition. The restlessness is extreme.

The trembling, weakness, sweat, footer, suppuration and ulceration,
the aggravation at night and from heat and cold, give the earlier im-
pressions of the remedy.

The mental symptoms, which still more deeply show the nature of
the medicine, are rich. A marked feature running all through is hasti-
ness ; a hurried, restless, anxious, impulsive disposition. Coming in
spells, in cold cloudy weather, or damp weather, the mind will not
work, it is slow and sluggish and he is forgetful. This is noticed in
persons who are tending toward imbecility. He cannot answer ques-
tions right off, looks and thinks, and finally grasps it. Imbecility and
softening of the brain are strong features. He becomes foolish. De-
lirium in acute complaints. From his feelings he thinks he must be
losing his reason. Desire to Mil persons contradicting her. Impulse
to kill or commit suicide ; sudden anger with impulse to do violence.
She has the impulse to commit suicide or violent things, and she is
fearful that she will lose her reason and carry the impulses out. Im-
pulsive insanity, then, is a feature, but imbecility is more common than
insanity. These impulses are leading features. The patient will not
tell you about his impulses, but they relate to deep evils of the will, they
fairly drive him to do something. Given a Merc, patient, and he has
impulses that he tries to control, no matter what, Merc, will do some-
thing for him. During menses, great anxiety, great sadness. Anxious
and restless as if some evil impended, worse at night, with sweat.

A1 these symptoms are common in old syphilitics, broken down after
mercurial treatment and sulphur baths, at the springs, with their bone
pains, glandular troubles, sweating, catarrhs and ulcerations everywhere.

Merc, is suitable to rheumatic troubles of the scalp, and neuralgias
and brain trouble when there are burning, stinging pains and pains
affected by the weather, and when there arc head troubles that have
come on from suppressed discharges, such as suppressed otorrhoea
after scarlet fever, or when there arc head troubles in scarlet fever.
Think of Merc, if you are called to a child with sweating of the head,
dilated pupils, rolling of the head, and aggravation at night, who has
had scarlet fever or a suppressed ear discharge. Merc, cures linger-



^54


MERCURIUS


ing febrile conditions analogous to the typhoid state, but caused by
suppressed ear discharge. I have cured cases that were due to pack-
ing the ear with borax, iodoform, etc., the patient having first a remit-
tent and later a continued fever. This would go on for five or six
weeks and be relieved only when the discharge returned after a dose
of Merc. I remember a case of this type. It was called cerebro-spinal
meningitis ; the head was drawn back and twisted and held to one side.
It began as an otitis media with discharge which was suppressed. Two
or three doctors were called and could do nothing. In the night I
went to the bedside and got the history and symptoms of Merc. Merc,
re-established the discharge in twenty-four hours, the torticollis passed
away, the fever subsided and the child made an excellent recovery.
I can recall many such cases.

There is a tension about the scalp as if it were bandaged. Nervous
girls have headache over the nose and around the eyes as if tied with
a tape, or as if a tight hat were pressing on the head. Pressing, tear-
ing pain in the eyes. Burning pains in the temples ameliorated by
sitting up and moving about, worse at night. Periosteal pains worse
in cold, damp weather, in rheumatic and gouty constitutions, with sen-
sitiveness in the eyes and ears, sore throat and glandular swellings.
Headaches in old mercurialized syphilitics ; they become barometers ;
sensitive to the weather. The catarrhal headaches are very trouble-
some ; headache in those suffering from chronic catarrh with thick dis-
charge. The thick discharge becomes watery and the pain in the fore-
head, face and ears very distressing. These headaches are violent.
Chronic rheumatic headache from the suppression of a discharge from
any part, or from foot sweat suppressed ; alternation of foot sweat and
headache. When the foot sweat is gone he has pain and stiffness in
the joints. Silicea has that also. Sil, and Merc, do not follow each
other well, when well selected ; but if crude Mercury has been taken
for a long time. Silica, like Nitric acid, is a good remedy to eliminate
it when the symptoms agree.

With all headaches there is much heat in the head. Bursting head-
aches, fullness of the brain, and constriction like a band. Vise-like
pressure. He is sensitive to the air when he has headache. This is
true of Merc, all through. He is relieved in the room, but worse in
a warm or cold room, and violently worse from a draught. He wants
to be covered but is worse from heat. The hoop-like sensation is
worse at night.

Merc, is a wonderful remedy to ward off acute hydrocephalus after
measles and scarlatina ; the child rolls the head and moans, and the
head sweats. It is closely related to Apis, which is also a great rem-
edy after scarlet fever to ward off or cure hydrocephalus.

Exostoses in old syphilitics. Lacerating, tearing pains in the peri-



MERCURIUS


6J5

cranium. The whole external head is painful to touch. The scalp is
tense and sore. Foetid, oily sweat on the head. Children have moist
eczema, an excoriating, offensive eruption.

Mrc. is a wonderful eye remedy, especially for ‘‘colds.'’ Every cold
settles in the eye in gouty and rheumatic patients. Catarrh of the eyes
worse from looking into the fire or rather from sitting close to the fire ;
the radiated heat causes smarting. Eyelids forcibly drawn together as
if long deprived of sleep. Fog or mist before the eye. Merc, cures
iritis in syphilitics. The rule now-a-days is to use a mydriatic in iritis
to prevent adhesions. I have treated many cases and I have no desire
to dilate the pupil. I believe it is unnecessary. The homoeopathic
remedy will stop the iritis speedily so that no adhesions will form, and
if they have begun the remedy will remove them. Pains tearing and
burning around the eyes, in temples, etc. Tension of the scalp as if it
were a tight fitting cap, or tension as from a tape. Ulceration and in-
flammation of the cornea. Vascular appearance of the cornea ; inflam-
mation, especially confined to the cornea, sometimes pustular, some-
times diffused. There is copious lachrymation with all eye symptoms,
and the tears excoriate, causing a red line down the cheeks. Greenish
yellow, or a green discharge. Lids spasmodically closed. Great pho-
tophobia. In inflammatory conditions of all the tissues of the eye lids,
conjunctiva and deeper structures* Colds settle in the eye like Dulc,

Sometimes you will sec a little fine growth on the iris, growing
across the pupil and attached by k pedicle. It is really a syphilitic con-
dyloma. Merc, cures it in a fewv days. Inflammation of the retina
and choroid and of the optic ndrVK^. All sorts of disturbed vision. It
is useful in purulent ophthalmia, with swollen lids. Two kinds of con-
stitution need it, the syphilitic and the rheumatic or gouty. He can
not open the eyes ; they are spasmodically closed, and there is great
tumefaction.

Ear troubles. Horribly stinking greenish discharge. Green, thick,
acrid pus from the cars like the discharge from the nose and other
parts. Stinking otorrhoea. In otitis media with ruptured drum,
Merc, is a frequently required remedy. In Spring after a long, cold
Winter, the cold, damp weather causes many cases of otorrhoea ; it is
almost endemic in large cities. The ear drum heals like any other
place if the patient is put in good condition by the remedy. It not
well treated a hole will be left. Ears inflamed, with cramp-like pains.
Merc has stinging pain like Apis. All routinists will give Apis for
stinging pains, and yet it often is Merc, that the patient needs. Puru-
lent, offensive otorrhoea. Enlargement of the parotids and cervical
glands with all inflammations of the ears. Parotids sore and enlarged,
neck stiff, and head sometimes drawn back. Furuncles in external
canal. Fungous excrescences and polypi.



656


MERCURIUS


The nose troubles would take a long time to describe. Old syphi-
litics, with nasal bones affected, thick, greenish, yellow, acrid, stinking
discharge. Nosebleed and bloody discharge from the nose. Coryza
acrid, watery^ with pressure through the bones of the face, worse fromi
heat or cold, worse at night ; sensitive to every draught ; must get up
and walk the floor. It has coryza with much sneezing with an opposite
state, ameliorated lying, not at all during the night while lying in bed,
only in the daytime while up and about. The inhalation of hot air
feels good to the nose, but the heat arggravates the body. Incessant
sneezing. Bleeding, scurfy, red nostrils. Old catarrhal smell in the
nose. Rawness, burning and swelling. Inside of the nostrils smart-
ing and burning. Aching, tearing and pressure in the bones. Bones
of the face painful, feel as if pressed outward, and he wants to press,
but it is painful.

Merc, is not deep enough to cure the whole constitution in psoric
cases that are constantly taking cold. It cures the cold at once, but
implants its own nature and the patient catches cold oftener. It should
not be given often, not oftener than twice in a winter. Kali iod, is
better for the same burning in the face, running coryza, and aggrava-
tion from heat and warmth of the bed, and it will cure the coryza in.
a night when apparently Merc, is indicated. It is also an antidote to
Merc. Don’t give many doses of Merc, in psoric cases ; look for a
deeper medicine.

It has syphilitic eruptions and neuralgias of the face with or without
catarah. It is a great medicine for mumps ; it is a routine remedy for
this condition, which shows that it must be frequently indicated. It
cures where the symptoms agree.

Scorbutic gums in those who have been salivated. Rigg’s disease ;
purulent discharge from around the teeth. Toothache ; every tooth
aches, especially in old gouty and mercurialized patients. Looseness
of the teeth. Red., soft gums. Teeth black and dirty. Black teeth
and early decay of the teeth in syphilitic children, like Staph, Copious
salivation. Gums painful to touch. Pulsation in the gums and roots.
Gums have a blue red margin, or purple color, and are spongy and
bleed easily. Gums settle away, and the teeth feel long, and are
elongated. Teeth sore and painful so that he cannot masticate. Ab-
scesses of the gums and roots of the teeth.

The taste, tongue and mouth furnish important and distinctive symp-
toms. As the tongue is projected it is seen to be flabby, has a mealy
surface, and is often pale. The imprint of the teeth is observed all
round the edge of the tongue. The tongue is swollen as if spongy,
and presses in around the teeth and thus gets the imprint of the teeth.
Inflammation, ulceration and swelling of the tongue are strong features.
Old gouty constitutions have swollen tongue ; the tongue will swell



MERCURIUS


657


in the night and he will waken up with a mouthful. The taste is per-
verted, nothing tastes right. The tongue is coated yellow or white
as chalk in a layer. Ofensivc mouth ; putrid odors from the mouth
especially the mercurial odor of the salivated patient. The tongue
becomes clumsy ; difficulty in talking ; his speech is hardly intelligible.
Awkwardness of the tongue as in persons intoxicated. Ulcers flat ;
eating ulcers ; holes are eaten through the cheek. Eating away of
the soft palate and the bone of the hard palate is often eaten away.
Purulent formation in the antrum of Highmore and fistulae from the
mouth to the antrum. Fluoric acid and Silicea are more frequently
indicated in these fistulae, especially if the bone is involved. Copious
flow of foetid saliva. Sore mouth of children and nursing mothers ;
little aphthous patches with the mercurial odor and flabby, spongy
appearance of the mucous membrane and tongue. General diffused
inflammation of the mouth. The whole mucous membrane is sensi-
tive and painful, burning, stinging and smarting ; dryness with or
without aphthous patches. Thrush of children. Scorbutic gums.

Sore throat. It is a remedy for inflammation of the throat, with
spongy appearance, general diffused tumefaction, swelling of the
parotids, fulness and stiffness of the neck. Lardaccous base in ulcers ;
flat ulcers, spreading ulcers. Great dryness in the throat. The swell-
ing impairs the motion of all the, muscles that take part in swallowing.
Swallowing is attended with difficulty, pain and paralytic weakness,
and the effort to swallow forces the bolus up into the nose, and liquids
come out through the nostrils. The mercurial odor is a strong feature,
but Merc, often cures when that odor is not perceptible ; it has such
an affinity for the throat. It has chronic throat troubles and syphilitic
ulcers and patches. The inflammation extends upwards and down-
wards, red and pale patches, the red looking as if they would sup-
purate or ulcerate. The red spots become quite purple, but the more
purple they are the more they are like Lack, Tonsils dark red with
stinging pains. Quinsy, after pus has formed. It is useful in diph-
theria, and most cases are diffused, extensive patches or patches here
and there, with spongy appearance, but no ulceration. Tumefaction ;
and the exudations are upon a tumefied base. Stiff neck. Erysipela-
tous inflammation of the throat. Dark, sloughing, eating, corroding
ulcers in the throat.

He has aversion to meat, wine, brandy, coffee, greasy food, butter.
Milk disagrees, and comes up sour. Sweets disagree. He is turned
against his beer. The stoniach is chronically disordered ; eructations,
regurgitations, heartburn, etc. Sour stomach ,* it is foul. He has
nausea with vomiting and regurgitation of food. In such a stomach
food is like a load. Bad taste ; bitter mouth ; he tastes the food ; it
comes up sour. With all this the saliva constantly , runs from the

83



6j8


MERCURIVS


mouth. It docs not improve as digestion goes on. The half-digested
substances are vomited. It is like the state in persons v^^ho have de-
stroyed their stomach from crossing liquors, beer, wine and whisky.

The liver furnishes much trouble. Our forefathers for years took
blue mass every Spring to regulate the liver. They physicked them-
selves with it and tapped their liver every Spring with it, and as a
result they had worse livers than they would have had if the doctors
had stayed at home. Constipation, bilious habits and disordered
stomach. The fulness in the region of the stomach, coming in spells,
worse in cold, damp weather and warm, damp weather, worse in the
Spring, jaundiced condition, disordered stomach, the aggravation at
night and from the warmth of the bed, nightly feverishness and foul
mouth, will give you the Mere, state. Stitches in the liver. liver
symptoms worse lying on the right side. Many complaints of Merc,
arc aggravated by lying on the right side. The lung symptoms and
cough, liver, stomach and bowel symptoms are all worse while lying
on the right side.

In the abdomen we find colic, rumbling, distension, aches and pains,
stinging and burning. It has a great variety of stools, of diarrhoea
and constipation. It has a well-defined dysenteric condition. Slimy,
bloody stools with much straining, he feels as if he could never finish,
even when no more is passing, a **never-get-done'^ feeling. This is
the very opposite of Nux and Rhus in dysentery. These are relieved
if a little stool is passed, but Merc, and Sulph. will sit and strain, and
all the salts of Merc, have the same state. Merc, cor, has a more
violent attack, with violent urging to stool and to urinate, and intense
suffering, with burning in the parts and the passage of pure blood.
Merc., Ipec. and Aeon, are frequently indicated in epidemic dysentery
that comes in hot weather, and Ipec., Dulc. and Merc, are frequently
indicated in the dysentery of cold weather. You should go to the
bedside of a case of dysentery with the repertory or go home and
send medicine. Your first prescription should cure in epidemic
dysentery, and if you work cautiously you will cure every case. It
is a very simple condition to cure, but a very bad thing to get mixed
up. Do not give Arsenic just because it conforms to the dysenteric
condition, for if it does not cure it will mix up the case. Hesitate
about giving Ars, in dysentery until you arc perfectly sure it is indi-
cated. A few days ago I saw a patient who could not lie down because
of pain in both hypochondria ; he had incessant vomiting, inflam-
matory rheumatism of the ankles, hands, arms and shoulders, he had
purpuric spots on the arms and legs, he had inflammation of the
stomach, and was a perfect museum of diseases. He had had Phos.
and Ars. and many remedies very high, all supposed to be well selected
but Cadmium sulph. put biip to 9lccp in fifteen minutes. The point



MERCU^S


659


was that he wanted to keep perfectly still, and hence it was unlike Ars.,
although all the other symptoms were like Ars. That is a strong
feature of Cadmium sulph ; he wants to keep as still as Colch. and
Bry. For many years I have used it for such cases. I saw another
case of cancer with coffee-ground vomit, and Cadmium sulph. stopped
her vomiting, and she ate quite well until she died six weeks later.
The doctor in charge had given her Ars. and Phos. and Morphine till
she could take no more.

The urine burns and smarts. Frequent urging to urinate, drib-
bling a little ; bloody urine, great burning. Haemorrhage from the
urethra. Itching worse from the presence of urine. Gonorrhoea
which has existed for some time ; discharge thick, greenish-yellow,
and offensive. Smarting and burning in the urethra when urinating.
Loss of sexual power. Lascivious excitement with painful erections.
Ulcers on the prepuce and glans, making it suitable in chancre and
chancroid. Flat ulcers ; ulcers with lardaceous base. Inflammation
of the inner surface of the prepuce. Balanitis, offensive pus. In
chronic balanitis when pus forms behind the glans and under the fore-
skin, gonorrhoeal or psoric, consult Jacaranda caroba.

The woman has much tribulation. Burning, stinging in ovaries.
Screaming from pain. Stinging, tearing, cutting pains in the ovaries,
patient covered with vsweat. Copious, excoriating Icucorrhoea, parts
raw, sore, inflamed and itching, ; Stinging, itching and boring pains
in the uterus. Pains in the uteruli and ovaries at the menstrual period.
Milk in the breast of the non-pregnant woman at the menstrual period.
Milk in the breasts instead of the menstrual flow. I once had a freak
in a sixteen-year-old boy, who had milk in his breasts. I cured him
with Merc.

Menstrual flow light red, pale, acrid, clotted, and profuse or scanty.
The menses are sometimes suppressed. Women who have been in
the habit of taking mercury for biliousness remain sterile. (Coffee
drinkers often remain sterile also and you must stop their coffee.)
Amenorrhcea with ebullitions. Chancres on the female genitals. Aged
women have denuded genitals, rawness, soreness and false granula-
tions, which are always bleeding. Burning, throbbing and itching in
the vagina. Itching of the genitals from the contact of the urine ; it
must be washed off. In children, boys or girls, the urine burns after
urinating and they are always carrying the hands to the genitals. Little
girls have acrid Icucorrhoea causing burning and itching and much
trouble. Phlegmonous inflammation of the genitals. Boils and ab-
scesses at the menstrual period ; little elongated abscesses along the
margin of the mucous membrane and skin, painful, aggravated by
walking, forming during the flow and breaking after the period. This
with itching, causes great suffering.



66o


MERCURIUS


Morning sickness. A woman, while pregnant, has oedematous
swelling of the genitals. Diffused inflammation, soreness and fulness
of the genitals and pelvis, causing difficulty in walking, and she must
take to bed. In pelvic cellulitis in the early months of pregnancy Merc,
is an important remedy. Repeated miscarriages from sheer weakness
Merc, is a wonderful strengthener when properly used. Prolonged
lochia. Milk scanty and spoiled.

Merc, is one of the best palliatives in cancer of the uterus and mam-
mae. It will restrain and sometimes cure epithelioma. I knew one case
cured by the Proto-iodide, an ulcerated, indurated lump in the breast,
as large as a goose egg, with knots in the axilla, blueness of the part,
and no hope. The stooth attenuation, given as often as the pains were
very severe, took it away and she remained well.

The effect observed on the nose is not all of the Merc, coryza. Most
Merc, cases begin in the nose and travel down the throat, creating raw-
ness and scraping of the larynx, and rawness and soreness in the chest ;
laryngitis, tracheitis and bronchitis. Loss of voice, complete aphonia.
The course of the Merc, cold is downwards, even going on to pneu-
monia, with sweat, restlessness and aggravation from the warmth of
the bed. Of course many of the colds remain in the nose.

There are various conditions in the chest. Coughs ; colds that re-
main in the chest, lack of reaction and tardy recovery. The colds
finally settle in the bronchial tubes ; the chest feels as if it would burst
and the cough is worse tying on the right side. I look back over many
cases of patients who took cold from exposure and now look sickly and
sallow, with a dreadful cough and rattling on the chest ; every change
of the weather gives them a new cold, and they cannot lie on the right
side ; their tendency is to go into mucous phthisis or quick consump-
tion, The cough is worse in the night air. There are many pains in
the chest. He has a rheumatic constitution, is always sweating, worse
while sweating and from the extremes of heat and cold. Stitching
stabbing, rheumatic pains in the chest with night sweats. Bloody,
thick green expectoration. Suppuration of the lung, great quantities
of pus form. Tremendous orgasms, bubbling and flushes of heat
in the chest. With many complaints there is sore throat and rheuma-
tism and stiffness of the neck ; stiff neck with swollen glands and
goitre. Stiff neck with every cold ; stiffness of the side and back of the
neck. Induration and soreness of the cervical glands along with other
complaints.

Merc, especially affects the joints ; inflammatory rheumatism with
niLUch swelling, aggravated from the heat of the bed and from uncov-
ering. It is difficult to get just the right weight of clothing. Rheu-
matic affection with sweat, aggravation at night, from the warmth of
the bed and while sweating, with sickly countenance, ft especially at-



mercurius


66i


tacks the upper limbs, but is also found in the lower.

Tremulous condition of the extremities, like paralysis agitans.
Trembling of the hands with great weakness. Paralysis of the lower
limbs, and twitching, jerking and quivering of the paralyzed parts.
Arg, n., Phos., Stram,, Secale and Merc, have twitching of the muscles
of the paralyzed limb.

Soreness between the thighs and genitals. Ulcers on the legs ; ab-
scesses. (Edematous swelling of the feet. Cold perspiration. Copi-
ous sweat during sleep. Pain and sweat come on when comfortable in
bed ; bone pains. He covers up because he feels cold, but when he be-
comes warm the pains are aggravated.

Merc, is full of fever. Very seldom, however, has it a true, idio-
pathic, continued fever. It stands very low for continued fever alone,
but it is especially indicated in surgical fevers, at first remittent, but
later continued, such as come on from the suppression of discharges.
The Merc, patient about to go into a chill is chilly even when the chill
has not yet come on ; sensitive to the moving air in a warm room ; vio-
lently sensitive to a draught. Cold hands and feet. The sweat is pro-
fuse and offensive. The complaints in general arc worse while he
sweats, and the more he sweats the worse he is. He sweats copiously
and his greatest sufferings are in the sweat. Merc, does not have a
clear intermittent. Between the paroxysms he has liver disturbances,
diarrhoea, fever. In surgical fevers, bilious fevers, worm fever in
children, and remittent fevers thtre is much aching in the bones, great
sensitiveness to the air, aggravation at night in bed when the fever
runs highest, mercurial breath and sallow skin. The fever docs not
go so high and the skin is not so hot as in Bell, The loaded tongue
and the bilious fevers fade out after Merc. It is useful in hectic
fever in the last stages of consumption, and in exhausting diseases
with hectics, and in cancer when there is the aching, foul sweat, etc.
It acts wonderfully in catarrhal fever, grippe, etc., and when colds
extend to the chest and there are the copious discharges everywhere.
It is suitable in quasi-typhoids that have come out of remittents, symp-
tomatic typhoids, when the patient is icteric, low, prostrated, tremu-
lous, with quivering muscles, great exhaustion and continued fever.

There are many skin symptoms ; scurfy eruptions, vesicular erup-
tions, eruptions discharging pus. Vesicles burn and smart, with ex-
coriating discharges, especially on the head. Much itching of the
skin, violent, in all parts of the body, as from fleas, especially when
warm in bed at night. Copper-colored eruptions as in syphilis, and
mucous patches. The scurfy eruptions are especially marked. Ul-
cers on parts where the skin and flesh are thin over the bones. Of-
fensive forms of eczema. Most eruptions are moist with copious ooz-
ing. It cures shingles. The skin is sallow. Excoriating wherever



662


MERCURIUS


two parts come together. Rawness between the thighs and between
the scrotum and thighs. Eruptions in such places. It has fissures at
commissures, at the corners of the mouth and eyes ; rawness and bleed-
ing of the perinaeum rendering walking difficult.

This furnishes a basis for the Salts of Mercury.*

TOE SALTS OF MERCURY.

After studying Merc., corrosive mercury, the proto-iodide and the
bin-iodide, we may from some specific symptoms in the case say that
we prefer one of the salts of Mercury. When we go to rheumatic
and gouty cases with the aggravation from sweat, aggravation fromi
the warmth of the bed, the mercurial odor, etc., we can commonly say
that one of the Mercuries will cure this case.

MERCURIUS CORROSIVUS.

Merc. cor. has more excoriation and burning, more activity and
excitement, Merc, is slower and more sluggish. Merc. cor. is vio-
lent and active in its movements, it takes hold and runs its course
with greater activity. So with a mercury base we have often to pre-
fer this salt.

In the eye symptoms there is more excoriation. The pains, burn-
ing, smarting, etc., in the eruptions and ulcers are more violent. In
Merc, we have slow spreading ulcers, but in Merc. cor. there is great
eating; it will spread over an area as large as your hand in a night.
He has the mercurial odor and sweat, and he is sallow ; he needs mer-
cury, but a more active preparation than Merc, viv.

Merc. cor. has decided symptoms of its own, but they are limited.
You cannot tell the ptyalism, or the lardcceous ulcers apart. In sora
throat, if it is a Merc, case, the ulcers are spreading rapidly and burn-
ing and smarting like coals of fire, you would say that Merc, is not so
intense as this. You need Merc. cor. for the violence, the intense
burning, and the rapid spread. The throat is enormously swollen, the
glands are swollen, and the thirst is insatiable.

In dysentery there is more violence ; copious bleeding ; great anxiety,
can scarcely leave the stool a second, great tenesmus of rectum and
bladder ; urging to urination and stool is constant ; great burning in
the rectum. It is a violent case of dysentery. I would prefer Merc.
in ordinary Merc, cases, but if this patient is not relieved he will not
live, and Merc. cor. is needed here.

In the urinary organs the symptoms are violent. Albuminuria is
more marked in Merc. cor. than in Merc. It is one of the most fre-
quently indicated remedies in the albuminuria of pregnancy and



MERCURIUS


663


very useful remedy when gout is present.

From slight irritation of the foreskin of the male organ, the mucous
membrane and skin contract and phimosis takes place. Merc. cor.
relieves the itching and burning, and causes the purse-string to let
up. It is seldom indicated in gonorrhoea, but is called for when there
is greenish yellow or bloody watery discharge, with violent burning
and urging to urination and to stool, and violent painful erections.
Chancres spread with great rapidity.

Stitching, rending, tearing pains, here and there, especially in the
chest.


MERCURIUS CYANATOS.

Given a Merc, base and diphtheria, when the membrane is greenish
and inclined to spread through the nose and involve a large surface,
the Cyanide of Mercury is needed. It has exudation more marked
than any other form of Mercury. Malignant forms of diphtheria,
rapidly forming, and with phagedenic ulceration.

MERCURIUS lODATUS FLAVUS.

{Proto-iodide of Mercury.)

There are sore throats that especially call for the proto-iodide.
When in sore throats the inflammation and pain predominantly affect
the right side, and there is a tendency to remain on the right side, or
if the Merc, state is present and the sore throat goes from right to
left, it is the proto-iodide you want. The patient that needs this rem-
edy for constitutional troubles will be worse during rest and from a
warm room and better in the open air.

This is especially true when the patient needs Merc. prot. in neu-
ritis of the right arm that comes on in writers. The arm then is very
painful when writing, from passive motion, from rubbing, from
pressure, from both heat and cold, but better from walking in the open
air. Complaints are nearly all worse on the right side of the body.

MERCURIUS lODATUS RUBER.

(Bin-iodide of Mercury.)

Again, if in a Merc, patient with diphtheria, tonsillitis, etc., the
inflammation and pain begin on the left side, and incline to remain there
or spread to the right, the bin-iodide is indicated.

These two iodides have niore rapid and greater induration beneath
ulcers and chancres than Merc,^ and in old syphilitics the iodides are



664 MERCURIUS?

sometimes more useful.


MERCURIUS SULPHURICUS.

[Sulphate of Mercury, Turpeth mineral,)

Merc, sulph. will sometimes help, when you have a case of hydro-
thorax with quick, short breathing, etc., and burning of the chest.
If you go to an old case of hypostatic congestion, with dropsy, or a
case of dyspnoea from hydrothorax, when the Merc, base is present,
you will be astonished at the action of this sulphate.

CINNABARIS.

[Red Sulphide of Mercury,)

The symptoms are worse at night from warmth of the bed, and
when perspiring, like Mercurius, Worse from both heat and cold.
Catarrhal inflammation. Fig warts [Thuja). Ulcers. Many com-
plaints from eating. Syphilis in ali stages. Suppurating glands ;
chancres. It is best to study this remedy as a form of Mercurius,
which has a few cunning phases of its own. It is a deep acting rem-
edy in sycosis.

The patient desires to be alone. Aversion to mental work. For-
gets things which he intended to do. Mind crowded with thoughts
preventing sleep.

The pains in the head are violent ; worse after eating ; better by
heat and pressure. Fulness in the whole head. Constriction. Pain
in the cold forehead, which is ameliorated by heat. Tearing in the
forehead before the menstrual flow. Pain in the forehead and ver-
tex in the morning, worse lying on the left side and back, ameliorated
lying on the right side, and it passes off after rising. Shooting pains
in the left side of the head with flow of saliva and copious urine.
Headache with nosebleed. Sensitive scalp and skull. Supra-orbital
neuralgia.

Stitching, and dull pains in the eyes. Inflammation of the con-
junctiva ; worse at night. Red, congested lids. Ptosis. Weak vis-
ion. Iritis of syphilitic origin. The symptoms are worse at night.
Sharp paroxysmal pains from the warmth of the bed.

Roaring in the ears after eating. Itching in the ears.

Cold spot on root of nose Pressure on the bones of the nose.
Coryza with dirty yellow mucus drawn from posterior nares. Epis-
taxis ; pains in back and limbs.

The symptoms of the teeth are similar to Mercurius,

Tongue coated white every morning. Taste putrid, metallic and
bitter. Sore ulcerated mouth. Salivation. Inflammation of mouth



MEZEREUM


665


and throat with great thirst, worse at night. Dry mouth, and viscid
mucus in the throat. Fulness in the throat, with constant desire to
swallow. Dryness of the throat.

Aversion to food. Eructations, and vomiting. Tenderness of the
stomach.

Syphilitic buboes.

Dysentery, worse every night ; bloody mucous stools ; much strain-
ing. Diarrhoea, with greenish stools, worse at night. Protrusion of
anus during stool.

Copious urine. Pain as from an ulcer in urethra when urinating ;
it wakes him also at night, Albumin in the urine.

Inflammation of glans penis with profuse secretion of pus. In-
creased sexual desire. Swelling of prepuce with much itching.
Warts on the prepuce and fraenum, bleeding when touched. Chan-
cres on the prepuce of gangrenous odor. Inflamed and swollen chan-
cres, hard, discharging pus. Indurated, or neglected chancres.

Gonorrhoea, of yellowish green discharge, much pain during flow
of urine. Symptoms worse at night, and from the warmth of the
bed. The patient is sensitive to both a warm room, and to cold air.
Induration of testes.

Syphilitic laryngeal ulcers in a tubercular patient. Hoarseness in
the evening.

Pulse fast in the evening and night.

Stiff neck with pains shooting to occiput. Stitching pains each side
of spine in dorsal and lumbar regibns, worse on deep breathing.

Pain in the limbs at night. ' Sensitive to sudden changes in the
weather. Lame, bruised and stiff in all the limbs. Pains worse from
motion, Syphilitic nodes on tibia. Pain in tendo Achillis and os cal-
cis after walking. Numbness in the feet. Cold feet, day and night.
Wandering gout.

Burning itching of the skin, worse scratching. Itching all over.
Redness, and red spots on the skin. Pustules. Gangrenous ulcers.
Elevated ulcers. It is antidoted by Hepetr and 'Nitric acid. It is
closely related to Thuja,


MEZEREUM

The principal use of this remedy is in eruptions and ulcerations.
The most violent and important of its symptoms are those of mucous
membranes, skin and periosteum. The outer surfaces of the body are
in a constant state of irritation ; nervous feelings, biting, tingling,
itching, changing place from scratching. Even when there is nothing
to be seen, there is violent itching and the patient rubs and scratches
until the part becomes raw and then burns ; itching changes place ; the.

84


im



666


MEZEREUM


part becomes cold after scratching, cold in spots. Itching changing
place after scratching, especially when associated with no visible cause.
As soon as he gets warm in bed or as soon as he goes into a warm
room, the itching be^ns. Formication, itching, biting. The patient
is so nervous that he is compelled to move, to change positions.

Vesicular eruptions upon the skin, running a certain course, itch-
ing, burning like fire ; dries into a crust and disappears ; a new crop
appears near or in the same place. Vesicles form crusts beneath
which is ulceration ; these crusts turn white, chalk-like, are thick,
tough, and leathery. They are often elevated ; fluctuation beneath the
crusts ; pressure causes thick, white pus, sometimes yellow-white, to
ooze forth ; violent itching. The pains are aggravated by cold, but
the itching and restlessness are worse from heat. A child tears at the
eruption with its fingers when the crusts are present.

Scald-head ; thick, white, elevated crusts ; copious, white or yellow-
white pus, often offensive, putrid ; vermin are often found among the
crusts. Acrid pus eating away the hair ; the eruption spreads to any
part of the scalp, especially to the top ; it is also found beneath the
ears, and about the face and chin.

Eruptions with much itching ; dark, red rash with violent itching,
biting, tingling, crawling, changing place by pressure, rubbing or
scratching. Cases with a history of suppressed eczema or syphilis.
Eruptions upon the legs and arms, on parts with poor circulation as
the ears, wrists, backs of the hands ; skin eruptions followed by ulcers ;
discharging a thick, white, offensive matter. Especially useful where
eruptions have been suppressed by zinc ointment, mercurial salve, etc.
Eruptions on the face, eyes, ears and scalp in child or adult, which
have disappeared under the use of some ointment and inveterate ca-
tarrhal conditions have Resulted, or in which eye symptoms have de-
veloped ; conjunctiva chronically swollen, ectropion, granular lids, con-
junctival surfaces like raw beef ; fissures in the corners of the eye ; red
cicatrices about the eyes where the eruptions have been ; dry spots and
enlarged veins about the eyes and nose ; skin feels indurated.

Ear troubles from suppressed eruptions ; thickening of the mucous
membranes of the ears; degeneration of the drum of the ear; deaf-
ness, otorrhoea.

Offensive and troublesome catarrh of the nose ; incrustations, thick-
ening of the mucous membrane, ulceration ; he hawks thick, yellow*
matter out of the throat ; has been cauterized, atomized, etc., and yet -
the offensive ozsena remains. The periosteum is affected so that it
breaks down. Advanced state of atrophic degeneration of the mu-
cous membranes of the throat and nose.

In the throat, thickening, burning, chronic redness, tumefection,
smarting, soreness on swallowing; granulations and ulcerations of the



MEZEREUM


667


throat. Perforating ulcers of the soft palate, all due to suppressed
eruptions. Give the remedy and you will have a copious eruption in
the original place ; if not, there will be no relief. Often the deafness
cannot be cured, because the drum of the ear or the whole ear is
destroyed, is white, chalky, and contains no blood-vessels ; a state of
atrophic catarrh, so that there is too much structural change for hear-
ing to be restored, yet the patient can be cured.

Has all the catarrhal states, the ulcerations and patches of copper-
colored eruptions found in syphilis.

When outward manifestations are pronounced, its internal manifes-
tations are scanty. It tends to manifest the sufferings of the body
on the skin ; it throws the physical evils to the surface, hence, the
Mez. patient is in fairly good health when the eruptions are out ; when
they are suppressed, then catarrhal affections, bone diseases, nervous
disorders, strange mental symptoms constipation, rheumatism, and
joint symptoms appear ; he becomes a mental wreck.

Religious or financial melancholy ; melancholy which shapes itself
upon the patient's business ; indifference to everybody and everything ;
irritable ; thought is difficult ; memory weak ; absent minded ; has no
rest when alone, yet averse to talking. Insanity with melancholy,
sadness, and a history of eruptions that have called for Mez.

Violent headaches and brain affections ; pains rending, tearing ; bor-
ing ; head painful to touch ; syi^ilitic affection of the brain ; head-
aches through the sides of the head as if in the bone ; feels as if the
head would be crushed (closely related to Merc, and Kali tod.).
Headache extending from the root of the nose to the forehead (Merc.
and Hepar). Pains in the head cause faintness (Hepar), Pains in
the bones of the skull aggravated by touch ; bones feel as if scraped.

The hair mats together. “Head covered with thick, leather-like
crusts, under which thick, white pus collects here and there, and glues
the hair together. Scabs on the head look chalky and extended to the
eyebrows and nape of neck. Elevated, white, chalk-like scabs with
ichor beneath, breeding vermin.”

Neuralgias, sciatica, pain in the spine, in the brachial plexus and
down the arms ; neuralgia of the face ; all following suppressed erup-
tions.

The Mez. patient is sensitive to warm air as far as the skin and
eruptions are concerned, but very sensitive to damp or cold weather
as to the neuralgias. After the eruptions have given place to inter-
nal manifestations, the patient is chilly, sensitive to the changes of the
weather, worse in stormy weather; worse after a bath, because he
takes cold and his internal complaints are aggravated. The eruptions
are aggravated after washing. When the eruptions are not out, the
skin is hot and he wants something to cool it ; he is better from cool



MOSCHUS


668

water ; there is simply a redness at this time. The itching is aggra*
vated from bathing in warm water.

Ulceration about the roots of the teeth; a scrofulous condition ot
the gums, which bleed, settle away from the teeth ; the teeth decay
suddenly.

The face is sickly, full of ulcers, old scars, boils, etc. The anaemic
face may flush up at times, but it is usually pale, gray, and waxy, ex-
pressive of a cachexia met with in some bone diseases.

Sensation of goneness, fear, apprehension, faintness in the stom-
ach, as if something would happen ; every shock, pain and hearing bad
news, cause this apprehensive, hungry, faint, weak, all-gone feeling
in the pit of the stomach. It comes on when the door-bell rings, if
the patient is expecting the postman, while waiting at the depot for
the arrival of a friend or the departure of the cars ; on being intro^
duced to some one, he experiences a thrill beginning in the stomach
is ‘‘frightened in the stomach.'’ Cal, Kali carb,, Phos. and Mez.
have this. These ''solar-plexus” individuals often have a deep cracked
tongue and are hard to cure.

Worse from the warmth of the bed (hence related to Merc, and
syphilis). Neuralgia worse in bed and at night, relieved by the ex-
ternal application of heat, but worse afterward ; better in the open air.

Inflammatory rheumatism, worse from the warmth of the bed and
at night ; worse from touch ; pains run down the bones ; bursting sen-
sation in the bones. They feel enlarged ; tearing pains in the perios-
teum, necrosis, caries, fistulous openings discharging briny particles
and large ulcers surrounded by pustules.

MOSCHU&

Moschus cures many hysterical girls who have come to adult age
without ever learning what obedience means. They are self-willed,
obstinate and selfish. When they have been encouraged to resort to
crafty cunning, to have every whim gratified from infancy to eighteen
years of age they become fit subjects for Mosch., Asaf., Ignatia and
Valer. They not only have volumes of real and imaginary symptoms,
but they become adepts at producing at will a kaleidoscopic complex
of symptoms, increasing in quantity and intensity until all their own
desires are attained, and the onlooker, be he or she nurse, physician or
bewildered mother, is overw^helmed, dismayed and in retreat. How-
ever much they pretend to be honest and truthful their reported sen-
sations are untrustworthy. They have traded upon their sensations
and imagination so long that a direct effort to give a truthful state-
ment is unsuccessful. The most erratic and unexpected neuropathic
phenomena arc always in appearance. The physician cannot measure



MOSCHUS


669


these cases by his experience and say what is common and uncommon.
He is compelled to fall back upon the one word that covers a multi-
tude of these manifestations, viz., “Hysteria.” Moschus is often indi-
cated in these constitutions and cures much that is morbid, when its
own peculiar symptoms agree. When one of these girls becomes sick
from taking cold the acute symptoms will be told with a host of her
imaginary sensations. The globus hystericus is generally present,
hyperaesthesia of the skin, quivering of the muscles, wakefulness, pal-
pitation, excitement, fainting ‘and ‘trembling. “Dreadful” pain all
over the body, rush of blood to head, cramps in hands and feet, con-
vulsions of whole body. It is not generally known that the morbid
sensations and functions correspond with the mental state of the indi-
vidual. When the functions and tissue symptoms arc hysterical or
erratic the mental state will be found to be correspondingly hysterical.
When the peculiar Moschus symptoms of the face is present, viz.: one
cheek red and cold, the other pale and hot, there is certainly some
hysterical perversion in the mind of that patient. Many times it is
possible to suspect morbid mental states by knowing morbid sensa-
tions and functions. There is a kind of order in all morbid expres-
sions seen in sick people. Sensitive to cold, and complaints come on
from becoming cold. In addition to numerous hysterical mental
symptoms she has violent fits of anger with rage and scolding until
she is blue in the face and falls in a faint. Dread of death, and talks
only of death when there is nof serious complaint. Anguish and pal-
pitation. Peevishness and quaifelsomeness. In a constant hurry, and
lets things fall from her hands. Foolish gestures and complaint of
pain. Apprehension, trembling and palpitation. Fear of lying down
lest she die.

Sensation of falling from a height, or as if rapidly turned around.

Vertigo on moving head or eyelids, ameliorated in open air ; with
nausea and vomiting and fainting.

The headaches are ameliorated from becoming warm, and in the
fresh air. Tension in back of head and nape. Aching in head, with
cold feeling. Pressive, stupefying headache, mostly in forehead, with
nausea, aggravated on motion, ameliorated in fresh air. Hysterical
headaches, with copious colorless urine. Constriction as with cord.
Pain as if a nail in occiput, aggravated in room, ameliorated in fresh
air.

Eyes staring. Sudden blindness or dim vision, coming and going.
Eyes turned up, fixed and glistening.

Rushing sounds in ears as from wind, or fluttering as the wing of
a bird. Detonation in ears as from the report of a cannon, with a
few drops of blood. Nervous deafness in paroxysms, or after a mad
fit.



MOSCHCS


670


Epistaxis and illusions of smell.

One cheek is red and cool, the other is pale and hot. Heat in the
pale face and dim vision. Tension in face. Pale face with sweat.
Earthy pale face. Moving of lower jaw as if chewing.

Mouth and throat dry and hot ; bitter, putrid taste ; great thirst,
especially in hysterical conditions.

Craves beer or brandy. Aversion to food. The sight of it makes
her sick. Vomiting. Pressive, burning pain and distension of stom-
ach. Fainting during meals. Waterbrash. Hysterical hiccoughing.
Nausea when thinking of food. Drawing in at the umbilicus {Plb.).
Prolonged vomiting of food. Fulness in stomach after eating. Vom-
iting blood. Stomach easily disordered.

Tympanitic distension of abdomen with sharp pains. No flatus up
or down, yet greatly distended. Cramping pains.

Involuntary stools during sleep. Copious watery stools during
night. Stitching in anus to bladder.

Copious colorless watery urine. Urine passed during the night is
offensive and full of mucus.

In the male, violent sexual excitement. Emissions without erec-
tions.

In the female, violent sexual desire. Menses too early and profuse,
with drawing pains ; tingling in genitalia and fainting. Bearing down
sensauon. i i ' I

Erratic nervous phenomena during pregnancy.

Laryngismus stridulus in self-willed girls when they fail to have
their own way. Constriction of larynx as from vapor of sulphur.
Spasms of larynx when becoming cold. Spasmodic croup in nervous
children after punishment.

Dyspnoea and oppression of chest and heart. Spasmodic asthma in
extremely nervous women and children.

Constriction of chest. Spasms of chest and diaphragm, turns blue
in face and foams at mouth on becoming cold. Paralysis of chest,
rattling, cannot expectorate ; fainting.

Palpitation in hysterical girls. Palpitation, oppression of chest,
fainting, excitement, with copious colorless urine. The heart seems
to quiver when the pulse is normal.

Aching in limbs. Restlessness in legs, and tibia cold. One hand
hot and pale, the other cold and red.

Heat in evening in bed, on right side only ; wants to uncover. Per-
spiration smelling like musk in the morning.

Cold skin, trembling, fainting and palpitation.



MURIATIC ACID


67


MURIATIC ACID.

When treating a low form of continued fever with extreme pros-
tration Arsenicum, Muriatic acid and Phos. acid force themselves upon
the mind. With Arsenicum there has been the anxious restlessness ;
with Phos. add there has been the mental prostration, and then the
muscular weakness ; with Muriatic acid the muscular weakness comes
first, and there has been history of restlessness and the mind has been
stronger than could be expected. With this great muscular exhaustion
with jaw hanging down and the patient sliding down in bed and soon
the involuntary stool and urine, this remedy is forced upon the mind.
Paralytic weakness is what it must be called. Soon the tongue is
paralyzed, as well as the sphincters of the bladder and rectum. It
seems to be eminently fitted for the lowest forms of zymotic fever
when the above symptoms are present. He finally becomes uncon-
scious. There has been some restlessness, but nothing like Arsenicum
and Rhus tox. He refuses to talk because it frets him to do so. Phos.
acid is slow answering questions because of exhaustion of mind
which makes him unable to think.

The vertigo comes on moving eyes, and on lying on the right side.
This vertigo is sometimes associated with liver disease. A stout, full-
blooded jaundiced man about forty had suffered much from pain in
the liver, with great soreness, was comfortable only when lying on
left side; when he turned on his back or right side an anxious vertigo
would come at once and he wouM break out in copious sweat, and be
forced back to the left side. Muriatic acid made a complete cure of
this liver trouble, which had been pronounced serious.

The headache is aggravated moving the eyes and rising up in bed.
ameliorated by walking about slowly. Occipital headache with dim
vision, aggravated by effort to see. Heaviness in occiput. Numb-
ness in forehead. Soreness in occiput. Feeling as if hair were stand-
ing on end. Heat in top of head.

Perpendicular half sight. The eye symptoms ameliorated in the
dark. Stitching pain. Burning, extending left to right eye, amelior-
ated washing. Itching in the eyes.

Hardness of hearing ; loud crackling sounds during the night. The
sound of voices unbearable. Buzzing in the ears.

The nose is stopped. Nosebleed in whooping cough, in zymotic
fevers, in diphtheria and scarlet fever. Dark putrid blood from nose.

The lower jaw hangs down in typhoid fever. Margin of lips dry,
sore and cracked. Burning lips.

Mouth and tongue coated white.

Sordes on the teeth. Gums swollen and bleeding. Teeth become
loose. Tongue dry, heavy stiff and paralyzed. Mouth dry. Ulcera-



672


MURIATIC ACID


tion of mouth and tongue. Red tongue. Blueness of the tongue.

Mucous membrane of lips denuded. Sore mouth of nursing infants

Mouth studded with ulcers. Deep ulcers with black base.

Violent inflammation of the throat. Dryness of the throat. Dark
red throat with ulcers. Greyish white exudations. White exudations
resembling diphtheria. Gangrenous sore throat. Hawks out foetid
mucus. Diphtheria with extreme prostration.

Great thirst. Thirst during chill and thirstlcss during the fever.
Aversion to meat. Craves stimulants. Eructation bitter and putrid.
Spasmodic action of oesophagus. Vomiting sour. Involuntary swal-
lowing. Emptiness in stomach, not ameliorated by eating. Empty

sensation in stomach and abdomen without desire for food. Empti-

ness in stomach from 10 a. m. till evening. Emptiness in abdomen
in the morning after the usual normal stool. Indigestion ; faintness ;
constipation ; confusion ; sleepiness after eating.

Pressing in the liver. Soreness, and enlarged liver. Fulness and
rumbling in abdomen.

Watery stools, involuntary while urinating. Stools pass unnoticed.
Dark brown stools, with blood. Much flatus with stools Urging
aggravated by motion. Dysentery, putrid blood and slime. Haemor-
rhage from intestines of dark liquid blood. Prolapsus ani whil^
urinating. Urging to stool while urinating. Marked relaxation and
itching of anus.

I^arge, dark, purple haemorrhoids, extremely sensitive to touch. In-
flammation of tht pile tumors, hot and pulsating ; must lie with limbs
wide apart. Bleeding piles. Burning and cutting during stool. Burn-
ing after stool, ameliorated by warm applications, aggravated from,
bathing with cool water. Excoriation of anus. Fissures.

The urine flows in a feeble stream. Must wait a long time for
urine to start ; must press so that anus protrudes. This is in keeping
with the general paralytic muscular weakness in the body. Involun-
tary flow of urine and stool in low fevers. Burning and cutting in
the urethra while urinating, tenesmus follows.

Impotency ; desire weak. Bloody, watery discharge from the
urethra. Scrotum bluish. Itching of the scrotum not ameliorated
by scratching. Margin of prepuce sore.

Pressing in genitals as if menses would appear. Menses too early
and profuse. Ulcers on genitalia with putrid discharges. Cannot
bear least touch, not even of sheet on genitals. Leucorrhosa with
backache. Puerperal fever with extreme prostration, dropped jaw,
sliding down in bed, suppressed lochia. Stool and urine putrid and
involuntary.

Short breath with rattling after drinking. Breathing seems to
come from stomach. Oppression of chest



NAJA


673


Pulse slow and weak, intermits every third beat.

Pressing pain in back. Pressing, drawing, tired feeling in small
of back. Burning in spine.

Heaviness of arms. Numbness and coldness of fingers at night.
Lower limbs dusky. Putrid ulcers on legs, with burning margins.
Swelling of right tendo Achillis. Feet cold and blue. Burning of
palms and soles. Swelling and burning of tips of toes. Tearing in
limbs, ameliorated by motion. Pain in the limbs, during intermittent
fever.

Evening fever with chill with or without sweat. Chill mingled with
fever. The image of this remedy is found in typhoid and yellow
fever. Perspiration during first sleep. Symptoms worse when per-
spiring.


NAJA.

The use of Naja has extended far beyond its proving. So many
of the Ophidian family present symptoms in common with it, that
much has been presumed — truly so. Many characteristics run through
these remedies, each remedy having its own peculiar sphere. Taken
together the family presents a wide range of curative action.

Mure, of Brazil, thought thsut the snake family presented curative
powers for the healing of the nations.

In the mineral kingdom, man may find his remedy when sick, so in
the t^egctable and animal kingdom. It is possible that the product of
the serpent may be everything needed for the healing of man. Ex-
tend this to the whole animal kingdom and it is probably so. There
seems to be everything existing in one kingdom that exists in another.
The lowest is the mineral, the next the vegetable, and last the animal
kingdom. If we had a perfect knowledge of any one kingdom, we
could probably cover the entire scope of curative possibilities. But
we have only a knowledge of a few remedies in each kingdom.

Another idea has been advanced that in any particular region, the
vegetable kingdom provides all that is necessary for curing in that
region. If we were acquainted with all the vegetable growths, how
much we would know in comparison with what we do knowl It is
highly probable that there is a throwing off from the sick human race
of something that is absorbed by the plants. The evils that are thrown
off by man may be absorbed by the vegetable kingdom. Plants will
correspond to men in the region in which they grow, if there is any-
thing in this. In two thousand years there might be a necessity for
some kind of a check upon the growth of plants. The absorption of
these evils may cause them to vary in species, and if they continue to
grow and each to absorb the evils from the human race, they will com

85



674

tinue to differ. This favors evolution and explains it in a sense.

It is important to compare the symptoms of Naja widi those of the
other snakes. The patient is disturbed by closeness of the collar, <
after sleep. There are exhaustion and trembling, tremblii^ of the
muscles. Its direction is somewhat like Loch., from left to right, i. e.,
the ovarian pains, the diphtheria, the joint affections go from left to
right. Naja, like Lack., is < in damp weather. On inflamed sur-
faces it produces grayish exudations. It does not partake so exten-
sively of this character as do Loch, and Crotalus, There is only a
shadow of the septic in Naja, but it is extensive in Lack, and ex-
tremely marked in Crotalus. Naja is not a* subject to haemorrhage
as cither Lack, or Crotalus.

There is trembling of the muscles, a rheumatic diathesis, and tend-
ency of all complaints to settle about the heart. It is used in valvular
troubles of the heart, in young persons who grow up with cardiac
valvular diseases. The whole trouble settled about the heart. This
suggests Naja, and Naja has often cured. If the valvular trouble is
congenital it can not be cured ; but if not, it shows that all the disturb-
ing forces have settled about the heart. All the symptoms have set-
tled about the heart ; Naja has this. In school boys and girls who
have no symptoms this is the generic remedy for this kind of com-
plaint. Always prescribe Naja unless guided away from it by some
specific symptom.

Naja has more nervous, Lack, more septic symptoms. Naja, marked
agitation without sepsis. Lack., all the nervousness with a tendency to
haemorrhage and .sepsis ; black blood, like charred straw ; dark clotted
blood.

Naja has surging of the blood upwards, like Lack — a distressing
symptom. There is marked dyspnoea, cardiac or otherwise. There
is stuffing up of the chest ; great rawness of the trachea and larynx
the whole passage is raw as if excoriated.

There is much sneezing, with running of water from the nose ; in-
ability to lie down at night ; dryness of the air passages of the nose,
hay fever. The patient has suffocative attacks in August.

The whole chest is in a state of congestion ; emptiness of the left
side of the chest ; low pulse or intermittent pulse. With all the cron-
plaints of the chest there is inability to lie on the left side. Numbness
of the left arm. There is dyspnoea ; if he goes to sleep, he wakes up
suffocating, gasping, choking, or he starts from sleep as if from a
dream. In most complaints there is inability to lie on the left side.

There is a dry, hacking cough with sweating in the palms of the
hands that is cur^ by Naja. These cardiac cases are often attended
by a dry, hacking cough, a cough with every litde exertion. It k not
a catarrhal state, nor is it tubercular. The heart beats rfoisly ai^



will not be urged to work, and a cough comes on from exertion. Cac-
tus also has a cardiac cough.

The extremities are cold and blue and the head hot. The head
symptoms are < in a warm room ; the head feels warm, fevered, yet
the feet and limb do not become warm. There is copious sweating
of the hands and feet, causing the gloves and shoes to rot out ; but the
sweat is not offensive. There is a sense of fullnes and puffiness of
the hands and feet, showing a slow circulation in the veins which we
might expect.

We might naturally expect that this patient would be intense and
excitable, which is the case. There is a suicidal tendency.

The headaches are nondescript ; of a congestive character all over
the head, especially in the occiput. Headaches accompanied by a
quick and nervous pulse.

Profound sleep is consistent with all the snakes. There is deep,
profound sleep with stertorous breathing.

She wakes with a headache every morning. It is natural for the
Naja headache to be present in the morning and wear off with exer-
tion. The other complains are < exertion. Tlie mind symptoms are
< exertion of the mind.

These are symptoms in connection with hay fever; The rawness in
the throat and larynx ; dreadful aching in the throat extending to the
larynx, which swallowing does not relieve. The Lack, state is ex-
pressed more by a lump in the throat ; grasping of the throat with a
sense of choking.

The Naja patient is subject Jo severe attacks of bronchitis. There
is rawness between the larynx jmd trachea, < after coughing.

This is a great remedy in asthma, especially cardiac asthma. The
breathing is so bad that he cannot lie down.

Useful in chronic nervous palpitation ; palpitation after exertion of
any kind. Chronic nervous palpitation with inability to speak on ac-
count of choking.

There is a continued, dull, aching pain through the back between
the shoulders, associated with cardiac affections. Sometimes there is
little beside this sensation of heat, of aching, to indicate the remedy ;
he is so tired in that spot that he wants to lie down or lean backwards
to rest his back.

The palpitation is < lying on the left side, < walking.

This is the most useful of all the remedies we have in a cardiac
state with very few symptoms. It is true that this region is particu-
larly singled out by Naja to produce its symptoms.



^7^ KATllUM AKSENtCOSUM

the morning on waking. Burning in the eyes ; in the evening, in thei
open air, while reading. Pressing pain in the eyes ; smarting as from
smoke ; sore and tender when reading ; stitching pains in the eyes.
Paralysis of the upper lids ; of the optic nerve. Photophobia in day-
light. Pupils dilated: left eye larger than right. Redness of the
VEINS. Staring eyes ; stiffness of the lids ; of the eyeballs. Strabis-
mus. Swollen eyes ; uds ; oedematous lids ; supra-orbital oedema.

Ulceration of the cornea. Weak eyes and vision ; vision blurred ; tires
out when reading. Dark colors before the eyes. Vision dim, on
looking long ; wipes eyes for relief. Flickering, foggy vision.

Hemiopia. Myopia. Sparks before the eyes.

The ears are hot ; itching in the ears. Noises : morning, evening,
with vertigo, humming, ringing, roaring, rushing in the right ear ;
singing. Pain in ears: morning, stitching, tearing, behind the ears.
The ears feel stopped. Hearing acute ; for noises ; impaired.

Catarrh with pain in forehead and root of nose, post-nasal with
viscid mucus. Coryza: worse in open air, with cough, fluent or dry,

fluent alternating with dry ; discharge : copious, crusts, dry bloody

crusts, hard bluish mucus, offensive, purulent, suppressed, thick, viscid,
WATERY, yellow. Dryness in nose. Epistaxis after removing crusts
from nose ; bright red blood. Obstruction of nose at night (right) ;
morning on waking ; mucous membrane thickened and it is difficult
to breathe through the nose. Ozaena. The nose is red. Pain in the
nose, in the roof of nose ; burning, pressing at root of nose ; rawness
in nose. Smell acute at first, later wanting. Frequent, violent
sneezing.

Corners of lips cracked and indurated. Discoloration of the face ;
bluish, around eyes ; earthy ; pale ; red ; yellow ; liver spots. Face is
drawn. Eruptions on the face ; forehead and lips ; around the
MOUTH ; on the nose ; comedones ; herpes on lips ; moist eruptions ;
pimples ; vesicles. The face is hot and itching. Pain on moving the
jaw. The face feels puffed. Stiffness of muscles of mastication.
Swelling in the morning on waking ; molar bones feel swollen ; oedema-
tous ; swollen parotids. Twitching of face. Ulcer on the lips.
Aphthae in the mouth ; bleeding gums ; cracked and corrugated tongue.
Discoloration : redness of mouth and tongue ; white tongue ; yellow
tongue. Dryness of mouth ; tongue ; flabby tongue. Inflammation of
mouth and tongue. Salivation and saliva is viscid. Stammering
speech. Taste bitter in the morning ; metallic, saltish, sour, sweetish.
Ulceration in mouth. Vesicles in mouth and on tongue ; burning.
The teeth become loose. Pain in the teeth ; night ; pulsating ; warmth
ameliorates ; jerking pains, tearing pains.

Ch(A:ing ; constriction of oesophagus ; dryness in throat ; worse in
the morning ; after a cold. Throat red and glossy, purple red ; hawks



NATRUM AR8ENICX>SUM


679


frequently to raise white mucus, worse in the open air. Inflamma-
tion ; dark red, covered with yellow mucus. Sensation of a lump in
the throat; gray exudation in the throat. It is said to have cured
diphtheria. Mucus in the throat ; tough gelatinous, greyish, yellow,
white, from posterior nares. Pain in throat on swallowing, on empty
swallowing, but no pain on swallowing food or drink ; burning, sore,
stitching. Roughness in the throat ; scraping in the throat. Swal-
lowing difficult. Swollen pharynx, uvula and tonsils ; oedematous :
uvula hangs down like a water bag. Constriction in the region of the
thyroid gland. Stiffness in the sides of the neck.

Appetite increased, ravenous, wanting ; aversion to fats, to meat,
to his cigar ; sensation of constriction in the stomach. Desires beer,
bread, cold drinks, sweet things. Disordered stomach ; by milk.
Stomach is distended ; sensation of emptiness ; eructations afternoon,
after eating ; empty, tasting of food, sour after eating, waterbrash.
Fulness in the stomach after eating. Heartburn. Flushes of heat,
heaviness after eating. Hiccough after eating, indigestion is Very
marked. Loathing of food. Nausea ; after eating ; constant ; during
cough ; after cold drinks ; with headache ; during menses. Pain in.
the stomach : after eating ; burning after warm things ; cramping ;
CUTTING ; gnawing ; pressing after eating ; soreness ; stitching. Pulsa-
tion in the stomach. Retching when raising mucus from the throat.
Sinking sensation. Sensation of a stone in the stomach. Tension in
the stomach. Thirst : morning ; evening ; night ; burning thirst ; ex-
treme thirst ; unquenchable thirst ; jdrinks often but small drinks.
Thirstlessness. Vomiting : on coughing ; after eating ; bile ; bitter ;
blood; mucus; sour; watery.

Distension of abdomen after eating ; flatulence ; fulness, gurgling,
hardness. Heavy feeling in abdomen. Inflammation of liver ; spleen.
Liver affections. Pain in the abdomen ; at night ; after eating ; from,
flatus ; before a diarrhoea ; before stool ; better after stool and after
passing flatus : in hypochondria ; hypogastrium ; in region of umbili-
cus. Cramping ; before stool, better by passing flatus and stool. Cut-
ting ; before stool. Drawing in abdomen ; in hypochondria. Sore,
tender abdomen ; in hypochondria. Stitching in abdomen ; in hypo-
chondria ; in inguinal region ; in spleen. Nervous feeling in abdomen.
Rumbling in abdomen ; as if a diarrhoea would come on. Affections
of the spleen. Swollen inguinal glands. Tension in abdomen, in
hypochondria.

Constipation, alternating with diarrhoea ; stool hard. Diarrhoea :
evening ; daytime ; morning ; drives him out of bed ; night ; after mid-
night ; frequent stool during daytime ; from becoming cold ; from cold
drinks ; front taking cold ; worse after eating ; during menses ; after
.MILK ; after vegetable ; stool : bloody, copious, frequent, mucous, paifl-



68o


NATRUM ARSENICOSUM


less, pasty, scanty^ soft, thin, watery, yellow\ Excoriation of anus.
Flatus copious and offensive. Itching of anus. Pain : burning
during and after stool ; cramping, better after stool ; cutting, during
stool and in the hypogastrium ; before stool ; soreness and stitching ;
tearing during stool ; tenesmus during stool. Urging to stool ; in-
effectual ; after stool.

Sore pain in bladder relieved by urging ; urging to urinate at
night ; constant ; frequent. Urination difficult ; frecjuent ; involuntary
at night in sleep ; unsatisfactory. Burning and aching in the kidneys.
Burning in the urethra when passing urine. Urine : albuminous ;
burning ; dark ; pale ; copious at night ; clear as water ; offensive ,
scanty ; with mucus and phosphate. Specific gravity decreased ; loio.

Morning erections ; incomplete. Inflammation of glans penis,
prepuce and testes. Stitching of the genitals, penis, scrotum. Sore-
ness left testis. Seminal emissions. Swollen penis and testes.

In the female the desire is increased. Leucorrhoea ; copious ;
offensive ; thick ; yellow. Menses : copious ; too soon ; protracted ;
scanty. Metrorrhagia. Pain in the uterus.

Dryness and constriction in the larynx ; scraping slate-colored
mucus from the larynx ; mucus is detached with difficulty ; burning
and soreness in the larynx ; roughness in larynx. The symptoms of
the larynx are worse from dust, smoke or cold air. Voice: hoarse-
ness with coryza ; lost ; weak. Respiration is fast and deep ; miner's
asthma from coal dust ; difficult on ascending, short.

Cough : morning ; afternoon ; evening ; night ; from deep breathing ,
dry at night ; in the morning and from exertion ; dry teasing cough
all day ; exhausting ; hacking ; from Irritation in larynx and trachea ;
loose ; racking, short, spasmodic ; from tickling in larynx and trachea ;
violent ; worse in a warm room. Expectoration : morning, evening,
bloody, difficult, mucous, offensive, purulent, tasting bitter, flat,
putrid, viscid, yellow.

Anxiety and constriction of the chest. Eruptions, pimples. Sensa-
tion of fulness in the chest. Hcemorrhage from the lungs. Pneu-
monia and phthisis in miners from dust of coal. Irritation in the
bronchial tubes in the morning. Oppression of chest on exertion and
deep breathing ; heart. Pain in the chest, during cough ; in the heart ;
burning, cutting below the seventh rib ; pressing ; rawness ; sore from
coughing ; stitching. Palpitation of the heart ; night ; anxious ; ascend-
ing steps ; exertion ; tumultuous. Sensation as if he had inhaled smoke.

Coldness of the back at night. Stitchiijg of the cervical region.
Pain in the back, evening ; night ; worse walking ; in the scapulae ;
between the scapulae ; on bending forward and on breathing ; in the
lumbar region when stooping and walking ; in the sacrum both when
walking and sitting ; aching in the back ; drawing pain in the back ;



NATRUM ARSNntCOSUM


68l


sore pain in .the back ; sore pain in the sacrum when walking and
stooping ; sore pain in cervical region ; sore pain under scapulae ; sore
pain in spine on pressure. Stiffness in the cervical region, weakness
in the back.

Awkwardness of the limbs ; cold hands and feet ; cramps in calf ;
in soles. Eruptions on limbs ; thin white scales ; vesicles. Excoria-
tion between the thighs. Formication of the feet. Heaviness, a tired
feeling in lower limbs, in feet. Itching of all the limbs. Jerking in
the lower limbs. Lameness in the limbs. Numbness in the feet.
Pain in the limbs ; in the joints, during chill ; neuralgic pain in limbs ;
RiiEUMATtc ; gouty pains ; upper limbs ; right arm rheumatic ; should-
der ; rheumatic pain in shoulder and elbow ; palms painful ; pain in
fingers. Pain in lower limbs ; sciatica worse walking ; in the hip ;
thigh when walking ; knee. Aching down front of legs ; bruised pain
in limbs from continued motion ; burning feet and soles, crampy pain
in calf ; flying pains in fingers, palms and forearms ; drawing pains
in lower limbs, thigh, knees, calf ; neuralgic pain from axilla to little
finger ; stitching pain in hip, thigh, hip to knee on motion ; knee, leg ;
tearing pains in upper limbs, in lower limbs, in thigh, legs ankles, foot.
Perspiration of hands, of feet. Pulsation of limbs. Restlessness of
the limbs, upper limbs, lower limbs, legs. Stiffness of limbs, joints^
wrists. Swelling of limbs: dropsical; legs; feet. Trembling hands;
lower limbs. Twitching upper lii^bs ; thighs. Weakness of the
limbs ; upper limbs ; hands ; lower limbs ; thighs ; legs ; ankles ; feet.

The sleep is deep. Dreams : ^morous ; anxious; frightful; of
murder ; nightmare ; pleasant ; vexa^ous ; vivid. Late falling asleep;
restless sleep. Sleepiness in the afternoon. Sleeplessness before
midnight ; after midnight ; with sleepiness. Unrefreshing sleep.
Waking early^ frequently.

Chill morning ; forenoon ; evening in bed ; in cold air ; coldness
comes on at night in bed ; chilliness, internal chill, shaking chill in the
morning ; chill at 2 a. m. ; i p. m. ; 2 p. m. ; the chill is relieved in a
warm room.

Fever at night ; dry heat, flushes of heat, perspiration absent.

Perspiration : morning ; nights ; from anxiety ; in bed ; cold ; on
coughing ; on slight exertion ; following the fever ; on motion ; profuse
at night ; symptoms worse while perspiring ; aversion to uncovering
while perspiring.

Burning skin ; cold skin ; desquamation. Liver spots, red spots,
yellow skin ; dryness of the skin. Eruptions : blisters ; boils ; burn-
ing ; moist ; herpes ; itching in warmth ; painful ; pimples ; scaly ; thin
white scales ; stinging, suppurating tubercles ; urticaria ; nodules ; vesi-
cular erysipelas, with swelling, worse after scratching ; formication of
skin ; itching, crawling, vmrse after scratching. Swelling of skin mth

86



682


NATRUM CARBONICUM


burning. Ulcers : burning ; deep ; yellow discharge ; spreading ;
stinging.

f

NATRUM CARBONICUM.

Proved by Hahnemann, Hering and others. Persons who are in
the habit of raking carbonate of soda for sour stomach get a proving
of this remedy. I have met some of these people and been able to
confirm many Natrum symptoms.

Old dyspeptics who are always belching and have sour stomach and
rheumatism ; after twenty years they are stoop-shouldered, pale, sen-
sitive to cold, chilly, aggravated by the least draft ; require much cloth-
ing ; unable to resist the cold or the heat ; require a medium climate ;
are worse from the changes of the weather ; their digestive, rheu-
matic, and gouty troubles are all worse from the weather changes. A
state of trepidation from the slightest noise, the slam of a door ; nerv-
ous excitement and palpitation with great prostration ; nervous weak-
ness with trepidation ; weakness from slight exertion of mind or body ;
internal and external trembling. The rattling of paper causes palpi-
tion, irritability and melancholy. Estrangement from family and
friends. Aversion to mankind and to society ; to relatives, to strang-
ers ; feels a great division between himself and them ; sensitive to
certain persons. Music causes a tendency to suicide, melancholy,
weeping and trepidation ; playing the piano is so exhausting that she
must lie down ; music causes great sadness which increases to religious
insanity. Tliis is true of all the Sodiums, but especially so of Natrum
carb. ; aggravation from the slam of a door, a pistol shot, which causes
headache and complaints in general, aggravated from music.

The more soda these patients take, the more flatulent do they be-
come : they are stoop-shouldered ; digestion is difficult, and finally milk
will not digest at all, bringing on a diarrhoea with undigested, lienteric
stools ; also, starch causes flatulence and looseness of the bowels.
Many symptoms from drinking cold water when overheated.

Urine offensive like that of a horse, from a vegetable or milk diet.
This is not so marked as in Nitric ac., but resembles it.

Natrum carb. throws out eruptions upon the knuckles and finger-
tips : also the toes ,' vesicular eruptions open up and form ulcers on the
joints of finger-tips. Borax, Sepia, Ars., and Natrum carb. arc the
remedies most inclined to produce ulceration of the tips and knuckles
of the fingers, and also the toes.

Vesicular eruptions on the body in patches and circles ; the herpes
family is especially related to Natr. carb. ; zona, herpes labialis, herpes
preputialis ; patches as large as a dollar on the hips, thighs and back.
•Smaller patches show vesicles ’containing a white serum ,* • burning.



f^ATRUM CARBONICUM


^3


smarting and itching, better from scratching. The eruption passes
away with a crust, but will often ulcerate, it does not heal and an ulcer
forms. Circulation feeble ; wounds suppurate. Feet and skin burn.
Crusty eruptions on the skin that have not been vesicular ; but most
Natr. carb. and Natr, mur. eruptions are of the vesicular form. Ting-
ling, biting, itching, changing place, now here and now there ; cold
skin ; sweaty body.

Nervous exhaustion, physical exhaustion, weakness of mind and
body. Book-keepers lose the ability to add up figures. In reading a
page, the one previous to it soon goes out of the mind. The memory
will not hold out from the beginning to the end of a sentence. For-
gets what he reads. Confusion of mind follows and then he is unable
to perform any mental labor. Men become so fatigued from the de-
tails of business that a confusion of the mind comes over them, they
get brain fag.

Oversensitive to heat, especially after sunstroke, even some years
after ; has to be well shaded when walking in the sun, must seek a
cool or dark place ; the patient has not had the proper acute remedy
during the attack ; the remedy is aggravated by both cold and heat,
but this is a special aggravation from the heat of the sun ; head troubles
are not worse from cold in Natr. Carb. Old cases of brain fag with
weakness and trepidation. The body troubles are aggravated from
cold and in the winter ; as cold as ^ he had no blood in the body, ex-
tremities cold, and he cannot get twm warm ; cold as ice to the knees
and elbows. The body and extremities are worse in winter, the head
in summer. '

Anxious trembling and sweating during pains.

The senses are all disturbed ; oversensitive to light ; pain in the eyes
from a bright light.

Oversensitive hearing ; little noises seem enormous, like thunder ;
the crumpling of paper seems like the crashing of a waterfall.

Taste perverted, too sensitive, so that the tasting of things ordi-
narily grateful becomes painful ; sometimes loss of taste.

Loss of smell. Hay fever, catarrhal fever ; where catarrhal condi-
tions are present there is copious, thick, yellow, purulent discharge
from the eyes, nose, vagina. The vesicles are filled with thin, white
serum, but the pustule, when it ruptures, throws out a thick, yellow
discharge. Leucorrhoea thick, yellow, ropy; gonorrhoea of the same
character; thick, yellow, ropy, purulent discharge from the bladder
which clogs up the urethra when urinating.

Otalgia, with sharp, darting, piercing pains ; when the mental state,
the chilliness and other generals are present.

The discharges are commonly offensive.

Coryzas trouble much ; always has a cold in the head ; the watery



NATRUM MURIATlCtnvt


^^6

of lime. Children can get plenty of lime from their food and that is
better when the salt or the lime is given in such shape that it cannot be
resisted by the internal man — aimed not at the house he lives in, but
at the individual himself — then the bone, salt inanition, the Natr. mun
inanition, will soon pass away. We do not with our small dose sup-
ply the salt that the system needs, but we cure the internal disease, we
turn into order the internal physical man, and then the tissues get salt
enough from the food. Drugs must all be administered in suitable
form. We may need to go higher and higher until the secret spring
is touched.

Natr. mur. is a deep acting, long acting remedy. It takes a wonder-
ful hold of the economy, making changes that are lasting when given
in potentized doses.

A great deal is presented that can be seen by looking at the patient,
so that we say: this looks like a Natr. mur. patient. Experienced
physicians learn to classify patients by appearance. The skin is shiny,
pale, waxy, looks as if greased. There is a wonderful prostration of
a peculiar kind. Emaciation, weakness, nervous prostration, nervous
irritability.

There is a long chain of mental symptoms ; hysterical condition of
the mind and body ; weeping alternating with laughing ; irresistible
laughing at unsuitable times ; prolonged, spasmodic laughter. This
will be followed by tearfulness, great sadness, joylessness. No mat-
ter how cheering the circumstances arc she cannot bring herself into
the state of being joyful. She is benumbed to impressions, easily takes
on grief, grieves over nothing. Unpleasant occurrences are recalled
that she may grieve over them. Consolation aggravated the state of
the mind — the melancholy, the tearfulness, sometimes brings on anger.
She appears to bid for sympathy and is mad when it is given. Head-
ache comes on with this melancholy. She walks the floor in rage.
She is extremely forgetful ; cannot cast up accounts ; is unable to
meditate ; forgets what she was going to say ; loses the thread of what
she is hearing or reading. There is a great prostration of the mind.

Unrequited affection brings on complaints. She is unable to con-
trol her affections and falls in love with a married man. She knows
that it is foolish, but lies awake with love for him. She falls in love
with a coachman. She knows that she is unwise, but cannot help it.
In cases of this kind Natr. mur. will turn her mind into order, and she
will look back and wonder why she was so silly. This remedy belongs
to hysterical girls.

In a mental state where /gn. temporarily benefits the symptoms,
but does not cure, its chronic Natr. mur. should be given. It is as
well to give Natr. mur. at once if there is an underlying constitutional
state too deep for Ign,



NATRUM MURIATICUM


687


Aversion to bread, to fats and rich things.

The Natr, mur. patient is greatly disturbed by excitement, is ex-
tremely emotional. The whole nervous economy is in a state of fret
and irritation, < from noise, the slamming of a door, the ringing of
a bell, the firing of a pistol, < music.

The pains are stitching, electric-like shocks, convulsive jerkings of
the limbs on falling asleep, twitchings, shooting pains. She is over-
sensitive to all sorts of influences, is excitable, emotional, intense.

Complaints come on in the warm room, worse in the house, she
wants the open air. The mental complaints are > in the open air.
She takes cold easily from sweating, but is generally > in the open,
air, though worse on getting heated ; < by sufficient exertion to heat
up, but > by moderate exertion in the cold air.

Both Natr. carh. and Natr. mur. have the general nervous tension
of Natrum, but one is a chilly patient, the other warm blooded.

The face is sickly looking, the skin greasy, shiny, sallow, yellow,
often chlorotic, covered with vesicular eruptions around the edges of
the hair, the ears and back of the neck. There are scaly and squam-
ous eruptions, with great itching, oozing a watery fluid, or sometimes
dry. An exfoliation takes place, a shining surface is left. In the
meatus, scales form and peel off, leaving an oozing surface. Watery
vesicles form about the lips and wings of the nose, about the genitals
and anus. Vesicular eruptions, white, oozing a watery fluid, come and
go. Great itching of the skin is prelent

The skin looks waxy, dropsical.; iThere is great emaciation, the skin
looking dry, withered, shrunken. An infant looks like a little old
man. There is a down on the fate that passes away when improve-
ment sets in. Emaciation takes place from above downward. The
collar-bones become prominent and the neck looks scrawny, but the
hips and lower limbs remain plump and round. Lyc, also has ema-
ciation from above downward. The directions of remedies will often
enable us to distinguish one from another.

The characteristic discharge from the mucous membranes is watery
or thick whitish, like the white of an egg. There is a marked coryza
with a watery discharge, but the constitutional state has thick, white
discharges. He hawks out a thick, w^hite discharge in the morning.
There are gluey oozings from the eyes. From the cars flows a thick,
white, gluey discharge. The leucorrhoea is white and thick. With
the gonorrhoea the discharge has existed a long time and become
gleety. There is smarting in the urethra only after urination.

The headaches are awful ; dreadful pains ; bursting, compressing,
as if in a vise ; the head feels as if the skull would be crushed in. The
pains are attended with hammering and throbbing. Pain like little
hammers in the head on beginning to move. Hammering pains in the



688


NATRUM MURIATICUM


head on waking in the morning. The pain comes on in the latter part
of sleep. There is great nervousness during the first part of the night ;
she falls asleep late and awakes with hammering in the head. There
are also headaches beginning at lo to ii a. m., lasting until 3 p. m,
or evening. The headaches are periodical, every day, or third day,
or fourth day. Headaches of those living in malarial districts, C>
from sleep ; the patient must go to bed and be perfectly quiet, > from
sweating, headaches associated with intermittent fever. During the
chill it seemed as though the head would burst ; he is delirious and
drinks large quantities of cold water. There is no relief to the head
until after the sweat. Sometimes all the symptoms are relieved by
the sweat except the headache.

In another form of headache ; the greater the pain the more the
sweat ; sweating does not relieve ; the forehead is cold, covered with
a cold sweat. When the head is covered warmly he is > moving
about in the open air.

Headache due to disturbance of vision where there is inability to
focus rapidly enough. Headache < from noise.

Headache involving the whole back of the head and even going
down the spine in troubles following the brain diseases, hydrocephalus.

In spinal troubles, when there is great sensitiveness to pressure —
an irritable spine. The vertebra? are sensitive and there is a great
deal of aching along the spine. Coughing aggravates the pain in the
spine, also walking makes it worse, but it is > from lying on some-
thing hard, or pressing the back up against something hard ; they may
sit with a pillow or the hand pressed against the back. In menstrual
troubles you find the woman lying with some hard object under the
spine.

A general nervous trembling pervades the body. There is jerking
of the muscles, trembling of the limbs, inability to keep the limbs still,
as in Zincum,

The stomach and liver are closely related. The stomach is dis-
tended with flatus. After eating there is a lump in the stomach. It
seems to take a long time for food to digest. < from eating. Whit-
ish, slimy mucus is vomited attended with relief. There is great thirst
for cold water. Sometimes there is relief from drinking, sometimes the
thirst is unquenchable. We find fullness in the region of the liver
with stitching, tearing pains. The bowels are distended with gas.
There is slowing down of the action of the bowels, the stool being
very difficult, in hard, agglomerated lumps. There is slowing down of
the action of the bladder. Must wait before the urine will start, and
then it comes slowly — dribbles ; there is not much force in the flow.
After urination there is a sensation as if more urine remained in the
bladder. If anyone u present he cannot pass urine, cannot pass it in a



NATRUM MURIATICUM 689

public place. There is also continued urging, he must pass the urine
often.

This remedy and Natr, sulpha were used by the homoeopaths to clear
up chronic diarrhoea, the old army diarrhoea.

Natr. mur. is useful in the complaints of women, in troublesome
menstruation. There is a great variety of menstrual complaints :
menses too scanty or too free, too late or too soon. We cannot indi-
vidualize from the menstrual symptoms, we must do it from the con-
stitutional state. Examine every possible function to be sure you have
all the symptoms. Examine every organ, not by examining it phy-
sically, for results of diseases do not lead to the remedy, but examine
the symptoms.

Observe the rapidity with which remedies affect the human system :
there are some that are long acting, deep acting. Natr. mur. is one
of these. It operates very slowly, bringing about its results after a
long time, as it corresponds to complaints that arc slow, that are long
in action. This does nor mean that it will not act rapidly ; all remedies
act rapidly, but not all act slowly ; the longest acting may act in
acute diseases, but the short acting cannot act long in chronic diseases.
Get the pace, the periodicity of remedies. Some remedies have a con-
tinued fever, some a remittent, Others an intermittent fever. In
Aeon., Bell, and Bry. we have thwee different paces, three different
motions, three different forms of velocity ; so in Stdph., Graph., Natr.
mur., Carbo veg . — a different form; a different development. Some
would not hesitate in a continued ^fever to give Bell, but its com-
plaints come on in great haste, with great violence and have nothing
in their nature like a continued feter. This is not like typhoid. Bell.
and Aeon, have no manifestations of typhoid, even if the symptoms
are present. Be sure that the remedy has not only the group of
symptoms, but also the nature of the case. The typhoid case has a
likeness in Bry. or Rhus, but not in Bell. We owe no obedience to
man, not even to our parents, after we arc old enough to think for
ourselves. We owe obedience to truth.

Natr, mur. is a long acting remedy; its symptoms continue for years;
it conforms to slow-coming, long lasting, deep-seated symptoms. It
requires a long time for a man to be brought under the influence of
it, even when moderately sensitive.

The chill comes in the morning at 10-30 ; every day, every other
day, every third or fourth day. The chill begins in the extremities
which become blue ; there is throbbing pain in the head, the face is
flushed ; delirium, talking of everything, constant, maniacal actions.
They grow worse until a congestive attack comes. During the entire
attack there is thirst for cold water. During the coldness he is not
> by heat, not > by piling on the clothings but wants cold drinks.
87



690


NATRUM MUIUATICUM


Wc would naturally suppose that a person freezing to dcatli would
want warm things, but the Natr. mur. patient cannot bear them. The
teeth chatter, he tosses from side to side, the bones ache as if they
would break, and there is vomiting as in congestive conditions. In
the fever he is so hot that the fingers are almost scorched with the
intense heat, and he goes into a congestive sleep or stupor. The
sweat relieves him ; the aching all over is > by the sweat, and in time
the headache passes away. There is intense chill, fever and sweat.
Sometimes the attacks are in robust, strong people, but usually in the
anaemic, in emaciated people full of malaria ; lingering, chronic cases.
Complaints do not always have this long prodrome. Its most striking
use is in cases that have been living a long time in malarial swamps ;
saturated with the malarial atmosphere ; they are anaemic, often drop-
sical ; in old cases that have been mixed with arsenic and quinine, the
crude drugs used by the Old School to break the fever as long as the
patient is under their sway, but the patient is sick internally even
more than before, and when the condition comes back it is generally
in its original form ; the crude drug is usually unable to change the
type of an intermittent fever. Remedies only partly related to the
case will change the character of the sickness so that no one can cure
the case. The homoeopathic remedy will cure intermittent fever
every time if you get the right remedy. If there is a failure the case
is mixed up so that no one may be able to cure it. First of all a
master must realize the case and turn it into order so that it can then
be cured. There are few men who never spoil a case of ague, because
many cases come from partly developed, marked cases, the symp-
toms not being all out, especially in cases that have taken homoeo-
pathic remedies. The homoeopathic failures are the worst failures
on earth,

Natr. mur. is irregular enough in its nature to develop the chills
into regularity. When it has come into better order, wait: either the
whole case will subside, or another remedy will be clear. There are
other remedies that can turn cases into order. Often cases spoiled
by homoeopaths can be turned into order by Sep, Marked cases with
congestion of the head, aching in the back and nausea arc turned into
order by Ipecac, The cure is permanent after homoeopathic pre-
scribing ; the chills do not return.

Natr. mur. not only removes the tendency to intermittents, but
restores the patient to health, and takes away the tendency to colds —
the susceptibility to colds, and to periodicity. It is the susceptibility
that is removed. We know that every attack predisposes to another
attack. Each attack of ague is more destructive than the previous
one. The drugs used increase the susceptibility; the homoeopathic
remedy removes the susceptibility. Homoeopathic treatment tends to



NATRUM MURIATICUM


6gt

simplify the human economy and to make diseases more easily man-
aged. Unless this susceptibility be eradicated, man goes down lower
and lower into emaciation — emaciation from above downwards.

Children born in a malarial region are likely to go into marasmus.
They have a voracious appetite, a wonderful hunger, eating much,
but all the time emaciating.

Conditions of pregnancy. The mammary glands waste, there is
wasting of the upper parts of the body. The uterus is intensely sore.
The leucorrhoea, which is at first white, turns green. Women take
cold in every draft of air. There is pain during sexual congress with
dryness of the vagina, a feeling as though sticks pressed into the walls
of the vagina ; pricking pains. There is dryness of all mucous mem-
branes ; everywhere the membranes are dry. The throat is dry, red,
patulous ; a sensation of a fishbone jagging into it when swallowing ;
there is inability to swallow without washing down the food with
liquids ; there is sticking all the way down tlie oesophagus.

Most prescribers give Hep. for every sticking or fishbone sensation
in the throat ; this is the old keynote, the old routine. Nitr. ac., Argent,
nit., Alum, and Natr. mur. all have it, but all differently.

Hep. — The tonsils are swollen, full, purple — quinsy. The patient
is sensitive to the slightest draught, there is pain in the throat even
on putting the hand out of bed ; sweats in the night with no relief ;
he is sensitive to every impressioii; feels everything ten times ampli-
fied. I

Nitr, ac, — ^There are yellow paitches in the throat ; ragged, jagged
ulcers in the throat, or it is inflUmed and purple. The urine smells
like horses’ urine.

Argent, nit. — ^There is much hoarseness, the vocal cords being dis-
turbed. The throat is swollen, patulous ; the patient wants cold things,
cold water, cold air. Adapted to those cases that have had ulceration
of the os uteri with cauterization.

Natr. mur, — There is extreme dryness of the mucous membranes,
as if they would break ; chronic dryness without ulceration. There
is much catarrhal discharge like the white of an egg, with dryness
of the mucous membranes when not covered by this mucus. The
patient is extremely sensitive, sensitive to a change of weather.

Every remedy has its own pace, its order or succession. We must
bear in mind the order of succession.

Natr. mur, is useful in old dropsies, especially dropsy of cellular,
tissues. Sometimes there is dropsy of sacs, dropsy of the brain fol-
lowing acute diseases. In acute spinal meningitis with extreme ner-
vous tension, where there is chronic drawing back of the head, chronic
jerking of the head forward. Acute diseases that result in hydro-
cephalus, or in irritation of the spine. Sometimes useful in abdominal



NATOUM PHOSPHO&KiUM


692

dropsy, but more often in oedema of the lower extremities. Acute
dropsies after scarlet fever ; the patient is oversensitive, starts in his
sleep, rises up in the night with confusion; there are albumen and
casts in the urine.

In dropsy after the malaria Natr. mur., when it acts curatively,
generally brings back the original chill. The only cure known to
man is from above down, from within out, and in the reverse order
of coming. When it is otherwise, there is only improvement, not
cure. When the symptoms return there is hope ; that is the road to
cure and there is no other.

The skin symptoms are sometimes very striking. In old lingering
cases where the sldn looks transparent as if the patient would become
dropsical, a waxy, greasy, shiny skin ; other remedies with greasy,
shiny skin are Plumb,, Thuja, Selen. These remedies go deep into
the life. Any remedy that can produce such wonderful changes is
long-acting.

Useful after labor when the mother does not progress well ; she
is feeble and excitable ; the lochia is prolonged, copious and white ;
the hair falls out from the head and genitals ; the milk passes away,
or the child docs not thrive on it. Useful in afterpains where there
is subinvolution of the uterus, the uterus is in a state of prolonged
congestion. She is < noise, music, the slamming of a door. She
craves salt and has an aversion to bread, wine and fat things. Sour
wines disorder the stomach. Natr. mur. will clear up the case, restore
the milk, trun the case into order.

Natr. mur. is needed by those chlorotic giils who have a greasy
skin, a greenish, yellowish complexion ; who menstruate only once in
two or three months. The menses are copious, or scanty and watery.
Where the symptoms agree, this remedy can eradicate this chlorosis
and turn the countenance into a picture of health, but not in a short
time. It takes years to establish health in a typical chlorosis ; the cut
finger bleeds only water ; the menstrual flow is only a leucorrhcea ;
there is pernicious anaemia. Natr. mur., goes deep enough into the
life to restore the pink complexion.

NATRUM PHOSPHORICUM,

We are not dependent upon Schuessler alone for indications for
this remedy, as we have many pathogenetic symptoms. Schuessler’s
indications were good and mostly confirmed by clinical observations.
The author has given this remedy for twenty years to many patients
whose nerves were in a fret from mental exertion and sexuil excesses
and vices. The symptoms are worse in the morning, evening and
night, and after midnight. There is marked anaemia and aversion to



UATkVM PHOSPHORICUM


^3


the open air. He is aggravated from a draft, from open air, from
cold, from becoming cold and after becoming cold, and there is a
tendency to frequent taking cold. He is worse from changes in the
weather. Chlorosis. Aversion to bathing. Many symptoms come on
after coition. He may be a sexual debauche. Many symptoms come
on from fasting, and he is generally ameliorated after eating. He is
aggravated from any physical exertion. His muscles are flabby, and
he is losing flesh. He is disturbed by butter, cold drinks, cold food,
fats^ fruit, milk, sour things and vinegar. Formication externally and
internally. There is great physical irritability, and later a marked lack
of reaction. Many symptoms are aggravated from a jar, or stepping.
There is marked lassitude in tlie morning in hot weather. Constant
desire to lie down. Prolonged weakness from loss of fluids. Lying on
left side aggravates many symptoms. Worse before and after menses.
During menses the symptoms are aggravated afternoon and evening.
Numbness in single parts. Orgasm of blood. Stitching, tearing pains,
aggravated during a thunderstorm. Pulsation all over the body.
Sensation as though a shot was forced through the arteries is a verified
symptom. Oversensitive in general, and to pain. Shocks through the
body, in night while awake. Sitting aggravates. General aggravation
during a thunderstorm. Tension in muscles and tendons. Trembling
in thunderstorm. Twitching of muscles. Nervous and paralytic
weakness aggravated in momingi tnd after exertion. The body smells
sour (like Hepar, Sulph.^ Lyc,). {

Anger over trifles, and comfli^ts from vexation. Anxiety evening
and night ; in bed ; before midnij^ht ; after eating ; with fear ; during
fever ; about the future ; about , Ms health ; on waking. Complaints
from bad news. Aversion to company. Concentration difficult. Con-
fusion of mind in the morning ; in the evening ; after eating ; fromi
mental exertion ; on waking. Delusions, frightful ; thinks he secs dead,
people ; imagines ; thinks he is going to have typhoid fever ; that he
hears footsteps in the next room. Discontented, discouraged, and
easily distracted. Dullness of mind while reading. Mental exertion
brings on many complaints. He is very excitable. Fear at night ; of
impending disease ; that something will happen ; of misfortune ; on
waking. Fears bad news. Forgetful. Easily frightened, and heed-
less. She is hysterical, and in a hurry. No one works fast enough to
suit him. Sometimes his ideas are abundant, and again deficient, and
his mind grows sluggish. Impatience. He is indifferent to everything,
even to his family. A gradually increasing indolence ; a dread of
mental and physical work. Irritability ; in the morning ; during
menses ; about trifles. Memory weak. Times of mirthfulness. Great
PROSTRATION OF MIND. Rcstless and anxious evening and night. Sad-
ness in evening, after emission, during fever, and from music. He is



694


NATRUM PHdSPHC>RICtJM


extremely sensitive to music and noise and to his surroundings. He
grows serious and silent, and sits by himself quite still for a long time.
He is easily startled, from fright, from noise, on falling asleep, and
during sleep. Spells of stupefaction creep over him. His friends call
him suspicious. Indisposed to talk. His thoughts wander. He is
growing timid and bashful. Weeps easily. Mental work becomes im-
possible and he seems to be approaching imbecility.

Vertigo in the morning ; aggravated from mental exertion while
sitting and walking. Tendency to fall.

CongCvStion in the evening. Heat in head in evening, in forehead and
vertex. Flushes of heat after sweat. Tension in the scalp. Erup-
tions on the head of golden yellow scabs ; eczema on the forehead.
Fullness in forehead ; over the eyes ; in the morning ; aggravated by
mental exertion. Heaviness of the head, and the hair falls out. Pain
in the head, morning, afternoon, evening and night, aggravated bind-
ing up the hair ; after eating ; must lie down ; aggravated from light ;
lying ; before, during and after menses ; mental exertion ; after sour
milk ; motion ; motion of head ; noise ; rising from lying ; in a room .
sexual excesses ; after sleep ; after stooping ; straining eyes ; during a
thunderstorm ; while walking ; warm room ; ameliorated in open air ;
by pressure. The headaches are periodical, pulsating. Pain in fore-
head aggravated from mental exertion ; from motion ; over eyes ; ii>
occiput ; sides of head ; temples ; in vertex on waking in morning ; in
vertex and forehead. The pains are bursting, cutting in temples and
sides of head ; drawing in head and occiput ; pressing with sour slimy
vomiting ; pressing in forehead, outward, over eyes ; pressing in occi-
put, and sides of occiput ; pressing in temples ; pressing in vertex as if
it would open. Stitching in head, in forehead, in sides of head, in
temples. Stunning in head and forehead. Tearing in head. Perspira-
tion of forehead. Pulsating in head, forehead, temples and vertex.
Shocks in the head. Twitching. Uncovering the head brings on the
symptoms.

Dryness of the eyes. Creamy yellow discharges. Heaviness of the
lids. Inflammation of the eyes. Scrofulous ophthalmia, and granular
lids. Itching and burning of the lids and margin of the lids. Burning
lachrymation, must rub the eyes. Pain in the eyes when reading,
Burning and cutting. Pressing during menses. Pain as though sand
in eyes. Sore, bruised feeling when reading. Stitching pain in eyes.
Paralysis of the optic nerve. Photophobia. Pupils dilated. One pupil
dilated. Quivering of right eyelid while reading. Staring; Strabis-
mus. Swollen lids. Yellow sclerotica. Colors before the eyes, dark.
Halo around the light. Dim vision for distant objects. Foggy vision ;
blindness. Exertion of vision aggravates many symptoms. FUcker-
ing before the eyes morning on rising, at 5 p, m. Mist before the eyes



NATRUM PHOSPHORICUM


695


aggravated in gaslight at 8 p. m. Myopia. Sparks before the eyes.

Eruption on the ears. Creamy yellow crusts on the ears. Fullness
in ears. Heat and redness of one ear. Itching in the ears. Lobe of
right ear burning and itching, must scratch it until it bleeds. Noises in
cars, with vertigo, humming, ringing, roaring, rushing, singing, whiz-
zing. Pain in ear. Aching in right meatus. Burning. Stitching in
and behind ear. Tearing. Pulsation. Stopped sensation. The hear-
ing is acute, acute for voices ; impaired, lost.

The patient is subject to fluent coryza, and catarrh of the nose with
thick yellow* purulent discharge. Epistaxis on blowing the nose. Full-
ness at the root of the nose. The nose is obstructed with mucus and
crusts, but the discharge is generally scanty. Offensive odors in the
nose in the morning. Ozaena. Pricking in the left nostril brings tears
to the eyes. Smell is acute. Soreness in the left nostril. He picks the
nose constantly and scales form. Frequent sneezing. Tension over
the root of the nose.

Discoloration of the face, bluish ; circles around the eyes ; earthy,
PALE ; red blotches but not feverish ; red alternating with paleness ;
yellow, liver spots, white about nose and mouth. Eruptions on the
face, on the chin, forehead, lips, about the mouth, on the nose.
Pimples on the forehead. Pustules on the face. Heat in the evening
during chill. The face burns. Itching of the face and nose.

Pain in the face, burning, neuralgic. Shooting in the right cheek.
Soreness in the right lower jaw at angle, darting through it. Stitching.
Swelling of the glands of the lowen jaw. Swelling of the sub-maxillary
gland.

Bleeding gums. The tongue i$ coated yellow. Yellow at the base,
or dirty white. Roof of mouth Coated golden yellow or creamy. Dry-
ness of mouth and tongue. Salivation, Sensation of a hair on the
tongue, followed by prickly numbness of whole mouth. Speech diffi-
cult. Stinging on the tongue. Taste bad on waking, bitter, metallic,
saltish, sour. Vesicles in mouth and on tongue.

Caries of the teeth. Grinding the teeth during sleep in children.
Looseness of the teeth. Pain in the teeth, at night, ameliorated by
pressure and external warmth. Burning, pressing and pulsating.

Throat and tonsils coated yellow. Dryness of the throat. Mucus
forms in throat. Tough clear white mucus in posterior nares. Thick
yellow mucus drops from posterior nares, aggravated at night, must
sit up to clear the throat. Sensation of a lump in throat. Much hawk-
ing. Inflammation of throat. Pain in throat on swallowing. Sore
throat on right side, aggravated swallowing. Burning, pricking, stitch-
ing. Pulsation in left tonsil. Scraping mucus from posterior nares.
Swallows liquids better than solids in sore throat.

The appetite is increased, ravenous or wanting. Aversion to food,



696


NATRUM PHOSPHORICUM


to meat, to milk, to bread and butter. Desires alcoholic drinks, beer,
pungent food, eggs, fried fish, cold drinks. The stomach is disordered
by fat and milk. Emptiness, aggravated after eating. Eructation
after eating, empty, sour ; waterbrash. Fullness after eating. Heart-
burn, heaviness and pressure. Heat in the stomach. Nausea in the
morning, evening, during cough, and during headache. Pain in the
stomach ; after eating ; two hours after eating ; cramping ; gastralgia,
several attacks every day with vomiting sour fluids ; over-secretion of
lactic acid. Gnawing in the stomach. Pressing after eating. Sore-
ness and stitching. Retching. Extreme thirst. Ulceration of the
stomach. Sour vomiting. Creamy coating on the tongue. Sour odor
of the body. Vomiting on coughing, with headache, of bile, bitter,
frothy with headache, of mucus, sour in infants fed on milk, sour
cheesy masses in intermittent fever ; in pregnancy ; vomiting yellow,
(green.

Distension of the abdomen after eating. Sensation of emptiness,
after stool. Flatulence, obstinate, after eating. Fullness gurgling and
hardness. Pain afternoon and night, after eating, paroxysmal, before
stool. Pain in hypochondria. Burning in abdomen. Cramping before
stool, causing urging to stool, while walking. Cutting in abdomen.
Pressing in the hypogastrium. Soreness in the whole abdomen.
Stitching in the abdomen and in liver. Torpid liver. Rumbling.
Tension.

Constipation with difficult hard stool. Inactivity of the rectum ; one
day constipated, next day diarrhoea. Diarrhoea morning, night, with
colic, after eating, in summer, with flatus. The anus is excoriated ;
much flatus; involuntary stools, involuntary when passing flatus. Sore,
itching anus, aggravated in the warmth of the bed. Pain in the rectum
after stool. Burning during and after stool. Painful contraction of
anus. Cutting during stool. Stitching on walking. Tenesmus. Urg-
ing to stool after coition, in a man. Urging ineffectual, unsatisfactory.
Weak feeling in the rectum before stool. The stool is bloody, cheesy,
crumbling ; light colored, bileless stool ; green ; jelly-like masses ; pasty ;
(sour-smelling -stools ; thin yellowish brown stool ; Watery ; yellowish
green ; yellowish brown. Worms with the stool.

Paralysis of the bladder. Pressing pain in the bladder before urina-
tion. Urging to urinate at night, after coition (man) ; after eating ;
constant ; frequent. Dysuria. Urination frequent, at night, during
perspiration, involuntary, night, during sleep. Must wait for urine to
start. Must press a long time before urine starts. Unsatisfactory
urination. Stitching pain in the kidneys. Emission of prostadc fluid
during stool. Enlarged prostate. Burning in the urethra during the
flow of urine. After stool burning and itching of the meatus. The
urine is albumirtous, burning, cloudy, dark, pale, copious night and



MATRUM PHOSPHORICUM


697


morning, offensive, scanty, with mucous sediment.

Erections are troublesome morning and night, continued, frequent,
incomplete, painful, without desire, violent, wanting. Vesicles upon
the genitalia. Itching of the scrotum, prepuce and anus. Pain in the
spermatic cords and testes. Drawing in spermatic cords. Pressing in
testes. Seminal emission after coition, without dreams, without erec-
tions, frequent, unconscious. Sexual passion diminished, or increased,
without erection, vomiting. Swelling of penis and testes.

Desire increased in the female. Leucorrhoea after menses, acrid,
copious, creamy, honey colored, sour smelling, yellow and watery-
Menses absent, copious, too frequent, late, pale, painful, protracted.
Prolapsus of the uterus with a weak sinking feeling after stool.
Sterility,

Soreness in trachea. Hoarseness and loss of voice. Respiration is
asthmatic, difficult, short and sighing.

Cough afternoon, evening in bed, night, during chill, constant, with
coryza, ^ter drinking. Dry evening cough with expectoration in the
morning. Hacking, hollow, short, racking cough, with irritation in
chest or larynx. Loose morning cough. Tickling in larynx and chest.
Violent cough. Cough aggravated while sitting. Expectoration in the
morning bloody, greenish, mucous, offensive, purulent, thick, viscid,
yellow ; tasting flat, putrid, salty.

Anxiety in the chest ; a bubldf starts from the heart and passes
through the arteries. Constriction of the chest. Empty sensation in
the chest after eating. Pimples the chest. Sudden feeling of full-
ness in the upper part of the chci^t. Oppression of the chest. Pain in
the chest after dinner, from deep breathing, during cough. Pain in the
heart. Aching, pressing in the chest. Burning deep in the chest, ag-
gravated on the right side, evening in bed. Cutting, pressing. Raw-
ness in chest on coughing. Soreness in chest. Stitching in the chest,
sides of chest aggravated in left side. Palpitation, anxious, after
eating ; aggravated from noise, lying on the left side, during a thunder--
storm. Phthisis florida in young people. Trembling of heart, after
menses, on ascending stairs.

Heavy dragging in the back. Itching of the skin of the back. Pain
in the back at night, during menses, on motion, from sexual excesses,
while sitting. Pain in the dorsal region ; left scapula, between scapulae.
Pain in lumbar region, during menses. Pain in sacrum, during menses.
Aching in back during menses in lumbar region. Sore bruised back
and spine. Spinal irritation. Burning in lumbar region and in the
spine. Drawing in the back. Sharp pain in right sacro-iliac junction.
Stitching in lumbar region.

Perspiration of the back. Stiffness both sides of neck. Swelling of
the glands of the neck. Weakness of the back toward evening, in the

88



6g8 NATRUM PHOSPHOmCUM

lumbar region, after emissions.

Ck)U> HANDS, legs and feet. Feet icy cold during menses, in daytime,
bum at night in bed. Contraction of extensors in forearm while writ-
ing. Sore stinging corns. Cramp in calves and feet. Cramp in hands,
while writing. Cracking in joints. Eruption on limbs, vesicles ;
pimples and vesicles on lower limbs ; pimples on nates, eczema of
ankles. Formication of upper limbs and of feet. Heat oi hands and
feet. Heaviness of limbs, of lower limbs, legs and feet. Itching of
limbs, upper limbs, lower limbs, ankles. Numbness of limbs, upper
limbs, right hand and arm, of fingers, right fingers, of feet. Pain in
the limbs. Gouty, rheumatic joints, wrist. Rheumatic pain in shoulder
(right). Pain in leg, calf, ankle, ball of foot, first toe. Bruised pain in
limbs, lower limbs, knee, leg. Burning hands and soles. Crampy pain
in left hand and index finger. Drawing in forearm, wrist during
menses, hand, joints, left shoulder, hip and knee. Pressure in shoulder.
Stitching in shoulder and fingers, in hip, thigh, knee, soles, heel.
Tearing in limbs, joints, upper limbs, shoulder, upper arm, elbow,
fingers ; lower limbs, hip, knee, leg, foot, toes. Perspiration of hands
and feet. Restless legs. Shortening of tendons in hollow of knee, also
after menses. Stiffness of joints. Swelling of fingers ; of lower limbs,
of feet. Tension in hamstrings and calf. Trembling in hands, in
knees after emissions. Twitching of muscles. Weakness of upper
limbs, of hands, of right wrist and left ankle after menses ; of lower
limbs, thighs, ankles. Weakness of ankles in children (Nat. c.).
Sudden giving way of legs while walking.

Very deep sleep. The patient is a great dreamer. Dreams anxious,
amorous, of dead people, distressing, of previous events, of fire, fright-
ful, nightmare, pleasant, vexatious and vivid. Falling asleep in the
chair. The sleep is restless. Sleepiness all day and after dinner, most
in forenoon. Sleepless before midnight, after midnight, from crowd-
ing of thoughts. Sleepiness, yet cannot sleep. Unrefreshing sleep.
Wakeful from 12 to 3 a. m. Waking early, 5 a. m ., unrested. Wak-
ing late.

Coldness in evening in bed, in cold air. Chilliness in evening, duringi
menses, after eating. Shaking chill. One-sided coldness. Internal
chill. Fever, flushes of heat and headache every afternoon. Caimot
get to sleep, feds so hot. Fever with sweat during sleep. Intermittent
fever with vomiting of sour masses. Perspiration in the daytirne,
morning, afternoon, during the night. Anxious sweat. Cold sweat.
Perspiration on coughing, on slight exertion. Profuse sweat in the!
morning and during the night with great nervous weakness. Sour-
smelling sweat. The infant smells sour.

Biting, burning, or coldness of the skin. Liver spots ; red spots,
yellow spots and jaundiced skin. Dry skin, Dry, burning eruptions;



NATRVM SULPHURICUM


699

blisters, Ixiiils, burning, desquamating, moist, dry, herpetic, painful,
phagedenic, pimples, golden yellow scales ; suppurating, urticaria, vesi-
c^ar. Eczema with honey colored discharge. Erysipelas. Excoria-
tion. Formication. Freckles. Gnawing pain in skin. Inactivity of
the skin. Itching, biting, burning, crawling, creeping, stinging, ameli-
orated by scratching, aggravated by warmth of bed. Sensitive skin.
Sore feeling in the skin. Sticking in skin. Swelling of skin, of
^ected parts. Dropsical skin. Ulcerative pain. Ulcers ; biting, burn-
i®S’ crawling, deep ; discharge offensive and yellow ; fistulous, in-
flamed, red areola, sensitive, stinging, suppurating, swollen, unhealthy.
Unhealthy skin. Warts.

NATRUM SULPHURICUM

This is one of our most frequently indicated constitutional remedies.
The symptoms appear in the morning, evening and during the night,
especially before midnight. Some symptoms are better after break-
fast, during the daytime and after midnight, except the sweat. It is a
very useful remedy for complaints following neglected gonorrhoea.
The symptoms and the constitutional state of the patient are worse in
wet weather. It is useful in patients who li ve near waterways and
h ave suffered long from malarial influences. It is useful as an anti-
dote to the abuse of quinine. It t-especially belongs to patients of the
neuropathic and bilious constituti^. He is extremely sensitive to the
night air. He suffers from uniVcrsal patarrh and the discharges are
generally greenish . It cures dm^ical conditions. Sensitive to touch
and pressure ; oversensitive mentally and physically. Very sensitive to
pain. The pains are very numerous ; dull pains, sharp pains, all better
from motion. Bruised feeling all over. Strong desire for open air
and better while walking in the open air. Sensitive to a warm
room, though he is sometimes sensitive to cold and must have
warm clothing. The feeling of fulness or distension is found in many
places ; in the head, in the ear, in the abdomen, in the veins generally.
Complaints all worse in the spring and in warm weather . General
physical restlessness and anxiety. Marked weakness and trembling
wiA internal pulsations and rapid heart. Twitching of muscles. Com-
plaints from injuries of head and spine. The symptoms all worse dur-
ing rest. Rheumatic complaints all over the body. He is compelled to
lie on the back. Convulsions from injuries of the head. Sycotic con-
ditions with a history of warts and condylomata. Anxiety in the
morning which passes off after breakfast ; in the evening in bed ; at
night before midnight ; during fever ; about the future : anxiety and
loathing of life with suicidal impulse, must use all self-control to pre-
vent taking his life. A woman during gestation attempted several times


700


NATRUM SULPHURICUM


to hang herself, after this remedy she was cheerful and there was no
return of the suicidal disposition. Cheerful after stool. Music makes
her sad. Sadness in the morning, which passes off after breakfast.
Extremely irritable in the morning. Violent anger which is followed
by jaundice. Aversion to company. Dislikes to speak or to be spoken
to. Dullness of mind and excitability. Mental exertion brings on
mental symptoms. Mental troubles come on from injuries of the
head. A young man became very sad and subject to attacks of vertigo,
and neglected his business after being hit on the side of the head by a
base ball. He was entirely free from all symptoms after taking this
remedy. Fear of a crowd ; of evil ; of people. Forgetful, easily fright-
ened, hysterical ; indifferent ; indolent ; insanity. She is oversensitive
and suspicious. Starting from fright or noise and in sleep. Sub-

ject to vertigo, congestive headaches with fulness and heat. Pressing
outward in the head with pulsation. Periodical headaches with vomit-
ing bile. The pains are worse when thinking of them and better by
pressure, in the open air and when lying. Pulsation in the temples

when walking. Splitting pain in the vertex. Heat of the vertex.

Headache in the morning on waking. Mental exertion brings on head-

aches. Sensation as of brain falling to side lain on. Headache with
intermittent fever. Violent occipital headache with pain in the nape
of the neck. Headache from injuries of the head. Itching of the
scalp. Formication. Eczema of the scalp with much moisture.

Photophobia and head complaints from looking into the light. Lach-
rymation and dim vision, jaundiced eyes ; inflamed eyes with many
blisters. Burning in the eyes morning and evening. Greenish dis-
charge from the eyes. Lids stuck together in the morning. Granular
lids. Scrofulous inflammation of the conjunctiva. Redness, swelling
and burning of the margins of the lids. Heaviness of lids. Pressing in
eyes when using eyes. Itching of the eyes in the morning.

Chirping in the ears in the evening ; during chill and fever. Flap-
ping sensation in the ears. Ringing in the cars. Pressing out feeling
in the ears. Earache as if something was forcing its way out. Stitch-
ing pains in ears, worse entering warm room from cold air ; in damp
weather. Earache. Complaint worse on right side. Heat in right ear
in evening. Catarrh of right ear. Stopped sensation in right ear.
Purulent discharge from the ears.

Catarrhal discharge from nose, yellowish green. Epistaxis before
and during menses ; in afternoon and evening. Dryness and burning
in the nose. Obstructed with mucus in the night. Mucus drawn from
posterior nares tasting salty. Sneezing with fluent coryza and influenza.
Epidemic influenza. Chunks of dried mucus blow from high up in
nose.

Itching of the face with eczema. Sickly expression and jaundiced



NATRUM SUUHURICUM


701


skin. Vesicles and pimples on the face. Vesicles on the lower lip and
around the mouth. Pimples on the chin burning on touch.

The teeth become loose and fall out in sycotic constitution. The
gums separate from the teeth. Pain in the teeth worse from warm
things, better from cold drinks and the cold air. Gums red, ulcerate
and burn. Blisters on the gums. The mouth is always slimy. Much
mucus forms in the mouth and throat. Taste is better and tongue is
heavily coated a dirty greenish brown. Blisters on the tongue and roof
of the mouth. Burning in the roof of the mouth during menses.
Numbness in the mouth. Salivation.

Chronic inflammation of the throat with copious viscid white mucus.
Dry sensation in throat. Pain in throat on swallowing food. Chok-
ing feeling in the throat when walking. It is often needed in goitre.
Great thirst in the evening ; for very cold drinks ; during chill and
fever. Aversion to bread and meat. Qualmishness after farinaceous
foods ; hiccough after bread in evening. Eructations of sour water :
of bitter fluid. Nausea before breakfast. Constant nausea. Vomit-
ing of sour or bitter fluid. Vomiting of green bile with colic. The
stomach feels distended and heavy. Pulsation in the stomach after
breakfast. Extreme cases of gastric weakness with acidity. Can
digest only the simple foods. IMgestion very slow. This remedy has
cured many complaints of the liver ; congested, enlarged, sore liver.
Pain in the liver from lying on tl|e right side. Dragging in the right
hypochondrium when lying on tlt«i left side {Mag. m.. Card, ni., Ptel.),
soreness and itching in the liver ?when walking. Sharp pains in the
liver on deep inspiration. The %ver is disturbed by mental exertion
and anger. The liver seems to manufacture an excess of bile. Per-
verted viscid bile that readily forms gall stones. It causes the liver to
make healthy bile which is the natural solvent of gall stones, when
given in homoeopathic doses at long intervals. It has cured many
cases of gall stone colic. It has removed gall stones in many cases.
Sensitive to clothing over the hypochondria. The following three
cases will testify:

Case I. — ^Woman, married, grown children. Aged 37. Headache
followed hy vomiting of bile for several years. Face purple. Heat
ameliorates the pain. Pain begins in right eye, spreads over the fore-
head with a dragging feeling in back of head. Pain in sacrum extends
to thighs, aggravated on right side. Nervous, easily startled, ap-
prehensive. Intensely fastidious. Had gall stone colic three months
ago. Cold feet. Headache at menstrual period for sixteen years.
Menstrual flow thick, clotted, dark, lasts one day. Stool, light color
when sick, darker when in better health. Must restrain herself or she
will commit suicide. Slow pulse at times. Tired all the time. Con-
demned to an operation by the surgeon for gall s^one. Fissured



KATRVM


m

tongue. Natrum sulphuricum cured ; the gall sttmes disappeai:^.

Case 2 . — ^Man actively engaged in business, weight i8o pounds. Age
40. Pain in region of gall bladder. Gall stone colic. Came on after
indigestion. Dull aching in that region. Must walk about the room,
not ameliorated in any position. Only once has stool become light
colored. Pain in region of kidneys, also through pelvic region and
legs with a cloudy condition of the urine ; dribbling of few drops of
urine after urination. Dull heavy pain in right side behind the lower
ribs, continuous pain ; pain extend up right side as far as nipple ; stab-
bing pains in breast. Pain in duodenum aggravated after eating.
Natrum sulph. cured. The patient is in perfect health.

Case 3. — Woman. Age 64. Diarrhoea ; stool watery, sometimes
chalky ; enlarged liver ; clawing feeling in gall bladder ; gall stone colic.
Had been condemned by a surgeon to the operating table. Sinking
spells after stool ; cold spells ; vertigo, stooping, lying or walking ; spells
of rapid beating of heart ; mental depression ; thirstless ; temperature
sub-normal ; sensitive to jarring abdomen ; flatulence and rumbling in
abdomen ; cold legs to knees ; cold hands ; much belching, aggravated
after meals ; sensitive to weather changes ; nervous and sleepless be-
fore a storm ; sore dragging feeling in the liver ; bowels sluggish ; slow:
digestion ; heaviness of arms and legs ; chilliness down the back ; un-
able to lie on right side with comfort ; urine copious ; strong ; late going
to sleep. Natrum sulph. made a radical change in her condition and
there are no more signs of gall stones.

Distress in the abdomen relieved by displacing flatus. Emptiness re-
lieved by passing flatus and by eructations. Cramps and many pains
from obstructed flatus. Pain and distension in the ascending colon
from flatus. Pain in the region of the caecum. It has cured many
cases resembling the first stage of appendicitis. Pain and tenderness
in the whole abdomen. Dull heavy pain from abdomen to back.
Burning in the abdomen. Feeling in the abdomen as if a diarrhoea
would come on, ameliorated by eructations and passing flatus. Dis-
tress in the abdomen that hurries him to stool but only flatus passes.
Pain in die abdomen during menses. Cramp in morning before break-
fast. Pain in abdomen, 4 to 8 p. m., and in evening. Constant distress
in bowels and urging to stool. Fulness, rumbling, motions, gurgling
with or without diarrhoea. Pain in right ascending colon when lying
on the right side. Bilious colic with vomiting of bile. It has cured
many cases of syphilis. It has cured enlarged abdominal glands.
Morning diarrhoea with copious flatus soon after rising or ‘soon after
standing on the feet. Diarrhoea in wet weather. Stools gushing ;
cc^ious ; greenish ; thin ; very offensive ; slimy, bloody ; cramps in the
abdomen b^ore stool. Smardng in the anus during stool. Sometimes
cheerful after stool. Often the diarrhoea is painless. Diarrhoea after



NATHUM SULPHUWCUM


703


farinaceous food ; from vegetables ; fruit ; pastry ; cold drinks ; ice
cream. Diarrhoea alternating with constipation. Diarrhoea with stools
at any hour of the day or night, but especially morning and evening.
It has cured many cases of chronic diarrhoea with stool involuntary and
lienteric. Itching and crawling in the anus. Condylomata at the anus.
It cured an ulceration in the rectum with copious bleeding in a lawyer
who had long struggled with suicidal impulses. It has often cured
bleeding piles. !

It has cured parenchymatic inflammation of the kidneys following
scarlet fever and front malarial influences. It has cured sugar in the
urine and polyuria. It has cured brick dust sediment many times also
where copious white sandy sediment was present. It has cured copious
deposits of phosphates with copious jelly-like mucous sediment. Must
rise often in the night to urinate. Burning during and after urina-
tion. Urine loaded with bile. Where these symptoms appear after
neglected gonorrhoea.

In the male strong sexual desire and troublesome erections. Gonor-
rhoea when the discharge has a greenish yellow color and there is burn-
ing during and after urination. It has cured enlarged prostate many
times. Condylomata, soft fleshy with greenish discharge. CEdema of
the scrotum and prepuce. Itching of the penis and scrotum with burn-
ing after scratching.

The menstrual flow is copious' acrid and clotted. Leucorrhoea acrid
greenish, purulent, excoriating tht! |)arts. It has cured milk leg.

Much thick, viscid white mh^us forms in the larynx and trachea.
Dyspnoea on exertion and while Wklking ; with sharp pain in left chest.
Stitching on deep breathing. Dyspnoea in damp weather. It is a most
useful remedy in humid asthma in children of sycotic parents. Humid
asthma with copious viscid mucus in every spell of hot weather.
Chronic catarrh of the bronchial tubes.

Frequent attacks of paroxysmal cough from irritation in larynx end-
ing in copious white, viscid expectorations. Expectoration bloody ;
greenish yellow ; purulent ; white ; viscid. Oppression of the chest
from damp evening air and in the morning on waking. Emptiness in
the chest on inspiration. Soreness in the chest on coughing, better by
holding the chest with the hands. Bronchitis and pneumonia are*
sometimes hard to cure in sycotic patients until they have received this
remedy. Muco-purulent expectoration in old people. Eruptions on
the chest every spring in sycotic patients. Swelling and suppuration in
the axillary glands.

It has been the epidemic remedy in this country in cerebro-spinal
meningitis, where the pain in, the back of the head and neck was mark-
ed, "as the gnawing of a dog” and the head was drawn backward.
Piercing pain between the scapulae in the evening while sitting. Ten-



nitric acid


704

dcrness of the spine. Sore pain in the small of the back and sacrum.
Pain in the small of the back during the night compelling her to lie on
the right side ; it passes away in the morning after rising. Pain in the
small of the back from retaining the urine. Itching of the back when
undressing. Pain in the sacrum, cannot lie on either side.

Trembling, twitching and weakness in the limbs, twitching in hands
and feet during sleep. Pains in the limbs during rest. Rheumatic
pains in the limbs in wet weather. Cracking in the joints. Warts on
the arms and hands. Pains in the limbs during chill and fever, better
by motion and walking. Worse in the lower than in the upper limbs.

Weakness in the hands ; flexors pain on grasping anything. Trem-
bling in the hands in the morning on waking and when writing. The
tendency to suppuration around the nails is a marked symptom in this
remedy. Palms raw and sore and exude a watery fluid. It has cured
bad cases of psoriasis of the palms. Fingers swollen and stiff. Pan-
aritium, pain more bearable in the open air.

Ulceration, pain under the nail and in the tips of the fingers.

Pain in the right hip joint on motion. Stitching in the left hip. Pain
in the hip extending to the knee. Swelling in the left leg. Sciatica
better in motion. Dull aching in the lower limbs during chill and
fever, better when walking. Restlessness of the limbs at night in bed.
Ulcers on outer side of thighs. Stiffness of knees. Weakness in lower
limbs. Burning of feet and legs to the knees. Dry heat in feet at
night. CEdema of flie feet. Sharp pain in soles and heels.

Drowsiness in the forenoon when reading. Frightful dreams. Chill
from 6 to 9 p. m., with fever, than dry heat until i a. m., sweat absent.
Chill with icy coldness and gooseflesh from 4 to 8 p. m. during menses.
Shaking chills. Chilliness with fever in the evening from night air.
Perspiration after midnight or toward morning. Fevers with vomit-
ing bile. Remittent and intermittent fevers. It is a much neglected
remedy in chronic intermittent fever.

Eczema with watery oozing. Water blisters. Yellow scales aftqr
breaking the vesicles. Jaundice. Intertrigo. Wart-like, red excres-
censes all over the body. Red, knotty eruptions on head above the
cars ; on the forehead and left side of nape of neck ; in the middle of
chest. Itching when undressing.

NITRIC ACID

Great general weakness ; feeble reaction ; extreme sensitivity, and
nervous trembling, are marked features in this remedy. Patients
greatly broken by long suffering, pain and sickness, physical more than
mental suffering, finally anaemia and emaciation are marked. Sensitive
to cold ; always chilly. Symptoms are aggravated from becoming coldt



NITRIC ACID


705


and in cold air. Always taking cold. The walls of blood vessels are
relaxed and bleed easily ; profuse dark blood. Pains as if flesh were
torn from the bones and a sensation as though a splinter felt in inflam-
ed parts, in ulcers and in nerves. Inflammation of the periosteum, in
bone, and in the nerves. Syphilitic bone pains. Caries of bone, and
exostoses. The margins of orifices bleed and grow warts. Old scars
become painful in cold weather and when weather changes to cold ;
pains like splinters. Inflammation of glands after the abuse of mer-
cury in syphilitic subjects. Prolonged suppuration in glands, with no
tendency to repair, when there are sticking pains. The discharges are
thin, bloody, offensive and excoriating ; sometimes a dirty yellowish
green. Suppuration where there is no tendency to repair. This is
often the case when the patient is syphilitic and has been surcharged
with mercury. For suppuration and ulceration in cancerous affections
with bloody, watery, offensive discharges and sticking pains. It has
often been observed that the patient requiring Nitric acid is more sub-
ject to diarrhoea than constipation. It has cured many complaints in
patients who are never so comfortable as when riding in a carriage.
Twitching of muscles in all parts of the body. Many complaints are
aggravated from a jar, and from noise. Even his pains arc aggra-
vated from noise. Nitric acid patients are often extremely sensitive to
medicines, especially high potencics-^indeed, they prove every remedy
given too high. Fissures form in nSany places ; canthi. corners of the
mouth, above the anus ; the skin cracks — and all these have the splinter
sensation. He finally becomes dropsical, especially in the extremities.
Offensiveness is a marked condition of this patient, often putrid odors.
The urine smells like that of a horse. Offensive leucorrhoea. offensive
catarrh, and breath ; foetid foot sweat. Strong odors from the body.
Too much weight must not be given to the dark, swarthy complexion
so often mentioned as the one most likely to need this remedy. Nitric
acid will cure blondes as often as brunettes, if the symptoms agree.

Prostration of mind. Any effort to reflect on certain things causes
the thoughts to vanish. A general indifference to all matters ; tired of
life ; has no enjoyment in anything ; aggravated before menses. Mental
depression in the evening. Anxiety about his failing health, with fear
of death. Anxiety after loss of sleep ; vexation and sorrow. He is
angered over his own mistakes. Anger with trembling. Obstinate and
refuses to be comforted about his misfortune. He is weary of life but
fears death. Excitable and weeps. Despair of recovery. Hopeless-
ness. Easily startled, frightened. Starts from fright on falling asleep.
Cannot comprehend what is said to him. The whole mental state is
better when riding in a carriage.

Suffers much from vertigo in the morning ; must lie down.

His headaches are violent, aggravated from niose of wagons on the



NITRIC ACID


706

paved streets, but often ameliorated from riding in a carriage on a
smooth, country road. The noise and jarring increase the pain. Pain
as if in a vise from ear to ear. The biparietal syphilitic pain is often
cured by this remedy. Pain as though the head were bound up. Pain-
ful drawing in head extending to eyes, with nausea. Stitching pains in
the head. Hammering pain in the head. Pain in morning on waking,
ameliorated after rising, aggravated by a jar, motion and noise,
ameliorated riding in a carriage. Heat offten ameliorates the head
pains and cold aggravates. Wrapping up ameliorates. Pain as if con-
stricted by a tape. Extreme sensitivity of the scalp and skull to comb-
ing the hair, and to the hat. The hair falls out in profusion, as in
syphilis. Eruption on the scalp with sharp sticking pains as from
splinters ; moist, itching, offensive eruptions. Caries of bones of skull.
Exostoses.

The eyes have lost their lustre, the pupils are dilated, and there is
diplopia. There is inflammation of the conjunctiva with acrid tears.
Ulceration of the cornea with pricking pain. Iritis with stinging,
stitching pain, aggravated at night and changing from warm to cold
room or in cold air. Spots on the cornea. Intense photophobia, burn-
ing, pressure and sensation as though sand in the eyes. Ptosis.
Swollen lids, which are hard and bum. Small warts on upper lids.
Warts that bleed easily, with sensation of sticks,

Deafness, ameliorated when riding in a carriage or train. Catarrh
of the Eustachian tubes. Pulsating in ears. Discharge from ear, foetid,
brown, ichorous, purulent — since scarlet fever. The auditory canal
nearly closed. Swelling of glands about the ear. Caries of the mastoid.

Subject to coryza every winter ; no sooner does he get over one cold
than he has another. The nose is obstructed in the night during sleep.
Sneezing in cold air, from every draft, must keep the room very warm.
Bad smells in the nose, and the catarrh is offensive to others. Nose-
bleed mornings and nights. Nasal catarrh, acrid, watery at night,
yellow, offensive, excoriating, bloody, brownish, thin — since scarlet
fever or in mercurio-syphilitic patients. The nose feels as if there were
splinters in it. Large crusts from high up in nose. Green crusts blown
out every morning. Ulceration high up in nose. Warts form in and
about the nostrils. Red, scurfy tip of nose. Cmsts form on the
wings of the nose. Cracked nose.

Deep lines of suffering characterize the Nitric acid face. The face
is pale, yellow, sallow and sunken. The eyes are sunken. Dark rings
about the eyes, mouth and nose. The face is bloated. The lids are
tumid in the morning. There are brown spots. Pigmented warty
spots on the forehead. The right parotid is large. The skin feels
drawn over the face. Crusts and pustules form on the face. Crack-
ing in jaw when chewing. Comers of the mouth cracked, ulcerated



NITRIC AClD 707

and scabby. The lips raw and bleeding. Painful swelling of the sub-
maxillary gland. Ihc expression is anxious, haggard, sickly.

Pain in the teeth, tearing, aggravated from cold or warm things.
Pulsating evening and night, after mercury. Caries of teeth. Teeth
become yellow. Gums bleed easily, scorbutic, swollen.

The tongue is excoriated, sore, red, yellow, white and dry, fissured,
with sore spots. Ulceration of tongue with viscid mucus in mouth.
Inflammation of the tongue.

Ulcers in mouth, on tongue or in throat, white, or dark and dirty,
putrid, phagedenic, syphilitic, with sticking pains as from splinters.
Sore mouth with stinging, burning pain. Excoriated, red, swollen
membrane. Foul cadaveric odor from the mouth. Saliva flows from
the mouth so acrid that it excoriates the lips.

Confusion of the muscular action in throat causes food to stop in
throat and choking. Difficult swallowing. Violent pain in throat,
extending to ear on swallowing. Sticking in throat like a splinter
(Hepar, Nat. mur. Alum., Arg. n.) on swallowing. Viscid mucus in
throat. Mucus drawn from posterior nares. Inflammation of throat,
tonsils, uvula and soft palate. Uvula and tonsils oedematous (Apis,
Rhus t.y Great swelling of the throat and tonsils. Ulceration of
tonsils, uvula and soft palate. Inflammation of the oesophagus.

Longing for fats, pungent things, herring, chalk, lime, earth ; and
aversion to bread and meat. Genially thirstless.

The stomach is disordered by? milk. Food sours, and causes sour
eructations and vomiting. Fats disagree. Nausea after eating, ame-
liorated by moving about or riding in a carriage. Vomiting bitter and
sour, contents of stomach. Ularation of stomach. Pain in cardiac
opening of stomach on swallowing. Sticking pain in stomach. Ca-
tarrh of stomach. Weight after eating. Sensation of rawness in
stomach after eating.

Chronic inflammation of liver. Clay-colored stools. Enormously
enlarged liver. Pain in region of liver with jaundice. Stitching pain
in liver. Enlarged spleen.

Cramping pain in abdomen. Violent pain in ilio-caecal region, sore
and tender, aggravated from motion. Awakened at midnight with a
crampy pain in abdomen ; chilly ; pain aggravated from motion.
Rumbling in abdomen. Abdomen distended and tender. Great sore-
ness in abdomen. Inflammation and suppuration of inguinal glands.
The relaxed condition in weakly infant boys, that so much disposes to
inguinal hernia, is often overcome by Nitric acid and the hernia cured
{Lyc., Nux V,).

Broken down subjects who are disposed to suffer from frequent
attacks of diarrhoea, or from constipation alternating with diarrhoea,
often need this remedy— when the urine smells strong like that of a



7o8


NlTKXC ACID


horse, and he is pale and sickly, losing flesh and strength, subject to
excoriation of orifices and excoriating catarrhs and ulcers. The stool
is bloody, putrid, undigested, green, slimy, excoriating, sour, curdled
if milk is used as a diet, black putrid blood. In dysentery. Cold
changes of the weather bring on diarrhoea. Anus excoriated, burn-
ing, fissured, covered with warts. Membrane comes with the stool.
Much pure blood with the stool not even clotted, very offensive. In-
effectual urging to stool. Sensation as if rectum were filled and he
cannot expel it. Constipation, painful hard difficult stool. Drawing,
cutting and pressing before stool ; constant fruitless urging {Nux v.).
During stool there is colic, tenesmus, spasmodic contraction of anus,
unsatisfactory straining. Splinters in rectum. After stool there is
still urging (Merc.), exhaustion ; soreness of anus ; cutting pain ;
burning and shooting in rectum ; constriction of anus ; great nervous
excitement ; palpitation. The pain keeps her in bed for hours after
every stool. Itching and burning in anus. Constant acrid moisture
about the anus. Periodical bleeding of rectum and pain in sacrum.
Fissures of anus. Painful prolapsus of rectum. This has been a
most useful remedy in fistula, fissures, condylomata, polypi, caruncles,
cancer of the rectum and haemorrhoids — when the symptoms agree.
It has cured caruncles so sensitive that the patient would cry out when
they were touched. Haemorrhoids that are exquisitely painful to
touch and at stool ; that bleed, external or internal, with burning and
sticking during stool. Piles that ulcerate and discharge copiously of
blood and pus. When piles arc so painful that she breaks out in
sweat, becomes anxious, and pulsates all over, on the slightest touch or
at stool, this remedy has been useful (compare Pseonia and Staph.),
Foetid moisture at the anus.

The male sexual organs are in a constant state of irritability. Sex-
ual desire is increased and erections troublesome at night. Painful
spasmodic erections at night ; stitching pain in the urethra and chor-
dee. It has been a useful remedy in gonorrhoea when the discharge
is thin and bloody, later when it is greenish or yellow ; burning and
sticking on urination, and the urethra is swollen and very sore. It
has cured condylomata which have the ‘‘splinter” sensation, and bleed
easily, and extremely sensitive to touch. Condylomata on genitals and
around the anus. Inflammation of the prostate gland with gonorrhoea,
especially when the discharge becomes scanty from taking cold or
from strong injections. It cures old cases of gleet when the urethra
has pain in it like a splinter on touch or when urinating. Prolonged
inflammation of the urethra with infiltration, making the urethra feel
hard and nodular like a whip-cord (Arg. n.). Sore spots in the ure-
thra, ulcers, with bloody pus, and the sensation of splinters. Itching
in the urethra after gonorrhoea (Petr.). Pimples, vesicles, herpes and



NITRIC ACID


709

crusts on the prepuce. Small ulcers on the glans or prepuce. Spread--
ing ulcers. The ulcers discharge a brown, bloody water, offensive.
Phagedenic ulcers {Ars., Aur, m. n,, Caust., Merc, c.). Inflam-
mation of the prepuce. Ulcers that destroy the fraenum. Inflamed
and ulcerated parts have the splinter sensation and flow a bloody
water. Paraphimosis and phimosis and great swelling. The hair
falls off from the pubes.

The female is greatly troubled by the constant itching and burning
and sexual desire. Excoriation of the parts from leucorrhoea and
menstrual discharges. Every exertion brings on uterine haemorrhage
(Calc,), The menstrual flow is dark and thick. Menses too soon and
profuse, like bloody water. Uterine prolapsus. Many and extreme
nervous sufferings come during the menstrual period ; flatulence,
bruised pain in limbs, pain down thighs, “splinter’' under the finger
and toe nails, palpitation, anxiety, trembling, neuralgic pains in any
part. After the menses there comes a muddy, watery flow, lasting
many days, and extreme excoriation of the parts. Thin, bloody, ex-
coriating leucorrhoea at all times or at any time. The vagina is ex-
coriated and condylomata grow upon the genitalia. Erectile tumors.
Caruncles at the orifice of urethra, exquisitely sensitive to touch. The
itching is aggravated by cold. The parts are fissured and bleed easily.

Many troubles culminate during menses and lactation. Lumps in
the mammae. The nipples are figured and tender, are excoriated and
have ‘"splinters.” Tendency to abortion from general weakness and
the ease with which a uterine hiemorrhage may set in.

Hoarseness, and ulceration of the larynx. Voice lost. Laryngitis
in old spyhilitic subjects. Oppression of the chest, ameliorated by
expectoration. Shortness of breath. Intermittent breathing.

The cough is aggravated in winter, yet aggravated in a warm room
and from becoming warm. The cough is dry, barking, aggravated
during the night, aggravated lying, aggravated before midnight ;
comes on during sleep. Cough with hectic fever and night sweats.
Paroxysmal cough with retching, like whooping cough, violent, rack-
ing cough. Hard, prolonged coughing spells with difficult expectora-
tion. The irritation to cough is like a tickling in the larynx. The
expectoration is greenish, viscid or thin, dirty, watery, bloody mucus,
or dark clotted blood. Loose cough in daytime, dry at night. Rat-
tling in daytime, but no expectoration. Cough in broken-down consti-
tutions, from liver and lung affections, in tubercular subjects. The

sputum tastes bitter, sour or salty. It is offensive, even putrid. He

is covered with sweat during efforts to expectorate. Stitching in the
chest. In typhoid pneumonia, with rattling in the chest, inability to
expectorate, or when he can expectorate the sputum is brown and
bloody, and the urine smells like that of a horse. In tuberculosis with



MUX MOSCHAtA


710

night sweats and haemoptpis. Palpitation from excitement, on as-
cending stairs. The pulse is rapid, irregular, and every fourth beat
is missed.

Swelling of glands of neck and axilla. StifE neck. Stitching pains
in back and chest Burning spots in spine. Pain in back, nights,
compelling him to lie on the abdomen. Sharp pains in back and limb
in tabes dorsalis. Sharp pains in back on coughing.

Rheumatic pains in limbs. Emaciation of upper arms, and thighs.
Weakness of limbs. Dropsy of limbs. Crippled nails. Rheumatic
pains in upper limbs. Stitching. Sticking pains in limbs in cold
weather. Numbness of arms and hands. Copper colored spots on
arms. Chilblains on hands and fingers. Cold, sweaty hands. Nu-
merous large warts on back of hands. Herpes between the fingers.
Vesicles on the tip of the thumb that open into ulcers, felons, distorted
and discolored nails. Yellow curved nails, splintered sensation under
nails. It is useful in wounds that inflame and have the “splinter”
sensation. Tearing in the long bones of the lower limbs at night.
The legs arc weary and bruised. Pain in hip as if sprained. Stick-
ing pains along the nerves as from splinters. Syphilitic nodes on the
tibia with nightly pains. Chilblains on the feet and toes. Phagedenic
blisters on Ae toes (Graph.). Extreme soreness of the tibia. Pro-
fuse, offensive sweat of feet.

Shocks on going to sleep (Agar., Arg. m., Ars., Nat. m.). The
pain comes during sleep. Starting in sleep. Anxious, unrefreshing
sleep, with frightful dreams.

Nitric acid is a very useful remedy in fevers. The thirstlessness
during all stages has often called attention to it. Cold hands and feet.
Chronic intermittent in cachectic constitutions, copious night sweats,
extreme weakness, with the characteristic odor of the urine, and bleed-
ing from some pan a dark blood, this remedy will act well.

NUX MOSCHATA

This is not a very great remedy ; it has not a very wide range of
usefulness, but it is often overlooked when needed. We get into the
habit of relying entirely on the polychrests.

The old women used to pve nutmeg to hysterics, and wonderful to
tell its provings justify its use. It must have had some palliative
relation to the hysteria. The root is much stronger than Ae nut, in
Ae same proportions, and contains the real medicinal qualities.

The patient appears to be dazed ; Acre is a complete loss of mem-
ory ; she is automatic in her actions. This is a wonderful state of Ac
mind. She goes about the house performing her duties, but if inter-
rupted, forgets what she has been doing, forgets Aat she was all day



NUX MOSCHATA


711

in conversation with her son ; she has no recollection of past events.
This is a singular state of the mind sometimes found in hysterical
women. Sometimes it is impossible to find out what state of the mind
is present she is so forgetful. She lies with the eyes closed and yet
knows everything that is going on, but remembers nothing. She
speaks with intelligence about the things of the moment, but knows
nothing of the past. She prophesies, predicts with a sort of clairvoy-
ance. The mental state is the keynote. Sometimes she is < in the
morning, sometimes in the evening, or on waking. She performs all
her duties and yet seems to be in a dream — she seems not to know
her friends.

The Nux mos. patient is always ready to go to sleep ; it is with great
difficulty that she can keep awake. She falls asleep on all occasions,
in season and out of season. The eyes look heavy ; she cannot keep
awake ; falls into a profound slumber, sometimes into coma.

Useful in the coma of typhoid and intermittent fever. When
aroused she remembers nothing ; looks dazed'; looks about and wants
to know who the people arc around and what they are doing. It is
a state in which patients answer questions slowly after a long inter-
val, and then look confused again. They give an answer that has no
relation to the question asked, or, answer correctly. We find such a
state in typhoid, in hysteria, after shock, after fear, blighted affections,
or the loss of a friend. It is most suitable after shock ending in this
kind of trouble than in typhoid. ^ It is also useful in typhoid, but
where there is great weakness, sliding down in bed, and nervous trem-
bling, Phos, ac. is a better remedy. Nux mos. does not relate so com-
pletely to the general image of a typhoid as docs Phos, ac.

The sleepiness and the dazed state are two things combined, and
when combined are difficult to cover by a rcmcly. This state is some-
what like Opium,

Faintness and even fainting when standing long, suchlas occurs in
a nervous woman standing to have a dress fitted.

There is a dry mouth, the tongue cleaves to the roof of the mouth
in all complaints. There is great sleepiness and automatic conduct,
especially in nervous women. It has cured petit mal.

The haemorrhages stand out in bold relief ; haemorrhages from the
nose, uterus and bowels. There is vomiting of blood.

The patient is sensitive to wind, to a draft, to damp air. She has
a headache < walking against the wind ; hoarseness from walking
against the wind ; she is so sensitive to cold weather that she comes
home dazed and sleepy from walking against the wind ; her mouth is
dry but there is no thirst, she doesn't desire water (sometimes thirst
is present). The patient may hold water in the mouth without desire
to swallow it. Nux mos. holds ice water and succulent fruits in the



NUX VOMICA


712

mouth to relieve the sensation of dryness. Often there is a sensation
of dryness when the mouth is moist.

In the extremities there is numbness, tingling, prickling, paralytic
weakness ; there is threatened paralysis ; momentary hysterical paraly-
sis ; coming for a short time and then going away. Aphonia with a
dry mouth, in hysterical patients ; when walking out of doors. This
aphonia passes away on going into the house.

The whole back is sensitive to pressure : the vertebrae are sensitive.

This remedy has prolonged and inveterate constipation ; prolonged
urging to stool followed by a soft stool. [Alum,, Psor,, China.)
The stool is difficult but soft. He wonders why he has to urge for
a soft stool.

In woman there are many troubles ; menorrhagia lasting ten or fif-
teen days ; the blood is clotted ; the menses are too often, last too long,
are irregular. The abdomen is full of colic ; cramping pains extend-
ing to be broad ligaments and down the limbs ; most distressing dys-
menorrhoea from exposure to cold, riding in the wind or living in
damp houses. With this there is a dry mouth and thirstlessness ; she
wakes at night with a dry mouth ; it seems as if the tongue cleaved
to the roof of the mouth.

This remedy is especially suitable for lean women, those who have
lost flesh. The breasts are flat. I remember a case of a woman
thirty-five years old whose breasts which were once well rounded be-
came perfectly flat. Nux mos. restored the breasts.

This is a little remedy, but when wanted nothing will take its place.

NUX VOMICA

Everywhere in this remedy we observe the striking oversensitive-
ness of the patient ; it is brought out in all the symptoms. Irritable :
oversensitive to noise, to light, to the least current of air, to his sur-
roundings ; extremely touchy in regard to his food ; many kinds of
food disturb, strong foods disturb ; he is aggravated by meat ; craves
stimulants, pungent, bitter, succulent things, something to brace him
up. Oversensitive to medicines. One reason why there are so many
Nux patients is because people have been overdrugged by the old
school. When a patient comes from the old school and had prescribing,
having had stimulants and tonics to brace him up, wine and stimulants
of all sorts, it is sometimes impossible to get reliable symptoms, to get
the patient settled down, until we give Nux as an antidote.

It is useful in those overdrugged by tea, coffee, wine. Old coffee
drinkers become sensitive, oversensitive to noise, their symptoms are
flitting ; they do not give their symptoms well. Such patients will do
well for a few days on Nux ; some of their symptoms will drop out



NUX VOMICA


7*3


and they will settle down.

The mental state is varied, but they all show oversensitiveness ;
irritable, touchy, sensitive conditions. They are never contented, never
satisfied ; disturbed by their surroundings, and the become irritable,
so that they want to tear things, to scold. Impulses are strongly
marked at times. The woman has impulses to destroy her husband
or to throw her child into the fire ; the impulse is intermingled with
violent temper, cannot be contradicted or opposed ; if a chair is in the
way he kicks it over ; if, while undressing, a part of his clothing should
catch on a button he would pull it off because he is so mad at it.
(Like Nit, ac.). An uncontrollable state of irritability ; it is a weak-
ness and is accompanied by physical weakness ; a lack of balance.
For example, a business man has been at his desk until he is tired out,
he receives many letters, he has a great many irons in the fire ; he is
troubled with a thousand little things ; his mind is constantly hurried
from one thing to another until he is tortured. It is not so much the
heavy affairs but the little things. He is compelled to stimulate his
memory to attend to all the details ; he goes home and thinks about
it ; he lies awake at night ; his mind is confused with the whirl of busi-
ness and the affairs of the day crowd upon him ; finally brain fag
comes on. When the details come to him he gets angry and wants
to get away, tears things up, scolds, goes home and takes it out of his
family and children. Sleeps by fits and starts ; wakens at 3 a. m., and
his business affairs crowd on him so that he cannot sleep again until
late in the morning when he falla into a fatiguing sleep and wakens
up tired and exhausted. He wants to sleep late in the morning.

Melancholy, sadness, but all the time he feels as if he could fly to
pieces, jerks things about, tears things up ; wants to force things his
own way. Driven by impulses to commit acts that verge upon insan-
ity — the destruction of others. Natr, sul. has a strong impulse to
destroy himself. Arg, nitr,, also, particularly by jumping from a
height, but he avoids placing himseif in such a position.

He is oversensitive to the open air, to a draft of air ; always chilly,
always taking cold and it settles in the nose and extends to the chest.

Skin oversensitive to touch, to draft. Full of pains and aches. He
sweats easily on the slightest provocation. Brain fag, fatigue, neural-
gias ; on the verge of insanity and this goes on to convulsions. Con-
vulsions of single muscles and those of the whole body ; muscular
twitchings ; weakness, trembling, and paralysis. This paralytic weak-
ness and disordered state of the activity of the muscles and nerves are
prominent.

Another state running through Nux is that actions are turned in
opposite directions. When the stomach is sick, it will empty its con-
tents, with no great-^ort ordinarilfj but in Nux there is retching and

90



NUX VOMICA


7H

Straining as if the action were going the wrong way, as if it would
force the abdomen open ; a reversed action ; retches, gags, and strains
and after a prolonged effort he finally empties the stomach. The samo
condition is found in the bladder. He must strain to urinate. There
is tenesmus, urging. The bladder is full and the urine dribbles away,
yet when he strains it ceases to dribble. In regard to the bowels,
though the patient strains much, he passes but a scanty stool. In the
diarrhoea at times when he sits on the commode in a perfectly passive
way, there will be a little squirt of stool, and then comes on tenesmus
so that he cannot stop straining, and when he does strain there comes
on the sensation of forcing back ; the stool seems to go back ; a kind
of anti-peristalsis. In constipation the more he strains the harder it
is to pass a stool. In diarrhoea and dysentery there is straining with-
out relief, but as soon as he passes a little stool there is relief. In
dysentery, Merc, has the constant urging ; Merc. cor. tenesmus with
great desire to urinate. The reversed action of the various functions
shows the spasmodic nature of this remedy. Pains shoot from the
rectum up ; burning.

Neuralgias about the eyes, face, and head ; neuralgic headaches ;
the pains stick, and tear ; they cause weeping, fainting ; they burn and
sting. Pains in the head and face and in the extremities, that sting
and tear, but especially draw. Sensation of tension in the muscles.
A drawing in the back like a pulling or tension in the muscles. The
pain feels as if drawing, a spasm of the muscles ; a drawing pain in
the back ; drawing pain in the back of the neck, forcing the patient
to let the head go back ; drawing pain down the spine ; lumbago.
Backache worse as soon as she lies down (pregnancy) as if it would
break (Bry., Phos. — as if broken. Kali c.) must get up and walk.
Neurities with great soreness of skin. Pains in the regions of the kid-
neys and liver. Pains draw so that he cannot turn over in bed, and
the only way he can get over is to lift himself up by his hands and
then turn over and lie down. Drawing pains in the sacrum and hips ;
drawing pains in the sacrum in connection with dysentery. Rending
pains in the bowels and every pain causes desire for stool. Such is
the characteristic of all the abdominal pains. Drawing pains in the
extremities, causing spasms in the calves, feet, and toes. Cramps in
the abdomen cause desire for stool; after pains in the form of cramps
urge to stool ; menstrual colic, with urging to stool ; pains in the stom-
ach, after eating, urge to stool. After much straining no stool passes,
but after going several times a small stool passes with relief. It is
scanty and with reversed peristaltic action.

Oversensitive to stimulants. It is a routine remedy in men trying
to sober up ; even in delirium tremens. Old debauchees, broken down
with stimulantp^ sexual. excesses and the worry and fret of business;



Mtnc VCOkOtiA


1^5


they work half an hour and then go out and get a drink, and this goes
on until finally they must give up, go home and go to bed. He is on
the verge of insanity, irritable, fatigued, sweats much, is aggravated
from the air, sensitive to noise and light ; broken down. He must
have Nux, rest and no stimulants.

In those drinking too much tea, coffee and stimulants, they stay
awake day and night until the end must come ; there is tension in all
the nerves ; he feels as if he must fly, as if he could no longer hold
together ; his muscles and hands tremble ; there is jerking of the limbs
on going to sleep and in sleep.

Full of anxiety, despair, and hypochondriasis ; ‘ oversensitive to im-
pressions all the senses are in this condition ; cannot bear reading
or conversation ; irritable, and wishes to be alone.” Everybody dis-
pleases or does something to annoy him. Everybody that attempts to
soothe only angers him. He dreads the business affairs of the day.
Finally this state comes on — “he quarrels, reproaches, scolds, insults
from jealousy, mingled with unchaste expressions ; soon afterwards
howls and weeps aloud.”

Patient is broken down sexually because he is unusually endowed
with sexual desires and he indulges until broken down ; sexually ex-
hausted, impotent. Mental erethism but relaxation on intromission.
Driven to suicide.

Nux is an old dyspeptic, lean, hi^ngry, withered ; bent forward ; pre-
mature age ; always selecting his ;food land digesting almost none ;
aversion to meat, it makes him sidk'; craves pungent, bitter things, ton-
ics. Weak stomach ; after meals pain in the stomach, nausea, retch-
ing ; stomach sinks in ; withers and loses flesh.

Tendency to take cold ; gets coryza. Colds settle in the nose, throat,
chest and ears. Takes cold from the least provocation ; perspires eas-
ily and the least current of air causes headache with coryza. If he is
in a heated room and is disturbed in his equilibrium he gets a coryza.
Cepa coryza is also worse in a warm room. Much stuffing up of thet
nose in the house at night ; nose feels completely filled up, particularly
out of doors, but fluent in doors ; thin, watery discharge during the
day. Sensitive to the least draft; sneezing caused by itching in the
nose. This itching goes to the throat and trachea. Cough ; burning
in the air passages ; all the mucous membranes in a state of irritation ;
nasal tone to voice ; loss of voice ; sore throat ; tickling cough. Dry^
teasing cough with great soreness of the chest, like Bry., the hea'
feels as if it would split. Coryza goes to the chest. Grippe with fev^'-'
and bone pains ; must pile on clothing ; the only relief is by keeping
unusually hot, yet a warm room aggravates the coryza before the fever
comes on ; but after the fever comes on he must have heat ; aggravated
even from the movement of air under the bed clothes ; lifting the cov-



7 >6 i4trx voMttiA

ers aggravates the pains, cough, etc.

Sharp fever and sweat, or a hot sweat like Opium (but Opium in a
hot sweat wants the covers olf, whijp Nux cannot raise the covers).
Chills and fever ; heat and sweat intermingled. In chills the fingers
and hands are cold, and purple ; cold from head to foot ; the chill be-
gins in the extremities or back, and extends over the whole body and
the patient must be covered up. Shortly there is a reaction and heat
and sweat come on, but he must be covered through all the stages.
Thirst is not a marked feature ; sometimes it is found in the heat.

Tendency to jaundice in all the febrile states. Sclerotics become
yellow. Skin becomes very yellow. Old intermittents with yellow
skin. Runs close to Bry. in abdominal complaints with jaundice.

Nux suffers from a disordered stomach. A stasis of the portal sys-
tem is present, portal congestion ; stasis in haemorrhoidal veins
with haemorrhoids ; constipation ; dysentery ; paralysis of the rectum.
Stomach symptoms like Puls. ; worse in the morning ; foul mouth in.
the morning also like Puls. Bursting sensation in the head as if a
stone crushed the vertex after disordered stomach.

Full of paralytic conditions. The bowels are in a state of excite-
ment but this passes away and the time comes when the fasces remain
in the rectum with no warning. This extends to the bladder, so that
it becomes full of urine which cannot be voided ; dribbling of urine in
old men with large prostrate, or in gonorrhoea. Paralysis of the ex-
tremities ; of the face ; one arm ; one hand ; single muscles ; facial
paralysis not uncommonly cured by Nux. The sticking pains in pa-
ralysis are important.

At times false plethora, with flushed face ; excitement of face ;
blushing ; great weakness and exhaustion, with irritability and the
mental condition. When under no exertion with nothing to think of,
patient appears to be well, but the thought of doing something ex-
hausts him in a moment.

Headache from sweating ; in wine dri|^kers ; in those staying out at
night ; from night watching. The greatest relief in headaches is from!
perfect quiet. Headaches as if a stone pressed upon the vertex.
Most symptoms better from heat, but the head is worse from heat.
Acne from eating cheese.

It has most violent convulsions with opisthotonos ; convulsions of
all the muscles of the body, with purple face and loss of breath from
j^e movements ; conscious or semi-conscious during the whole spasm,
aware of the sufferings and contortions which are horrible; worse
from the slightest draft of air ; tickling of the feet ; the merest touch
of the throat causes gagging.

It is given as a routine remedy for loss of appetite. It will increase
the appetite but do dangerous work to the patient. “Aversion to meat,



NUX VObdiCA 717

usual food and drink, and customary tobacco and coffee, to water, ale,
food just eaten/'

Pains particularly of the abdomen ; pains cutting, causing the pa-
tient to bend double, with nausea from overeating ; bearing down ;
spasmodic pains in the abdomen, often extend into the limbs, but more
often towards the rectum ; colicky pains which urge to stool and uri-
nation ; renal colic, especially when each pain shoots to the rectum and
urges to stool. Renal colic is caused by a stone in the ureter, which
by its irritation causes a spasmodic clutching of the circular fibres of
that canal ; the proper medicine relaxes these fibres and the pressure
from behind forces these calculi out at once. The same is true of gall
stone colic. The remedy that ameliorates, or some of its cognates,
will overcome the tendency to form stones. Healthy bile dissolves gall
stones in the sac ; healthy urine does the same to a stone in the pelvis
of the kidney. Nux runs close to Bry, in abdominal complaints with
marked yellowness of the skin, Bry. is worse from motion and not
better from heat — Nux is both and is more suited to portal conges-
tion, the neuralgias, etc. ; is worse from slighetst pressure (Coloc.
is better from the slightest pressure, — Mag. pli. is better from press-
ure and heat). Bry. indicated more in peritonitis, lies with limbs
drawn up. Haemorrhoids, portal congestion, cutting pains to rectum
causing urging to stool. Cupr. h^s cutting pains from front to back
as if transfixed. Abdomen sunkeu in Nux, while in Calc, and Sepia
it is engorged. Inula resembles l^ut ; has colic with urging to stool
and to urinate.

'‘Milk sours on the stomach.” “Heat in the head when eating.”
Bad effects from coffee, alcoholic drinks, debauchery. Sensation of
phlegm in the throat ; worse from eating. Aloe has diarrhoea from
leaving off beer, Nux has diarrhoea from leaving oft alcoholic drinks.
Sensation of a lump in the stomach (Bry.). In chronic cases Sepia
is more apt to be indicated and follows Nux well, but quarrels with
Bry. ; associate this with the pressure in the vertex and you have the
typical Nux condition. Sensation of stone comes an hour after eat-
ing, showing that there has been an attempt at digestion, but in Abies
nig. it comes at once. Kreos. pains do not begin until three hours
after eating and then the food is vomited.

It is closely related to Sulphur and often antidotes the overaction of
Sulpfiur. It seldom goes to the bottom and antidotes the constitu-
tional action of Sulphur, but it will remove its exaggerated action, its
superficial action.

Menses too soon ; too long ; flow copious ; more strikingly pro-
longed ; flows and dribbles just enough to stain the linen, starting up
now and again with clots. One menstrual flow is prolonged into an-
other. This will be accompanied with the mental stjatc; excitable;



7 i 8 6pwht

oversensitive to medicines. '‘Menses too early and too profuse ; occur
too soon and last too long ; flow dark/' At times attended with vio-
lent pains, cramps in the uterus, extending over the body, ameliorated
from heat and pressure ; aggravated by the slightest current of air or
cold ; pains and spasms ameliorated by the hot water bottle, clothing
and heat. Labor pains with soreness like Arn. — urging, etc. Bear-
ing down as if contents would protrude, with teasing to urinate and
urging to stool. The flow may be scant and fitful. Itching of the
vulva is prominent.

Full of hysterical manifestations. Europeans develop symptoms
more often calling for Nux in their hysterical manifestations, while
Americans oftener need Ignatia,

Has troublesome asthma. Useful in persons who say they have
asthma from every disordered stomach. They may go free for a
year after Nux is given, and then they eat something that disagrees,
and they sit up all night with asthma. They need Nux. Asthma
associated with cough ; rattling in the chest ; chest fills up with mucus ;
cough with gagging, retching ; appears as if he had taken a fresh cold.

Coryza every time he disorders his stomach. I have a patient who
has a coryza every time she eats sausage; there is no cure for her
because she places her coffee, wine, and social matters above her
health. She can eat steak ; some cannot eat any meat. After a dis-
turbed stomach coryza which goes to the chest and then asthma
comes on.

Palpitation and excitement of the heart and circulation. Much
throbbing.

Worse in the morning — mentally and physically. The coryza and
some head symptoms are worse from the warmth of the bed like
Merc,f yet worse uncovering ; worse from eating and from motion ;
head is worse from heat.

Pressure and sense of weakness in the left inguinal ring — hence
cures hernia in babies {I^yc,, right side). Atti, relieves soreness, etc.
Conium also — ^it competes with Nux in sense of goneness in the groin.

Chills are not better from any amount of covers ; Ign, chills are bet-
ter uncovering. In intermittents, the chill and heat intermingle, the
heat is short and dry, and followed by hot sweat and intense heat ;
worse in the morning, but the chill comes at any time.

OPIUM

Among the striking features of Opium is a class of complaints
marked by painlessness, inactivity, and torpor. Many of the provers
taking small doses had torpor, inability to realize or feel their sur-
roundings, or to take in the nature of states and judge of things.



OPIUM 719

Deception m vision, taste, touch ; deception of the state he exists in ;
in his own realization ; a perversion of all the senses with much de-
ception.

The general characteristic is painlessness, but now and then an
alternate state is produced, in which a small dose of Opium will cause
pain, sleeplessness, inquietude, nervous excitability ; the very opposite
state from that produced in the majority of cases. The majority are
constipated, but in some there is dysentery and tenesmus. The
patient is sleepy, yet at times the drug is characterized by sleepless
nights, anxiety, increased sensitiveness to noise, so that he says he
can almost hear the flies walking on the wall, and hears the clock
striking in the distant steeple.

It is generally supposed that in these opposite conditions one is
primary and the other is secondary. This is true, e. g., those exhibit-
ing stupor and painlessness will go into a state of increased insensibility,
inquietude, anxiety, and irritability, and also one who has a state of
increased sensibility first will have a docile state following. Some;
oversensitive provers will get a basilar headache in the first hour after
taking a dose, so that they cannot raise the head from the pillow ; they
are paralyzed from it ; the pain holds them down. This does not
come on in most provers until the waning of a large dose. This has
been debated over as the primary and secondary actions. What is
the action in one is the reaction ih another, but all are the effects of
the drug, and all the actions tbak follow arc the symptoms of the
remedy. ^

The sluggishness and painlessness are most striking. The inaction
is shown in the lack of reaction to the properly selected homoeopathic
remedy. It here competes with Sulphur. On studying the case you
may find many Opium symptoms, and when given thus indicated,
it rouses the system out of the state of sluggishness and causes re-
action.

Ulcers which are perfectly painless, which do not granulate, and do
not eat or spread, with numbness or lack of sensibility in the ulcer
that ought to be sensitive ; Opium will often heal. Insensibility in
parts that are in a high grade of inflammation.

Paralytic conditions or paresis, partial paralysis ; inactivity, slug-
gishness. Such a condition is found in the bowels so that they do
not move, and rectum fills with round, hard, black balls, which can
be dug out with the finger or spoon. There is no activity, no ability
to strain at stool.

The bladder is in a similar state. There is no ability to use the
abdominal muscles ; he cannot strain to urinate ; retention of urine ;
accelerator muscles are in a state of paresis*

.When drinking, the oesophagus seems, to have no action and the



OPIUM


7ao

fluid does not go down but passes out through the nose ; a paresis ;
fluids go down the wrong way or out through the nose.

Weakness of limbs and muscles ; weakness and paralysis.

Often there is a state of peace. Wants to be let alone. She tells
you she is not sick; and yet she has a temperature of 105-106®, is
covered with a scorching hot sweat, has a rapid pulse ; is delirious.
You ask her how she is and she says she is perfectly well and happy ;
no pains or aches ; wants nothing and has no symptoms. But thtJ
nurse tells you that the patient has passed no stool or urine. The
face looks besotted, bloated, purple : the eyes are glassy and the pupils
contracted. The brain is in a state of confusion, yet she can answer
questions. Or the mental symptoms may be more marked and the
physical condition less prominent ; there is confusion of mind, de-
lirium, loquacity, but this is rare, more commonly only talks when
aroused ; a condition of stupor in which the patient will say nothing
and do nothing. Delirium with a happy turn of mind.

The stomach is in a state of undue warmth, sinking, all-gone,
hungry, and this is not ^relieved by eating. He fills the stomach full
and yet the faint feeling remains. The food sours in the stomach
and is vomited. He can take no more food. He becomes covered
with a cold sweat ; great exhaustion ; nausea, retching and the vomit-
ing continues. This nausea is a troublesome symptom following the
administration of Opium or Morphine. It is a prolonged vomiting
and nausea. He can take nothing into the stomach and nothing will
stop the vomiting for him. The homoeopath knows the use of Chamo-
milla and one dose will give wonderful relief at once and stop the
deathly sinking and nausea.

There is never any use for the crude Opium in the sick room. In
surgery at times it is admitted that something seems necessary, and
we will not quarrel with the surgeon. But in disease, in sick people,
k is not necessary. It performs no use and in the end it is an injury ;
it prevents finding the homoeopathic remedy. It has masked tho
symptoms and spoiled the case, and you cannot do anything for days.

Opium has been much abused and much has been learned about it,
but this abuse has not helped much in its proving, for the individual-
izing symptoms arc not obtained. Big doses cause gross effects, and
the symptoms thus obtained arc sometimes useful, e, g., in cerebral
apoplexy with stertorous breathing, jaw dropped, pupils dilated or
contracted, generally the latter, face mottled, purple, or hot, hot sweat,
one sided paralysis. You would wonder on seeing such a case whether
he had been paralyzed, had Opium, injured himself in a fall or had
been indulging in the bottle, and you would examine the case to dis-
tinguish. This is a mechanical trouble, there is pressure of blood on
tht bmin. .. This alone may not -kUl-but ]fttx on- inflammatoty faction



OPIUM


721


18 set up around the clot. Opium causes a flow of blood to the brain,
and when given hoinoeopathically it checks this, and in six hours he
will become rational, his skin cool, face normal color, pulse normah
We thus see the usefulness of the crude effects of Opium in giving
us a picture of apoplexy.

Nervous headaches beginning in the back of the head and spreading
over the whole face ; worse in the morning. He feels as if his head
were held down to the pillow by the intense aching pain in the base
of the brain, and yet when he gets up he is unable to lie down again.
This is common in women ; a false plethora ; excitable ; going through
pregnancy or menstruation ; headache. The patient sits up and is
unable to lie down. The pain begins in the morning and is so violent
that the patient cannot move, cannot wink the eye, turn the head,
cannot bear the least jar or the ticking of the clock ; face is mottled,
purple, blue ; eyes injected. It is difficult to get symptoms from her.
Opium will relieve at once.

But most of the complaints are painless.

It lakes on the appearance of drinkers, besotted ; fever with besotted
countenance. Delirium tremens with awful anxiety, vomiting, con-
gestive headache, contracted pupils ; violent headache after drinking,
exhaustion ; not able to get out of bed ; delirium. Most of the com-
plaints are attended with stupor ; lies in a stupor like apoplexy, cannot
be aroused.

The Opium patient is full of cOi^vulsions. The patient wants to be
uncovered, wants the cool air, the 0pcn air. Convulsions if the room
is too warm. Opisthotonos j head drawn back ; cerebro-spinal menin-
gitis. In a case of cerebro-spinal meningitis we find convulsions ap-
proaching, opisthotonos, head drawn back, kicks the covers off, wants
a cool room ; skin red ; face red and mottled, pupils contracted. Now
if the mother puts that child into a hot bath, to relieve the convulsions,
it will become unconscious and cold as death. If you arc called to
see such a case be sure to give Opium, and in twelve hours you vvill
be astonished to see the state of quietude. It competes here with
Apis, Puerperal convulsions.

A mental state appears in these constitutions. Fear and its results.
The Opium patient, when not too stupid, rouses up as if startled,
rouses up with the appearance of awful fear or anxiety. The old
Opium eater is overwhelmed with anxiety and fear. If a dog jump
at him suddenly, he will be thrown into convulsions, have diarrhoea,
fits of some sort, and it will be days and weeks before that fear is
gone. Complaints from fear when the fear remains, or the idea of
the fear remains, or the cause of it comes before the eyes. A pregnant
woman is frightened and an abortion is impending, and the object of
the fright continually looms up before her eyes. Epilepsy dating back

9 ^



722 OX.^C Acm

to a fright, and that object comes up before the eyes before the attack
comes on, and the fear of the fright remains. Hysterical attack ;
physical shock with diarrhoea and sometimes constipation ; retention
of urine or return of the menstrual flow as results, or it may stop the
menses for months. In these conditions there is great fear and the
object of the fear remains before the eyes.

An Opium prover, when coming out from under the influence of
the drug, sees frightful images, black forms, visions of devils, fire,
ghosts, someone carrying her off, murder. Imagines that parts swell
and that he is going to burst.

Inhere is also a sensation of bodily well being ; great happiness ;
great state of confidence in the first hours of the drug. Hence, com-
plaints from sudden joy, anger, shame, sudden fright. Coffea has a
similar state of beatitude. It is both a physical and mental beatitude
in Opium. Opium and Coffea are related ; they antidote each other.

Opium eaters like whisky drinkers are constitutional liars. They
have no conscience left.

“Great sensibility to sound, light, and faintest odors.'* '‘Drowsi-
ness wi h headache, amounting almost to stupor." “Marasmus ; child
wrinkled and looks like a little dried up old man ; stupor."

Old cases of lead poisoning. Pulsatilla cures the diarrhoea follow-
ing the abuse of Opium.


OXALIC ACID

This remedy has been greatly neglected. It will cure many heart
complaints that are treated with ^ague, crude, unproved remedies with
indifferent remits. The violent action upon the heart racks the whole
system. Trembling, convulsions, loss of sensation ; numbness of the
body and limbs ; blueness of the lower limbs, fingers and lips ; paralysis
of the limbs are symptoms showing how violently this remedy takes
hold of the liodv, affecting the heart, spinal cord and brain. Symp-
toms are worse from exertion and motion. The patient is sensitive
to cold air. Symptoms come on in paroxysms. Pdpitation alternates
tvith loss of voice. No remedy produces more violent pains ; cutting,
shooting, stitching, tearing pains in many parts ; sores and bruises all
over the body ; burning in forehead, stomach, abdomen, throat,
urethra, hands and feet ; painful spots on the scalp, sore to touch, also
in other places. The body is mottled in places. Complaints come on
from eating sour fruits, such as strawberries, cranberries, apples,
rhubarb, tomatoes, grapes ; also from eating sugar and starchy foods.
Wine and coffee disagree. The symptoms, and especially the pains,
come on or are worse when thinking about them. At times there is
great excitement and exhilaration— again there is loss of memory and



OXAUC ACID


723


dejection ; maniacal conduct ; aversion to conversation. Fainting
during stool There is marked hyperaemia of the brain and surging
of blood from body to head ; flashes of heat mount upward ; he be-
comes dizzy and there is vanishing of sight. The head leeis empty ,
dull aching in the head ; in forehead and vertex ; the brain burns ,
headache in sppts ; pressing pain in small spots ; pressing pain behind
ear ; the headaches are worse from wine, lying, after sleep, and on
rising and better after stool. Sore tender spots on the scalp. Typ^’
blurs when reading ; vanishing of sight ; small, especially linear objects
seem larger and more distant ; pain eyes, especially the left ; bleared
eyes. Epistaxis with vanishing of sight. Face is pale and blue ;
sunken expression ; heat in face ; face covered with cold sweat ; draw-
ing pain with rigidity near the angle of lower jaw — first in left, then
in right. Ulcers on gums ; gums bleed and are painful in spots ; sour
taste in the mouth ; tongue sore, red, dry, burning, swollen, with white
coating ; there is loss of taste ; aphtha: in the mouth ; much thick
mucus compels him to constantly clear the throat ; swallowing is pain-
ful in the morning ; pain in throat ; chronic sore throat.

Appetite increased ; wanting, with loss of taste ; thirst.

Pain in stomach better after eating ; gnawing in stomach better after
taking soup. After eating, eructations, nausea, pains at the navel,
colic, rumbling in bowels, urging to stool, weakness. Sugar increases
the pain in stomach ; wine makes headache worse ; coffee acts violently
on the heart and causes diarrhoeas heartburn worse in the evening;
eructation, sour, tasteless, after eadng. Nausea and vomiting ; nausea
during pregnancy ; thirst and a>lic after diarrhoea ; nausea and cramp
in calves after stool. Paroxysm^ pains in abdomen in the night, re-
lieved by passing flatus ; burning in stomach and throat ; extreme
tenderness of stomach ; inflammation of stomach and intestines ; empty
feeling relieved by eating. Cramping pains in abdomen. Burning in
the abdomen. Stitching pains in abdomen and in the liver. Great
pain in the region of the umbilicus, worse evening and night ; worse
from motion. Sore pains about the navel The pains in abdomen
come on or arc worse when thinking of them. Obstructed flatus in
the splenic flexure of the colon, causing pain in left hypochondrium.
Stitching pains in liver, relieved by deep breathing.

Cramping pains in abdomen, worse at night with vomiting ; worse
from motion and from eating sugar. Chronic inflammation of the
bowels. Extreme tenderness of the abdomen ; chronic morning diar-
rhoea with cramping about the navel ; tenesmus, renewed urging on
lying down. Coffee brings on diarrhoea ; stools watery : of mucus and
blood ; stools involuntary. The tenesmus during stool causes pain in
head ; constipation with difficult stool and the straining causes head-
ache.



OXAUC ACID


724


The renal region is painful and tender. Frequent urination ; copi-
ous urine containing oxalate of lime ; soreness of whole urinary tract ;
the urine causes soreness and burning of the urethra ; when urinating
there is pain in the glans penis ; incontinence of urine in sleep ; all the
urinary symptoms are worse when thinking about them.

Tearing pains in the spermatic cords, worse from motion ; marked
tenderness in testes which become painful when walking. Strong
sexual desire and erections when in bed ; seminal emissions and sexual
weakness ; shooting pains along the spermatic cords.

Loss of voice with cardiac complaints ; palpitation alternating with
loss of voice ; larynx sore, raw, with ticlding and clutching ; mucus
forms in the larynx when talking ; must constantly clear the larynx
when talking ; white mucus in the larynx ; hawks up thick yellow and
white mucus.

In complaints of the heart there is most difficult breathing. In
feeble, nervous women there is paroxysmal breathing ; violent rapid
respiration with intervals of normal breathing ; jerking inspiration
and sudden, forced expiration in angina pectoris ; dyspnoea with con-
striction in the larynx that is very painful : with wheezing and oppres-
sion of chest worse thinking of it.

Cardiac cough on slight exertion ; choking feeling in larynx ; tick-
ling in larynx while walking in cold air.

Sharp, shooting pains in left lung, heart and left hypochondrium,
with inability to breathe during perfect rest ; soreness in chest ; pain
in middle of chest through to the back. Dullness in lower part of
left lung.

Stitching tearing pains behind the sternum going to shoulders and
arms ; worse on left side; with blueness of nails and lips ; cold sweat ;
paralysis of lower limbs ; spasmodic respiration (compare Latrodeatus
mactans). Violent palpitation in rheumatic subjects, worse when
thinking about it. Pulse irregular, intermittent, fast ; cold sweat, blue
nails, great weakness. It cures many cardiac complaints ; endocarditis,
pericarditis, valvular insufficiency, etc. Fluttering heart.

Pain under point of scapula, between shoulders, extending down-
ward to small of back ; stitches in chest, extending to scapula ; violent
aching pain in back and down the thighs, relieved by change of posi-
tion. This symptom is an exception as the pains are generally worse
from motion. Benumbing pains in the small of back better after stool.
Numbness, pricking, causing a cold sensation with weakness .in spine ;
weakness in loins and hips extending to lower limbs ; pains shoot up
back to head. Cold chills in lower part of back followed by evening
fever, coming every day. Motion brings on many pains in spine with
much drawing in muscles of back; paralysis from inflammation of
spinal cord ; limb stiff ; paroxyms of dyspnoea.



PETROLEUM


ns

Numbness in shoulders to finger tips ; sharp lancinating pains in
arms ; right wrist feels sprained ; pain in right mcta-carpus and fleshy
part of right thumb with heat and numbness ; hands almost helpless ;
hands cold as if dead ; fingers and nails blue in heart complaints ; pains
in the points of flexed hngers. Twitching of muscles of shoulder ;
arm and fingers. The legs are stiff, numb and weak ; lower limbs
cold, blue and paralyzed. Violent pains in lower limbs. Burning in
feet and hands. Rheumatism of joints.

Frightening dreams ; wakens with palpitation, cold sweat and pain
in limbs ; sleepy during day but distressing sleep at night ; feels better
after passing flatus. Violent pains in stomach keep him awake.

Chilliness ; shaking chill, cold body. Heat from slight exertion :
flashes of heat then cold sweat ; shaking chill in evening followed by
internal heat and external sweat, hands cold. Cold sweat of face,
hands and feet.


PEFROLEUM

It is one of the abused remedies. It is used externally in rheuma-
tism, bruises and all sorts of troubles, and the amelioration that comes
is the result of establishing a disease on the surface, by counter-irri-
tation, and not by homoeopathic action. Crude Petroleum is exten-
sively used in the oil regions on botli man and beast as a ‘‘cure all.”

It is a counter-irritant and, on tiie skin, produces irritation, eruptions
and disturbances, like Turpentine. \ Among the early things that Pe-
troleum does to a prover is that it puts him in a state of confusion of
mind and dizziness ; he is dazed so that he loses his way in the street.
She has strange imaginations that there are people near her who are
not present ; that the atmosphere is full of strange forms ; that her
limbs are double ; that another person is in the bed with her. Such
things are found in the fevers. A woman after childbirth imagines
there is another child in bed with her, and she wonders how she will
take care of the two. These ideas are found in many diseases, have
been often verified. In typhoids and low forms of sickness ; in diar-
rhoeas ; when just awakening he is in confusion ; in his dreams he had
the idea of being two or more and the impression remains with him
while he is in a semi-conscious state. He cannot reconcile the state,
but when aroused to consciousness he is able to reason it away, and
when semi-conscious again it returns. This annoys him day and
night.

Skin symptoms. The surface symptoms are striking. The tend-
ency is to throw out vesicles, herpetic vesicles which are isolated, and
the tendency of the vesicles is to form thick yellow crusts, with con-
siderable moisture. The vesicles break early. At times the vesicles



P£TROLEUM


*]%6

do not form crusts, but break early and ulcerate underneath, and this
changes into a phagedenic ulcer ; this condition occurs about the fin-
gers, scrotum, face and scalp. There is a special tendency to produce
vesicular eruptions about the back of the neck. Papular, pustular,
vesicular, dry, mealy eruptions, but most commonly moist ; eruptions
which extend deeply. It builds up eruptions on the site of old erup-
tions, with an increasing hardness in the base of the old eruption.
When the crust dries down it indurates, and this induration takes place
at the margin and builds up little rings about the margin. The indur-
ation cracks, bleeds, looks purple. Apply this to salt rheum, and
eruptions about the hands. It is suitable when there are cracks about
the ends of the fingers and on the backs of the hands. The skin is
rough, ragged, exfoliates, cracks, bleeds ; the tissues are hardened ;
this occurs sometimes about the palms of the hands and nails. This
tissue ulcerates, and the ulcers eat and spread. All eruptions itch
violently. He can not rest until he scratches the skin off, when the
part becomes moist, bloody, raw and inflamed. There is also itching
with no visible eruption. He scratches the skin until moisture oozes
forth, and keeps on scratching until the skin bleeds and the part be-
comes cold, (This word makes me remark here that coldness in spots
is quite a feature of this remedy. Coldness in spots ; coldness in the
stomach, in the abdomen, in the uterus ; coldness in a spot between the
scapulse ; coldness in the heart — sensation as if the heart were cold.).
Various forms of eczema. Eczema of the scalp, especially of the
occiput. Herpetic eruptions about the mouth {Nat, m.), about the
genitals, lips, face, and the patches become crusty and ooze much.

, The mucous membrane^ or internal skin, has little patches of ulcers,
with induration about the patch, and hence Petr, is useful in syphilitic
ulcers. Ulcerous patches in the throat ; aphthous patches in the
mouth. There is inflammation of the mucous membranes everywhere,
producting watery and finally thick yellow discharges. The nose is
filled by tumefaction of the Schneiderian membrane. Old catarrhal
complaints of the nose, crusts, thick yellow discharge, foetid odor froms
the nose. The nose, posterior nares and pharynx become thickened
and there is an accumulation of thick mucus, especially in the morn-
ing. The larynx is involved and there is loss of voice, and the trouble!
extends to the chest, causing a catarrhal condition with cough. He
coughs especially at night, and there is emaciation of the body with
pain and soreness of the chest. Dry, hacking cough, alternating with
copious expectoration ; emaciation about the chest. A striking feature
of this drug is that the cough is worse at night, and the diarrhoea is
worse during the day. Catarrh of the stomach and bowels. Catarrh
of the rectum, much mucus wdth the stools. Diarrhoea during the day*
time, ameliorated at night, while the patient is quiet and at rest. He



PETOOLEUM


727

cannot eat without pain, but he has a gnawing hunger which drives
him to eat. [Loch,, Graph,) There is an “all-gone/' hungry feeling
after stool, which drives him to eat. With the diarrhoea there is con-
stant hunger, yet he cannot eat without pain : emaciation, skin erup-
tions, unhealthy ragged fingers which never look clean ; he cannot
wash them, as this causes them to chap.

Catarrh of the bladder and urethra ; chronic catarrhal discharge ;
chronic gonorrhoea. Itching is common to the internal skin, and a
striking feature in gonorrhoea is the itching in the posterior half of
the urethra wdth the discharge. It almost drives him wild, keeps him
awake at night. He rubs and manipulates the perinseum to relieve
this itching. The gonorrhoeal discharge is white or yellow. It is use-
ful in that '‘last drop.” Also in the early stages of gonorrhoea when
the itching is troublesome.

Sore bruised feeling all over the body, e.specially in the joints.
Rheumatic pain in the joints on motion ; sore to touch ; sensation as
ii bruised. It is analogous to Arnica in relation to bruises.

Petroleum is suitable in old stubborn occipital headaches, Silicea
is the routine remedy for offensive foot sweat and periodic occipital
headaches. Petroleum has also offensive foot sweat : offensive sweats
all over, and especially so in the axilla, where it is so pungent that it
can be observed on the patient entering the room. The pain often
remains in the occiput, but when yery severe it extends up over the
top of the head to the eyes and forehead {Silicea has that condition).
Petroleum is not so closely related to Silicea as it is to Graphites and
Garbo veg,, which are carbonaceous substances ; and all carbonaceous
products affect the back of the head. “Pain from occiput over head
to forehead and eyes, with transitory blindness ; he gets stiff ; loses
consciousness.” “Circumscribed pain in the occiput, aggravated on
shaking the head.” This remedy, unlike Garbo veg,, has oversensi-
tiveness of the senses, hearing, touch and smell.

The Petroleum constitution produces a peculiar vertigo which comes
on under regular circumstances, when on ship-board, or riding in a
carriage, or on the cars. It suits occipital headache from riding on
the cars, or from such motions, with nausea like seasickness. Seasick-
ness is a trouble we cannot always meet, yet most people, when con-
stitutionally treated, can be directed into a better state, so that they
will not be troubled under ordinary conditions, such as riding on the
cars or in a carriage. To a great extent the above condition is due to
a lack of accommodation, a visual trouble ; coming on, for example,
from focusing the eyes on the waves as they retreat from the rear end
of the ship, or on passing objects, the patient being relieved while in
a dark state-room. Occipital headache, with the vertigo above men-
tioned, and an all gone hungry feeling or pain in the stomach, driving



728 PETROLEUTM

him to eat, will be mitigated by Petroleum. The most common form
of seasickness I have found to be the following: Awful deathly nau-
sea, great pallor, cold body, profuse sweat and exhaustion, amelior-
ated by fanning, by the open air, by closing the eyes, by quiet and
darkness, and aggravated by warmth. Tabacum is generally the rem-
edy for such cases.

In Petroleum there is much disturbance of vision, but the catarrhal
state of the eyes is striking. Vesicular formations, ulcerations, in-
flammation, redness and copious discharge : granular lids, thickening
of the raucous membranes, craks in the lids, fissures in the corners
of the eyes with great itching. This itching is present in all conges-
tions of the mucous membrane. Eustachian tubes. The muco ;s
membrane is thickened, and deafness results. It is a catarrhal state,
and is attended by great itching in the tube, which he cannot reach
by any method ; itching deep in the car. He rubs the ear and tries to
scratch it, but he cannot reach it. Itching in the pharynx ; also in the
external canal of the car. Ear discharges.

Induration and inflammation of the glands of the body. In ear
troubles the parotids enlarge ; in tioubles about the jaw the sub-max-
illary and sub-lingual glands are involved ; they become hard and tend
to remain so. Face pale or yellow ; sickly. '‘Nausea and qualmish-
ness all day."'

Stiffness in the back. Pain in the back on rising from a seat.

Heat and burning. Skin hot in places ; with sensation of coldness
in spots. Burning and itching of palms and soles ; face and scalp
burn. The itching and burning often go together ; parts that burn
itch much. Feet burn and have a sensation as if frozen. Chilblains
which itch, burn and become purple. Parts frozen will, years after,
itch, burn, sting and become red and hot. The patient can tell when
it will thaw because of the itching in the chilblains. Petroleum cures
the itching and burning in frozen parts, but not as prominently as
Agaricus. Agarictis leads all other remedies, especially when the con-
dition affects parts where the tissues are thin over the bones, as over
the back of the toes.

Paretic conditions, especially left-sided.. Weakness of muscles,
weakness of the lower extremities, especially left-sided.

The eruptions on the surface and the state of induration are like
Graphites, but the oozing in Petrolleum is thin and watery, and in
Graphites it is gluey, honey like, sticky, viscid. You have indurations
and cracks of the fingers, and rhagadcs in both remedies, but the horn-
like warty growths, lifting up the quick of the nails, you will find only
in Graphites.

It is of wonderful use and competes with Rhus in eczema of the
genitals of either male or female. Eruption on the scrotum, penis,



PHOSPHORUS


729


vulva. Rhus produces violent inflammation of the skin of the geni-
tals in male and female ; erysipelatous inflammation ; nodules vesicles
and large blebs. Petroleum produces small vesicles which itch, sting
and burn. Herpetic eruptions which tend to become erysipelatous.
Petroleum and Rhus are the most common remedies for eruptions on;
the scrotum and genitals. ‘'Herpetic itching, redness and moisture on
scrotum ; skin cracked, rough and bleeding ; extending to perin3L‘uin
and thighs.’’ “Obstinate dry eruptions on genitals and perinaeum.”
“Sweat and moisture of external genitals of both sexes.’'

Scurfy nipples ; white, bran-like scurf ; itching ; always peeling off.
If the woman is in run-down health, then the nipples inflame and be-
come oversensitive to the touch of clothing.

Very sensitive to change of weather, like Phos, and Rhod.; aggra-
vated before a thunder storm. Often sensitive to air and cold. Lean,
emaciated subjects ; threatening consumption. Eruptions disappear of
themselves or are suppressed. Hands and feet burn ; wants the palms
and soles out of bed. Do not be too sure Sulphur because the soles
burn, or too sure of Silicea because the feet sweat. Sweating of sin-
gle parts. Eruptions in patches. Itching in patches. Coldness in
parts. Complaints come in single parts. The most striking offensive-
ness is about the feet and in the axillae. There are many strange sen-
sations which arc peculiar and striking. Study closely the skin symp-
toms and compare with Graphites and Sulphur,

PHosviroRus

The complaints of Phosphorus are most likely to arise in the feeble
constitutions, such as have been born sic k, grown up s lender, and
grown too rapidly. Its complaints are found in such as are emaciated,
and in those who are rapidly emaciating ; in children who are going
into marasmus, and in persons who have in them the foumlation o|^
consumption J^rly jwcHJa^^^ Delicate, waxy, anaemic . and emaciated
Ejects. Th persons who are vehement, irascible. This expresses the
persoiTs disposition somewhat as well as his internal constitutional
state. Internally he is in a turmoil. Subject to ^v iolent puls ations,
complaints from electri c changes in the atmosphere ; vi olent palpi ta-
tions Imd orga?ms. "~"^TF"c&forotm who have grown too rapidly and
h^ve_suddenly t^ n on weakness, pallor, green sickness, with men-
strual, difficult^ Ebullitions and congestions. J Haemorrhagic consti -j t
tutions. Small wounds bleed much ; the prick of the needle will bub-
ble forth much bright red blood, haemorrha ge from small wounds ,
fro m the nose, fro jn^ the lu np, from the stomach, froni the bladder
and -from th e u terps. Bleedmg from ulcerations. False granulations
that bleed. Purpura haemorrhagica. Black and blue spots. Blood

92



730


PHOSPHORUS


settles beneath the conjunctiva, or beneath the skin an ywher e. Bloody
^liva ; evidences of disorganized blood, or that the blood seems to be-
come fluid. Small bruises take on broad blue spots. Blows much
blood out of the nose. Petechia* all over the body, such as are found
in typhoid fever, low forms of continued fever with ha emorrhag es .
Fungous growth. Fatty (regener atio n is a maiTced Tea ture of PHos»
phorus, and can be found in the liver, heart or kidneys. General
'dropsical condition. Bloating of the hands and feet, especially drop-
sical conditions after scarlet fever. The mucous membranes are all
pale, such as is found after bleeding or in low forms of disease. A
marked state of anaemia and relaxed condition of the muscles. Mus-
cles flabby. Fattyi d egeneration jof the muscles . The genitals hang
down. In th ^ woman, relaxation oTThe pelvic organs, prolapsus and

other displacem e n tj^. Snjl'ness is a maiked f eature of Ph ospho rus.

Stiffness on beginning to move. Limbs stiff like a foundered horse,
especially in the morning. Rheumatic stiffness in all the limbs.
Phosphorus has tearing, drawing pains in the limbs. Drawing, tear-
ing pains in affected parts. Phosphorus complaints are \yorsc i n cold
weather . The patient himself, generally considered, is sensitive to
cold. All his complaints arc .worse fro m, cold and cold applications,
and better from heat and wa rm app licalions, exc ept the complaints. ^
the head and stomach, which at^ ameliorated from, cold as will here-
after be described. Phosphorus has been ^'ery useful in weak, relaxed
conditions of the joints following sprains, when the symptoms agree.
Necrosis is another feature of Phosphorus, especially of the lower jaw,
but may be useful in necrosis of any of the bones. Exostoses of the
skull with tearing pains. Tearing, boring pains, especially at night.
Ph osphorus has cured polvpi of the noj^ and car§. Scrofulous and
glandular swellings. Glands enlarge, especially after contusions like
Beilis, Glandular affections of weak, pale, sickly individuals, such as
suffer from diarrhoea, such as suffer from exhaustive conditions, ab-
scesses, fistulous openings, with hectic fever. Abscesses with copious
discharge of yellow pus. Malignant growths are greatly restrained
by the use of Phosphorus, when the symptoms agree. Burning pains
are observed everywhere. Burning in the brain, burning in the skin.
Burning in the stomach, in the chest, and in various parts.

The Phosphorus patient is very sensitive to all external impressi ons ;
o dors, noises, touch. Slight causes lead to exhaustion of either
body or mind. Trembling throughout the body from slight causes,
using the hands, from slight exertion, from debility, from coughing.
Weakness prevails in a marked degree, finally becoming paralysis or
paralytic weakness such as occurs in most forms of typhoid fever, with
sliding down in bed, trembling and jerking of the muscles. Paralysis
with formication and tearing in the limbs. Paralysis that comes with



PHOSPHORUS


731


apoplexy. Jerking and twitching of the muscles such as has been
found in paralysis. Spasms of the paralyzed parts. Tearing, draw-
ing, burning pains throughout the body. The Phosphorus patient
wants to be rubbed. He is generally better after sleep. Always
wants to rest. Always tired. The Phosphorus patient undergoes
great excitement. Tremulousncss. Wild thoughts. Excitability,
keeping him awake at night. Violent imaginations. Excitability even
to ecstacy and clairvoyance. The mind may be overactive or may be
extremely passive with loss of memory. Irritability of mind and body
and great prostration of mind after slight mental effort, and of the
body after slight physical exertion. Anxiety, gloomy forebodings.
Fear that something will happen. Anxious at twilight. Anxious
when alone. A p pr ehensiveness . Apprehensive during thunder
storms, which brings on many complaints ; palpitation, diarrhcjea and
trembling. Trembling of the whole body. Attacks of indige stio n
from fear. Fear in the evening, fear , of dcatlL. I'ear of strange old
Taces looking at him from the corner. Full of strange, insane imag-
inations. On the border land of insanity. Inability to sustain a men-
tal effort. Fear of apoplexy. Reflecting brings on headache and dif-
ficult breathing associated with apprehensive ness or j^inkin^ at^ the pit
of the stomach. His fear seems to begin at the pit of the stomach.
Apathy or indifference ; indifferent to his friends and surroundings.
Indifferent to his children. Answers no questions, takes no notice of
his family and things about him, answers slowly, thinks sluggishly,
seems dazed or in a stupor. Ev^thing looks dark, he is weary of
life, gloomy and says nothing. Dejected ; a most marked case of
hypochondriasis. Weeping, sa d, hysterical ; will uncover the body and
expose his person. Violent^ loquaci ous ; ^delirium. Delirium of low;
forms of fever, or delirium of mania a potu. Maniacal attacks come
on during sleep with fury and extreme violence, so that no one dares
approach him, and this progresses to imbecility, silliness, weak brain,
idiocy. Brain fag from mental overwork and constant strain of eyes.
Vertigo is a very common symptom throughout all of the complaints
of Phosphorus. Staggering while walking as if intoxicated. Vertigo-
when in the open air ; vertigo after earing ; vertigo in the evening.
Heaviness and confusion in the head and things go round ; great
weakness of the head. All of these mental symptoms are worse in
the dark ; worse when alone ; sometimes worse from music ; worse
from excitement ; worse from playing the piano.

Tpbe headaches of Phosphorus arc -congeatixe-^nd thffbbjng^ The
blood mounts to the head. The headaches are ameliorat^|rpiti.-CQld
and worse from heat , worse from motion, and bette r Jrom jr^st, worse
Ijing; d^!^^ is often compelled to sit upright, with great

pressure upon the head and cold applications. The face is flushed



73 ^


PHOSPHORUS


and hot ; burning in the brain. The warm room, warm surroundings,
warm food, putting the hands into warm water will increase the head-
ache. The complaints of the head like the complaints of the stomach
are worse from heat, warm applications and from warm food, and
better from cold things ; while the complaints of the body are better
from warmth and worse from cold. The headaches arc most violent
and are often attended with hunger or Receded by hun ger : headaches
with vomiting, red face, and scanty urine ; uraemic headaches ; violent
neuralgic pains darting, tearing, shooting through the head ; pressing
pains in the head. Periodical headaches, headaches brought on from*
mental exertion. Great heat in the head and stiffness in the muscles
of the face and jaws. This is sometimes attended with coldness in the
back of the head. Shocks through the brain. The headaches are
worse from noise, from light ; apoplectic congestion of the head. It
has cured acute hydrocephalus and hydrocephaloid symptoms.
Chronic inflammation of the meninges of the brain ; softening of the
brain ; imbecility ; insanity. Violent head pains ; atrophy of the brain ;
medulla oblongata. The scalp is covered with dandruff ; the hair falls
out in patches, leaving bald places here and there. Great heat in the
scalp ; tension in the scalp and face and forehead as if bound by a
bandage. Scaly eruptions on the bald places of the head ; exostoses
on the skull. The complaints of the head are brought on from becom-
ing overheated. Sensation as if the hair were pulled ; great soreness
of the scalp ; must let the hair hang down during headaches.

The eye symptoms are very numerous ; burning, redness, conges-
tion, enlargement of the blood-vessels. Objects look red and often
blue in the field of vision, or objects sometimes look green and gray
as is observed in incipient cataract. Colors, also, appear black before
the eyes. Vision is vague ; the eyes give out while reading ; secs
better in the morning, in the twilight. The eye symptoms, like Phos-
phorus in general, have amelioration after rest. Momentary blindness
like fainting ; seems to suddenly become blind ; paralysis of the optic
nerve ; blindness after electric shocks, or after a stroke of lightning.
It has cured glaucoma. It has cured inflammation of the retina in
Bright's disease. It has cured opacity of the vitreous humor. It has
cured paralytic weakness of the various muscles of the eyes. It has
cured paralysis of the third pair of nerves where there is falling of
the lids ; sub-acute inflammation of the eyes. Burning, redness, and
smarting ameliorated from cold applications. The eyelids twitch and
tremble ; swelling of the eyelids ; dropsical swelling of the eyelids ;
great darkness around the eyes ; great circles around the eyes. It is
a very useful remedy in malignant growths involving the eye,
straining very much the progress of the disease. The eye symptoms
like the head and mind symptoms arc such as often come on in brain



PHOSPHORUS 733

workers ; working under a bright light causing much determination
of blood to the head in which the eyes as well as other parts suffer.

Phosphorus has a peculiar deafness. One of the most striking
features of Phosphorus is inability to understand the articulations of
the human voice. Hearing is difficult. He sometimes feels as if there
were something over the ears ; as if the ears were covered, obstruct-
ing the waves of sound. Violent itching in the cars ; congestion of the
external ear ; itching, tearing, throbbing, burning pains within the car.
It has cured polypi in the ears.

The nose symptoms are also very numerous ; inveterate nasal
catarrh. He takes cold in the nose, but the most common scat of the
Phosphorus cold is in the chest, and most of his difficulties begin in
the chest, but Phos phor us cures nasal cattarh and coryza. There is
painful dryness in the nose; constant sneezing and ruhriirig from the
no se oF "bloodj water, l^que nt a lternations of fluent and sjtQpped-iip
conditions of the ^ nose; coryza with sore throat; stoppage of the
nostrils ; much sneezing and stopping of the nose alternating with dry-
ness of the nose in scarlet fever ; nostrils filled with green mucus ; a
copious nasal discharge of greenish-yellow, blood-streaked mucus,
worse in the morning ; bad odor from the nose ; frequent blowing of
blood from the nose ; copious haemorrhage from the nose of bright
red blood ; swelling of the nose, redness and shining ; very sensitive
to touch ; necrosis of the bones of the nose. It has cured polypi of
the^ nose, especially bleeding polypi. Fan-like motion of the nose,
like Lycopodium,

The Phosphorus patient preSs^ts a sickly face, earthy, sunken and
pale, such as we find in consumption and those about to go into con-
sumption, and those suffering from deep-seated constitutional con-
ditions ; haggard, anaemic. The color is changeable ; swollen, cedema-
tous face ; puffed under the eyes ; lips and eyelids swollen. Again,
red spots upon the cheeks, which appear in hectic fever ; the hectic
blush. Tension of the skin and of the face ; tearing, shooting pains
all through the face and about the eyes, from the temples and vertex
down to the zygoma. Jerking, tearing pains in the teeth. The pains
of the teeth are often ameliorated by warmth, while those of the
head are ameliorated by cold. The pains of the teeth are worse when
talking and eating, and worse after eating It has violent neuralgias
of the face involving the jaw and temples, with hot, bloated face,
worse from talking and from eating. It has caries of the lower jaw,
with great heat, burning and fistulous openings. Neuralgia of the
face and teeth ; has to be wrappend up at night ; worse in windy weather.
The countenance is sickly, sunken, declining, as if a serious sickness
was coming.

The lips are parched, dry and bleeding. The lips become black,



734


PHOSPHORUS


brown and cracked as in low forms of fever, and with necrosis of the
lower jaw. Inflammation of the parotid gland, especially when it
suppurates or there are fistulous openings. Rapid decay of the teeth.
The gums bleed and settle away from the teeth.

Phosphorus is very useful for the bright red haemorrhage after the
extraction of teeth. The tongue is swollen and speech is difficult.
It is difficult to articulate. The taste in the mouth is bitter or sour,
especially sour after taking milk ; sometimes salty or sweetish ; bitter
after eating. Taste of hydrogen sulphide in the morning. The
tongue is coated like fur ; sometimes chalky-white, sometimes yellow ;
dry, cracked and bleeding ; sordes on the teeth. Crusts form upon
the mucous membranes of the mouth, gums, lips and tongue. The
tongue is s wolle n and the papillae are engorged.

Dryness of the mouth and throat ; sore, excoriated mucous mem-
branes of the mouth and throat. The mouth may be covered with
thrush, as in nursing sore mouth ; bloody erosions of the mouth :
nursing sore mouth. Much watery saliva and bloody saliva flows
from the mouth. The saliva is copious, tasting sweetish, saltish or
foul. The mucous membranes of the thioat are like those of the
mouth. Great dryness, roughness, rawmess, excoriation, bleeding,
and inflammation of the tonsils ; inflammation of the throat ; sensation
of cotton in the throat ; sensation of velvet in the throat. The tonsils
are much swollen. Intense pain in the throat and burnTng in the
throaF” that ^extends into the oesophagus. Inability to swallow any
nourishment because of paralysis of the oesophagus or acute inflam-
mation of the mucous membranes of the throat and oesophagus ; con-
striction of the oesophagus. In Phosphorus there is violent hunger
and v ery soon after eating the hunger returns again . Must eat during
the chill. Must get up in the night to eat. Feels faint and is driven
to eat. Ravenous hunger during headache ; he knows that the head-
ache is coming on because of his violent hunger ; in ^periodical head-
aches. The hunger is often spasmodic, because at times there is
aversion to food. Again, he wants to cat and as soon as the food is
offered he does not want it. Thirst is one of th^ nmst co^^ features
o f Phosphorus. In acute and chronic cornplaints t here is violent thirst ;
thiiit_^mrJ^-col d drinka*^ Wants something refreshing ; is ameli-
orated inoimenta^^ drinking cold things, but the thirst appears
as soon as the water gets warm in the stomach. Vomiting comes on
asL ^on as the water becomes war m in the st omac hs but there are
many conditions where the ice-cold " w^atcr agrees. Unquenchable
thirst- When the water is vomited there is always unquenchable
thirst. He wants cold food as well as cold drinks ; refreshing, spicy
things, juicy things ; desir ^for wines and sour things. Phosphorus
often cures the violent longing m inebriates for alcohol. It simply



PHOSPHORUS


735


resembles tRe congestion of the mucous membrane of the stomach.
Aversion to sweets, to me at, to boiled rnlll^jo salt^ fish, to beer, t£
pu3(ii^ s, to tea and coffee.

Many of the complaints of Phosphorus are ameliorated by eating.
The nervous symptoms of Phosphorus drive the patient to eat and he
feels better for a little while, and then he must cat again or the nervous
symptoms will come on. Often he can sleep better after eating and
cannot go to sleep until he eats something.

The stomach symptoms are numerous — pains, nausea, vomiting,
burning. The stomach symptoms arc ameliorated by cold things and
aggravated by warm things. The ncusea and tomiting are brought
on by putting the hands into warm water, from being in a warm room,
from w'arm things and from taking warm things into the stomach.
The nausea of pregnancy is cured when the woman cannot put the
bands into warm water without bringing on vomiting. Another
marked feature of Phosphorus is eructations of food. The food is
eructated by mouthful until the stomach is emptied of the last meal.
Constant nausea except when something cold is in he stomach. As
s,oon as water becomes warm in the stomach it comes up. This very
much resembles the vomiting and nausea of Chloroform, and^hos;:^
phorus is a great friend to the^urgeqn Jiccause. he, can .nearly ^
amidote the stomach Vomit-

ing of blood and violent vomiting, of sour fluids; vomiting of bile and
mucus ; vomiting of black substances, coffee-ground substances.
Awful sinking, gone feeling in tfie stomach. This sometimes comes
.at 1 1 o*c Iock like Sulphur. Pressing pains, burning pains, tearing
pains in the stomach ; pain in the stomach after eating ; sensitiveness
in the pit of the stomach ; inflammation of the stomach. It has been
a very useful remedy in cancer of the stomach, with coffee-ground
vpmiting and burning ; coldness, as il freezing, in the pit of thei
stomach ; paroxysms of knife-like pains in the stomach. The pains
in the stomach arc ameliorated by ice-cold things for a moment ;
spasmodic contractions of the stomach ; haemorrhage from the stomach ;
vomiting of great quantities of clotted blood ; long-standing dyspepsia ;
much flatulence; regurgitation of food ; distended stomach and ab-
domen ; ulceration of the stomach.

The liver furnishes us many symptoms of Phosphorus. Congestion
of the liver, fulness, pain, hardness, Jaity dcge iieratioH^-of the liver,
hypersemia of the liver. Phosphorus_is o ne of our most use ful liver

liyeXt. With the stomach and liver symj^rns
the re is co mmonlY.iaundicc.

Very s*ensitive abdomen ; painful to touch, rolling and rumbling.
Sensation of emptiness in the abdomen ; sunken feeling in the ab-
domen. The abdomen feels as if relaxed ; hanging down sensation



73*5


PHOSPHORUS


and sensation of great weight in the abdomen. Tympanitic abdomen
such as occurs in typhoid fever. A marked featiu-e in Phosphorus
is the peculiar gurgling which begins in the stomach and gurgles along
down through the intestines, attended with involuntary stool. This
occurs in typhoid fever. The gurgling that occurs in Arsenicum is
down the oesophagus. Flatulence ; colic ; rending, tearing, cutting
pains throughout the abdomen ; stitching pains in the abdomen ; .violent
neuralgic p ains in the abdomen ; inflammation of the bowel s, of the
peri toneum ; appendicitis. Yellow, brown spots on the abdomen ;
petechiaa over the abdomen during typhoid fever. Phosphorus is rich
in symptoms of the rectum and stool ; involuntary discharges from
the bowels ; copious emission of fluids ; fcetid, gushing stools; horribly
offensive, yellow, watery stools. The patient lies as if dying, the
stools passing involuntarily ; stools of white mucus ; stools of slime
intermingled with little specks like tallow ; involuntary oozings from
the constantly wide open anus. Haemorrhage from the bowels in
typhoids, in low forms of disease ; bloody discharges like meat wash-
ings, involuntary, on every motion. Burning in the rectum during
stool. Protrusion of the rectum ; protrusion of hacmorrhoidal tumors.
Sharp, stitching pains from the coccyx up the spine to the base of the
brain drawing the neck backward, and this symptom occurs during
stool. It has occurred during involuntary stool. After stool painful
cramps in the rectum ; burning in the anus ; violent tenesmus : sinking
feeling in the abdomen ; obliged to lie down ; exhaustion and fainting.
The copious diarrhoea is like the profuse flow of water from a hydrant.
It is useful in cholera times and in cholera morbus. It is a useful
medicine for chronic diarrhoea with soft, thin stools. It has been a
very useful remedy in cholera infantum. It has also cured dysentery
with bloody mucus, scanty stools with violent tenesmus. It also cures
inveterate constipation. The stool is hard, long, and slender, described
in the books as like that of a dog. Alternating diarrhoea and consti-
pation in old people. Spasms of the rectum. Paralysis of the bowels
so that it is impossible to strain at stool. Haemorrhage from the
bowels. It has cured polypi of the rectum; inflammation of the
rectum. It has many times cured bleeding, protruding haemorrhoids ;
haemorrhoids that burn. It has cured fissures of the anus. Among
many of these bowel symptoms the anus feels as if wide open.

Phosphorus is a useful remedy in diseases of the kidneys, especially
diabetes, with sugar in the unne when there is great thirst for ice-cold
thin^ and ice-cold water. Gradual emaciation ; gradual' weakness ;
considerable heat of the head ; coldness of the extremities, and sugar
in ihe urine. Phosphorus will cure fatty degeneration of the lidhevs. ’
Rena Lcalculi. No desire to pass iirine though the blatlder is Tuir
There is a paralytic weakness which resembles the paralytic weakness



PHOSPHORUS


737


throughout all the muscles of the body. He is unable to strain to
pass the urine because such straining increases pain in the region of
the bladder. Profuse, pale, watery urine ; frequent and scanty or
completely suppressed urine. Turbid, whitish urine ; curdled like
milk. Albuminous urine. Jnv'oluntary urination during sleep. Tear-
ing in the urethra ; twitching and burning in the urethra. Periodical
sick headaches sometimes arc preceded by scanty urine and sometimes
by a copious watery flow of urine.

The male sexual organs furnish many symptoms of Phosphorus.
Violent sexual desire driving him frantic. Erections frequent and
painful day and night. Seminal emissions at night even without las-
civious dreams. Sexua l debility from the inordinate use of table salt.
Impotence after excessive cxcitcrhenf and secret vice, preceded Ty
over-excitement of the sexual organs. Frequent discharges day and
night of thin, slimy, colorless fluid from the urethra. Sexual abuse
with spinal disease. Discharges of prostatic fluid during a hard stool.
Chronic urethral dischargH duenFo hypertrophy of the prostate gTahd';
gleety discharge. Swelling and soreness of the testes and cord ; in-
flammation of the testes and cord. It has cured hydrocele following
gonorrhoea.

In the woman it is equally useful. Phosphorus has cured many
cases of sterility supposed to idepctoii upon violent sexual jgxcUement. '
Violent sexual excitement with avciiion to coition. Violent pain in
the ovaries extending down the inn^r side of the thighs during men-
struation caused by inflammation of the ovaries. Inflammation of
the uterus during menstruaiion and during pregnancy or during
pyaemia. Copious haemorrhages from uterus, bright red, clotted blood
after confinement, during menstruation or during the climacteric
period. Frequent and profuse haemorrhages from the uterus caused
from cancerous affections. The menstrual per iod i s too ear ly, , flow
bright red, l asting too long, is c opious ; duri ng th^^mensU-ual^
i^coia p^ia-ia-the^back, iO^oken _

rings around eyes ; loss of flesh ; much fearfulness. It has also men-
struaT sup^ in consumptives with cough, bleeding from the
nose, and spitting of blood. Violent sexual excitement driving to
secret vice. C opious yellow l eucorrhoea with gr eat weakness ; leuc or-
rhoea instead of menses ; wTute, watery leucorrhoea, acrid, excoriating ;
milky Teucorrhma,“cbp^ when walking. The ^leucornh oea^is so ex-
coriating that blisters form upo n the genitals . Burning and smarting
'wTthc vapna. Stitching pains upward from the vagina into the
pelvis. While there is violent sexual excitement during coition there
is lack of sensation in the vagina, as if it were numb. Condylomata
appear like fig warts and excrescences about the genitals and in the
^jgina. Bleeding warts^ Erectile tumors on the external genitals.

93



73^ PHOSPHORUS

Dropsical swelling of the labia. Cauliflower excrescences with much
bleeding. Painful, hard, large nodosities in the female mammary
glands. Fibroid tumors of the breast. Fibroid tumors of the uterus
with copious haemorrhages.

During pregnancy and lactation violent sexual desire ; vomiting of
pregnancy. Much prostration, sinking, and trembling, puerperal con-
vulsions ; pain in the back, as if it would break. Increased secretion of
milk out of season. Inflammation of the mammary glands with much
heat, weight, and suppuration. Erysipelas of the breasts or of the
genitals.

Inflammation of the larynx with hoarseness in the morning ; husky
voice ; great sensitiveness of the larynx to touch and cold air ; pain and
burning in the larynx on talking ; weakness in the vocal cords ; violent
tickling of the larynx while talking ; constriction and spasms of the
larynx ; constant irritation to cough in the larynx ; tuberculous condition
of the larynx ; bleeding ; loss of voice ; cannot sp eak a word on accoun t
of pai n in the lary nx ; sensation of velvet in the larynx ; rawness and
smarting in the larynx. Phosphorus has cured many cases of croup,
membranous croup, when all the symptoms were present. Every change
of weather, from becoming overheated, and colds settle in the larynx,
producing loss of voice and hoarseness, especially in public speakers
and singers. H oarse ness an d loss of voice; great dryness in the
larynx and all of the air passages. Hard, dry, rasping cough that
shakes the whole body from irritation in the larynx. The irritation
travels down the air passages, affecting the trachea, along with difficult
respiration ; asthmatic breathing ; clutching in the larynx ; suffocation ;
dyspnoea ; spasms and constrictions of the chest. Violent, stridulous
inspiration in tlie evening on falling asleep ; fear of suffocation ; labored
breathing. Paralysis of the lungs ; fulness in the chest after eating,
much irritation in the larynx ; difficult breathing ; scraping of mucus
from the larynx after eating.

In the chest, Phosphorus produces oppression ; anxiety, weakness and
constriction going along with its chest complaints. Heaviness as if a
great weight were lying upon the chest. With the cough, bronchitis,
pneumonia and cardiac symptoms there is always more or less con-
striction of the chest as if bound, or as if bandaged, or as if tied tight
with a string. Tightness felt over the sternum, and with all complaints
great weakness of the chest ; pressure as of a weight over the middle of
the sternum ; feeling of a rush of blood to the chest with or without
violent pulsations. Sensation of heat in the chest mounting to the
head ; flushes of heat in the chest extending upward. Stitching pain in
the chest ; spasmodic pains in the chest ; violent stitching pains in the
left side of the chest better by lying on the right side. These are pains
likely to occur in pleurisy or iu pleurisy with pneumonia. Ck)mplamt8



PHOSPHORUS


739


of chest, worse in cold air. Rawness in the trachea extending into the
lungs ; burning in the chest ; acute pain in the lower part of the lungs ;
violent pain in the chest with coughing. The patient is compelled to
hold the chest with the hand. Inflammation of the lungs with anxiety,
oppression, and expectoration of bright red blood. The Phosphorus
patient suffers from copious haemorrhages from the lungs in phthisical
conditions, in inflammation, inflammation of the bronchial tubes with
intense fever and violent shaking cough ; the body trembles with the
cough ; tearing pains in the sternum with the cough ; suffocation and
constriction of the chest. Pain in the larynx. The expectoration may
be blood-streaked or rust-colored as it is in pneumonia. It may be
purulent. In the later stages it becomes thick, yellow, sweetish. Phos-
phorus is a useful remedy in old bronchial catarrhs, in complaints that
date from pneumonia or from bronchitis. Every cold settles in the
chest. The lungs seem to be w^eak. Again, in hepatization during
pneumonia with hard, dry, hacking cough ; in hepatization of the lungs
during pneumonia Phosphorus, Sulphur and Lycopodimn arc the most
frequently indicated medicinCsS. Phosphorus is often the remedy to
follow Arsenic when Arsenic has been suited to the restlessness, pros-
tration, and anxiety that comes to a place where because of hepatiza-
tion it is capable of accomplishing no more toward the cure of a case.
If, then, the patient has_thirst^J§r ice-cold water, constriction of the
chest, dry,^ hacking cough, p araly :ic weakness of the , lungs, ^ and ex- ,
^etdf au frothy myic us Phosphor ns. is ^

Inpneumonia, there may be burning in the chest, burning in the head,
hot cheeks, and fever ; gesticulation and delirium ; violent thirst for
ice-cold water ; fan-like motion of the nose ; difficult breathing ; catchy
inspiration ; lying on the back with the head thrown far back ; short, dry
cough. The carotids pulsate. Rawness in the chest ; bruised feeling in
the chest ; pains are cutting, burning or sharp and tearing in the lungs
when coughing. Suffocation, or inspiration almost impossible, espe-
cially at the beginning of hepatization when the face becomes livid and
the features pointed with cold sweat and quick, hard pulse. Frothy ex-
pectoration in low forms of pneumonia known as typhoid pneumonia.
Threatened paralysis of the lungs. Again, Phosphorus is a useful rem-
edy when tuberculosis is about to make its appearance, in persons who '
are narrow-chested, slender, and of feeble vitality. All colds settle in <
the chest. After each cold, much rat tling^ hgrd cough that shakes then
whole body, i n persons who^ a re fccbTc," pale , sickly, and di sposed- ,tp )
haemorrhage s. Cough comes on in cold air. Emaciation ; emaciation )
of the chest and neck. Along with these conditions comes lactic fever ^
in the last stages of ph thisis ; intense fever, red fa ce, an^nipit Tweats : ^
fevelr^oi ^g onHSTme aftern oon and last ing until after midni^^ A c
powder of Pfios^orus very liigh will re^uce^tKIs" fever and make the



740


PHOSPHORUS


patient comfortable until death. In all incurable cases after the
Jias been reduced, Phosphorus shouH noT be ^iven, as it will intensify
e fever and do lust what it was ^ven to avoid. It is not uncommon
for a crisis to follow the administration of Phosphorus. Prolonged
sweat and diarrhoea, these should never be interfered with as they will
soon stop of their own accord and the patient will be left in a state of
quietude. Bosphor us is a ^ng erous medicine to give very high in
isome cases of phthisis^ in the last s tage s pLphthmg,,. In this case they
i should Tiave rcceli^d Phosphorus when they were yet curable. In these
jea^es Phosphorus jjoth miay sometimes be used with saf ety an d ft will
act as a test in doubtful cases to see whether reaction can be brought
about. In such cases where reaction can be brought about the admin-
istration later of a still higher potency may be found useful, but in the
beginning with Phosphorus m phtMsical cas es far advanced it is better
not to go higher than t he 30th or aootli. Phosphorus v ery loj ^will act
as ^j)qisonjn^ really Phosphorus cases and the only safety some pa-
tients have had ^o have received PEosphoius so very low was due to
the fact that the Phosphorus was not similar enough to cither kill or
icurc.

Phosphorus has violent palpitation ; worse from motion, and from
lying on the left side especially in the evening ; worse at night on wak-
ing, with orgasms of blood in the chest, accompanied by much suffoca-
tion. Tightness in the chest and palpitation over the body ; pressure in
the region of the heart. Phosphorus has cured endocarditis. Phos-
phorus has cured enlargement of the heart and dilatation and also fatty
degeneration. With fatty degeneration where there is much veinous
stagnation, puffiness of the face, particularly under the eyelids, Phos-
phorus is often the remedy. In all of these cardiac affections thirst for
very cold water will always be present. Internal heat ; he wants some-
thing cold to cool his insides. Violent orgasms of blood in the chest
from every excitement, from worry, and from anticipation. Phos-
phorus has many neuralgic pains upon the outer chest and yellow brown
spots. There are many symptoms in the back ; stiffness in the back and
in the back of the neck, between the shoulders, and in the small of the
back. Stiffness on rising from a seat. Sensation of intense heat in the
back running up the back. The patient complains of a hot spine. Sore-
ness in places up and down the spine ; soreness to touch between the
shoulders ; pulsations in various places in the back and in the whole
spine. The coccyx is sensitive to pressure ; pain in the coccyx as if
ulcerated, preventing motion. Pain in the back during menstruation
and during confinement as if the back would break. Spinal affections
and inflammations. Weakness of the limbs after mental exertion,
prolonged physical exertion, being overheated, sunstroke and sexual
excesses ; paralytic weakness. Myelitis ; softening of the spine ; pro-



paoSPHORUS


741


gressive spinal paralysis. Phosphorus has been a useful remedy in
locomotor ataxia, palliating many of the symptoms ; the pains ; re-
storing the reflexes. Phosphorus is often suitable and restrains the
progress in multiple sclerosis where there is much weakness and
trembling of the extremities. Phosphorus has cured caries of the
vertebrae in scrofuous children. Phosphorus is a broad remedy in
various diseases of the spine.

In the limbs we hav e par a lytic weaknes s extending^ to b(^ a rms and
legs, with trembling and numbness ; paralysis of one or of both lower
extremiues~or~of~the upper extremities with trembling and numbness.
The hands and arms become very cold. The limb s emaciate_and the
veins become distended ; the arms bum ; periodical constriction of the
fingers ; numbness increasing to complete insensibility of the fingers ;
finger tips feel numb and insensible. Great restlessness in the lower
limbs ; weariness in the lower limbs ; weakness in the lower limbs, espe-
cially observed on walking, unsteady and trembling gait ; paralysis of
the lower limbs. Acute inflammation of the joints of the knees and
hip joint. Burning, tearing pains in the limbs from exposure to cold.
Rh eumatism of the joints and muscl es ; stiffnes s of the joints on be-
coming cold. All complaints of the limbs are am eliorated by heat,
while complaints of the head and s tomach are amelio£aited ^ cold.
'I'he complaints of the chest are axniillorateid hy Eeat. The lower limbs
are covered with foetid sweat. The lower limbs are gangrenous. In-
flammation of the periosteum of t|he tibia. Ulcers upon the lower
limbs ; feet icy-cold. The Phosphorus patiept wants to lie down; ex-
hausted ; he is unable to walk ; staggers when walking from weakness
and from vertigo. A gradual progressing weakness creeps over him ;
weakness ; trembling ; faintness, [ericing and twitching of the musses ;
spasms of the paralyzed parts. Epilepsy ; convulsions ; neufal^c pains
of the various parts of the body and of the limbs especially, ameliorated
by heat. It has cured multiple neuritis.

Restless sleep ; starts in sleep ; feels in the morning as if he has not
slept enough, yet most of the complaints and aches are ameliorated by
sleep, especially the head symptoms ; walks in his sleep. He sleeps on
the right side . Lying on the left side causes anxiety and pain in the
heart and palpitat ion. Late fafling to sleep in the evening ; lies awake
thinking about the affairs of the day and borrowing trouble. Phos-
phorus is a usual remedy in low forms of typhoid fever on the symp-
toms previously mentioned.

There are many eruptions in Phosphonis. The eruptions are dry
and scaly ; dry furfuraceous herpes ; blood blisters ; purple spots ; yellow
spots on the chest and abdomen ; formication and itching in the paral-
yzed parts ; numbness of the skin ; irregular brown spots upon the
body; psoriasis of the kness, legs, elbows, and eyebrows; hives and



74^2 PHOSPHORIC ACID

blood boils ; phlegmonous inflammation. Chronic suppurating c^Kai-
ings with hectic fever ; fistulous openings ; ulcers bleed on appearance
of the menses ; deep eating ulcers ; indolent ulcers ; malignant ulcers.
Very useful in cancerous ulcers that bleed and take on fungous appear-
ance, and in low forms of scarlet fever where the rash is very dusky or
disappears and suppuration begins in various places about the neck or
upon the extremities or upon the ends of the fingers and there is violent
thirst for cold water, purple appearance in the throat, and dry, hacking,
shaking cough.


PHOSPHORIC ACID,

“Mental enfceblement” is the thought that will come into the mind
when considering what the Phosphoric acid patient says, does and
looks. The mind seems tired. When questioned he answers slowly or
does not speak, but only looks at the questioner. He is too tired to talk
or even think. He says : “Don’t talk to me ; let me alone.” This state
is found in both acute and chronic diseases. He is so tired in mind,
perfectly exhausted. In chronic diseases when brought on from long
study ; prolonged worry in business men ; in feeble school girls, who
become relaxed from very little effort. In acute diseases he, especially
in typhoid fever, is averse to speaking or answering questions. He
merely looks. Finally he rouses up and says: “Don’t talk to me, I am
so tired.” He cannot think what he wishes to say, cannot frame his
answers to questions. Another cause is sexual excesses in young men,
or in those guilty of secret vice. Weakness ; lack of reaction ; state of
stupor, with impotency ; mental prostration, and as if the spine had
given out.

In every case we find the mental symptoms are the first to develop.
The remedy runs from the mental to the physical, from the brain to the
muscles. This is so striking that it is contrasted with Muriatic acid.
In the latter remedy the muscular prostration comes first, and the mind
seems clear until long after the muscles arc prostrated. In Phosphoric
acid the muscles seem strong after the mind has given out. The pa-
tient seems vigorous physically. He says he is all right physically, can
work, can exercise even violently ; but the mind is tired, there is mental
apathy, he can not add up a column of figures, can not read the news-
paper and carry the trend of thought, can not connect circumstances.
He forgets the names of those in his family ; a business man forgets
the names of his clerks ; he is in confusion. Yet he can exercise, can
go out and walk ; the weakness in the muscles will come later.

Phosphoric acid has also great physical weakness ; so tired in the
back so tired in the muscles ; so tired all over ; a paralytic weakness.
Later there is sexual impotence ; aversion to coition ; loss of sexual de-



PHOSPHORIC ACID


743


sire ; no erections ; penis becomes relaxed in the midst of an embrace
and he cannot finish the act. [Nux v.)

Ailments from business cares ; prolonged grief ; young women suf-
fering from unrequited affection, or from the loss of a loved one.
Some suffer more intensely than others ; some seem more philosophical.
'Ailments from care, grief, sorrow, chagrin, homesickness or disap-
pointed love ; particularly with drowsiness ; night sweats towards morn-
ing ; emaciation/' The patient pines and emaciates, grows weaker and
weaker, withered in the face ; night sweats ; cold sweat down the back ;
cold sweats on the arms and hands more than on the feet ; cold extremi-
ties ; feeble circulation, feeble heart ; catches cold on the slightest provo-
cation and it settles in the chest ; dry, hacking cough ; catarrhal condi-
tions of the chest ; tuberculosis ; pallor with gradually increasing weak-
ness and emaciation.

During this weakness there is vertigo. Vertigo while lying in bed ;
seems like floating while lying in bed. Limbs seem to be lifted up
while the head does not seem to move, as if the limbs were floating.

Congestive headaches ; in school girls from slight exertion of the
mind and use of the eyes. Periosteal pains ; bones ache as if scraped ;
ameliorated by motion ; when lying the pain shifts to side lain on.

Most of the complaints are ameliorated from keeping warm, from
absolute quiet, from being alone at peace. There is aggravation of the
complaints from exertion, mental or physical, from being talked to.
Morning headaches. He must liq down with the headaches. Head-
ache aggravated from being talked to. He is sensitive to cold weather.
He is sensitive to a warm room.

In the headache the pain often begins in the back of the head and
spreads to the top of the head ; feels as if a crushing weight were on the
top of the head ; worse from motion, talking and light. "Pressure as
from a weight in head from above downward.'’ These headaches are
associated with mental weakness, brain-fag ; so tired and exhausted.
Vertigo with ringing in the ears and glassy eyes.

Its use in low fevers must be studied. The complaints come on
slowly, slow decline, slowly increasing prostration. Such appearances
as are found in advanced typhoid. It has the prostration, tympanitic
abdomen, dry, brown tongue, sordes on the teeth, gradually approach-
ing unconsciousness ; little thirst increasing to intense thirst with crav-
ing for much water during perspiration ; wants to be let alone ; looks at
the questioner with glassy eyes as if slowly comprehending the ques-
tion ; pupils contracted or dilated ; eyes sunken ; hippocratic counte-
nance ; continued fever ; bleeding from the nose, lungs, bowels ; hsemor-
rhage from any mucous membrane ; sunken about the eyes ; discolored
lips, covered with sordes, becoming very black ; prostration gradually
increasing. From the beginning the mental state has been most marked



744


PHOSPHORIC ACID


I f

1 ' '

and finally comes the muscular weakness, which increases until thd
jaw drops and it seems that the patient must die of exhaustion. Such
states of weakness may come on from haemorrhages (China was the
routine remedy among the older homoeopaths). It checks the haemor-
rhage and causes a rally, prevents the dropsy. There is a state like
anaemia ; pale lips and tongue ; face, hands and feet waxy.

Pains and aches all over the body, ameliorated from motion and
worse from cold. The pains seem deep-seated, often alpng the nerves,
but especially along the long bones, as if tl\e bones were scraped ; as if
a rough instrument were dragged over the bones. The pains are com-
monly worse at night. Severe bone pains.

The stomach refuses to do its work. The food remains in the
stomach and sours. Sour vomiting. Old dyspeptics with brain-fag.
Complaints from acid drinks, cold drinks and rich foods. Singing
sensation in the abdomen after a normal stool.

In most of the complaints of Phosphoric acid a marked feature is
milky urine. Sometimes it is milky when passed ; milky flakes in the
urine. At times the male urethra seems to clog up and examination
will show these little milk-like flakes. The urine becomes milky on
standing, like flour, chalk or phosphate deposits stirred up in it.

In Phosphoric acid there is often an amelioralion of complaints by
their ending in a diarrhoea. Copious, thin, watery stool. From the
quantity it would seem that the patient would be exhausted. Child
with copious, watery, stool in summer ; so copious that the napkin
seems of no use ; the stool runs all over the mother’s dress and on the
floor forming great puddles ; the stool is almost odorless, thin and
watery, and the little one smiles as if nothing were the matter. The
mother wonders where it all comes from, and yet the child seems well.
The Phosphoric acid diarrhoea often ameliorates many of the symp-
toms and the patient feels better. Chronic diarrhoea, copious, thin and
watery, whitish gray, and the patient feels comfortable, free and
happy. If the diarrhoea slacks up the patient is worse and on come
symptoms of tuberculosis, weakness, prostration, brain-fag. Some
patients say they arc never comfortable unless they have diarrhoea.
Podophyllum is the very opposite. Take the same child ; the stool is
very copious and runs all over the floor, the mother wonders where it
all comes from, but the stool is offensive, a horrible stench, and
the patient looks as if dying ; mouth and nose drawn, countenance hip-
pocratic ; almost unconscious. There is painless stool in both, but
Phosphoric acid has not the great prostration. In Phosphoric acid the
stool is whitish gray, like dirty white paint ; in Podophyllum it is
yellow. Gratiola has a similar state of prostration, but the fluid is
green water; when seen it looks like light shining through a green
glass; sometimes thicker, like green bil^ ^



PHOSPHORIC ACID


745


Abdomen much bloated, tympanitic ; great soreness of the bowels
as if in a typhoid state. “White or yellow, watery diarrhoea, chronic
or acute, without pain or any marked debility or exhaustion”. It is
uncommon for the stool to be yellow when watery. It is yellow when
it is mushy ; when watery it is light colored, sometimes milky. When
yellow it is like corn meal mush, pappy ; as in the typhoid state, thin
like thin mush. “Diarrhoea ; not prostrating ; after catching cold dur-
ing heat of summer ; water ; chronic ; violent, bilious or mucous of
twenty months’ standing ; has the appearance of an old man ; from
acids in young persons who grow too rapidly ; after eating, undigested ;
greenish white ; painless.” When we have a diarrhoea from acids we
sometimes find symptoms running to Phosphoric acid. In the diar-
rhoea from sour wine, such as claret, from acids, vinegar, lemons, be
sure to study Antimonium crudum. This is a very striking feature of
that remedy. Useful in cholera,

Male sexual organs. Sexual weakness, prolonged exhaustion, im-
potency ; masturbators ; nightly pollutions with great exhaustion*
“Prostatorrhoea ; immediately after every erection discharge of pros-
tatic fluid.” Even when passing a soft stool the prostatic fluid is dis-
charged.

Falling out of the hair is a striking feature ; falling of the hair from
the genitals, whiskers, eyebrows, head. It is closely related to Natrunt
mur, and Selenium in falling out ct the hair. Selenium has falling out
of the hair from the head, eyebr|)ws and lashes, beard and genitals,
from all over the body, Natruni pur. causes the hair to become very
thin ; during confinement the hair falls from the genitals.

Phosphoric acid produces a troublesome leucorrhcea ; “yellow, mostly
after menses, with itching ; profuse, yellow ; thin, acid mucus ; with
chlorosis.” It suits the woman who has been nursing her child a long
time, or nursing twins, and who gives much milk. She becomes tired
and weakly. Loss of fluids, blood ; prolonged nursing, and weakness
from such causes.

The tendency of the Phosphoric acid patient at the end of the brain
fag and weakness is to run into chest troubles. If a diarrhoea comes
on then the chest trouble is averted. Most awful results will ensue
from the use of astringents, or any remedy that does not correspond
to the patient, that will stop that diarrhoea. He goes into tuberculosis,
difficult respiration ; coughs and suffers in the chest, and the trouble
culminates in structural changes in the lungs. The indications for
Phosphoric acid are seldom found in the tissue changes, but they will
be found in the early states of the patient, the nervous conditions, the
milky urine and the diarrhoea, whid) have existed a long time. Chest
complaints are acute ; typhoid pneumonia ; low forms of fever ending
in chest troubles ; not unlike Phosphorus. Prolonged pneumonia with

94



746


PHYTOLACCA


the mental symptoms, lack of reaction, infiltration at the end of pneu-
monia. Hasmoptysis.

Prolonged fever ending in feeble heart, with palpitation and the.
mental symptoms. Palpitating during sexual excitement. Tendency
to abscesses after a prolonged fever.

Limbs and joints become affected. Pain in the hip joint. Pains in
the long bones between the joints, better by motion. Old gouty consti-
tution. Tissues become weak Red spots appear wherever the flesh is
thin over the bones, and these spots bcome inflamed and form open
ulcers. After fever, abscesses in the muscles, and state of molecular
weakness about the ankles ; over the tibia where the flesh is thin. Phos-
phoric acid has a special relation to the periosteum. Periostitis. Pains
in the tibia at night. Bone feels as if scraped. Cold hands and hot
feet. Ulcers on the legs with watery, offensive discharge.

Boils, abscesses, pustules and other moist eruptions. Suppurating
eruptions ; tissues become weak.

Nervous state ; marked indifference ; weak and trembling ; fainting ;
great nervous exhaustion ; hysterical affections. Creeping, tingling
and crawling all over the body, especially where there is hair, as if in
the roots of the hair ; formication ; especially in those debilitated from
sexual excesses. “Formication over whole body.” Sore spots in the
spine ; lame back. Backache.

“Itching between the fingers or in the bend of joints or on hands.”
Herpes ; eczema, erysipelas. I^arge purple spots form on the skin,
an extravasation of blood from the capillary veins ; ecchymoses. Ulcers
on the skin ; carbuncles ; warts ; chilblains ; wens ; corns with stinging
and burning, and parts become black ; feeble circulation in the skin.
Skin withered, old and gray, and the patient emaciates.

PHYTOLACCA

This is a very imperfectly proved remedy, and it is only possible to
present fragments of it. The mental symptoms have not been brought
out, but the remedy has some striking features.

You will notice the resemblance of this drug to Mercury, and it is an,
antidote to mercury. In those lingering mercurial bone pains, where
the patient has been salivated ; the pains come on at night from the
warmth of the bed ; the body aches ; a chronic, sore, bruised state ;
soreness of the periosteum where the flesh is thin, over the tibia ; joints ;
soreness of the muscles ; drawing and cramping ; drawing in the mus-
cles of the back ; backache, worse at night ; worse from the warmth of
the bed. The patient suffers from these symptoms in cold, damp
weather, as in Mercury, Tendency to ulceration, hence its usefulness
in syphilis ; old, chronic, syphilitic ulcers ; the patient has been sali-



PHYTOLACCA


747


vated ; had Mercury rubbed in ; he became saturated with it, but it no
longer helps. Ulcers in the throat; on the skin; on mucous mem-
branes anywhere.

Spasmodic conditions ; drawing in the muscles ; this may extend to
violent spasms ; opisthotonos ; sometimes the cervical region is afEected
and the head is drawn back ; jerking and twitching of the muscles.

Phytolacca is a glandular remedy. The glands become inflamed and
hard. It produces sore throats, with inflammation of the glands of the
neck, particularly the submaxillary and parotid. Inflammation of the
throat with the accumulation of thick, tenacious mucus ; swelling of the
tonsils. Low grade inflammation like erysipelas.

The symptoms are aggravation at night, on cold days, in a cold room,
and from the heat of the bed ; so that there is a controversy between
heat and cold.

It seems that the remedy centres in the mammary glands. Soreness
and lumps in the breasts from each cold, damp spell ; becomes chilled
and a sore breast results ; sore breast in connection with the menses ; a
nursing woman is exposed to the cold, the breast inflames and the
milk becomes stringy ; coagulated milk. This comes out in the proving,
but poke root has been extensively used by cattle raisers when the
cow’s milk became thick and there were lumps in the bag, and when'
the condition was brought on from the cow standing out in the rain.

Almost any excitement centers in the mammary gland ; fear or an
accident ; lumps form, pains, htet, swelling, tumefaction ; even violent
inflammation and suppuration. No other remedy in the Materia
Medica centres so in the mammary gland. Mercury is similar ; when
the patient takes cold the glands become sore. If every tribulation
makes the glands sore in a nursing woman, give her Phytolacca.
When a mother says she has no milk, or that the milk is scanty, thick,
unhealthy ; dries up soon ; Phytolacca becomes then a constitutional
remedy if there are no contra-indicating symptoms. A bloody watery
discharge which continued for five years after weaning the infant was
cured by Phyto. The breast is so sore that, when she nurses the child,
she almost goes into spasms, with the pain extending down the back
and limbs all over the body.

Diphtheria. In certain epidemics ; great tumefaction of the throat ;
swelling of the glands of the neck, parotid and submaxillary ; aching
in the bones ; foetor from the mouth, with heavily coated tongue ; great
aching in the back ; nose bleed : soreness of the muscles. Analogous ta
Mercurius ; they are closely related in diphtheria. At times in diph-
theria we can only obtain the foetor, loaded tongue, exudation, swollen
glands and stiff neck. This looks like Mercurius or one of the Mer-
curies, The Protoiodide is right sided, and stays there or may go to
the left side. The Biniodide goes from left to tight. The Merc,



748


PHYTOLACCA


cyanide has a thick, green membranous cast, extending from the nose
to the throat. In Phytolacca we have many features of Mercury,

It has cured syphilitic nodes on the skull and shin bones.

Many eruptions. “Squamous eruptions ; pityriasis, psoriasis.'’
“Ringworm.” “Barber's itch.” “Rash on body ; measles ; scarlet
eruptions all over the body.” It is not surprising that it cures scarlatina,
as it has this scarlet rash, the sore throat and glandular involvement.

It has the ability to delay the formation of malignant growths, espe-
cially in the breast ; glandular tumors that become hard and scirrhous.
Until this remedy was known there was but one remedy for the old
cicatrices in the mammary gland. Women who were confined years
before, had abscesses of the breast which were poulticed and lanced
had a cicatrix left, and now in the present confinement they have
trouble ; inflammation in the old cicatrices ; ulceration which eats off thd
lacteal glands or turns the ducts aside and twists them ; high inflamma-
tion ; throbbing and pain ; milk bloody. Graphites was the old routine
remedy, but Phytolacca is a better remedy and suits the general con-
comitants oftener. The symptoms usually found in an inflamed breast
after confinement are : Aching in the back and bone pains ; fever and
shivering. Phytolacca has these and falls into the very nature of the
case. Graphites has it only in a limited way. If there is high fever ;
congestion to the head ; throbbing carotids ; much redness, and the red-
ness radiates from the nipple, Belladonna is the remedy. When the
entire gland is as heavy as a stone, and hard, and the patient is sensi-
tive to motion and touch, Bryonia, Mercury when the general symp-
toms agree. Hepar and Silicea after suppuration is inevitable, espe-
cially when the only comfort is obtained from heat. Hepar when
there is extreme pain and soreness, irritability and this relief from
heat ; it limits the extent of the suppuration and opens the part with-
out pain.

The most distressing, lingering, inveterate, old catarrhs with de-
struction of the bones of the nose. “Total obstruction of the nose :
when riding, must breathe through the mouth.” “Coryza and cough,
with redness of eyes and lachrymation ; photophobia ; feeling of sand
in the eyes, with soreness and burning.” “Syphilitic ozaena, with
bloody, sanious discharge and disease of bone.” “Noli me tangere
and cancerous affections of nose.”

It is somewhat like Graphites, in that it seeks out fissures in which
to establish inflammation, induration and eruptions. Where the cir-
culation is feeble it has the tendency to establish induration.

“Face sunken, pale, hippocratic ; blue around eyes ; yellowish com-
-plexion ; looking blue and suffering.” “Pains in bones of head and
face at night.” “Swelling around left ear and side of face like ery-
sipelas ; thence over scalp ; very painful.” “Lips everted and firm.



PICRIC ACID


749


Tetanus. Ulcers on lips/* “Parotid and submaxillary glands swol-
len.** “Tongue thickly coated on back ; coated yellow and dry.** This
is found in all acute complaints and is like Mercury, Phytolacca holds
a reputation among the Eclectics, and in their results we see a shadow
of its homoeopathic action. In Cincinnati they used three drops in a
tumbler of water and gave it for ulcers in the mouth. It was a stand-
ard remedy with them and they made some homoeopathic cures. “Ul-
cerated sore mouth.** Syphilitic ulcers find a curative remedy in Phy-
tolacca, when the. symptoms agree.

There are several pages in the Guiding Symptoms showing homoeo-
pathic cures of the throat ; diphtheria ; sore throat : inflamed glands ;
aching bones worse at night ; violent cases, with difficult swallowing,
pains in the tonsils ; enlarged tonsils ; tendency to slough. Syphilitic
and mercurial sore throats. The sore throats are often aggravated
from warm drinks ; he wants cool things ; and there is an aggravation
at night. Here is a summary: “Diphtheria ; sick and dizzy when try-
ing to sit up ; frontal headache ; pains shooting from throat into ears,
especially on trying to swallow ; face flushed ; tongue much coated, pro-
truded ; thickly coated at back, fiery red at tip ; breath foetid ; putrid ;
vomiting ; difficulty of sw^allowing ; tonsils swollen, covered with mem-
brane, first upon left ; three or four patches ; tonsils, uvula and back
part of throat covered with ash-colored exudation. Pain in the root
of the tongue on putting out.'*' .

Old gout and rheumatism cf ^thc limbs ; in acute rheumatism which
is prolonged, worse at night, worle from the warmth of the bed, worse
from warm applications. Gouty rheumatism ; syphilitic cases ; pains
as if in the bones, “Sharp cutting pains in hip, drawing ; legs drawn
up ; cannot touch floor.^’ “Syphilitic or gonorrhoeal sciatica, etc.*’
“Ulcers and nodes on the legs.”

A certain class of physicians used to call Podophyllum “vegetable
Mercury/^ Phytolacca ought to be called “vegetable Mercury'^ be-
cause it is so full of symptoms analogous to Mercury,

PICRIC ACID

The weakness of body and mind is the first impression wrought upon
the mind of the reader who goes carefully over this proving. It is
progressive, passing from weariness to paralysis. The evidences of
softening of brain and cord are strong. He soon becomes sensitive to*
heat and desires the cool air which ameliorates his head and bodily
condition. Cold air and cold bathing are grateful to him. He is sen-
sitive to wet weather. Numbness of many parts, trembling, lassitude,
heaviness, must lie down, worse from least exertion are marked feat-
ures. Loss of sleep, mental worry, mental labor, a^e the exciting



7J2


PLATINUM


things, is moody and sulky over slight vexations, anxious, weepings
Palpitation, trembling in all limbs during every little excitement, fears
death and loathes life. Fear is a very prominent feature in this rem-
edy. Fears that something will happen, fears that her absent husband
will never return to her, though he comes back regularly. Restless
disposition, excitable, walking, moving about, and weeping.

The mental symptoms alternate with the physical symptoms.
Strange illusions of fancy. Imagines that she does not belong to this
race and becomes insane over religious matters, sits in the corner and
broods and says nothing. Takes on insanity ; becomes a sexual per-
vert, utters unchaste speech and trembles. Spasms will come on from
vexation or anger. Whistles, sings, and dances. Talks constantly
about fanciful things. She may go into melancholy or into mania.
Any disturbance of her pride will bring on her symptoms. Sexual
excitement will bring on her symptoms. The usual mental symptoms
arc intermingled with trembling of the limbs, sexual excitement, and
numbness of various parts of the body and limbs. Compressing sen-
sations, pressing pains, pressure of the limbs as if bandaged or con-
stricted, tension of the skin of the limbs as if bandaged. These charac-
teristic features prevail throughout the various regions of the body and
modify many particulars. Sensation of numbness of the scalp with
pressing pain in the head, boring, compression of the head. Tension
of the scalp, cramplike constrictions of the scalp gradually increasing
to violence, cramplike pains gradually increasing to violence. Squeez-
ing sensation in the head. These pains may be in the temple, in the
top of the head, or in the forehead. Again, there is crawling, creep-
ing, numbness of the scalp. Sudden shocks in the head. There is no
symptom in the head more persistent than numbness of the scalp, it
prevails throughout all sensations and pains. All headaches gradually
increase until they are severe. Violent neuralgia in the head with sen-
sitiveness in hysterical persons. Sometimes numbness in the head is
described as if the brain were numb. Headaches come on from cha-
grin, from fear, from vexation, from haemorrhages, and from sexual
excitement.

Sparks before the eyes, spasms of the lids, and objects appear smaller
than they really are. Senstion of coldness in the eyes, spasms, spas^
modic trembling and twitching of the muscles of the eyes* Cramping
pain in the ears, coldness in the ears, numbness of the external ears*
The numbness of the ears extends to the face, nose and scalp. Plat-
inum is a haemorrhagic remedy. Bleeding from various parts of the
body and mucous membranes. The haemorrhages wherever observed
are black clots with fluid. On examining the symptoms of the nosd
haemorrhage is observed. Black, coagulated blood from the nose.
Ovensensitive to smell. Violent crampy pains at the root of the nose



PLATINUM


753


with redness of the face.

Sensation of coldness of the face, numbness of the face, cramping,
pressing pains in the face. Neuralgia of the face. Coldness, crawl-
ing, numbness of the face. Numbness of the malar bone. Tearing
boring pain in the face.

Pulsating and digging through the lower jaw, especially the right
side, together with numbness and coldness. The pains come gradually
and go gradually. Sensation as if the tongue were scalded, crawling
in the tongue. Loss of appetite on account of the depressed mood or
at other times a ravenous appetite ; hasty eating, eats everything around
her. Much flatulence, fermentation in the stomach. Jerking of the
muscles of the stomach and abdomen. Sensation as if the whole abdo-
men were tightly constricted or bandaged. Tension of the skin of the
abdomen. Violent, cramping pains in the abdomen, drawing pains in
the navel as if by a string, which causes a sensation of retraction of
the abdomen. Pressing, bearing down pains in the abdomen. These
pains are much like Plumbum and Patinum has been used as an anti-
dote to Plumbum, Pressing, drawing pains from incarcerated flatus.
The torpor of the intestinal canal is much like that which is found in
Plumbum, Inveterate constipattion, much flatus.

The stool is half digested and papescent or hard as if burnt, or may
be scanty and very difficult, of* may be glutinous and adherent to the
anus like soft clay, Frequci|t urging to stool and inability to strain
at stool, inveterate constipation and unsuccessful urging to stool. Pain
in the abdomen after lead ||>isoning and colic after lead poisoning.
Constipation in travelers. jT^longcd efforts to pass a stool. Aching
pains, burning pains and ^protrusion of haemorrhoids during stool.
Burning in the rectum during stool. Itching, tickling, and tenesmus
of the anus, especially in the evening. Extreme sexual erethism is
found in both male and female. In the male there is great sexual
erethism driving to secret vice. It has cured epilepsy arising from
onanism. Sexual erethism is one of the most prominent features of
Platinunt in women. Unbearable sexual excitement and voluptuous
crawling in the genitals. Such extreme sensitiveness of the external
genitals that it is impossible for the woman to wear a napkin during
menstruation. Such extreme sensitiveness of the vagina that it is im-
possible for the physician to make an examination with the index fin-
ger. It is not an inflammation but a hyperaesthesia. Increased sexual
excitement in young girls, in hysterical girls. Violent sexual desire in
married women with itching, tingling, and voluptuous sensations.
Pain in the ovarian region, especially the left. It has cured sterility of
long standing, especially sterility that is supposed to come from ex-
cessive sexual excitement. Burning, stitching pains in the ovaries.
Infl^tmmation; of the ovaries coming with haemorrhage of the uterus^
95



754


PLUMBVM METALUCUM


and during the menstrual period. It has cured ovarian tumors and
cystic tumors. Inflammation of the uterus, bearing down, as in pro-
lapsus. Prolapsed uterus and dragging in the pelvis. Polypus of the
utcnis and uterine haemorrhages. Copious menstrual flow, 'fhe flow
is dark, even black, and clotted with much fluid blood. These nCTVOUS
women constantly feel as if the menstrual flow was going to appear.
The menstrual flow comes too early, is too profuse, and then generally
of short duration. The haemorrhage is somewhat like the menstrual
flow in old women. The menstrual periods sometimes return every
fourteen days or the menstrual flow may be entirely absent. The vulva
and vagina are extremely sensitive during coition, sometimes prevent-
ing the act. The woman suffers from albuminous leucorrhoea, mostly
in the daytime without much sensation. There are many complaints of
pregnancy, threatened abortion, exhausting haemorrhages, discharges
of black clotted blood. During labor the contractions are interrupted
by sensitiveness of the vagina and internal parts. It is impossible for
the obstetrician to make the usual examination. Cramping in the limbs
during parturition or profuse haemorrhage ; hysterical convulsions,
puerperal convulsions. After every mental exertion palpitation,
trembling, numbness, quivering, and excitement in the limbs. Tremu-
lous restlessness in the legs with numbness. Cold feet. Pains in the
great toe as if bandaged. This sensation prevails throughout. The
limbs feel as if bandaged about the thigh or leg. The nerves are in a
great state of excitement most of the time. The patient is prostrated.
Paralytic weakness, which is worse during rest. Numbness, stiffness
and coldness. Painful tremulousncss all over the body, with throbbing
in the blood vessels. Numbness of the scalp, of the feet, of the hands,
of the limbs. Shifting, neuralgic pains. Spasmodic affections of hys-
terical women. Spasms from sexual erethism. Coldness, crawling,
and numbness of the skin, especially during fever,

PLUMBUM METALLICUM.

This drug illustrates a doctrine of Hahnemann — the doctrine of at-
tenuation. When you think of the insolubility of lead, and then thiiflc
of it as spread on the wall of a room, and then remember how many
become sick from sleeping in a newly painted room, you will then wtm-
dcr how much lead it took to make them sick. Many patients cannot
sleep in a newly painted room — they come down with lead colic or the
acute affections of lead. Many people are sensitive to lead. This sen-
sitivity is more marked than is observed in painters, who may use it
for years with impunity, but all at once become susceptible to it. You
wonder how much he gets, pven off in the air. It is too atcemmed
to be examined by the miaoscope and yet enough to make Idm jritiu



PtUMBl/M MKTALUCUM


75S


,Wc have no measure by which to find out how much he gets. We
make use of such susceptibility, the lead palsy of lead workers, the
lead colic in painters — these things add to the proper proving and give
a well>rounded image of Plumbum.

If we study the whole symptomatology of Plumbum, we will be
strudc with the general paralytic state in this remedy. The activities
of the body, the functions of the organs, are slowed down in pace.
The nerves do not convey their messages with the usual activity. The
muscles are slow in action, sluggish. There is first paresis and finally
paralysis, of parts first and finally of the whole. The mind is impaired,
slow. Perception is slow. He memorizes with difficulty. Compre-
hension is difficult. He cannot recall words to express himself. Tho
operations of the mind are slow. When in conversation with such a
patient you will wonder what he is thinking about while making up his
mind to answer. There is sluggishness also in the skin. You may
prick him and a second later he says, “Oh,” showing the slowness in
feeling. You would expect him to feel the prick instantly. When you
begin to conclude that he does not feel at all, his limb will jerk. An-
sethesia of the skin. There is a state of hyperacthesia in the acute
affections, but the chronic affections are characterized by loss of sen-
sation. Numbness of fingers and toes, soles, and palms, and this ex-
tends to the skin, towards the ^liie.

The trophic functions are sldjd in that they do not keep up with the
waste, and so we see emaciatk^luntil the patient becomes almost a
skeleton. The skin is wrinkled |)uckered, shrivelled, and drawn over
the bones. The emaciation is Sometimes local. When local it is gen-
erally associated with a painful part ; the painful part withers. Pains
down the sciatic nerve ; burning, shooting ; as if the bone were being -
pulled out of place ; as if being scraped and the limb emaciates. Pain
down the arm, in the shoulder ; violent pains in the brachial plexus and
the arm withers. Neuralgia of one side of the face and that side with-
ers. Paralysis of single muscles and these muscles wither. There is
paralpis of both extensors and flexors, but especially extensors. The
paralysis begins in the extensors, so that we have wrist drop. He can-
not raise or lift anything with the hand. Extension is difficult. This
occurs in piano players ; they cannot lift their fingers sufficiently rapid
to keep up the pace, while flexion is all right. Curare is another rem-
edy which corresponds to this state in piano players ; a paralysis from
overexertion of the extensor muscles. When the muscles become fa-
tigued from playing fixed exercises, scales, etc., for hours at a time,
whra the player has to do the same thing over and over again, Rhus
omtes in, but it is an acute remedy and only holds for a short time. It’
is esptxially a Rfuts omdition when certain muscles become overused
and the pati«at takes cold and a weakness sets in ; aftef a cold bath dr



PLUMBtn>I METALUCUM

pluAge the muscles take on paresis ; getting wet when tired brings on
the Rhus state. For the chronic state which follows, Plumbum and-
sometimes Curare will be indicated.

Paresis of the intestines ; constipation ; cannot strain at stool. The
patient can use the abdominal muscles, but the rectum is in a state of
paresis and he cannot expel the faeces.

The bladder is also paretic ; cannot expel the urine, the muscles doi
not co-operate to void the urine and there is retention. Plumbum has
both retention and suppression of urine.

The paralyses are found in the chronic state. In the acute we have
the fever, the colic, the sudden constipation ; tearing pains in the in-
testines ; indigestion with vomiting. Everything eaten turns sour.

Violent vomiting of everything eaten. Chronic gastric catarrh with
vomiting of albuminous mucus and sweetish substance. Vomiting of
stercoraceous matter, blackish blood and green Quid. Sour eructations.

The remedy is slow and insidious ; it works continuously ; it does not
leave the economy but holds on and establishes a miasm of its own. It,
therefore, suits slow and insidious chronic cases, with no tendency to
recovery. Progressive muscular atrophy ; progressive paralysis.
Chronic constipation ; chronic retention of urine ; chronic giving way
of the mind.

Aside from the slowness of the mind, which is a general, the remedy
is full of melancholia, sadness, feeling as if something terrible would
happen ; that she has sinned away the day of grace ; that she has com-
mitted the unpardonable sin. The body and mind are weak. “Deep
melancholy with timidity and restlessness.” In the mental state, while
he is slow to think, yet in this slow thinking he does a great amount
of thinking ; he makes an effort to think. His thoughts trouble him
all night and prevent sleep. Insomnia; sleepless from the continual
effort to think. The mind will not operate, yet the patient is full of
imaginations and emotions. Inability to comprehend and to remember.
Now, this progresses from periods of insomnia to periods of coma and
this coma is associated with suppression of mine. Uraemic coma.
Uraemia. Perhaps it will fix it in your mind if I tell you something
clinical about it. Some years ago a physician came to me in regard to
his wife. She had been unconscious for two days and had passed no-
mine for days and the catheter showed there was none in the bladder.
She had quite an array of symptoms but they were comm, on symptoms,.
She had had the slowness for days before, and complained of a sensa-
tion of a continual pulling at the navel, as if a string were drawing it
back to the spinal column, and then the coma came on. In the middle
of the night this doctor came to me in great distress. He said she was
pale as death and breathing slow. A single powder of Plumbum high
was given, and she passed urine in a few hours; roused up and netec?



PLUMBUM MEXALUCUM


757


had such an attack again.

Violent spasmodic palpitation of the heart, worse lying on the left
side, with marked anxiety in the cardiac region. Hypertrophy and
dilatation of the heart. Stitching pain in the heart.

Hysterical diathesis ; hysterical contractures ; cramping of the fin-
gers ; hysterical motions ; convulsions of parts, hands, feet, whole body ;
an apparent delirium ; cardiac pains ; numbness in parts— all hysterical
phenomena.

Plumbum produces an inclination to deceive, to cheat. The Acetate
pf lead produced in a woman, who took a little of it for suicide, a con-
firmed hysterical state. She would be in a hysterical condition for
hours when any one was looking at her. When she thought no one
was near she would get up, walk about, look in the glass to see how
handsome she was, but when she heard a foot on the steps she would
lie on the bed and appear to be unconscious. She would bear much
pricking and you could scarcely tell she was breathing. Plumbum es-
tablishes a hysterical state in the economy ; an inclination to deceive, to
feign sickness ; to exaggerate one’s ills ; and it goes to the root of the
evil providing the symptoms agree.

Changeable ; continually changing from one thing to another, from
one group of imaginations to another, from one group of emotions to
another. The whole remedy is iat^scly emotional. While the intel-
lect is slowed down, yet most of t]^ symptoms arc emotional.

Plumbum cures kidney affecti^^s with albumen and sugar in the
urine. The urine is dark, scanty, ijftiid of high specific gravity. Rctem
tion of urine from lack of sensation that the bladder is full.

Apoplexy. ■ Stupor, when Opiutn is sufficiently similar to remove the
cerebral congestion which always surrounds the apoplectic clot. Plum-
bum may follow. Plumbum, Phosphorus and Alumina are three sheet
anchors. They conform to the symptoms often when the first state has
been like Opium. The paralysis of muscles, the paralytic weakness of
one side of the body, or single parts of the body, show its relation to
such cases.

There is another feature of the upper part of the body, of the head
and mind, which is not clear in the books and which is worthy of your
attention. The mental symptoms, the emotional symptoms, and the
head symptoms are greatly exaggerated by any exertion, especially ex-
ertion in the open air. ^^ile walking in the open air the patient be-
comes hot in the head, pale in the face, and cold in the extremities ;
hands and feet cold as ice, as if dead ; and if he continues the exertion
the face becomes fairly cadaveric. Persons cannot exercise and con-
tinue it without cold extremities. An irritable brain ; pain in the base
of the brain, back of the neck, in the nerve centers. Cold extremities
from exertion ; yet can do considerable mental exertion without becom-



75^ PLUMBUM MSTALUCUM

ing cold. It is from physical exertion like walking in the open air.
Paroxysmal pain in the limbs, evening and night; better by pressure
and worse from motion. Lightning-like pains. Jerking and trembling
of all the limbs.

The Plumbum patient is cold and emaciated, ne^s much clothing
even in warm weather, not about the head, but over the body. Extremi-
ties cold, blue, numb and emaciated. Sweat on the extremities, and
the feet it is stinking. Feet and toes withered like a washerwoman’s
hands. Toes blistered ; blisters between the toes, smarting. Ulcera-
tions. Molecular death and even gangrene of the skin of the fingers
and toes. Calluses about the feet, corns and bunions.

With the chronic affection of the head there is contraction of the
muscles of the back and neck ; drawing and twitching indicating men-
ingeal troubles ; spasmodic jerking. “Swelling of the submaxillary and
sublingual glands.” Convulsions often like tetanus, with lockjaw.
“Distinct blue line along the margins of the gums.” “Gums pale,
swollen, show a lead-colored line ; blue, purple, or brown ; painful with
hard tubercles.” “Tongue dry, brown, cracked ; coated yellow or
green ; dry, red, glazed in chronic gastritis.” Breath foetid, dryness of
mouth, ulceration, aphthae. “Sensation of a plug in the throat ; globus
hystericus.” “Paralysis of throat and inability to swallow,” a paralysis
of the oesophagus.

The stomach has no ability to digest food. Assimilation is also de-
stroyed. Pains in the abdomen, tearing, like colic, doubling the patient
up. Constant sensation of pulling at the navel as by a string ; as if the
abdomen were drawn in. At times the abdomen does become concave,
as if the abdomen and back were too close together.

Constipation is a common and well known feature. The constipa-
tion, colic, and abdominal symptoms are commonly associated. "Con-
stipated stools, hard, lumpy like sheeps’ dung ; with urging and terrible
pain from constriction or spasms of anus ; knotty faeces in form of
balls.” No matter how much straining he cannot expel the stool.
“Constriction of intestines ; navel and anus violently retracted.” Ex-
cessive pain in abdomen radiating from thence to all parts of the body.”
"Severe colic ; contracted abdomen ; bends backward, motor nerves most
affected.” Rumbling and flatulence. Impaction of faeces. Vaginis-
mus in keeping with the spasmodic action.

"Inclination to take strange attitudes and positions in bed.” Anae-
mia, chlorosis, emaciation, muscular atrophy, wandering pauns, dixp-
sical swellings, yellow skin, jaundice.”

Burning in ulcers is in keeping with the remedy everywhere,^..



PODOPHYLLUM


759


PODOPHYLLUM.

This remedy is seldom used except in acute affections, but it is a long
acting and deep acting drug ; it produces a powerful impression on the
economy ; it relates to the deep-seated miasms.

It affects profoundly the abdominal viscera. It shows its symptoms
largely on the abdominal organs, the pelvic organs, and the liver. The
abdomen seems to be the earliest seat of attack. It produces such an
impression upon the stomach and intestinal canal that the healthy action
is impaired, digestion and assimilation cease. Everything taken into
the stomach becomes sour. The glands of the stomach are as if para-
lyzed ; there is no digestion ; this goes on until we have vomting and
diarrhoea. During this there is a wonderful disturbance in the abdo-
men ; rumbling ; gurgling as if animals were floundering about ; clin-
ically, as if fish were turning and tossing in a pond, as we have seen
them before a storm. Rumbling and rolling. This is attended with
severe, cramping pains doubling her up. Abdomen is sensitive ; so sore
she cannot endure pressure. The soreness extends to the stomach, in-
testines and finally to the liver. The whole abdominal viscera are sore,
sensitive to pressure. After this comes a gurgling, watery stool, pour-
ing out of the anus. A tremendous outpouring so that the patient
wonders where all the fluid comes from, and soon it comes on again.
Copious, enormous, and very frequei|t. This soreness, cramping, and
rumbling precedes the stool, but someiimes it continues during the stool.
Commonly the patient is relieved hyfthe stool. There is much flatus
and spluttering, but not so marked ai in Aloe. The colic often comes
and goes without stool. Painless stools, in which compare China which
has stool coming on at night and atfter eating. Putrid or not, and of
inky color. Podophyllum is rarely indicated when the discharge is not
offensive. After a while the abdomen again becomes tumultuous, and
this is again relieved by a stool. This process is repeated over and
over. It seems as if the blood vessels would empty themselves into the
abdominal cavity, and then into the outer world. Not unlike cholera
and cholera morbus, and these two are the common manifestations of
disease for which this remedy is used in routine practice. The cholera
morbus coming on in the latter part of the night, especially about 3, 4,
or 5 o’clock, resembles Podophyllum. Tumultuous action of the botv-
els with rumbling, pain, and soreness, and the prostration is so marked
that if not relieved in a day or two, it seems he must die. Rice-water
stools, jelly-like on standing.

With this tumultuous action, she has an indescribable sensation ; an
all-goite feeling, a deathly sick feeling, described by some as an empti-
ness, as if fasting, yet averse to food. An a'wful, hungry, empty weak-

as if the whole intestines would drop out. No wonder th^ think



762


PSORINUM


ncct the vomiting and the stool with this color. Hie patient declares
he is “bilious his "liver is out of order bitter taste in the mouth ;
spitting up bile and the color is yellow ; in diarriicea it is a green sub-
stance.

In children subject to cqjious diarrhoea, with prolapsus of the anus —
no other symptom — ^Podophyllum often cures.

A feature of infancy is the following : Child may not have diarrhoea,
may even be constipat^, but it lies in bed and rolls the head in sleep.
Bell, and Apis roll head. Apis lies on back with the head on its side.
Chewing motion of the jaws ; sometimes a sucking ; a grinding of the
teeth in those who are old and have teeth ; rolling the head from side
to side ; if you lift the eyelids you will find a strabisms. Provers felt
as if the eyes were drawn inward. It has cured such a strabismus in
congestion of the brain following a suddenly suppressed diarrhoea.

A child who should have a colored stool has instead a white one like
chalk {Calc. c.). In adults, a bileless, white stool.

The body is offensive ; offensive sweat ; compare Sepia, Merc., Aloe,
Sulph., Murex, Nux.


PSORINUM

Psorinum is closely allied to Sulphur. The patient dreads to be
washed. The skin over the body, especially of the face, looks filthy,
though it has been well washed. A dingy, dirty, foul look, as if cov-
ered with dirt. Skin rough and uneven, cracks easily, bleeding fis-
sures ; it becomes rough and scaly. He cannot wash it clean. The
skin of the hands is rough, chaps easily, becomes thick and scaly, easily
cracks ; breaks out in little scaly eruptions ; looks unwashed ; he always
appears to have dirty hands. Many of the complaints of the skin are
worse from bathing and from the warmth of the bead. The skin itches
when warm ; itches when wearing woolens. Itching when warm in
bed ; he scratches until the part becomes raw, and then it becomes
scabby. When healing takes place there is itching and then he has to
scratch. Legs and arms raw and scabby from scratching. Violent
itching from the warmth of the bed, even without any eruption. Tlie
skin is unhealthy, looks dirty, dingy ; studded with capillary blood
vessels and enlarged veins. This is the state before the eruption ap-
pears. Scabs form from scratching and then comes the eruptiwi.
Papules, pimples, crusts, boils, vesicles, and eruptions ooze a watery
moisture. 'WTien the eruption has gone on for some time the crusty
formation and vesicles mingle ; the skin becomes thickened and indur-
ated, and new crops come out under the old crusts ; rawness, itching,
tingling, crawling, bleeding.

Eczema of the scalp and face ; the crusts cover the scalp ; the hair



PSOMMVM


763


falls out ,* the oozing lifts up the crusts and exposes new vesicles ; it
looks like raw beef, and it tingles so that the child cannot keep its fin-
gers it ; worse at night, worse from the warmth of the bed, worse
from warm applications, anything that would keep the air away from
it ; ameliorated by cool air and worse from covering. This is the oppo-
site of the general Psorinum state, which is aggravated from the open
air. He has an aversion to the open air.

The eruption goes on, spreads, and the true skin becomes elevated,
thickened, indurated, with an increased vascularity and redness. The
oozing is offensive like carrion or decomposed meat ; nauseating odor
from the oozing fluid.

Offensiveness runs through Psorinum in such a characteristic way
that it is worth while mentioning it here ; foetid odors, foetid breath ;
discharges and oozing from the ddn smelling like carrion ; stool so
offensive that the odor permeates the whole house, in diarrhoea, sum-
mer complaint, cholera infantum ; perspiration foetid ; leucorrhoea abom-
inably (rflensive ; eructations taste as if he had eaten hard boiled eggs
and they had spoiled, and they smell so to others ; stool flatus, and eruc-
tations smell like spoiled eggs ; offensive to sight and smell is the sub-
ject who needs this medicine.

The skin grows increasingly thick and bleeds, and the eruption
spreads to other parts. Eruptienw on the lips, on the genitals ; very
offensive ; soreness and rawness about the anus ; the vulva ulcerates
and is very offensive ; ulcers on the legs ; on the tibiae ; on the backs
of the hands ; on the dorsum of ^e foot ; behind the ears and upon
the ears ; over the scalp ; over thti cheek bones ; on the wings of the
nose and on the nose and eyefids. Greasy skin. The eruption is
accompanied by redness of the mucous membranes of the nose, mouth,
lips and eyes. Eyelids thickened and turned out, like ectropion ; gran-
ulation and induration of mucous membranes, so that they become
like gristle ; redness and ulceration. Ulceration of the cornea ; lachry-
mation ; turning out of the lids with loss of the eyelashes. He looks
frightful with his red eyes, eruption on the face, red skin oozing a
thick yellow discharge. In the early stages the oozing is a whitish
thin or whitish thick moisture. In old eruptions ulceration takes
place beneath the crusts and there is a thick, yellow, purulent dis-
charge. Yellow green discharge from the eyes and nose. Horribly
offensive discharge from the nose ; gluey discharge from the nose ;
offensive like Merc., Sil., Calc, p.. Hep/. Accumulation of foetid pus
in the eyes.

Cwyza with thick, yellow discharge. Always taking cold. In the
coryza Ae nose dries up part of the time and runs part of the time ;
he must use the handkerchief continually ; must blow the nose all the
time. In the early stages of the coryza he blows it all the time, but



764


PSORINUM


there is no discharge or relief. This state is so marked that some
think of it as a continuous hay fever, which runs all the year and
ripens up in the Fall. It is closely related to hay fever; stuflSng up
of the nose in the Fall ; catarrhal state of the eyes and nose. Hay
fever is one of the ntost difficult conditions to fit a remedy to. It
belongs to a low constitution which must be built up before the hay
fever will cease. It is an expression of psora which comes once a
year, and the psoric miasm must be changed. In a few years most
subjects can be changed, but not in one season, so do not be disap-
pointed. In catarrahal states, hay fever often dates back to low fever
improperly treated.

The Psorinum patient himself is one of debility. He wants to go
home after a short walk. He is worse in the open air. He cannot
breathe in the open air ; cannot breathe while he is standing up ; wants
to go home and lie down so that he can breathe. Asthma or cardiac
dyspnoea, when the patient wants to go home and lie down so that he
can breathe. Usually this condition is relieved by sitting up and fromi
the open air. Not so with Psorinum, he wants a warm place and to
lie down and to be let alone.

Psorinum is slowed down in all of its functions ; a state of paretic
weakness. He does not rally after a fever ; his digestion is slow ; the
stool is normal, yet it requires a great effort to expel it ; the bladder is
full of urine, yet it passes slowly and he feels that some remains ; he
can never finish stool or urination ; he has to go back several times.
Although the stool is soft and perfectly normal it cannot be expelled
at one sitting.

A psoric patient comes down with typhoid ; the typhoid has been
arrested or has run its course and it is time for convalescence. The
fever has subsided, but the patient has no appetite ; he does not con-
valesce ; he wants to lie down and does not desire to be moved ; he
is worse when sitting up, lies upon his back ; he has troublesome
breathing and lies with hts arms abducted from his side, thrown across
the bed ; this relieves his breathing and allows the chest to operate
properly ; so tired and so weak ; one dose of Psorinum will cause a
reaction, stop his sweat, increase his appetite, cause better breathing.

The Psorinum complex of symptoms is one in which remedies cause
improvement but a short time and then the symptoms change and an-
other remedy must be selected. It is a state of feeble reaction.

The mental symptoms present some strong features. Sadness,
hopelessness ; he sees no light breaking through the clouds above his
head ; all is dark about him. He thinks his business is going to be a
failure ; that he is going to the poor house ; that he has sinned away
his day of grace. It is a fixed idea during the day and he dreams
about it at night. Overwhelming sadness ; dejection ; he takes no joy



PSORINUM


765


in his family ; feels that these things are not for him. His business is
prosperous, yet he feels as if he were going to the poor house. No
joy or realization of benefit. Extremely irritable, wants to be alone.
Does not want to be washed. Full of anxiety, even of suicide. De-
spair of recovery if sick.

Though there is no eruption at night he is driven to despair by the
continual itching. If he throws the covers off then he becomes chilly ;
if he covers up then there is itching. Sensitive to cold yet the skin is
worse from heat. Tingling, itching, formication, crawling like ants
running over the surface, as of insects in the skin.

Especially suited to broken down individuals, who have vertigo as
soon as they go into the open air ; become dizzy and want to go home
and lie down ; afraid tliey will lose their breath.

Old chronic periodic headaches with hunger, and often the hunger
lasts during the whole headache ; must get up at night to get some-
thing to eat. The headache is sometimes improved by eating. If he
goes without a meal he has a headache. Violent rush of blood to the
head, hot face, hair wet with the perspiration, hunger. Every one,
two, or three weeks a recurrent headache. Every time the air blows
on his head it slacks up the cattarrh and a headache comes on. Either
coryza or headache from catching cold. Headache is violent, throb-
bing, pecking as of little hammers, red face, hot head — congestive ; at
times sweat. Hungry headache Jn such as have a dry cough in win-
ter. Dry, teasing, racking cougfaf with no expectoration. If the cough
ceases he has a periodic headaithe. So complaints alternate. Head-
ache goes and cough appears of eruption in winter alternating with
headache.

Scalp cold ; wears fur cap in summer ; worse uncovering the head
(Si/.), worse from getting the hair cut {Bell., Glon., Sep.). Hepar
is also worse from cold.

Salt rheum, psoriasis in winter. Dry, cold weather, cold wet
weather ; washing in cold water ; dish washing, aggravate the salt
rheum.

“Hair dry, lusterless, tangles easily, glues together ; must comb it
continually.”

Chronic offensive otorrhoea ; thick, purulent, offensive, yellow dis-
charge from the ears ; smells like stinking meat ; continuous discharge ;
eruptions about and behind ears. Discharge resulting from scarlet
fever ; abscess in middle ear ; otitis media ; rupture of drum ; prolonged
discharge from such an abscess ; foetid discharge. “Otorrhoea with
headache ; thin, ichorous and horribly offensive like spoiled meat ; very
offensive, purulent ; brovra, offensive from left ear, for almost four
year.” Otorrhoea associated with watery, offensive diarrhoea
Scurfs in ears, and humid scurfs behind ears.



766


PSORINUK


Teeth. Rigg’s disease ; the teeth became loose ; the gums settle
away, spongy, bleed easily, humid, blue, the teeth fall out. Ulcers
about the tongue and mouth ; ulcers as found in infancy ; aphthae,
thrush ; ulcerated sore mouth, sore throat, chronic ulcers of throat.
Chronic thickening and elongation of the uvula. Enlargement of ton-
sils, parotids and submaxillary glands : they become hard and tender to
touch ; swelling from taking cold. Glands of the neck sore.

Chronic abdominal affections with disturbances of stool. He will
strain to pass a soft stool (Nux mos,, Alumina), Chronic diarrhoea;
horribly offensive ; frequent stool day and night (unlike Sulphur, the
remedy it most resembles). He must go several times to pass a nor-
mal stool.

Chronic vomiting ; ulcer of the stomach, distension of stomach are
commonly associated. Always sour l^elching, sour stomach. Vomit-
ing of blood and bloody stools. This is not strange, because Psor-
inum has a tendency to haemorrhages, especially from the uterus. All
sorts of menstrual disorders, especially a prolonged menstruation-
When a woman has passed through an abortion and the placenta has
come away, but every few days a little gush of fresh, bright red blood
and clots, or going days and weeks with a little oozing of bright red
blood ; every time she gets on her feet there is a new start of the flow ;
no tendency to permanent recovery. Two remedies that fit this state
are Sulphur and Psorinum. A marked state of relaxation, sub-involu-
tion. The uterus does not go back to its normal size and tliere is this
tendency to bleed ; a state of inertia.

“Soft stool, passed with difficulty,'’ do not forget this. Obstinate
constipation. Haemorrhage from the rectum. Cholera infantum ;
often in the early days the stool is horribly offensive, slimy, undi-
gested ; there is vomiting and prolonged weakness and the whole child
has an offensive odor ; child dirty ; nose sunken in {Ant, /.), sunken
countenance. Psorinum causes reaction and cures, or brings the child
into such a condition that a simple remedy completes the cure. It is
not the sourness of Hepar ; in spite of washing, the child smells so
sour ; like sour milk ; the diaper, urine, and faeces and perspiration are
sour. This is a strong general feature of Hepar, The stool smells
like spoiled eggs, so also the eructations and flatus. The offensivc-
oiess of the stool is horrible, but not so permeating as Bapt,, which is
thick and clay-like, while the Psorinum stool is watery, brown, gush-
ing and may be bloody. Chronic diarrhoea, early morning, urgent.
Hot flatus, burning the anus ; smells of spoiled eggs, Arn, and Staph,
Involuntary stool at night {China has a black, profuse, watery stool at
night and after meals). In Psorinum wc find the haste of Sulphur,
the flatulence of Okan, and Aloe, and difficulty of expelling a soft stool
like Alumina, China and IStAx mosch.



PSORINUM


767


There is prostration in some Psorinum cases ; prostration of the
genitals. It is not such an unusual thing in the female to have aver-
sion to sexual intercourse, but man is not often subject to the com-
plaints that cause aversion to coition. Yet we have in man as well as
in the woman actual aversion or a state of no enjoyment. He can
perform the act and he has no difficulty in obtaining an erection, so it
is not impotence, but there is no enjoyment. Impotence comes later.
‘^Absence of erections ; parts flabby, torpid.'’ “Aversion to coition ;
impotence ; want of emission during coitus.’* “Prostatic fluid dis-
charged before urinating.”

Old gleet, painless discharge ; the “last drop relaxed and cold
genitals ; a drop of white or yellow pus after a well selected remedy.
[Sepia, Sulphur^ Alumina, Psorinum.) Psorinum is indicated above
all others if there is an unusually offensive state of the genitals^
Thuja, if the odor is of a nauseating, sweet character ; warts exposed
by rolling back the foreskin ; sweet odor in spite of washing.

Psorinum cures many heart complaints. Palpitation from the least
exertion, better lying. Stiching pain better lying. Cardiac murmurs
of either side. Mitral regurgitant murmur. Pericarditis of rheumatic
origin. Heart symptoms with general weakness, dusky face, dazed look.
Weak, irregular and rapid pulse.

But mark the modalities. Aggravation in the open air, aggravation
when sitting up, aggravation when sitting at the writing table ; wants
to lie down ; wants to rest the chest and breathing apparatus by lying
down. Asthmatic dyspnoea amelfcrated by lying down, and w^orse the
nearer the arms are brought to the body. Such symptoms are found
in very few remedies and in none so marked as in Psorinum.

Febrile state. Intermittents, bilious fever, fever from a cold. The
patient is so hot that the hand under the covers feels as though in a
steam bath and the sensation of heat causes one to draw it back. It
is not the dry beat of Belladonna, yet it is as intense. It is a steam.
He is covered with a boiling sweat in fevers. Head and body hot and
hot air or steam beneath the covers. [Opium has this, but it is in a
violent congestion to the head, an apoplectic condition.) In intermit-
tents he is taken on the street with difficult breathing. He wants to
go home ; he is weak and exhausted, crawls up stairs on the hands and
knees. The chill is not marked, but the heat is intense and the sw^eat
ct^ious. He is almost in a stupor, befogged, bewdldered, cannot an-
swer questions ; face red, pufed, mottled. “Sweat profuse, cold,
clammy from least exertion,” This is another form which comes on
in the weak, broken down state. After typhoids, he sweats if he turns
in bed, after the least exertion, and the sweat is cold. Profuse night
sweats. Night sweats of phthisis ; when there is that tremendous heat
nndcr the covers, a copious hot sweat ; mental state as if dazed.



768


PULSATILLA


Marasmus ; shrivelling of the skin ; dirty skin ; cannot wash it clean.
Offensive discharge from the bowels ; great emaciation ; increased
growth of hair on the face ; a fuzz (Natr. m., Psor., Svlpfi., Calc.) ;
horribly offensive in spite of washing; ravenous appetite yet grows
thin. Foetid odors would lead one to think of Psorinum.

PULSATILLA

It is said to be a very good medicine for women, for blondes, espe-
cially for tearful blondes. It is one of the polychrests and one of the
medicines most frequently used, as well as often abused.

The Pulsatilla patient is an interesting one, found in any household
where there are plenty of young girls. She is tearful, plethoric, and
generally has little credit for being sick from her appearances ; yet she
is most nervous, fidgety, changeable, easily led and easily persuaded.
While she is jt^ld^entle and tearful, yet she is remarkably irritable,
not in the sense of pugnacity, but easily irritated, extremely touchy,
always feels slighted or fears she will be slighted ; sensible to every
social influence. Melancholia, sadness, weeping, despair, religious de-
spair, fanatical ; full of notions and whims ; imaginative ; extremely ex-
citable. She imagines the company of the opposite sex a dangerous
thing to cultivate, and that it is dangerous to do certain things well
established in society as good for the human race. These imagina-
tions belong to eating as well as thinking. They imagine that milk is
not good to drink, so they will not take it. They imagine that certain
articles of diet are not good for the human race. Aversion to mar-
riage is a strong symptom. A man takes it into his head that it is an
evil thing to have sexual intercourse with his wife and abstains from
it. Religious freaks ; an especial tendency to dwell on religious no-
tions ; fixed ideas concerning the Scripture ; he misuses and misapplies
the Scriptures to his own detriment ; dwells on sanctification until he
becomes fanatical and Insane ; thinks he is in a wonderfuly sancti-
monious state of mind, or that he has sinned away his day of grace.
This goes no until he becomes insane on other subjects, and then the
tendency is to sit day after day in a taciturn way. He will not answer
questions unless hard pressed, when all he will say is “Yes” or “No,”
or he will merely shake his head. Puerperal insanity in a woman who
was mild, gentle and tearful, later .sad and taciturn, and then she sits
in her chair all day answering nothing or merely nodding her head for
“Yes” or ‘m”

Many of the complaints are associated with weakness of the stom-
ach and indigestion, or with menstrual disorders. Women who abort ;
various irregularities of the menstrual flow ; false conception. The
mental symptoms are often associated with the ovarian and uterine



PULSATUXA


769


difficulties.

With such a mental state the general state of the body \^JpOYse in a
warm room and relived by niotion. Tearful, sad and despoiiUent^
ameliorated walking in the open air, especially when it is crisp, cool,
fresh and bright. Suffocation and an increase of the pains, ond even
chilliness in a warm room ; a nervous chilliness when the patient per-
spires from the heat of a room. The inflammatory symptoms, neural-
gias and rheumatisms arc relieved by a cold, by eating and drinking
cold things, by cold applications, or cold hands. Cold drinks relieve,
even though the patient is not thirsty. Cold foods are digested while
hot food make the body warm from which symptoms are worse. Ice
cold water feels good going down the oesophagus, and is retained in
the stomach, though there is not thirst.

Many symptoms worse after eating. It is often only a lump in the
stomach, but the mental and nervous symptoms also are worse after
eating. The stomach symptoms are worse in che morning, the men-
tal symptoms worse in the evening. Aggravation front fats and rich
foods. Complaints brought on by eating fat, pork, greasy things,
cakes, pastries and rich things. The Pulsatilla stomach is slow to
digest. Hours after eating there is a sense of fulness in the stomach,
a lump in the stomach, ameliorated by slow walking in the open air.
The patient is commonly relieved from slow motion in the open air,
becomes frantic when trying to kicep still, worse during rest, amelior-
ated by doing something, generaBy slow, moderate motion. This re-
lief from motion and aggravation jfrom rest, relief in the open air, and
aggravation in a warm room give us a good summary of this beauti-
ful remedy.

In Pulsatilla patients the skin feels fcvciish and hot, while the tem-
perature of the body is normal. There is aggravation from much
clothing ; she wants to wear a thin dre.^s even in moderracly cold
weather. Does not need to dress warmly. Much clothing and cov-
ering aggravate. Often he cannot wear flannels or woolen clothing
because they irritate the skin, causing itching and eruptions like Sul-
phur, and this ivS not surprising, as Pulsatilla and Sulphur are anti-
dotes. There is no remedy like Pulsatilla to antidote Sulphur when
it has been used every Spring to ‘^cleanse the blood.” Some people
use Sulphur until the skin becomes red, hot, easily irritated, and ag-
gravated by clothing. Pulsatilla is the antidote. Old cases of psoria-
sis ; little flat, brownish patches about the size of the thumb nail, which
itch tremendously, in old Sulphur patients are cured by Pulsatilla. A
, general feature of the skin is itching and burning, but a more marked
Pulsatilla state is a Lsichesis appearance of the skin. It is mottled,
erysipelatous ; spotted, purplish in spots ; veins engorged ; capillaries
tumid ; a vasomotor paralysis of the capillaries or veins producing a
97



770


PULSATILLA


mottled appearance. Pulsatilla has an unusually venous constitution.
The veins are engorged, in a state of stasis, hence there is over-heat
of the skin. This unusual fulness, redness and purple aspect of the
face is a false plethora. It often goes on to a puffiness and swelling,
and especially at the menstrual periods. Considerable bloating of the
face and eyes, bloating of the abdomen ; feet puffed so that she can-
not wear shoes, feet red and swollen at the menstrual period, amelior-
ated by the menstrual flow. Many women are late and are preparing
for a week or ten days ; face purple, red, puffed and bloated; abdomen
distended ; dyspnoea ; and all this is relieved by the menstrual flow.
She feels these symptoms perhaps one or two weeks, and is relieved
by slow motion in the open air. Cannot breathe in a warm room ;
wants the windows open ; chokes and suffocates in a warm bed at
night. This increases until the menstrual flow starts. The stomach
is so full and distended that she cannot eat. No appetite or desire
for food.

With the engorgement of veins ulcers surrounded by varicose veins
are common in this remedy. Ulcers bleed black blood which coagu-
lates early ; little black clots : bleeding is not copious ; clots easily, dark,
tarry, offensive. Ulcers bleed and ooze, discharge a bloody watery
fluid or there is a very thick yellow or green flow.

This brings us to the catarrhal slate. Wherever there is mucous

membrane there is catarrh. The mucous membrane is covered with

purple spots, dry spots ; tumid, puffed, looks erysiipelatous. Wher-
ever there is inflammation of the mucous membrane it looks purple ;
a venous congestion. Thick, green, yellow catarrhal discharges arc
most characteristic. The catarrhal discharges arc bland with the ex-
ception of that from the vagina, which is excoriating, causing raw-
ness of the parts. P'rom the eyes, ears, nose and chest there are

thick, yellow, green, bland, discharges, but there is thick yellow green

excoriating Icucorrhoea. Remember, however, that Pulsatilla has a
bland leucorrhoea, in keeping with tlie general state. Discharges are
often offensive, sometimes bloody, watery, but even then mingled with
yellow green purulent fluid.

The Pulsatilla patient suffers from vertigo from affections of the
eyes, ameliorated by wearing well-adjusted glasses ; attended by nau-
sea which is worse lying down, worse from motion, worse from the
Emotion of the eyes, and ameliorated in a cold room, and by riding in
a carriage in the cold air. As soon as she enters a room that is warm
she has nausea, even to vomiting. Vertigo with vomiting after eat-
ing.

Pulsatilla has violent headaches. Headaches in school girls who
are about to menstruate. Headache accompanying menstruation.
Headache associated with suppressed menses, with menstrual disor-



PULSATILLA


771


dcrs ; not caused from them, but associated with them. Pains through
the temples and sides of the head are common Pulsatilla headaches.
Headaches before, during and after menstruation ; but more commonly
before, when there is a general stale of congestion, stasis, and tume-
faction of the veins, and amelioration of the headache when the
menses set in if the flow is normal. It is common to have the head
and nervous symptoms through the menses, because the flow is so
scanty, often little more than a leucorrhoea, and for a single day a
little clot of dark blood. One-sided ^headaches and one-sided com-
plaints arc peculiar to Pulsatilla. Perspiration on one side of head
and face ; fever on one side of the body ; one side cool and normal and
the other side hot, I rememl^er a case of puerperal fever with sweat
on one side of the body and dry heat on the other and confusion of
other symptoms. Pulsatilla was given and the patient recovered.

The Pulsatilla headache is a throbbing congestive headache ; much
heat in the head, ameliorated by the application of cold, by external
pressure, and sometimes by slow motion, aggravated by lying and
sitting quiet, ameliorated by walking slowly in the air ; becomes wwse
towards evening and gradually increases through the evening and
night, worse from the motion of the eyes and from stooping. The
pains are often constricting, throbbing and congestive. Periodic sick
headaches, with vomiting of sour food. Headache when he overeats.
Though he likes ice cream, he has headache and congestion of the
stomach after eating ice cream. J

Eyes, Catarrhal symptoms. iPustules about the lids and over the
ball ; on the cornea. Inflammiatory features. Thick, yellow-green
pus. Granular lids. Continued formation of little pustules. Iso-
lated granules on lids, grow out here and there in bunches as large as
pin leads. Eyelids inflamed and bleed easily. Every time he catches
cold it settles in the eyes and nose. Eyes red, inflamed and discharge-
In infants catarrhal diseases of the eyes of a gonorrhoeal character ;
ophthalmia neonatorum. In early days the infant often needs the
same constitutional remedy as the mother. Yellow green discharge
from the eyes ; eyes are ameliorated by washing in warm water, or
tepid water ; even cold water feels good to the eyes. The Sulphur
patient is made worse by bathing ; the eyes smart, burn and become
increasingly red after washing in water. Pulsatilla causes a tendency
to the formation of styes ; recurrent styes ; always having styes. Pus-
tules, papules and little nodosites on the lids.

Prior to menstruation, in young girls especially, things get black
before the eyes, like a gauze or a veil. Nervous manifestations,
twitchings, spell of blindness and fainting. In the early stages of
paralysis of the optic nerve Pulsatilla is a great remedy. I'he patient
is always rubbing the eyes ; whether or not there is mucus in the eyes



77 ^


PULSATILLA


it matters not ; but it is a sensation of gauze before the eyes, amelior-
ated by rubbing. Pulsatilla has cured incipient cataract. Itching of
the eyes, in keeping with the skin symptoms. Itching in the ears,
nose, tickling in the throat, in the larynx.

In the cars we have the same catarrhal condition. Thick, yellow,
offensive, purulent, bland discharge ; very* foetid, sometimes bloody,
Pulsatilla is commonly indicated in earache of children ; when the child
is a gentle, fat, plump, vascular red-faced child always pitifully cry-
ing. If it is a case of earache in a nondescript child Pulsatilla will
also prove to be a temporary remedy, so closely is it related to pain in
the ear. Pains in the ears in the evening or in the night, ameliorated
by walking slowly about the room. In Chamornilla you have a snap^
ping and snarling child, never pleased, scolds the nurse and mother ;
ameliorated by walking about. The irritability decides for Chamo-
milla. You can detect a pitiful cry from a snarling mad cry. Both
are ameliorated by motion, by being carried. Both want this and that
and are never satisfied ; they want amusement. But the Pulsatilla
child when not amused has a pitiful cry and the Chamornilla child a
snarling cry. You will want to caress the one and spank the other.

Ear troubles with a ruptured drum and no healing ; otitis media.
Abscess in the middle ear ; inllamraation of the middle car ; copious
thick bloody discharge, then ycllow-grccn. I'hc case goes on night
and day until rupture takes place. I have found this condition as an
endemic, in which Merc,, Hep., and Puls, were the most frequently
indicated remedies. Ear troubles following eruptive diseases. Of-
fensive catarrhal discharge dating back to scarlet fever or measles :
badly treated and drugged patients. Inflammation and swelling of
the external ear ; erysipelatous purple conditions. Scabs on the tragus.

The patient is subject to repeated attacks of coryza, with sneezing
and stuffing up of the nose ; a febrile state ; sometimes with chills,
fever and sweat. Pains in the face through the nose. In the
evening considerable watery discharge with sneezing ; in the morning
stuffing up of the nose with thick yellow-green discharge. Pulsatilla
is suitable to chronic catarrhs, with thick yellow-grecn discharge which
is bland ; stuffing up of the nose ; copious discharge ; patient has a bad
smell in the nose ; smells various offensive things, sometimes like ma-
nure, but more commonly described as the offensiveness of a stinking
catarrh. Large bloody, thick, yellow crusts accumulate in the nose,
harden down and are blown out in the morning, accompanied by thick
yellow pus. In old lingering cases, loss of smell and taste. The mu-
cous membrane is in a state of thickening and suppuration, with the
formation of crusts and ulcers. Fulness high in the nose ; stuffing
up and fulness in the posterior nares. Hawks up thick yellow mucus
in masses, with crusts in the morning, very often offensive to others.



PULSATILLA


773


Many Pulsatilla patients in this catarrhal state get relief from this
horrible stench by blowing out great crusts. Thick clinkers of dired-
up pus or dried mucus and pus accumulate for several days and this
terrible catarrhal smell comes on ; but as soon as he blows o\it these
clinkers the odor goes away and he has relief until they form again
in a few days. I'he patient himself feels better in the open air, and
worse in a warm room. He breathes better in the open air ; feels
stuffy in a warm room. But there are times when his nose stuffs up
more in a warm room, where he sneezes more in a warm room.

The loss of smell is present in chronic and acute catarrhs. Much
stuffing up of the nose occurring in the evening ; he blows the nose
easily and cleans it out during the day, but it stuffs up in the evening
and he cannot clear it out. Remember that the mental symptoms arc
worse in the evening. He gets up in the morning with a stuffed up
nose, but can clean it out ; his mouth is foul, tongue coated, rancid
taste, requires much brushing of his teeth and washing out of his
mouth before he can take his breakfast. So you see the mouth and
stomach symptoms are worse in the morning, the mental symptoms are
worse in the evening and there is also a stuffing up of the nose in the
evening. Compare this with the cough. There is a dry evening cough
in Pulsatilla and a loose morning cough. Copious expectoration in
the morning, but a dry, tight, coi^tricted feeling in the chest in the
evening. Stuffed up in the evening, making breathing difficult. To
repeat, then, Pulsatilla is one of ouf sheet anchors in old catarrhs with
loss of smell, thick yellow discharge, and amelioration in the open air ;
in the nervous, timid, yielding, with stuffing up of the nose at night
and copious How in the morning.

With the catarrhs and acute colds there is often bleeding of the nose,
blowing blood from the nose ; the crusts cling tight, and when blown
out they are torn loose, and this causes bleeding ; but the nose bleeds
easily, subject to cpistaxis. Nose-bleed during the menstrual period ;
nose-bleed before the menstrual period ; nose-bleed with suppressed
menses ; bleeding dark, thick, clotted, almost black, venous blood. Es-
pecially do we find catarrhal subjects in women who have late, scanty,
light colored menses ; scarcely more than a IcucorrhaM ; if bloody,
then only a little black stain or clot. Chlorotic patients who have their
menses once every two or three months ; chlorotic girls who are irreg-
ular, and are subject to these catarrhal states,

Pulsatilla is very useful in hay fever. The management of hay
fever requires considerable study because you have to deal with thd
troublesome imaginations of the patient, he will refuse to let you study
him ; he wants the hay fever treated ; he don’t want the haemorrhoids,
the thick skin on the soles of the feet, the pains in the sacrum, the
diarrhoea which alternates with constipation, talked about or inquired



774


PULSATILLA


into ; these are always better when the hay fever is present. Some-
times he will tell you that he is always well except when he has hay
fever. He may feel well, but it is impossible for him to be well ; he
has always had these complaints and he does not want you to bother
with them. The hay fever will hardly ever reveal the indications for
a remedy for the patient.

Another individual has epilepsy, and if you expect to find in the fit
the remedy that cures the patient you will be mistaken. When an
acute mimicking manifestation of disease follows several times the
same beaten track the details are hard to find. He does not know
much about his hay fever. If you suggest several things he has them
all. In nearly all these acute expressions you do not find in the ex-
aggerated attack the symptoms that will lead you to the remedy. You
will find these symptoms by getting the state of the patient before he
was taken with hay fever. These primitive symptoms are of more
importance. Sometimes it is important to know what region was af-
fected before the nose was affected. At times you will find spinal
symptoms ; great soreness in the back relieved by lying on something
hard. Few remedies have that. They do not tell you that at first
but continue to dwell on the hay fever. In many nervous women the
attack comes on with sneezing and watery discharge and then a copi-
ous, thick, yellowish-grccn discharge. These are the natural symptoms
of hay fever, but in the ‘^back” symptoms you see something.

In Pulsatilla the menstrual symptoms and the prolapsus come in.
When the hay fever comes on, all the other symptoms are better, she
feels nothing except the hay fever, however, all the symptoms inter-
weave with each other. The Natrum mur, symptoms will be worse in
the morning and until toward noon, while in Pulsatilla they are worse
in the evening, the nose filling up with thick, yellowish-green, ropy
mucus, and when the nose has been cleared, a dry, burning, smarting
feeling remains ; if the room is warm at night, she cannot sleep. Na-
irum mur, is a little like that in the smarting and inability to sleep at
night in a warm room. In Natrum mwr. too, the discharge may con-
tinue day and night. We have an acute class in which Pulsatilla is
sometimes indicated — copious watery discharge which ends in sneez-
ing. In the beginning we will think of Carbo veg,, Arsenic, Allium'
cepa, Euphrasia,

With Carbo veg, there is a watery discharge and the irritation ex-
tends into the chest, with hoarseness and rawness. In Allium cepa we
have one group of symptoms that points to this remedy. Excoriating
discharge from the nose and bland discharge from the eyes ; in the
larynx, sensation as if hooks were there, and sometimes this extends,
below the larynx ; this always means Allium cepa ; it is also worse in
a warm room like Puls. The Euphrasia looks like Cepa, only the dis-



PULSATILLA


775


charge from the eyes is copious, watery and burning—thc lachrynia-
lion burns the eyes and excoriates the cheeks ; discharge from nose is
bland like Pulsatilla ; sometimes this goes into the chest, then it is no
longer Euphrasia.

Iodine is worse in a warm room ; thick discharge from nose which
burns and excoriates and is yellowish-green ; but there is one thing
that differentiates it from all the others — the patient immediately be-
gins to emaciate when the complaint comes on and is very hungry.

Kali hydr, with the thick yellowish discharge, worse in a warm room,
there is a great amount of rawness and burning in the nose ; external
nose very sore to pressure ; sensitiveness in the root of the nose ; whole
face aches and patient is extremely i*csfless ; wants to walk in the open
air which does not fatigue him.

Iodide of Arsenic; anxiety, restlessness and weakness; frequent
sneezing and copious watery nasal discharge that burns the lip. Burn-
ing, w'atery discharge from the eyes like Arsenic. Arsenic wants to be
very warm ; wants hot water applied to the eyes ; the only relief is
from sniffing hot water up the nose. The Iodide of Arsenic is worse
in a warm room, and, for days after sneezing, the discharge thickens
and becomes gluey, looking like thick yellow honey, this excoriates ;
much pain through the root of the nose and eyes ; often rawness in the
chest with dyspnoea. The remedks having the dyspnoea are Arsenic,
Iodide of Arsenic, Iodine, Kali hydr., and Sabadilla ; these are the ones
I have found most frequently indicted in the asthmatic forms of hay
fever. If the complaint has bew developed after being overheated
about that time, you will find tbit Silica, Puls, and Carbo veg. must
be carefully compared. There is another class of remedies having the
stuffing up of the nose not relieved by the discharge. There is a con-
stant desire to blow the nose, yet he gets no relief. This makes me
think at once of Lack., Kali bi., Psor., Naja and Sticta.

Psorinum has the copious, watery, bland discharge from the nose,
it may be excoriating, it has both. The stuffing up of the nose gener-
ally takes place in the open air ; he is relieved in a warm, close roomi
and by lying down ; has some dyspnoea which is relieved by stretching
the arms at right angles with the body. Hay fever is a psoric sick-
ness, Psorinum given in a single dose will so develop the symptoms
that the case will be more clear. The attack is not the best thing to
prescribe for. If it is too violent, a short acting remedy may be se-
lected that will mitigate it.

Nux vomica has a free, easy breathing in the open air, but when he
goes into the warm room his nose stuffs up, which also occurs at night,
though the water drips on the pillow yet he stuffs up like Puls., Bry.,
and the Iodine preparations Iodide of Arsenic and Cyclamen. Do not
understand me to have given remedies for hay fever, we cannot lay



776


PULSATILLA


down remedies for diseases. The whole constitution must be most
carefully examined.

The face is sickly, often mottled, purple, intermixed with yellow and
unhealthy colors ; venous puffing ; sensation of fulness ; often a red
face, like that of health, and the patient gets no sympathy ; face often
flushes ; flushes of heat to the face ; at times a sunken look ; dark rings
about the eyes : sallow, green, chlorotic. Subject to erysipelas ; ery-
sipelatous blotches on the face, spreading to the scalp, with stinging
and burning ; skin of face very sensitive to touch at such times.

Mumps and inflammation of parotid glands. If a woman suffering
with mumps takes a decided cold the breasts swell, and there is an in-
flammation of the mammary gland. Girls take cold, the swelling of
the parotid subsides too soon, and the corresponding mammary gland
swells ; sometimes both swell : or it may begin in one and go to the
lOther. In men it is the testicle. Pulsatilla is one of the most im-
portant remedies in this fonn of metastasis ; it breaks up complaints
that flit about. Pulsatilla is the common remedy for enormously swol-
len testicles from mumps in a boy. Carho vegetahilis is another rem-
edy, but then you have a Carbo veg, patient. Ahrotanum is also use-
ful in wandering around symptoms. Pulsatilla has wandering pains,
rheumatism goes from joint to joint, jumps around here and there ;
neuralgic pains fly from place to place ; inflammations go from gland
to gland. But here is the distinguishing feature — Pulsatilla sticks to
its own text ; it keeps jumping around, but it does not change to a new
class of disease. Ahrotamnn has this metastasis, but it changes the
whole diagnosis : that is, the allopath says, ‘This is a new disease to-
day.’’ The patient has a violent diarrhoea today, and an ignoramus
suppresses it ; an inflammatory rheumatism comes on, and he calls it
a new disease. The suppression of a diarrhoea or a haemorrhage, or
the removal of piles, causes an out-cropping somewhere else. A child
has a summer complaint suppressed and there follow symptoms refer-
ing to the brain, kidneys, liver, or a marasmus with emaciation from!
below upwards. Such things arc in the nature of Abrotanum,

Stomach, Hours after eating the patient eructates mouthfuls of
smir, rancid, bitter fluid ; liquids roll up from the stomach ; always
belching up rancid food. Some patients cannot digest butter ; cannot
use olive oil on their food. All sorts of bad tastes in the mouth.
Several hours after eating has not finished digesting food in the stom-
ach. Sour vomiting and eructations. Digestion i« slow, and the pa-
tient goes to the next meal hungry ; eating does not satisfy ; assimila-
tion is bad. Always bilious. Mouth is slimy and the taste is bad.
All these symptoms are worse in the morning. “Accumulation of sa-
liva and much mucus in the mouth.” “Flow of sweetish or tenacious
saliva,” “Constant spitting of frothy^ cotton-like mucus,”



PULSATILLA


777


A striking feature Pulsat illa p a tien t is that he

water. Dryness of the mouth, ^t Even in many of

the leversTie is tHimTcss, but there is at times an exception to this —
in high fevers there may be some thirst. 'Thirstlessness, with moist
or dry tongue.'’ ‘*J>esire.for sour, refreshing things." Often desires
things he cannot digest ; lemonade, herring, cheese, pungent things,
highly-seasoned things, juicy things, “Aversion to meat, butter, fat
food, pork, bread, milk, smoking." “Scraping sensation in stomach
and oesophagus like heartburn." Many pains in the stomach when
empty or when full. But the bloating, the gas and the sour stomach
are most striking. Gastric catarrh. Craves ice cream ; craves pas-
tries, yet they will not digest, and make him worse. Craves things
which make him sick. This is not uncommon. The whisky drinker
craves his liquor, yet knows it will kill him. So in Pulsatilla with
regard to pastries. Craves batter cakes, with maple syrup, yet knows
they will be vomited. Craves highly spiced sausage, yet averse to pork
alone.

Pulsatilla produces and cures jaundice. ‘Jaundice in consequence
of chronic susceptibility to hepatitis and derangement of secretion of
bile, with looseness of bowels ; duc^cnal catarrh ; disordered digestion ;
feverishness and thirstlessness ; after quinine,"

Many troubles seem to manifest themselves in the abdomen by bloat-
ing, distension of the abdomen, flart^lence, colicky pains, rumbling, fer-
mentation of food, and from dist^ers of menstruation or diarrhoea.
Great sensitiveness, tumefaction, tetiderness ; whole abdomen, stomach
and pelvic organs sentitivc to touch, Bloating after eating, especially
after fats and rich foods. FulncSJS of the veins ; general venous sta-
sis, It brings about especially a tumid fulness of the abdomen, such
a stuffed feeling that she cannot Weathc. In a woman about to men-
struate, there is bloating of the abdomen, stuffed feeling, has to throw
pff her clothes, cannot wear stays, wants to get into a loose dress or
to go to bed — so extremely puffed is she. Associated with this abdom-
inal tumefaction the face and lips become bloated and puffed, the eyes
red, and the feet puffed so that she cannot wear her shoes. There is
also a sensation of dragging down, a sense of great weakness, com-
monly related to the menstrual disturbances or uterine disorders. The
dragging down is recognized as prolapsus uteri. It is felt in the whole
abdomen and is described as a funneling sensation, as if the parts
would push out into the world, a dragging down. Oversensitiveness
of the abdomen ; especially in the lower part of the abdomen. She
cannot stand on her feet or walk around much, because of the weight
and dragging down. Labor-like pains in the uterus and back as if the
menses would come on. It is not uncommon for the Pulsatilla patient
to feel through the whole month as if she were about to menstruate,

98



778 FULSATtLLA

The abdominal and bowel symptoms are associated. Cutting, flit-
ting changing pains. Pains urging to stool Griping, in the bowels
associated with dysentery or diarrhcea ; loose watery or green stools.
A striking feature of the bowel symptoms is a loose, watery, green
stool, continually changing; yellow, faecal, slimy. In summer com-
plaints, when Pulsatilla is the indicated remedy, there will be hardly
two stools alike ; continually changing. This is characteristic of Pul-
satilla in general ; the pains wander ; complaints change by metastases ;
the patient is scarcely ever twice alike. Diarrhoea alternating with
constipation. Menstru aL flow stops and sta rts ^ intcrni ij;s-^.aii(Lc hanges .
In the Pulsatilla patient you never know what you will find next.
Dysentery ; dysenteric stools ; scanty, slimy, bloody, green, watery stool
with a little spurt ; next stool might be diarrhoeic, with quite a copious
discharge ; thus you have diarrhoea and dysentery together.

T roublesom^^h rftnin .^,ot»Rti pat ion : stool large^ hard and ^ difficult to
expel . It has (like Nux) frequent urging to stool without any stool,
or frequent urging with only a scanty stool ; goes many times before
can pass a stool, Nux and Pulsatilla. Frequent unsuccessful urging in
a chronic case is looked on as a keynote to Nux, but many remedies
have it. Pulsatilla is one. The diarrhoea and bowel symptoms of Pul-
satilla are worse in the evening and during the night ; that is, the stools
are worse at night. The stomach, throat and mouth symptoms are
worse in the morning. The mental symptoms are worse in the even-
ing. The bowel and stool symptoms are aggravated by keeping per-
fectly still, and ameliorated by gentle motion. There is much restless-
ness in Pulsatilla. Amelioration from motion in the cool open air
Feels stuffed up in a close room, and wants the windows open. “Dys-
enteric stools of clear yellow, ted .or green slime ; pain in the back,
straining.” “Stools of deep green mucus ; pain in the abdomen ; no
thirst.” You will rememl>er the word green in Pulsatilla, as it relates
extensively to the catarrhal discharges.

Most troublesome constipation with haemorrhoids ; violent pains in
the haemorrhoids, worse lying down, ameliorated from gentle motion,
worse from the warmth of the bed, better moving about in the open
air. She becomes so nervous in a room while at rest that the pains
seem intensified and she must move about. “Haemorrhoids ; painful
protruding, blind, with itching..and stitches in anus.” The aggravation
from lying down in extremely painful haemorrhoids is contrasted with
Ammonium carb, which has violently painful haemorrhoids relieved by
lying flat on the back. In violently painful haemorrhoids, with intense
burning, think of Arsenicum and Kali carbonicum. In those with
sticking, tearing pains study ^^sculus. Looking over a number of
years I have been forced to use in these cases a remedy not yet fully
proven. In painful haemorrhoids, in a broken dpwn constitution,



PULSATILLA


779


where the whole disease seems to culminate in the hsemorrhoidsj bleed-
a mer e touch almost ^uses a convulsion ; it causes
her to scream out at the top of her voice ; it is so painful that she feels
that death would be a relief ; she lies in bed holding the nates far apart
with her hands ; after every stool she has three or four hours of ex-
treme suffering. In these case look up the Paeony. The haemor-
rhoids it cures look like the flowers of the plant, they are so inflamed,
so red and bleeding ; oozing ; tender to touch ; patient is so worn out
with the pain. It has many times relieved the pain and cured these
enormous haemorroidal tumors. I have cured them after they had
been operated on, and all sorts of violence done them, without relief.
Do not go to this drug if you can find a remedy that covers all the
patient. Many patients will not confess any other symptoms, and some
of these will suffer so much from the harmorrhoids alone that you will
really need this remedy.

Urine frequent, scanty, with urging ; wonderful tenesmus ; extremely
painful, bloody, burning, smarting urine ; there is scarely a drop col-
lects in the bladder but it must be expelled. She cannot lie on the back
without having a desire to urinate. She may go all night without
urinating if she docs not lie on the back, but the minute she turns on
her back she is wakened by the desire to urinate and she feels that if
she does not hurry she will pass it involuntarily. Involuntary urina-
tion when coughing and sneezing or from a sudden shock or surprise,
pr from sudden joy, or from Iwghing, or from the noise of the slami
of a door or a pistol shot. Pulsktilla has dribbling of urine, dribbles
on the slightest provocation. She must keep her mind continually on
it, or she will lose her urine. As soon as she goes to sleep it flows
away. Little, mild, gentle, florid, plethoric, warm-blooded girls, who
kick the covers off at night and have noctural enuresis. Yellow, sal-
low, sickly girls who lose their urine in their first sleep call for Sepia,
Losing the urine in the first sleep is looked upon as a strong symptom,
but you can figure it out, and hence it is not so. All those cases that
have to make an effort to hold the urine during the day lose it in their
first sleep ; for then the mind is taken off it, and as soon as the mind
is taken off it the urine dribbles. Causticum and Sepia are remedies
looked upon as curing involuntary urination during the first sleep, but
I have cured it with many other remedies. A man past middle age
flooded the bed at night as soon as he went to sleep. The medicines
which have this are limited and he had received them all, I found I
(must figure it out on another basis. I ascertatined that when moving
about at his work he had no difficulty in holding the urine but when
he sat dowm he had to make an effort to control it. At the time this
condition developed he had been in Atlantic City and had bathed much
in the ocean. Here were the aggravation and amelioration of Rhus^



PULSAmU


j8o

and Rhus cured him. Few would think of Bryonia in urinary trouble.
When he moves the urine dribbles, when he walks it flows. He is
relieved only by keeping quiet. Bryonia is aggravated by motion ;
RJius is relieved by motion.

Pulsatilla has relief from motion. A few remedies have relief from
slow motion and of these Pulsatilla and Ferrum are the most striking.
A few remedies are relieved by hurried motion ; want to move fast.
Such are Bromine and Arsenicum. The Arsenic child cannot be car-
ried fast enough. The Pulsatilla baby is content with moderate mo-
tion. Any motion that heats up the Pulsatilla patient aggravates all
the complaints. A wood sawyer working hard said his cough was
relieved by moving about but when he became heated up from sawing
he had to sit down and rest on account of the violent spasmodic cough
that would come on.

Pulsatilla has complaints from exposure to rain ; getting feet wet.
Urinary troubles, worse when getting chilled [Dulcamara), Pulsa-
tilla establishes a chronic, inveterate catarrh of the bladder. Copious
mucous discharge, bloody discharge, especially after taking cold.
Thick, ropy, purulent, green, offensive discharge.

Sexual desire unusually strong. “Ix)ng lasting morning erection.”
“Sexual excesses resulting in headache, backache ; limbs heavy.”
"Burning and aching of the testicles, with or without swelling.” Or-
chitis ; inflammation and swelling of the testicles from suppressed gon-
orrhoea, from mumps, from catching cold, from sitting on damp
ground, or on a cold stone when perspiring. Gonorrhcea suppressed
by injections. “Cold” settles in the testicles. Pulsatilla is the most
frequently indicated remedy in gonorrhcea. in which the discharge is
thick yellow or thick yellow and green, in those who are sensitive to
heat, ameliorated walking in the open air. But also in persons with
no other symptoms, and the gonorrhoeal discharge is thick yellow or
green; no symptoms contra-in^cating it. Troublesome lingering dis-
charges ; an old gleet rouses into a thick yellow discharge, when he
takes cold or after coition. Frequent tenesmus ; chordee ; urging to
urinate; burning urination and yellow discharge. Tumefaction about
the penis. Foreskin dropsical. [Nitric ac., Fluor, ac,, Conn, sat.)
Pulsatilla is useful in cases of suppressed gonorrhoea, with complaints
following. Inflammation of the prostate. In old sinners with en-
larged prostate, hard, flat, packed faeces, must always use a catheter ;
especially when the trouble has been brought on by sexual abuses, sexual
excesses, vices. Pain in the testicles ; tearing in the swollen testicles.
Pain along the cord like cutting of knives ; lacerating, tearing.

Exaggerated sexual desire ; nymphomania ; wild, beside herself with
sexual thoughts ; uncontrollable sexual desire. Inflammation of ovar-
ies and uterus. Suppression of menses from getting feet wet. Menses



PULSATILLA


781


too late, scanty. Face pale, yellow, sallow, or green like a chlorotic
patient. It overcomes the tendency to miscarriage, false conception,
moles, etc., and stops the growth of fibroids, other symptoms agreeing.
In pregnancy and during confinement many symptoms call for Pulsa-
tilla. Most often called for when the patient is not irritable and the
pains are very feeble, lasting for several days, and doing nothing;
irregular, flitting, changeable pains, now up the back, now down the
limbs ; a prolonged first stage or prolonged preparatory symptoms.
Chamomilla is more suitable if the woman is extremely irritable. But
in a mild, gentle, mental state, when the pains are irregular, the os
dilated and the contractions have let up, the pains too short, Pulsatilla
will terminate that labor in a short time. The next pain after the dose
will be a good one. You very often see in these cases that the outsido
parts are relaxed and the conditions are such that everything ought to
go on well, but there is inaction. For weak pains Pulsatilla stands
high.

Violent menstrual c olic, causing her to bend double : soreness in the
rcgioiToFTHe uterus and ovarjea.;. dytstendfid-aMomen i_ ^.ows the cov-
cri~6ll ; wants "the "window s op en; teatfuL:.. .weeps. .withQut a cause,

' Suppression of the menstrual flow from getting feet wet. Flow slaw
in being established and the n gcar ccly more than a l eucor rheea. Men-
struation that has been painful (unce puberty in plethoric girls. I have
seen Pulsatilla cure a great n^ny girls of sixteen to eighteen years
old. The mother comes to saying her daughter has suffered since
her first menses ; she went in i^imming, or got her feet wet, and has
suffered since. The doctor isalys the parts are undeveloped and she
must be operated on. Pulsatilla has established a normal flow in a
few months. Now I will give you a contrast in another remedy.
Scrawny girls who are sensitive to cold, have also taken a bath at the
time the first menses should appear, or have got the feet wet, and the
flow is partially suppressed, or has come on with an inflammation ; a
state of undevelopment is established, a stenosis ; horrible menstrual
colic ; bearing down pains, as if everything would escape into the
world, doubling the patient up ; ameliorated by heat and aggravated by
cold. Calc. phos. is the remedy. “In girls of mild disposition, when
puberty is unduly delayed, or menstrual function is defectively or ir-
regularly performed ; they are pale and languid, complain of headache,
chillines and lassitude.” To develop these young girls Pulsatilla is a
great remedy. Most troublesome cases of prolapsus. It competes
with Sepia, Belladonna, Natrum niur., Nux vomica and Secale ; all of
these are remedies with great relaxation, bearing down ; some have
cured even procidentia. Pulsatilla cures many cases of gonorrhoea in
females. I think it is most commonly mdicated. A striking feature
is, when the menstrual flow is present there is milk in the breasts. In



78a


PULSATILLA


girls at puberty — ^milk in the breasts ; a premature establishment of
milk. In non-pregnant women, milk in the breasts. {C^men and
Mercurius^

The chest, respiratory organs, and ocugh furnish some most trouble-
some symptoms. Bronchitis ; pneumonia. Dry, teasing cough and
dyspnoea ; wants the windows open, aggravated lying down. Cough
gagging and choking. Copious expectoration in the morning, of thick
yellow-green mucus. Dry, teasing cough at night, worse lying down.
Chronic loose cough after measles. Whooping cough.

In the larynx we have many symptoms ; constriaion ; tickling caus-
ing cough. Dry, teasing cough, worse lying and" in a warm room.
Cough worse at night.

Bronchitis with loose morning and dry evening cough.

Dyspnoea; oppression from walking fast or becoming overheated
after eating ; stopping up nose ; after emotions. Spasmodic contrac-
tion of larynx. Tightness of chest ; dyspnoea when lying on left side ;
suffocation in the evening and during the night. Asthma of children
from suppressed rash or in women from suppressed menses. Loud
rattling in the chest when lying. Chronic loose cough after measles.
Expectoration of copious, thick, yellow-green, or bloody mucus ; salty ;
offensive. Chronic catarrh of chest. Sensation of fulness in the chest
in the evening with pulsation preventing sleep. Palpitation from lying
on the left side. Soreness in the walls of the chest. Pain in the chest
sometimes relieved by lying on the opposite side ; dryness and rawness
in the chest. Wandering tearing pains in the chest ; cutting pains in
pleurisy ; violent heat in the chest. Haemorrhage of the lungs, dark
blood. Dry cough in the evening, loose in the morning. Haemorrhage
with suppressed menses or instead of the menses. Pulsatilla is very
useful in catarrhal phthisis in chlorotic girls.

In curvature of the spine Puls, is of great value. Pain in the back,
lumbar and sacral regions ; wandering pains ; spinal irritation after
sexual excesses. Rlieumatic pains in the spine and limbs, worse dur-
ing rest and better from slow motion. Pain in small of back as if
sprained ; sensation of cold water poured down back.

All the limbs are painful ; drawing, tearing pains in the limbs, better
from motion and after motion ; worse from a warm room and better
from cold applications. Swelling of the veins in the arms and hands.
Varicose veins of the limbs like FI ac. Rheumatism of joints ; pain in
joints as if dislocated. Sciatica worse in the evening and better from
slowly moving about. Drawing and tension of muscles in lower limbs
in the evening in bed. Tearing, jerking pains in the limbs, changing
place. Burning in the veins. Piirple swelling vdth violent itching of
the feet as if they had been frozen. Feet bum, and he must put them
out of bed. Soles bum and arc bruised when walking. Marked rest-



PYROGEN 783

lessncss and twitching of the limbs and feet ; numbness of the limb
lain on ; wandering pains in all the limbs.

Sleeps on the back with hands over head. Cannot sleep on the left
side as it increases the palpitation and suffocation. Confused, fright-
ful, anxious dreams. Late falling asleep ; sleeplessness on account of
flushes of heat. Pulsatilla cures intermittent fever, coming on from
disordered stomach. Chill morning and evening daily. The chill be-
gins in the hands and feet ; pains in the limbs during the chill ; one-
sided coldness with numb feeling ; fever one sided. Thirst before the
chill and seldom during the heat ; heat with distended veins ; sweat pro-
fuse all over or only on one side of the body. Vomiting of mucus dur-
ing the chill.


PYROGEN.

The potencies prepared from Heath's 3d of decomposed beef have
been used by the author for many years against all forms of septic
fever and sequelae, when the symptoms agree. Violent chill inter-
mingled with heat and sweat, or dry heat with marked aching in the
limbs ; restlessness, > by motion and heat. The sore bruised condi-
tion is as marked as in Arnica and Baptisia ; the aching in the bones
like Eupatorium, the restlessness, by motion and heat like Rhus.
Pains all aggravated sitting. Complaints come on from becoming
cold, and from cold damp weather, j

These features are found in h^#c fevers in the last stages of phthi-
sis, as well as septic fevers. It aborts puerperal fever in a few hours
when clearly indicated. In cases of typhoid where there is the con-
fusion like that found in Baptisia and the heal is too intense for that
remedy. Pyrogen should always be considered. When the tempera-
ture reaches 106® and there is great soreness and aching this remedy
will make great changes in a single day ; but if the pains are > by mo-
tion and heat it will abort the fever.

When the pulse is extremely high, and the temperature not corre-
spondingly high this remedy will he useful. On the other hand, when
the pulse and temperature are out of rhythm either way this remedy
should be considered if the case is of septic origin. Great pain when
the flow from an open abscess becomes scanty. Violent burning in an
abscess (Ars., Anthr., Tarent. C.).

Offensivencss prevails extensively ; even putrid and cadaveric odors
of body, breath, sweat and discharges. Fevers from sewer gas poison-
ing ; erysipelas from infection and surgical fevers. It cures many
chronic complaints that date back to septic conditions. She has not
been well since a puerperal fever many years ago, is a good reason for
thinking of Pyrogen. ^



784


PYROGEN


A young man of good inheritance suffered from blood poison and
made a poor recovery, and for several years was affected with ab-
scesses in various parts. He was pale and sickly, rheumatic and stiff ;
at this time there was an abscess of the calf slowly forming. He took
Pyrogen and made a rapid and complete recovery. This time the ab-
scess did not open. He has remained in good health now ten years.

It has cured Bright’s disease that could ‘be traced to septic origin-
It is a most useful remedy when there is threatening heart failure in
septic and zymotic fevers. Septic hiemorrhage, when the blood is
dark. It will often save life in the most dangerous and rapid septic
fevers.

Loquacity ; can think and talk faster than ever before, especially
during fever.

Irritable. Delirium and confusion of mind about his body and limbs
(Bapt,),

Sensation as though he covered the whole bed.

Knew her head was on the pillow, but did not know where the rest
ol the body was.

Feels when lying on one side she is one person, and another when
turning on the other side.

Sensation as though crowded with arms and legs.

These symptoms are much like Baptism^ but if the temperature runs
very high Baptisia will not meet the condition so well as l^rogen.

Violent congestion of the head zvith pressing pain and pulsation, >
by pressure. Copious sweat on the head. Pain in occiput on cough-
ing ; in the morning on walking.

The eyeballs are sore to touch, on turning them outwards or up-
wards.

Septic bleeding from nose. Fan-like motion of alae nasi (Lyc.).

Face pale, sunken, and covered with cold sweat. Cheeks red and
burning hot.

The mouth is foul, and the taste putrid. The tongue is coated, and
brown. Brown streak down the center. Sordes on the teeth. Putrid
odor from mouth.

Vomiting ; of bile, blood ; of putrid masses. Vomits water when
it becomes warm in the stomach. Stercoraccous vomiting. Coffee
ground vomiting. Thirst for cold drinks during chill and heat.

Distension and great sensitiveness of abdomen. Inflammation of
peritoneum, intestines and uterus, of septic origin. Rumbling in bow-
els. Pain on deep breathing. Cutting, colicky pain. Pain in right
side going through to the back < on every motion, talking and breath-
ing ; > by lying on right side ; groaning with every breath.

Copious, liquid, putrid stools. Involuntary stool. Profuse, watery,
painless stool. Stool carrion-like. The difficult constipated stool also



PYROGEN


785


like carrion in odor. Constipation with hard dry, black, putrid stools ;
small black balls like olives. Putrid bloody stools. Soft narrow stools
with great straining. Haemorrhage from bowels.

IJrine scanty or suppressed. Red deposit, hard to wash off. Albu-
minous urine containing casts. Putrid urine. Frequent calls to uri-
nate as the fever comes on. Intolerable tenesmus of the bladder ;
spasmodic contractions, involving rectum, ovaries, and broad ligaments
(case cured by Yingling). Involuntary urine and stool in septic fevers.

Uterine haemorrhage. Putrid y scanty lochia. Suppressed lochia.
Violent chill ; puerperal fever. Menses lasting one day, then bloody
leucorrhoea. Septic fever following abortion. Prolapsus of uterus.

Wheezing when expiring. Weak and husky voice, and hoarseness.
Cough with large masses of mucus from larynx, < by motion, and in
warm room. Cough causes burning in larynx and bronchi. Putrid,
thick, purulent expectoration. Cough < by lying, > by sitting up.
Bloody or rusty expectoration. Cough, with copious, offensive night
sweats. It is a great palliative in the last weeks of consumption. Ab-
scesses in lung.

Heart failure in septic fevers, < by least motion. Every pulsation
felt in distant parts. Anxiety and sinking sensation in region of heart.
Distinct consciousness of the heart. Aching at the bifurcation of the
trachea. Oppression of chest and heart. Fulness in region of heart.
Feels as if the heart were pumpm]^ cold water (Yingling). Palpita-
tion., Loud heart , heats. .&nsatio|i of purring, of the heart . Rapid,
irrepilar.,^ fluttering, pulse. ’ ...

Pulsation in the neck. Weak feding in the back. Stitching in back
on coughing.

Pain in all the limbs with great restlessness. Aching in bones all
over the lx)dy. Soreness of the -muscles and the bed feels hard, >*
by motion. Cold extremities. Numbness of extremities. Hands and
arms numb. Hands cold and clammy. Pain in the thighs during chill
and fever. Pain in the knees and legs during chill and fever, amelior-
ated from walking, and from heat. Aching in legs while sitting, >
by walking. Aching above knee as if bone were broken, > by stretch-
ing of limbs and motion. Feet and legs dropsical. Numbness of feet.

Skin pale, cold, of ashy hue. Obstinate varicose offensive ulcers of
old people. It has cured many old fever sores with putrid, thin, bloody
discharges. Carrion-like perspiration. Putrid odors of the body.
Must be covered in all stages. Chill ameliorated by warm bed. The
chill is quotidian ; it comes in the evening, generally at 7 p. M. The
periodicity is regular. Cold sweat on the body. Hot sweat with high
temperature. The sleep is full of frightful dreams. Persistent
thoughts prevent sleep. Suffocation in sleep. Cries out in sleep from
oppression of chest.

99



786


RANUNCULUS BULBOSUS


RANUNCULUS BULBOSUS

This buttercup gives off an acrid ethereal vapor very poisonous to
such as are sensitive to it, and has been many times mistaken for Rhus
poisoning. This common field buttercup is not used as often as it is in-
dicated, and it must be that it is not as well known as many other rem-
edies. It is a rheumatic remedy of great usefulness when the chest mus-
cles are involved. Pain in the spinal nerves, pleura and costal muscles
always with extreme soreness. It is as sensitive to motion as Bryonia,
and to the cold, damp weather as Dulcamara, It has sudden weakness
even to fainting, and it has cured epilepsy. It is extremely excitable,
and resembles the much broken state of sensitive invalids ; hence it has
complaints from fright and vexation. Its complaints are worse in the
evening and after any change in the weather, especially from warm
to cold. The evening aggravations are quite marked ; the headache,
ear pain, the nasal symptoms, the fever, soreness in the short ribs,
dyspnoea, oppression of chest and heart, tightness of chest, increased
pulsation, trembling, chilliness, are all worse in the evening. He is
extremely sensitive to cold and cold, open air. Cold air brings on
headaches, rheumatism, neuralgia of chest, spine and ovaries, vertigo.
Sudden exposure while overheated will bring on febrile symptoms,
pleurisy or pneumonia. After exposure to cold air, his chest muscles
are sore as if bruised. Draft of cold air causes sore pains in many
parts. He is extremely sensitive to rainy and stormy weather. He is
sore and bruised in many parts. Stitching pains in liver, cars, chest,
abdomen, shoulder and other joints, spine, lumbar region to abdomen,
between the shoulders in the back, stitching, burning pains radiating
from the dorsal spine. Burning pains in cardiac orifice of stomach ;
in pit of stomach, neck ot bladder, in cornea ; in eruptions ; in ulcers.
Pressing pain in forehead ; vertex ; eyes ; temples ; root of nose ; pit of
stomach ; shoulder ; across the lower part of chest ; middle of chest.
It has creeping crawling, tingling. Inflammation of the pleura with
dropsy of adhesion. With pleural effusion it is a very useful remedy
when there is extreme soreness along the ribs, especially the lower ribs.
It has cured lupus and epithelioma. Jaundiced.

It has great depression of spirits and desire to die. Fear of ghosts
and very irritable, even quarrelsome. Confusion of mind.

Vertigo when going into the cold air. Sensation of enlargement
of the head.

Cerebral hyperaemia with heat of the face. Headache with change
of temperature, pressing headache in forehead and vertex worse when
changing temperature, either to cold or warm room. Violent pains
over right eye, worse lying, and better when walking and standing.
All other pains worse from motion. This is a notable exception.



RANUNCULUS BULBOSUS


787


Pressure and burning in the eyes. Great pains in the eye, especially
the right. Soreness and burning in right lower lid. Burning and
soreness in outer canthus of the right eye. Bluish-black herpetic ves-
icles over the eye. It has cured hemiopia during pregnancy.

Stitching pains in the ears, especially the right, worse in the evening.

It has cured hay fever with burning in eyes and itching of the soft
palate (like Wyethia), worse in the evening, pressing in the root of the
nose. The skin of the nose is red much inflamed.

It has caused vesicular eruption on the face with great burning. It
has caused epithelioma of the face. Prickling of the face, nose and
chin. Twitching of the lips.

Burning and soreness and redness in the throat, smarting and itch-
ing of the soft palate.

There is much thirst in the afternoon. It has cured many times the
weak and tottering condition of patients suffering from prolonged use
of stimulants, such as whisky and brandy. It is a great remedy for
weak and tottering condition of patients suffering from prolonged use
delirium tremens when he is besotted, has hiccoughs and is more or
less convulsive. Epileptiform convulsions from alcoholic liquors*
The hiccough is violent and convulsive Frequent eructations.

Burning in the stomach and especially in the region of the cardiac
orifice. Stomach is very sensitive, to touch. Paroxysms of neuralgia
of the stomach. i

Sore bruised feeling in the short ribs, stitching pains in the liver,
jaundiced. Soreness in liver oO /deep pressure ; symptoms worse in
the evening.

In the abdomen there is much flatulence, colic, burning and great
soreness on pressure. Stitching pain in right side of abdomen under
the ribs. The pains are much worse from motion, breathing and walk-
ing. Many stitching pains in abdomen. It has a watery diarrhaea
and dysentery. It has herpes zoster with violent pains.

Excoriating leucorrhoea and sharp pains in the ovaries every cold
change in the weather, from motion, and in the evening.

Heavy, short breathing with oppression of chest in the evening.
Sighing breathing. Pressure and constriction of the chest. Pressing
pains in the walls of the chest. Violent stitching pains in the chest
walls. Stitching pains in the region of fifth and sixth ribs. Painful
soreness on touch or pressure on the floating ribs. Rheumatic pains
in the chest. Chronic costal rheumatism. Soreness describing the
attachments of the diaphragm. Inflammation of the diaphragm and
pleura. Hydrothorax pains in chest from adhesions of the pleura.
Sensitive as if inner parts were adhered. Pain worse from motion, in
cold air, from becoming cold, on inspiration. Sensation of a cold wet
cloth on going into cold air. Stitching pains every change of the



788


RHOX>OD£KDRON


weather from warm, to cold. Sore spots here and there on the ribs.
Pain in the region of heart from motion and inspiration and lying on
left side. Rheumatic swelling of pectoral muscles with extreme sore-
ness to touch. Pleurodynia with most violent cutting pains from in-
spiration, pressure, turning the body and cold air. Pulse full, hard
and rapid in the evening and slow in the morning.

Sore spots in the spine. Pain along the inner margin of the left
scapula. Stitching pains in the spine between the scapulae. Pains in
lower and inner margin of scapulae in shoemakers, needle workers and
writers from sitting bent. One scapula often becomes adhered to the
back and it is immovable, and later burning pain comes on. Weak
spine and great lassitude. Vesicular eruptions form upon the back
and chest with blue contents, with severe pain.

Rheumatic pains, paroxysmal in character in the upper limbs.
Stitching pains along the nerves in arms and hands. Tearing pains in
forearm and hand. The pains are worse from cold, and worse from
motion. Bluish vesicles in the palms and fingers. Seed warts on the
thumb.

Great weakness in lower limbs in forenoon. Stitching burning from
the spine along the sciatic nerve in cold, wet weather and in stormy
weather, wrose from motion and in cold air. Drawing pain in the
thighs. Rlieumatic pain in knees, stinging and sorsness in foot and
toes. Corns very painful, sore to touch, sting and burn. He suffers
from complaints like chilblains.

He is late falling asleep. Sleepless from difficult breathing, from
heat, and orgasms of blood.

Dark blue vesicles upon the skin. Horny scurf forms after the ves-
icles have opened. It has been used for vesicular eruptions ; for burns ;
for herpes zoster ; for pemphigus ; for eczema. Flat burning, stinging,
ulcers. Horn-like excrescences.

RHODODENDRON.

This is a very useful remedy in gouty patients who suffer from
rheumatic pains, sometimes wandering from joint to joint, aggravated
during rest, aggravated before and during storms, aggravated in cold,
wet weather and ameliorated from warm wrapping. These pains may
be in the head or the limbs. It is a great palliative in old people who
have suffered long from gout. Rheumatic swelling of joints. Pain*
in the aponeuroses at night, during rest. He can always fortell a
thunderstorm. There are tearing, shooting pains. Sore bruised pains.
Stiffness of joints, neck and back. Extremely sensitive to cold weath-
er, and aggravated from becoming cold. Paralytic weakness during
rest, yet he is weak from exertion. Continued motion is his only re-



RHODODENDRON


789


lief. Painfully sensitive to windy cold weather. Chorea before a
storm. General amelioration from motion, even when the painful part
is aggravated from moving the ajQFectcd part.

hear of thunder in nervous persons (Phos.), forgetful. While
talking he forgets what he was talking about. Ijcaves out words in
writing. Aversion to his business. Easily affected by wine.

Violent rheumatic headaches in morning in bed, ameliorated by mov-
ing about, by wrapping up the head ; aggravated from drinking wine,
aggravated in cold wet weather. Headaches come on before a storm.
Pain in temples and forehead. The head feels sore as if bruised.
External heat ameliorates the head pains.

Pain in the eyes before a storm, ameliorated by heat and motion.
Weakness of the internal recti muscles with stitching pains before a
storm.

Violent pains in ear, sometimes tearing, aggravated before a storm.
Ameliorated by heat. Roaring, ringing and buzzing in the cars.

Neuralgia of the face in gouty subjects, aggravated from motion,
aggravated trom cold wind ; ameliorated by applied heat. The patient
is generally aggravated during rest ; comes in stormy weather. Pains
ameliorated by eating, and warmth. Pain in the teeth before a storm.
Pain in teeth with earache, ameliorated by heat ; aggravated at night,
from cold drinks.

Feels full after little food (Lye.),; Empty eructations. Green bit-
ter vomiting after drinking cold ^ater. Sinking at the stomach.
Pressure in the stomach after eating.

Pain as from flatulence high up m sides of abdomen. Stitching in
spleen from walking fast. Rumbling in abdomen and fulness alter
eating.

Much straining to pass a soft stool. Undigested, thin, brownish
stool. Diarrhoea after eating, after fruit ; from cold, wet weather,
before a thunderstorm. Dysentery before a thunderstorm. Pulsat-
ing anus, drawing in anus extending to genitals.

Drawing pain in bladder with frequent urging to urinate.

Orchitis with much swelling in rheumatic patients from taking cold,
from sitting on a cold stone, from suppressed gonorrhoea ; the right
most affected. Drawing pain in spermatic cord, during rest, amelior-
ated by heat and motion. Great pain in testes, cord, and hips, amelior-
ated by motion and heat. It has cured hydrocele in boys. Much itch-
ing of the scrotum.

Menses frequent and profuse. Serous cysts in the vagina.

Rheumatic stitching pains in chest in stormy weather during rest.
Constriction of chest. Pain in heart.

Rheumatic pains stiffness in neck and back. Pain in dorsal re-
gion extending to arms in cold, wet weather, aggravated, during rest.



790


RHUS TOXICODENDRON


Tearing pains in neck and back driving out of bed.

Rheumatic tearing pains in all the limbs in stormy weather, aggra-
vated before a storm and during rest, aggravated at night ; mostly in
forearms and legs. Wandering pains in the limbs and joints. Pain
in bone and periosteum. Pains drive him out of bed. Paralytic pains
in limbs. Cannot sleep unless legs are crossed. Sleepless after mid-
night. Pain in the shoulder joint so severe that the arm cannot be
moved — but the patient and the pain are ameliorated by walking about.

RHUS TOXICODENDRON.

The complaints of this remedy come on from cold damp weather,
from being exposed to cold damp air when perspiring. The patient
is sensitive to cold air and all his complaints are made worse from
cold and all are better from warmth. In a general way, the aching
pains, the bruised feelings over the body, restlessness throughout the
limbs, and amelioration from motion are features that prevail through-
out all conditions of Rhus. While he is better from motion and bet-
ter from walking, if he continues to walk he becomes exhausted. Any
continued exertion of the body or mind exhausts the Rhus patient.
He suffers from rheumatic conditions with pains in the bones, lame-
ness in the muscles, lameness in the tendons, ligaments, and joints from
suppression of sweat, from becoming chilled. These occur with or
without fever. Rhus is suitable in old chronic rheumatic conditions.
He is stiff, lame, and bruised on first loginning to move. This passes
off on becoming warme up, but soon he becomes weak and must rest.
Then comes the restlessness and aching and uneasiness which drive
him to move and which again make him better, but soon he becomes
weak and these continue, so that he is never perfectly at ease and never
finds rest. Inflammation of the glands and of the mucous membranes ;
inflammation of the muscles. Cellulitis of the pelvis, of the neck,
about the glands with much swelling. Inflammation of the skin that
becomes erysipelatous ; purple ; pitting upon pressure with large blis-
ters that fill with serum, sometimes bloody. It has abscesses and car-
buncles and vesicular eruptions. Inflammation of glands that are hot
and very painful. They are hot and end in suppuration. Abscesses
of the axillary glands and of the parotids. Scrofulous inflammation
of the glands of the neck and lower jaw. Inflammation of the perios-
teum and of the bones. Scrofulous and rickety affections. The
prominent projections of bones become sore to touch, especially the
cheek bones. Its complaints are more or less periodical. It has cured
many cases of intermittent fever, is often suitable in remittent fever,
and is a most useful remedy in continued fevers and in a low form of
typhoid fever. The pains that run through Rhus are aching, tearing,



RHUS TOXICODENDRON


791

and bruised pains often attended with numbness and paralytic weak-
ness of the limbs. It has paralysis of the limbs with loss of sensation.
In infantile paralysis Rhus is a very common remedy. The nurse-girls
at the present time often bring on in the child this paralytic condition
and spinal paralysis. The nurses take the infants to the park, take
them out of their carriage and put them down upon the cold damp
ground and in a few days the child comes down with infantile paraly-
sis, Rhus will cure these cases because the symptoms take the Rhus
type. Hemiplegia, especially of the right side. Twitching of the
limbs and muscles. It has cured chorea brought on from taking a cold
bath.

Most of the mental symptoms of Rhus are such as prevail during
low forms of fever, especially in typhoid. There is then incoherent
talking ; answers questions hastily. There is anxiety, apprehensions,
and fear. Intense fear at night. The complaints of Rhus often come
on in the night. The mental symptoms are worse at night. The de-
lirium is worse at night. The fears and anxiety are worse at night.
The chronic mental symptoms of Rhus are despondency, mental pros-
tration, inability to sustain a mental effort, disgust for life and thoughts
of suicide. He wants to drown himself yet he has fear of death. He
desires to die yet he has not the couirage to commit suicide. In many
instances he is filled with suicidal thoughts ; sadness and weeping yet
he knows not why. Irritability and tnxiety as if he had met with some
misfortune, restlessness, anxiousnets^ and nervous in the extreme in
acute and chronic complaints. Golls settle throughout the body and
limbs. He is full of dizziness as if intoxicated ; staggers when walk-
ing.

The headaches are commonly such as occur in fevers, in rheuma-
tism, and ill inflammation of the bladder. The brain feels loose or
there is an undulating feeling in the head. Pain in the head as if the
brain were torn. Stupefying headache with buzzing in the ears.
Stitching pains in the head : feeling as if the parts were screwed to-
gether ; feeling as if the brain were pressed. The muscles of the head
are sore. The periosteum of the cranium is sore to touch. The pain
in the back of the head is ameliorated by holding the head backwards.
Tingling in the scalp. Rush of blood to the head. Humming in the
ears. Formication in the scalp. Pulsating headaches. Meningitis
with high fever. Great restlessness with these Rhus symptoms.
Cerebro-spinal meningitis with the anxiety and restlessness. Aching
in the bones ; amelioration from motion. Eruptions upon the scalp ;
very sensitive to touch. The scalp is very sensitive on the side lain on.
Tearing, drawing pains in the periosteum of the head : pressure in the
bones of the skull as if screwed together. From every exposure to
cold, damp weather, or from suppressing the sweat upon the head



792


RHUS TOXICODENDRON


comes pain in the head ; rheumatic headaches. Headaches are worse
from wetting the hair. Vesicular eruptions upon the scalp ; erysipelas
of the scalp with large blisters ; eruptions upon the scalp that suppur-
ate. It is a very useful remedy in the treatment of eczema of the
scalp in infants ; herpetic eruptions upon the scalp.

Inflammation of the eyes in rheumatic subjects from exposure to*
cold, damp weather, from suppressing the perspiration, with restless-
ness and fever. Pustules upon the cornea ; photophobia ; suppuration
of the eyes. Inflammation of the iris of a rheumatic character.
There is much swelling and the eyes are closed from swelling. Very
acute conjunctivitis ; chemosis : eyes red and aggravated in the morn-
ing : scrofulous inflammation of the eyes from becoming cold. The
lids are red ; oedematous. The pains in the eyes are worse from mov-
ing the eyeballs, especially the bruised pain. Paralysis of the muscles
of the eyeball the result of rheumatism and exposure to the cold, or
from getting the feet wet. Red eyes and lachrymation ; erysipelas of
the lids ; paralysis of the upper lids. The lids are agglutinated in the
morning with a copious, purulent, mucous discharge. The Rhus pa-
tient. is subject to styes on the lower lids ; neuralgia in the eyes.

Neuralgia in the ears ; erysipelatous inflammation of the external
ears with vesicles ; inflammation of the parotid gland. Haemorrhage
from the nose : violent coryza. The nose is stopped up from every
cold ; great soreness in the nostrils : discharge froln the nose of thick,
yellow mucus.; green, offensive mucus. Much swelling of the nose
from erysipelas, TTie tip of the nose is red and sensitive: The nose
is puffed and oedematous. Eruptions upon the nose and in the corners
of the nose ; eczema of the nose and much swelling.

Erysipelas of the face with burning, large blisters, and rapidly ex-
tending inflammation which becomes very purple and pits upon press-
ure. The erysipelas of the face often extends from left to right across
the face. There is much burning, itching, and tingling, delirium, and
high fever, and the mental state referred to above. Eczema of the
face ; chronic suppurating eruptions of the face. Stiffness of the
jaws ; rheumatic condition of the jaws and of the joints. The corners
of the mouth ulcerate ; fever blisters ; lips dry and parched and covered
with reddish-brown crusts in typhoid fever ; lips bleed. We have many
symptoms of the mouth especially in connection with typhoid fever.
The tongue is sore, raw, and bleeding ; burning of all the tissues in the
mouth ; red tongue. The taste is putrid and metallic. The teeth are
covered with blood ; fever in the gums with blood ; blisters upon the
tongue and the whole mouth appears to be raw and sometimes bleed-
ing. The mouth is dry and an accumulation of saliva and sometimes
bloody saliva in the mouth, which runs from the mouth during sleep.

In Rhus the thirst is often violent, but there is difficulty in swallow-



RHUS TOXICODENDRON


793


ing solids from constriction of the throat ; painful swallowing ; inflam-
mation of the throat ; cellulitis of the throat internal and external with
painful inflammation of the throat. Enlargement of the neck ; swell-
ing of the glands of the neck. The neck is stiff ; sometimes erysipela-
tous inflammation of the parotids ; neck greatly swollen. Rhus has
cured diphtheria with these symptoms. Rhus is especially suitable for
inflammation of the oesophagus. When it is acute from swallowing
corrosive substances, because of the extensive cellulitis that such sub-
stances cause it makes the case like Rhus.

This remedy is very freaky. For instance, hunger, without appe-
tite ; hungry sensation or sensation of emptiness in the stomach with-
out desire for food. Dryness of the mouth and throat with great
thirst ; unquenchable thirst for cold drinks especially at night with
great dryness of the mouth. Yet the cold drinks bring on chilliness,
bring on the cough.

Pain in the stomach and nausea. His desires arc also strange. De-
sires oysters, cold milk, and sweets. Aversion to meat. Rhus has
nausea and vomiting ; bilious vomiting and nausea from drinking cold
water ; nausea after eating, with sudden vomiting ; inordinate appetite
with inclination to vomit ; worse at night and after eating.

Pulsation in the pit of the stomach ; gnawing pain in the stomach ;
fulness and heaviness in the stomach as from a load ; pressure in the
pit of the stomach as from a great weight ; pain in the stomach and
nausea, especially after cold things i pain in the stomach after ice
cream ; nausea after eating ice cream#

In the liver there is swelling and tenderness on pressure, so that he
cannot lie on the right lobe of the liver. The soreness is increased on
beginning to move ; shooting pains in the region of the liver.

In the abdomen we have many of the complaints of Rhus. Dis-
tended abdomen during typhoid fever ; extreme soreness of the tis-
sues of the abdomen to touch ; cannot bear any pressure ; sensitive to
clothing. Colic ; pains and violent colic compelling him to lie on the
back and draw up the limbs. Inflammation of any of the tissues of the
abdomen ; peritonitis ; enteritis ; typhlitis.

During these violent inflammatory conditions of the bowels, typhoid
symptoms arc likely to be present with involuntary stools. Inflamma-
tion and swelling of the glands of the abdomen and groin. With
typhoid conditions there is diarrhoea, copious, watery, bloody stools or
mushy stools ; involuntary stools ; frothy stools. Diarrhoea during
typhoid fever ; the diarrhoea is worse during the night and better dur-
ing the day time ; involuntary stools with great exhaustion. It has
cured cholera infantum of a low type and it is often useful in dysen-
tery with bloody, mucous stools. Violent tenesmus ; violent tearing,
pinching pains in the abdomen ; involuntary stools ; dysenteric stools ;

100



794


HHUS TOXICODENDRON


dysenteric discharges that drive him out of bed in the morning some-
times as early as 4 o'clock. Haemorrhage of black blood from the
bowels. Shooting pains in the rectum. It has cured haemorrhoids when
there is great soreness and when they are internal or protruding ; pro-
truding alter stool with pressing in the rectum.

Urging to urinate with tenesmus and pain in the region of the pros-
tate gland causing urging to stool, ameliorated by moving about.
There are more or less tearing pains in the region of the kidneys. Al-
buminous urine ; bloody urine ; urine hot ; muddy ; white sediment, be-
coming turbid on standing ; bloody drops of urine dribble away. Vio-
lent tenesmus of the bladder with dribbling of blood ; retention of
urine ; urine is voided slowly from paralytic weakness of the bladder.
There is sometimes complete paralysis of the bladder with involuntary
urination at night in bed. Frequent urging to urinate day and night ;
weakness of the bladder in girls and women with frequent desire to
urinate, especially in the women dribbling of the urine in cold air and
on becoming very cold.

In the male sexual organs we have inflammation erysipelatous in
character. Eczema of the genitals. The scrotum becomes thick and
hard with intolerable itching ; oedematous swelling of the genitals ;
erysipelas of the genitals ; humid eruptions upon the genitals. In the
female we have the same symptoms, especially erysipelatous swelling
of the genitals and some eruptions. The woman has prolapsus of the
uterus from straining or lifting ; weakness of all the pelvic muscles ;
labor-like pains in the abdomen from straining. Copious menstrual
flow ; clotted blood with labor-like pains. The menstrual period comes
too soon, is too profuse, and lasts too long. The flow is acrid, causing
excoriation of the parts. Every ovcr-cxcrtion brings on menorrhagia.
Membranous tissue in the menstrual flow ; suppressing of the menstrual
flow from beemoing wet; Irom getting the feet wet, or becoming
chilled. Similar complaints come on in pregnancy from overstraining
and a tendency^ to abortion. The after-pains are very torturesome.
The woman suffers from cellulitis such as occurs in milk-leg. Typhoid
symptoms come on and inflammation of the mammary glands. The
milk vanishes.

In the larynx many of the colds locate producing hoarseness, raw-
ness, and roughness. Soreness in the chest ; muscular exhaustion of
the larynx from loud and much exercise of the voice. Hoarseness on
first beginning to sing, which wears off on singing a few notes or wears
off after talking a little while ; burning and rawness in the larynx.
Rhus is suitable in many cases of influenza, such as begin in the nose
and extend into the larynx with hoarseness and with Rhus symptoms.
Respiration is hurried ; oppression of the chest ; very difficult and hard
breathing, especially in pneumonia and bronchitis and in colds that set-



RHUS TOXICODENDRON


795


tie in the chest. Rhus gets out of breath on exertion. The cough of
Rhus is very tormenting ; teasing cough ; paroxysms of almost any
kind ; tormenting, dry, teasing cough before and during chill. He
knows that the chill is coming because of the dry, teasing cough ; cough
with taste of blood in the mouth ; dry, hoarse, racking, rheumatic cough,
cough from rheumatic fever.

Inflammation of the lungs ; inflammation of the pleura with stitch
ing pains, much fever, progressing toward the typhoid state with ach-
ing in the bones ; restlessness ; general amelioration from motion ; in-
tense fever, marked thirst, great prostration ; typhoid symptoms. The
pneumonia is of a low type ; pneumonia such as would denominate
typhoid. Rhus has expectoration of blood from the lungs and from
the mucous membranes of the air passages ; haemorrhage from the
chest from overexertion ; haemorrhage from blowing wind instruments ;
haemorrhage from the chest from violent mental excitement.

The heart is weak, tremulous with palpitation ; violent palpitation
when sitting still ; pulsations move the whole body ; anxious palpitation
in the morning on waking ; palpitation from exercise. It seems as if
exertion had strained the muscles of the heart ; hypertrophy of the
heart from violent exercise ; hypertrophy that comes on in athletes, in
runners ; organic diseases of the heart with sticking pains. Numbness
and lameness of the left arm with heart disease.

In the back, we have stiffness and lameness. This is most noticeable
on beginning to move, but wears oiff on moving about. Pains in the
shoulder with stiffness ; pains between the shoulders on swallowing
food ; rheumatic symptoms ; pain^l tension between the shoulder
blades. The small of the back aches while sitting. Painful stiffness
on rising from a seat ; pain in the back as if bruised, sore and lame all
over the back. The pain in the back is ameliorated by lying on some-
thing hard or from exercise. There are violent pains in the back,
especially in the lumbar region, as if the back were broken. It is a
remedy for lumbago brought on from getting wet, ffrom overlifting,
from taking cold, and from stippressing the sweat. He is ameliorated
from motion and from moving about ; w^orsc on beginning to move.
This remedy has many spinal symptoms with paralytic weakness either
of the lower limbs or of one part of the body. Stiffness and lameness
in the sacrum aggravated on resting after exercise. It might now be
predicted that symptoms are to be found in the limbs from what has
been said in general. There are stitching pains, pressing pains, all
sorts of rheumatic lameness, and these pains are ameliorated from
motion and are worse from keeping still. They are brought on from
cold air and from suppressing the sweat, and as these pains grow
worse they become tearing down the limbs, drawing pains. Paralytic
pains, benumbing pains, and these are relieved from motion ; numbness



796


RHUS TOXICODENDRON


throughout the limbs ; numbness and aching in the arms from heart
disease ; numbness in the joints ; jerking, tearing pains in the joints.
Paralysis of the arms ; erysipelas with much swelling in the limbs :
swelling of the hands and arms. When grasping anything a tingling
and pricking is felt in the hands and fingers ; crawling and numbness
in the finger tips and lingers ; swelling of the fingers ; eruptions upon
the hands and fingers. In the lower limbs, we find similar pains and
similar modalities ; pain in the hip when lying upon it ; tearing, draw-
ing pains in the lower limbs ; sciatica with tearing, drawing pains in the
lower limbs, worse during rest and ameliorated from motion, brought
on from becoming chilled, from cold damp weather, from exposure,
and from suppressing the sweat. In sprains such as occur in the
ankles and in fact any of the joints, after Arnica has removed the first
and most painful symptoms, Rhus becomes useful for weakness of
tendons and muscular fibers such as always follows sprains. It is
a routine remedy for this weakness in joints following sprains. The
pains rush in streaks down the limbs ; restlessness in the lower limbs
at night, but amelioration from motion ; must keep the limbs in con-
stant motion ; paralysis of the lower limbs ; great weariness and heavi-
ness of the lower extremities ; weakness of the lower limbs on going
up stairs ; swelling of the joints of the lower limbs ; stiffness of the
knees and feet. Paroxysmal pains in the legs from getting wet, espe-
cially when sweating ; complaints from living in damp houses ; rheu-
matism in the lower limbs from living in damp houses. Ulcers on the
legs. Intolerable itching of the legs at night in bed ; eruptions upon the
feet and legs ; foetid sweat of the feet in persons of rheumatic tendency.
Eczema of the lower limbs. Rhus is a useful remedy in fevers. In ty-
phoid sufficient has been said. It is a very useful remedy in scarlet
fever with coarse rash. When the rash has been suppressed, with in-
flammation of the glands and much sore throat. During fever there
is often violent urticaria which passes off during the sweat ; night sweat
with much itching eruption ; fevers from suppressed foot sweat ; rheu-
matic fevers ; fevers worse at night ; fevers that come with cold sores
on the lips, remittent fevers and intermittent fevers takes on the typhoid
type and run through their course as symptomatic typhoid fever. In-
tolerable itching of the skin ; tingling in the skin ; eruptions bum and
itch violently ; much moisture with eruptions upon the skin. Large
blisters form upon the skin either with or without erysipelas. The
incessant itching is sometimes relieved by ‘‘scalding" the parts, as it is
called by some who are poisoned with Rhus, by "scalding" with water
as hot as it is possible to bathe the parts in. Rhus has cured shingles
and the tendency to herpetic eruptions. It has made a grand record
with humid eczema such as have raw surfaces ; excoriated ; oozing
much. It is very commonly the remedy for hives that come on from



RUMEX CRISEUS


797


getting wet or hives that come on during rheumatism or during chills
and fever ; hives that are worse in the cold air.

RUMEX CRISPUS

Rumex, the yellow dock, is a neglected remedy, and one that has
been only partially proved. The mental symptoms have not been brought
out, but the catarrhal symptoms have been well expressed by provers.

There is a state of sadness : low spirited ; aversion to work ; irritable ;
mental excitability. This includes about all the mental state we know
of this remedy, as the provings were made with the lower potencies
and tincture. The yellow dock has been used in domestic practice,
as a blood medicine, to cure eruptions and boils. When used in this
way it is a mild substance, and hence the provings are somewhat in
this form.

The catarrhal tendency is very striking. The nose, eyes, chest and.
trachea, the whole re.spiratory tract, gives forth a copious flow, copious
mucous discharge. I have seen it so copious from the nose that it
seemed as one continuous flow ; so copious from the trachea and
bronchial tubes that the patient continually hawked up, by the mouth-
ful, thin frothy, white mucus, so that in a little while as much as half
a pint of thin mucus, as thin as water, w'ould be in the cuspidor. It
also has marked dryness of the Isu-ynx and trachea with hard, dry,
spasmodic cough.

At times it has taken the form' 4f grippe, with a copious mucous dis-
charge ; thin, watery, frothy expectoration by the mouthful. This is
only the first stage. Following this the discharge becomes thick, yel-
low, tough or thick, white and tenacious ; so ropy and stringy and tough
that in spite of blowing the nose and coughing he fails to get it up.
Completely exhausted from his efforts to expectorate the tough,
stringy, tenacious even gluey mucus. This catarrhal state is commonly
accompanied by a morning diarrhoea, and these constitute the leading
features.

“Catarrhal headache with great irritation of the larynx and trachea,
clavicular pain and soreness behind sternum.” Catarrhal headaches
are headaches that come on during spells of dryness, alternating with
a copious flux. Extreme rawness in the larynx and trachea ; burning
and smarting; unable to endure pressure on the throat pit. Tickling
in the throat pit causing cough. Must sit without motion ; cannot
breathe deeply, hurriedly or irregularly because the burning is so much
increased by any change in breathing. If he steps into the open air
a paroxysmal cough ta^kes his breath away ; or if he passes from the
open air into a warm room the same paroxysmal cough comes on.
The paroxysm is so violent that in the morning, when he has a loose



798


RUMEX CRISPUS


Stool, he will pass it involuntarily with the cough. I'he urine also
passes away with the cough. The headache returns when the dis-
charges slack up.

A striking feature is pain under the clavicle ; a sense of rawness
under the clavicle ; as if the parts inside were raw ; as if the air came
directly under the clavicle, producing rawness and burning. Rawness
and burning from the inhalation of air.

“Nose obstructed ; dry sensation, even in posterior nares.^’ Many
limes the coryza starts out by a marked dryness in the posterior nares,
so that he is constantly hawking ; the irritation is so great that he can-
not let it alone. There is a sensation of thickening in the naso-
pharynx, and he produces a peculiar noise in trying to get rid of it.
“Sudden sharp tingling sensation in Schneiderian membrane.” This
is intense ; tingling, sometimes described as an itching extending from
the end of the nose to the pharynx ; sometimes forces sneezing, blow-
ing the nose and this peculiar noise, and sometimes a hawking to get
the mucus when it isi a little lower in the pharynx ; hemming to get rid
of it when in the larynx. The inflammation passes to the smallest
bronchi, producing a capillary bronchitis and finally a pneumonia.

It suits acute and chronic catarrhal states. In old phthisical cases ;
every time he takes a cold, he is so sensitive to cold air and change of
air that he sleeps with the bed clothes over his mouth. Every breath
of air causes a spasmodic cough. The early expectoration is thin mu-
cus, and then it becomes thicker and tenacious, and he cannot expec-
torate it ; be hears the rattle ; after many efforts which exhaust him
he expectorates a little with hardly any relief. This is a great remedy
to do patch work with in phthisis. Soreness, rawness and burning,
especially down the trachea and under the sternum.

“Violent sneezing, with fluent coryza, worse in the evening and at
night.” Many symptoms are worse in the evening. “Coryza, fluent,
with sneezing, with headache, worse evening and night.” Some symp-
toms are worse in the early morning. Certain kinds of cough are
worse at 1 1 p. m. Lachesis and Rumex furnish a puzzle in this cough
and each has to be understood. In Lachesis young children cough in
their early sleep, but if kept awake they will not cough. Therefore in
Lachesis the ii p. m. cough is an aggravation from sleep. In Rumex
the cough will come on at 1 1 o’clock whether the child is asleep or not.
“‘Accumulation of mucus in posterior nares.” “Yellow mucous dis-«
charge through posterior nares.” “Epistaxis, violent sneezing and
painful irritation of nostrils.” “Influenza with violent catarrh, fol-
lowed by bronchitis.” “Scraping in the throat whenever this catar-
rhal state goes into the larynx and trachea, there is this continual scrap-
ing in the throat. Hoarse ; cannot speak because the vocal cords are
covered with tough mucus. Chronic cases have often been cured.



RUMEX CRISPUS


799


Phosphorus has this hoarseness, but especially aphonia relieved by hem-
ming up a little mucus from the vocal cords. The Causticum hoarse-
ness is due to a weakness of the vocal cords. Phosphorus has an in-
flammatory state and the continual accumulation of mucus impedes
speech. Rumex has the accumulation of tough, gelatinous, gluey mu-
cus, and he continually scrapes the larynx.

“Sensation of a lump in the throat, not relieved by hawking or swaU
lowing, it descends on deglutition, but immediately returns ; this is also
a strong feature in Lachesis. “Aching in the pharynx, with collection
of tough mucus in the fauces.” “Catarrhal affections of throat and
fauces.” This remedy shows the various stages of severe colds, but
is especially indicated in constitutions that are constantly taking cold ;
worse from change of the weather ; always shivering about the fire ;
want much clothing, want even the head covered up.

Many complaints are worse in the evening, from a bath, from becom-
ing cold, from inhaling cold air. Rheumatic complaints are common
and are aggravated by cold. Every cold seems to affect the joints.
This is a marked feature of Calcarea phos,; every change to cold is felt
in the joints ; from bathing and getting chilled afterwards.

“Tight, suffocative, heavy ache in epigastrium, through to back;
clothes seem too tight ; weak feeling in epigastrium, all aggravated
when talking ; frequently takes a long breath.” “Shooting from pit of
stomach to chest ; sharp pain in left chest ; slight nausea ; dull aching in
forehead.” “Aching and shooting ih pit of stomach and above it on
each side of sternum.” The stomach will not digest food, or only the
simplest food ; the mucous rnembmue of the stomach is affected by
this remedy like other mucous membranes. Various pains in the stom-
ach ; aching, shooting pains in the pit of the stomach. “Aching pain
in the pit of stomach gradually becoming very severe ; sharp stitching
pains in stomach extending into chest, and below a sensation of pres-
sure like a lump in pit of stomach, sometimes rising up under sternum,
greatly aggravated from motion and somewhat from taking a long
breath ; generally aggravated after eating, ameliorated by lying per-
fectly quiet.” It is strange how the stomach symptoms are aggra-
vated by talking. The stomach feels sore, aggravated by talking,
walking, inhaling cold air ; wants warm things. Very flatulent ; full
of flatulent pains ; pains relieved {Carbo veg.) by belching and passing
flatus. Stomach and abdominal pains aggravated by talking, irregular
breathing ; must sit in a chair and breathe with perfect regularity. Ir-
regular breathing will cause cough or suffocation.

In the morning hurried to stool like Sulphur, “Stools, painless, of-
fensive, profuse ; brown or black, thin or watery ; preceded by pain in
abdomen ; before stool sudden urging, driving him out of bed in morn-
ing,” ''Morning diarrhoea with cough from tickling in throat pit.”



8 oo


RUMEX CRISPUS


It is common for phthisical cases to have a morning diarrhoea, and
many of them look like Sulphur. When the morning diarrhoea is
gushing, Rumex will palliate ; it will allay the extreme sensibility of the
lungs, will ward off the sensitiveness to cold and will patch him up.
Rumex is not so deep as Sulphur, but it is an antipsoric. It is limited,
however, to the early stages ; will carry a chronic case so far, but it
will require to be followed by another antipsoric. Calcara follows it
well.

Rumex is as sensitive to cold, to baths and chilly surroundings as
Rhus, but it is aggravated by motion. Bryonia may be confused with
it in this aggravation from motion and from talking, but Bryonia is not
so sensitive to cold air, is often relieved from cold air and worse in a
warm room ; the complaints subside if the room becomes cool. In
Rumex the nerves are sensitive to the open air ; a nervous sensitiveness
to open air as marked as Nux.

“Brown, watery diarrhoea, chiefly in morning, having stools from 5
to 9 A. M.'* “Serious attack of diarrhoea in an old man of seventy,
after failure of Sulphur.'* The Sulphur patient with a cough, espe-
cially in phthisis, commonly wants cool air, cooling things ; though the
stomach symptoms arc sometimes ameliorated from hot drinks, yet he
wants cool, refreshing air.

“Aphonia after exposufe to cold.’' “Tenacious mucus in throat or
larynx, constant desire to hawk." ^"Tickling in throat pit causing
cough/^ He fights off the cough as long as he can because of the
burning and rawness. In the most violent coryza there is a lack of the
febrile symptoms of Bryonia, Rhus and Aconite. It has not the con-
stitutional symptoms, the aching of the limbs, the general soreness, the
high fever and thirst. The condition seems to have localized itself.

“Hoarse, barking cough, in attacks, every night at 1 1 p. m. and at
2 and 5 A. M. (children)." “Cough, with pain behind midstemum."
“The most violent cough occurs a few moments after lying down, and
at night, in some cases, complete aphonia".

“In women, every fit of coughing produces the passage of a few
drops of urine."

Rumex is one of the most valuable palliatives in advanced phthisis ;
it will often carry a case through another winter. With Rumex, Pu/-
satilla, Senega, Arsenic and Nux vomica you can patch up the last years
of a phthisical patient. I would caution you also about the diarrhoea
that occurs in most cases of phthisis. You will sec 'Acetic acid recam-*
mended for the diarrhoea in phthisis. You had better let such condi-
tions alone, unless they are very marked. If the diarrhoea is very ex-
hausting use some simple medicine, like this one, to slack it up. But
the phthisical patient is better off with a little diarrhoea, a loose morn-
ing stool. It is the same with night sweats ; if he docs not have them



RUTA GRAVFOLENS


8oi


he will have something more violent. Hie allopath stops the diarrhoea
and night sweats, and then has to feed Morphine to his patient because
of the consequent sufiEcrings. The more you undertake to relieve these
outward conditions, these vents, the more harm you will do the patient,
and if you go on you will have to abandon your Homoeopathy and give
Morphine, which is really a crime.

You will remove the sore, bruised, aching all over the body of a con-
sumptive by Arnica, and it will suit the cough and gagging and retch-
ing, and make him sleep. Later Vyrogen may be needed for the ach-
ing in the bones and distressing cough. You patch him up year after
year ; sometimes Arsenic is the remedy, and it has to be more frequently
repeated ; sometimes it is Lycopodium, Pulsatilla, Pyrogen or Arnica,
These medicines help him along and they have often to be changed,
but finally the break down occurs, and these medicines are no longer
suitable. An awful dyspnoea gradually creeps on the patient ; there is
craving for air ; the breathing space is becoming diminished. Dropsy
comes on in the extremities. The heart gives out ; there is emaciation ;
the hippocratic countenance is seen ; there is cold sweat, blue face,
sinking. Even now we can palliate with Tarantula Cuhensis, Some-
times it has to be repeated. It will relieve for days and give an euthan-
asia, not a stupefaction as produced by Morphia, benumbing his
senses, but an actual comforting.

RUTA GRA^OLENS,

Ruta is another remedy often overlooked. It is sometimes over*
looked and Rhus or Argentum nitficum given, or other remedies not
fully related to the case arc given because Ruta is not well known.
Many of its symptoms are difficult to classify in the Repertory. A
knowledge of its nature must be obtained. It falls under a class of
complaints that resemble Rhus, in that it is sensitive to cold, aggra-
vated from cold, damp weather ; aggravated from becoming cold, and
the complaints are often brought on from straining the part ; over-
straining or overexertion of parts, but principally confined to parts
that are of a tendinous character ; aponeurotic fibres ; white fibrous tis^
sue ; the flexor tendons especially ; flexor tendons that are overstrained
by exertion. Rhus has something like this, but nothing like what is
found in Ruta. Ruta often suits in various surgical conditions ; peri-
osteal troubles from injury. Periosteal trouble where the flesh is thin
over the bone ; over the tibia. Bruises go away slowly and leave a
hardened spot ; thickening of periosteum ; a knotty, nodular condition ;
it remains sore ; slow repair. A lump in the periosteum that has ex-
isted for months or years ; sensitive and sore and nodular ; as a result
of a blow with a stick or a hammer, or from bumping the shin bone.



8o2


RUTA GRAVEOLENS


In farmers, woodmen, mechanics, from holding a hammer or iron in-
strument ; hard nodules form in the palm from clasping the hand over
an iron instrument in projecting it forward, as from using a crowbar ;
a hardened mass of tissue in the tendons, like a bursa. Tendency to
the formation of deposits in the periosteum, in bone, in tendons, about
joints. The especial location is in the wrist ; bursae and nodules form
in this part. Overstraining of tendons and in the place where it is
likely to give out a nodule will form in the tendon ; lumps, bunches,
little tumors in the tendon. Gradually increasing contraction of flex-
ors, so that the hands become permanently flexed ; the foot becomes
flexed so that the sole becomes increasingly concave, and the toes are
drawn under from overstraining and violence to the flexors.

Overstraining of the muscles of the eye. These muscles are largely
tendinous. Continual use until it becomes an overuse. Eyestrain fol-
lowed by headache, and the effects are also on the globe of the eye, and
coating of the eye, so that the overstrained eye is red. Pain in the
eye, above and through the eye when he attempts to use the vision,
that is, aggravation from the exertion of vision. From looking at fine
print, fine sewing. This overexertion ol vision brings about redness,
pain and inability to concentrate vision on one point. Headache fol-
lows. Here Argentum nitricum resembles Ruta. Arg, nit, and Na-
trum mur are the two remedies most frequently used, but Onosmodiunt
is a very frequently indicated remedy for headaches from eyestrain.
But they can be easily differentiated. Ruta is aggravated from cold,
wants everything warm. Arg, nit, is aggravated from heat, wants to
be in a cool place. The patient must be considered.

There is general exhaustion in Ruta. The legs give out on rising
from a chair, the patient totters and makes several efforts on rising
from a seat. Routinists give Phosphorus and Conium for this. Ruta
and Phosphorus both have violent, unquenchable thirst for ice-cold
water. Compare Phos, and Con, because of the weakness through the
hips and thighs.

The remedy has not been proved sufficiently to bring out the mental
symptoms. They are only common and belong to many other reme-
dies. ‘Inclination to contradict and quarrel.'’ “Dissatisfied with him-
self and others.” “Anxious and low-spirited, with mental dejection.”
These symptoms are only common ; they can be grouped in one of two
classes. The patient can be irritable, or the opposite— good-natured.
This remedy is classified among the irritable. “Despondent,” that is,
the opposite of happy — another of two classes. “Melancholy disposi-
tion toward evening.” The only thing here is that it is aggravated
toward evening. When things are brought out so that they belong to
one of two classes, they are important only in a mild degree.

Many of the complaints are worse lying down, especially the pains



RUTA GRAVEOLENS


803


that are sharp, stinging, tearing in the nerves. Ruta is a painful medi-
cine, but is slow in producing symptoms, hence its pains are of a
chronic nature. Old neuralgias, stinging, tearing, burning pains, es-
pecially in the lower extremities, about the eyes ; faceaches. It has all
the pains, described by all the adjectives that apply to pain, l)ut it is
worse lying down and worse from cold. Rending, tearing pains in the
sciatic nerves. The severest forms of sciatica ; pains commence in the
back and go down the hips and thighs ; tearing pains ; comfortable dur-
ing the day, but aggravated as soon as he lies down at night. Gna^
phalium is a great sciatic remedy, and it also has this aggravation from
lying down.

“Eyes feel hot like balls of fire.'" To use Ruta for a pure inflamma-
tion when the eyes feel hot would be a failure. Euphrasia^ Belladonna
and Aconite are used in simple inflammations from a cold, and the
antipsorics when the case is chronic. But if a woman strains her eyes
from long sewing on fine work, and the balls feci like fire, she needs
Ruta. Aconite if, after exposure to cold winds, there is inflammation
with lachrymation, and the eyes look like raw beef.

“Eyes burn, ache, feel strained ; sight blurred ; aggravated from
using them in the evening,” A part of the general aggravation in the
evening. When, in copying, the manuscript is placed here, and the
copy at a different distance, this necessitates a constant change of vis-
ion in looking from one to the other, and especially if the copying is
done in a poor light, a headache will come on, which Ruta will cure.
After overusing the eyes in this way^if the patient rides in a cold wind,
a paralytic weakness results, and this is a further indication for Ruta,
Lachrymation from exposure to the wind or riding in the cold. Pa-
ralysis of certain muscles of the eye, even strabismus ; all sorts of dis-
turbances of accommodation. “Loss of power over internal rectus.”
“Asthenopia ; irritability of every tissue of eye from overwork or from
nsing eyes on fine p)ork ; heat and aching in and over eyes ; eyes feel
like balls of fire at night ; blurring of vision ; letters seem to run to-
gether, lachrymation, etc.” Amplyopia, dependent upon overexertion
of eyes, or anomalies of refraction ; from writing by artificial light ;
fine needlework, etc, in a weaver, could with difficulty distinguish one
thread from another, and could not read at all ; mistiness of sight, with
complete obscuration at a distance.

Constipation is a striking feature, with prolapsus of the rectum at
stool, “Frequent unsuccessful urging with prolapsus ani.” “Protru-
sion of rectum after confinement.” Pain in rectum when sitting.
Great soreness in rectum as from ulceration. It is a useful remedy in
piles and stricture of the rectum.

Back symptoms. It is a decided rheumatic remedy. All those rem-
edies which are susceptible to cold, aggravated by cold, wet, stormy



SABABIIXA


804

weather, are described as rheumatic remedies. Rheumatic symptoms
of the back. ‘Tains as if bruised in lumbar vertebrae/' ‘Tain in!
back or coccyx as from a fall or blow, or as if bruised/' “Hamstrings
feel shortened and weak ; knees give way going up or down stairs/'
“Pain and lameness in the ankles after sprain or dislocation/'
“Lameness after sprains, especially of the wrists and ankles/’ Im-
mediately after a sprain, for the inflammatory state, you will most
likely need to give Arnica, and Rhus will probably follow. But when
nodules occur in the tendons as a result of the strain Ruta is called
for. Ruta is a great remedy for a mere sprain ; it has all the soreness
and weakness of tendons. Arnica, Rhus and Calcarea are often nec-
essary in a routine way when there is absence of all symptoms, except
the strain alone.

Paralytic weakness in the lower extremities after a sprain of the
back.

Under the aggravation in the evening is melancholy disposition,
burning in the eyes, green halo around the light ; sight blurred ; eyes
ache ; pain below right scapula.

Extreme restlessness like Rhus. So restless he can't keep still ; a
nervous restlessness.

“Bruised feeling all over as from a fall or blow, worse in the limbs
and joints." “Bruises and other mechanical injuries of bones and
periosteum ; sprains ; periostitis ; erysipelas."

Ruta is related to and is an antidote to Mercury.

Eruptions on the skin with itching, which changes place after
scratching like Mezereum. Compare Phos. in the thirst for cold water
and the weakness of the lower extremities. In the rheumatism distin-
guish Phytolacca. Compare Rhus, Sepia, Silicea and Sulphur. Ruta
is an antipsoric, but not so deep as Silicea and Sulphur.

SABADILLA.

The Sabadilla patient is a shivering patient, sensitive to the cold air,
a cold room, cold food. He wants to be well wrapped up ; wants hot
drinks to warm up his stomach. He is subject to catarrhal conditions,
and in these he wants hot air. The catarrhal conditions of the throat
require hot drinks and food. Warm things are grateful to him. It is
difficult to swallow cold things ; they increase the pain and difficulty
in swallowing.

We often study remedies by contrast. This remedy travels from
left to right, and at once a good prescriber connects it with Lachesis.
TTie soreness, pain and inflammatory conditions of the throat com-
mence on the left side and spread to the right in both Sabadilla and
Lachesis. But warm things aggravate the pain in Lachesis ; they cause



SABAJ>nULA 805

a spasmodic condition, with a sensation of choking, and therefore he
wants cold things, which relieve ; they are swallowed more easily and
ameliorate the pain in the throat. Sabadilla on the other hand is re-
lieved by heat, either outside or inside.

Catarrhal condition of the nose, with constant sneezing ; sensation
of great rawness in the nose ; burning ; stutiing up of the nose. Dis-
charge at first of thin mucus and later thick mucus. It has all the
appearance of a coryza. The coryza is ameliorated from inhaling hot
air. He sits before an open grate or register, with the head close to
it, inhaling the hot air. Especially useful when the catarrhal state of
the nose is prolonged ; a prolonged coryza, which does not yield to
ordinary remedies ; a lingering coryza, and the discharge is exagger-
ated by the odor of flowers. Even thinking of the odor of flowers
makes him sneeze and increases the flow from the nose. So thinking
of various things aggravates his complaints.

Many hay fever patients arc sensitive to the odor of flowers, to the
odor of the hay field, to dying vegetable matter ; so oversensitive to the
odor of fruit are some that apples have to be removed from the house.
Inhalation of odors that are beautiful, as that of the lavender, some
hay fever patients cannot tolerate ; such things may bring on an attack
out of the season. Now Sabadilla is of this sort. Ov'ersensitive to
surroundings, to odors ; these increase the catarrhal state of the throat
and posterior nares. Sneezing and a flow of mucus from the nose ;
goes on even to ulceration. Pericwdical attacks ; a rose cold in June ;
in autumn about August 20 as a hay fever. Hay fever is often an
easy thing to palliate with short acting remedies ; they will cut short
an attack in a few days. But the cure requires years, and the patient
must be treated in the interim and according to his symptoms. When
the hay fever symptoms arc present he has no others ; one group is
manifested at one time, and another group at another time. But the
patient is sick and all the symptoms must be gathered together and
the case treated accordingly.

Many of the annoyances of this individual seem to be imaginary.
His mind is filled with strange things. Imaginations concerning j)er-
sons or himself are strange. Imagines the body is withering, that the
limbs are crooked, that the chin is elongated, and larger on one side
than the other. She feels that this is so and believes it even in spite
of her vision. It is a sensation which she believes, a delusion, an in-
sanity. “Erroneous impressions as to the state of his body.*' “Im-
agines himself sick ; imagines parts shrunken ; that she is pregnant
when she is merely swollen fro.m flatus ; that she has some horrible
throat disease that will end fatally.’' The imaginations are ground-
less ; nothing is visible, and the suffering is greater than if there was
something to be seen. These patients often get no sympathy ; they



8o6


SABADILLA


should Veally have a remedy. Thuja has erroneous impressions as to
the state of the body ; thinks she is made of glass ; the idea is not that
of transparency, but rather of brittleness, fears that she would break
in pieces. There are but a few remedies which have fixed ideas ; these
ideas may be concerning religion, politics, clothing, things of the family
and life. I once had an insane patient who would get out of the street
car if anyone entered who wore a certain color, because she had a fixed
idea that this was of evil import to her. The Pulsatilla mental state
in a man is that a woman would be a detriment to his soul ; it is a
delusion, a fixed idea. Iodine is full of fixed ideas. Anacardium has
a fixed idea that a devil is sitting on one shoulder talking into his ear,
while an angel sits on the other shoulder talking into the other ear,
and he halts between the two and says nothing.

"Delirium during intermittents.'’ "Mental exertion aggravates the
headache and produces sleep.’’ A sleepiness comes on from thinking,
meditating, reading. While meditating in a chair he falls asleep like
Nux moschata and Phosphoric acid.

Dizziness : vertigo. He wakens up at night with vertigo. Vertigo
in the open air ; under all sorts of circumstances. Full of headaches.
Headaches on one side of the head. The meditation which drives him
to sleep brings on headache. Headache in school girls. Feeble chil-
dren, who have to be taken from school because of headache, come
home with strange imaginations concerning school and themselves.
Headache stupefying and associated with coryza ; in the frontal sin-
uses, above the eyes. Fulness, bursting, stupefying, aggravated by
jarring, sneezing, walking. Stupefying headaches with coryza. Often
gets up with it in the morning, increases during the forenoon. Head
covered with a cold sweat. Many of the symptoms arc closely related
to Veratrum, especially in the cold sweat on the forehead with com-
plaints.

Hay fever when there is spasmodic sneezing, fluent coryza ; nostrils
stuffed up ; inspirations through nose labored ; snoring ; itching in the
nose ; profuse bleeding from the nose ; bright red blood comes from the
posterior nares and is expectorated ; very sensitive to the smell of gar-
lic : coryza with severe frontal pains and redness of eyelids ; violent
sneezing ; copious watery discharge from the nose.

A peculiar kind of itching coming on in some hay fevers is an itch-
ing in the roof of the mouth, on the soft palate, and for relief the
patient must draw the tongue back and forth over the soft palate, with
this coryza, sneezing, etc. Wyethia will cut the attack short.

When the itching extends to the larynx and trachea, with great irri-
tability and sensitive to cold: Nux vomica.

When the discharge burns a red streak over the upper lip and about
the wings of the nose, with sneezing and profuse, watery nasal dis-



SABADILLA


807


charge ; A rsenicum.

Copious acrid lachrymation, and copious bland flow from the nose
with sneezing: Euphrasia,

Copious, bland, watery discharge from the eyes and copious, acrid,
watery discharge from the nose: Allium cepa.

But these are not the constitutional remedies ; they do not cure, but
only palliate during the severe attacks. These symptoms arc the out-
come of the psoric constitution, and this constitution must be treated
by antipsorics. Sometimes the hay fever is so severe that it seems to
be the only manifestation of psora in the patient, but if it is restrained
or stopped up by bad treatment he is not well during the whole year.
If let alone he has good health during the rest of the year. Many a
time the hay fever goes through the whole winter and only by consti-
tutional upbuilding can it be mitigated. But with constitutional treat-
ment each yearly attack is lighter, and at the end of treatment he is
able to live in his own climate unaffected. He must not go to the
mountains to mitigate it. If to any place, he should go where the
affection would be worse, so that all its manifestations would be ap-
parent. The hay fever will only be cured if the patient is curable, but
if not, if his constitution is so broken down that he is incurable, his
hay fever will not be cured.

The most striking place of attack is the mucous membrane of the
nose, throat, trachea .and larynx. Violent acute inflammation of the
raucous membrane of these parts.

Great thirst for hot drinks. The Appetite is singular ; it is commonly
seen in pregnant women. She says she is never hungry ; never wants
anything to cat, and often there is aversion to food ; l)ut when, from
a matter of reason, she concludes to eat, and she takes a mouthful, it
tastes good, it recalls the appetite, and she makes a good meal. At
other times not only a loss of appetite, but a disgust and loathing of
food. “Disgust for all food, for meat, for sour things, for coffee, for
garlic.'' '‘Morbid hunger or loathing for food."

A routine remedy in pin worms, scat worms, all sorts of worms ;
stomach and tape worms. A careful prcscriber never thinks of pre-
scribing for worms. He takes all the symptoms of the patient, and
these guide him to the remedy. I remember one time in a lady's house
seeing a dog drag his hinder parts over the carpet as if to scratch the
anus. She said: “Doctor, can’t you give the dog a remedy?" I put
a dose of Sabadilla in its mouth. Some time afterwards she asked
me: “Doctor, what did you give the dog that medicine for?’' I in-
quired why she asked. "Why," she said, "in a few days it passed an
atvful lot of worms." Sabadilla and Sinapis nigra are well adapted to
cases in which pin worms arc present. Often a remedy restores the
patknt to order in general and then all his particular parts are set in



8o8


SABINA


order.

Female sexual organs. “Nymphomania fronn ascarides.” “Cutting
pains, as from knives, in ovary.'' “Menses too late, with painful bear*
ing down a few days previous ; decreased, flow by fits and starts, some-
times stronger, sometimes weaker ; blood bright red."

Hysterical patients ; a patient with a strangely unbalanced mind, ac-
companied by various nervous manifestations. “Twitchings, convul-
sive tremblings, or catalepsy from worms." It is true that worms will
not prosper in a perfectly healthy stomach, intestine or rectum. They
can only thrive in the unhealthy. Many a time I have had a patient
bring me a tape-worm in a bottle after I had put them on an antipsoric,
even when I did not suspect its existence. Turn the economy into
order and the parasites go. The same applies to germs. They only
exist as a result of disease. They have never been known to exist
without the disease having first existed. If you ignore the worm, but
select the remedy on the totality of the symptoms, the patient will be
restored to health, and, so far as the worm is concerned, go without a
symptom. The worm becomes smaller, shrivels and finally departs.
It is rarely the case for the worm to disappear inside of six weeks
after the remedy. If, on the other hand, you eject the worm by vio-
lent means, the patient may gc for years with troublesome symptoms,
and you do not know why you fail to cure him.

Prescribe for the patient first. No results of disease should be re-
moved until proper constitutional treatment has been resorted to, and
be sure that it is proper.


SABINA

The use of this remedy is generally confined to symptoms of the
kidneys, bladder, uterus, rectum and anus ; inflammatory and haemor-
rhagic symptoms principally of these parts. Sabina establishes a tur-
moil in the circulatory system, with violent pulsations all over the body.
The patient is disturbed by heat, is worse in a warm room or from too
much clothing. Wants the windows open and to be in the open air
(Puls.). This turmoil in the circulatory system is such as might be
expected in a haemorrhagic remedy. Tendency to bleed from all the
mucous membranes, especially of the kidney, bladder and uterus. It
has a decided effect in diminishing knots, enlargements, or varices in
veins. The principal action is on the lower bowel, about the anus.
Hsemorrhoidal tumors which bleed copiously. Constipation with
bleeding haemorrhoids. A sense of fulness in these parts. A sense of
fulness in all the veins of the body, a sense of distension, fulness, puf-
finess, bloating, with pulsations all over, associated with repeated
bsemorrhages from the mucous membranes. Great burning and throb-



SABINA


809


bing in the region of the kidneys. Severe suffering, attended with
inflammatory symptoms ; bloody urine ; inflammation of the bladder
with continuous urging to urinate, with the general aggravation from
heat and the throbbing all over.

Inflammation of the urethra, with a gonorrhoeal discharge, or a ca-
tarrhal discharge in the male. The most important sphere is in men-
strual symptoms, and its relation to uterine haemorrhage. In the men-
strual symptoms the woman suffers from bearing down, laborJike
pains. Most distressing in dysmenorrhoea. The menses last too long
and are too copious, and at times in some subjects the flow does not
stop before the next period begins. Too frequent and prolonged co-
pious menses. A striking feature in this drug, as in a few other reme-
dies, is that the flow is liquid, bright red, intermingled with clots. It
suits many cases in which the flow slackens up and remains away for
a while and then labor-pains come on, and an enormous, partially de-
composed clot is passed and this is followed by a bright red flow. This
occurs over and over again. Such a state comes on after abortion,
after labor and in dysmenorrhoea. Accompanying the labor-like pains
is a violent pain in the sacrum to the uterus or pubes. Another striking
feature is itching, shooting, knife-like pains, causing the patient to
scream out, shooting up the vagina to the uterus, or up as far as the
umbilicus. These two features, shooting pains from the back to the
front and from below upwards, with haehorrhages, are striking cor-
roborations.

Belladonna and Sabina are the two" most important remedies in abor-
tion at three months. BelL has the same bearing down pains which
expel a clot followed by a copious, bright red flow. But the BelL state
is not like that of Sabina. In Bell it is a hyperaesthesia, oversensitive-
ness to touch and jar ; the patient will not allow the nurse to jar the
bed, and the bright red flow is hot, so much so that it is noticeable ; the
parts over which the flow passes are so sensitive that the blood feels
intensely hot to her. This is in keeping with the oversensitiveness of
BelL, to touch, light, motion, jar. If the physician jars the bed a scowl
will immediately co-me over the patient's face. BelL has many pains,
not only shooting up but in every direction, irregular pains and bear-
ing down pains. They come and go like lightning, appear suddenly
and disappear suddenly, shooting in every direction. If these symp-
toms are present you will never need Ergot for its physiological effects.
It has often been argued that in these cases of haemorrhage you 'Von’t
have time to get the symptoms." The expert physician will often see
all these symptoms in the twinkling of an eye. The actions of the pa-
tient, a word dropped by the nurse, and what he has observed himself,
will have shown him the remedy.

As a medicine to prevent abortion it is one of the first to consider,

102



SABINA


8lO

because the symptoms we know arc such as come during abortion, and
it is most useful after the membranes have ruptured, or the ovum
passed, or when the placenta is about to be expelled. It establishes
the normal activities of the uterus so that it will expel whatever is left
behind of these membranes. The curetting is never necessary with
the homoeopathic remedy. It suggests that there is something defec-
tive about the woman's organs.

“Inflammation of the ovaries or uterus after abortion or premature
labor." Violent pains through ovaries and uterus. Aching in the
sacrum as if broken, as if the bones would separate. Most violent tear-
ing, rending, burning pains, with throbbing in the sacrum, with burn-
ing and throbbing all over the body, especially throbbing in parts,
whether it be the uterus or bladder. “Copious haemorrhages, accom-
panied by uterine colic." Contractive labor-like pains extending from
back to pubes and great urging to urinate. The uterine colic described
is labor-like, drawing up like colic, but also bearing down as if to expel
the clot. Metrorrhagia, resulting from false plethora ; clotted and
fluid blood ; pain extending from sacrum or lumbar region to pubes,
with severe bearing down, extending from lower part of back around
abdomen and down thighs ; blood bright red, thin, liquid ; labor-like
pains in lumbar and uterine region, discharge of large clots of blood,
bright red, coming in gushes, paiticularly profuse on motion, etc.
This describes the symptoms from abortion or menstruation. “Menses
too profuse, too early, last too long, partly fluid, partly clotted and
offensive ; flow in paroxysms ; with colic and labor-like pains ; pains
from sacrum to pubes."

At another time, during the climacteric period, a woman is run down
by overwork and much child bearing ; she has repeated uterine haemor-
rhages of this character, bright red intermingled with clots ; pain from,
sacrum to pubes ; she becomes exhausted and anaemic, but after a while
she again builds up, her face becomes plump and she becomes plethoric,
only to be broken by another haemorrhage. Uterine haemorrhage in
fibroids.

Chronic catarrh of vagina with granulations, copious leucorrhoea.
Bloody leucorrhoea. Old, prolonged, psoric cases. This medicine es-
pecially suits gonorrhoea in women. It has all the wart-like excres-
cences found in Thuja, and found in sycosis. The Thuja wart is a
little sensitive wart, appears to be covered with a thin film, and bleeds
from the slightest touch. Sabina cures warty excrescences about the
anus, cauliflower excrescences, gonorrhoeal warts about the vulva and
about the male genitals.

In the uterine haemorrhages compare it with Ipecacuanha, which has
a gush of bright red blood fully as copious as Sabina, but at the begim
ning of that gush, before it has kept on long enough to produce cx-



SABINA 8ll

haustion, the face becomes pale, there is nausea and a feeling of faint-
ness, syncope, all out of proportion to the amount of blood lost. Mi7-
iefolium produces a gushing flow, but it has a continuous dribbling day
after day, a continuous flow of bright red blood. Stcale looks like
Sabina, and when it is indicated it should never be given in large quan-
tities. It has the expulsive, bearing down, labor-like pains, with tho
expulsion of large clots and copious flow, but the flow is dark and
offensive and after a short time it becomes thin and watery, leaving a
brown stain difficult to wash out ; at times tarry, copious and continu-
out, as if the uterus had no ability to contract. If you observe the
cases in which during labor or abortion crude Ergot had been used,
you will notice that the patient has feeble uterine contractions as a
resultant condition, and this will be seen during the menses or in the
next labor. The symptoms of Ergot last for years ; it is another psora.
Large doses may kill the feetus and cause abortion, but she will con-
tinue to bleed ; the uterus will not contract when she most needs con-
tractions. It produces a paralytic condition, and this is the state wo
prescribe Secale for. We seldom prescribe it for its primary effect,
but rather for the state of sub-involution, when the uterus retains thO
secundines. There is a continuous oozing of dark and offensive flow.
The picture is more complete if we find that no matter how cool the
room is she does not want heat, but wants to be uncovered, and she is
a lean, shrivelled, scrawny, hungry patient with dusky skin ; she never
takes on fat ; is not robust. It produces varicoses of the skin and the
skin about the toes becomes dusky, and over the shin bones are dark
spots, and she wants to lie with the extremities uncovered. Such pa-
tients lose flesh and become shrivelled.

In old, troublesome, lingering haemorrhages, starting up fresh on the
slightest provocation, Sabina will stop the gush, the acute stage, but it
does not hold, the haemorrhage recurs, and then an antipsoric is needed.
Sulphur is very commonly the remedy, but Psorinum, though not laid
down in the books for haemorrhages, after Sulphur has exhausted
itself, will often follow for this oozing and frequent recurrence.

Phosphorus is somewhat like Sabina. It has a copious bright red
flow, which may or may not contain clots. The striking features are
outside the flow. There is pinched countenance, extremely dry tongue
and mouth ; violent, unquenchable thirst, craving ice<old water. The
haemorrhage is bright red, in a gush or continuous oozing.

In this way we must study well the haemorrhagic remedies. The
physician must be acquainted with the emergency remedies, such as
belong to the violent diarrhoeas, cholera, violent sufferings and haemor-
rhages, He must have them at his finger ends, and he must be able
to compare instantaneously. Blood must be stopped.

Atony of the uterus is a striking feature of Sabina. The uterus will



8i2


SANOUINARU


not contract on itself until it has something to contract on, like a clot
or mole. Haemorrhages from other parts as well. But other reme-
dies have taken its place in these regions because the individualizing
symptoms have not been brought out.

Much rheumatism and gout ; gouty nodosities in the joints ; they
burn so and are so hot that the patient is compelled to put Ae hands or
feet out of bed. Gouty cases, especially when the constitutional state
changes ; an alternation ; when the gout is present there will be no
haemorrhages, and when there are haemorrhages the gout will be re-
lieved. An alternation of states. The gouty condition of the veins is
often a haemorrhagic state.


SANGUINARIA

Blood root is an old domestic remedy. A great many eastern farm-
ers' wives will not go into the winter without blood root in the house.
In the cold winter days, when the coryzas come on, a “cold” in the
head, throat and chest, then they get the blood root ready and make
a tea of it. With them it is a routine remedy for “colds.” They give
it to combat all complaints, and there is no doubt but that even in this
crude form it does break up “colds,” because the provings show its re-
lation to chest troubles and “colds” that go to the chest.

Periodic headaches, when the headache comes once in seven days ;
it begins in the morning on waking or wakes the patient up. It begins
in the occiput and travels upward and settles over the right eye and in
the right temple. It gets worse during the day and is aggravated by
light, so that he is driven into a dark room and compelled to lie down.
Vomiting comes on and the vomited matter is bile, slime, bitter sub-
stance and food, and then comes relief of the pain. The headaches are
relieved from passing flatus up or down. If the patient suffers when
he goes to bed with hot palms and soles, so that he must put them out
of bed, this is an additional striking feature.

Take an individual who has missed his chronic headache, by some
means, for a considerable time, but since then he has become increas-
ingly sensitive to cold, and “colds” settle in the nose, throat and bron-
chial tube and these parts feel as if on fire, with rawness and burn-
ing ; the expectoration is thick, tenacious mucus ; disturbance of thq
belly, with much belching, and the belching is especially noticed after
a violent attack of coughing.

It is not a very long acting remedy. When a periodic sick headache
is interrupted by Sanguinaria, if a deeper drug, an antipsoric, is not
given, the headache will return or something worse will come on, as
Sanguinaria does not go deep into the nature of the case. I remember
a case in which the patient missed his Sanguinaria headache and an



sancuinabia


813


epithelioma developed, which was cured by Phosphorus. I am con-
vinced that if Phosphorus had been given at the end of the attack the
cancer would not have developed, as Phosphorus was his constitutional
remedy. If a chronic sick headache is interrupted the patient will tend
to phdiisis. Chest troubles come on and grow worse and worse. Its
ability to palliate phthisis is very well known.

A patient much debilitated with bronchial catarrh ; susceptible to*
cold, to every change in the weather, from change to damp weather,
to every draft, to change of clothing ; always taking new ‘‘cold.*'
There is burning in the chest behind the sternum ; thick, tough, ropy
expectoration ; spasmodic cough, and every cough ends in belching ;
eructations of gas ; empty eructations. If to the burning in the chest,
the severe pains in the larynx and trachea when talking, and cough
ending in belching, you add heat in the palms and soles, Sanguinaria
will patch him up and mitigate the trouble. Many such cases get
Sulphur, but to their destruction. There is a class of remedies that
suits these phthisical patients better than Sulphur, Silicca and Graph-
ites ; remedies such as Pulsatilla, Sanguinaria, Senecio gracilis and
Coccus cacti, which palliate, mitigate his suflerings, and may even build
him up so that he could take a medium potency of a deep remedy. But
the deeper remedies ought to be avoided if the vital force is low, if the
body is too much damaged to be repaired. Hahnemann warned against
the use of Phosphorus in such cases of | deficient vitality. Sanguinaria
is a surface remedy ; it does excellent palliation.

Catarrhal conditions of nose and threat, especially those due to colds
and to poisonous plants ; also rose colds.^ The Sanguinaria patient has
‘*rose colds^’ in June. Sensitive to flowers and odors ; subjects with
hay fever. Hay fever patients with burning in the nose, in the throat,
as if dry ; as if the mucous membrane would crack open. Dryness and
burning in the larynx, with hoarseness ; dryness and burning through-
out the chest, with asthma ; associated with burning of the palms and
soles. Examination shows the palms to be dry, wrinkled and hot to
the touch ; so, also, the soles, where the skin is thickened and indurated.
Corns that burn ; the tocsi burn and the patient puts the feet out of bed
for relief.

When the headache is present it seems to be a general congestive
headache ; although beginning in the morning, coming up the back and
extending to the right eye, the whole head is hot and aches.

Sulphur, Silicea and Sanguinaria have periodic weekly headaches.
Arsenicum has a headache every two weeks. Not that these remedies
will not cure other headaches, for Sanguinaria has also a headache
every three days. The majority of headaches coming every two weeks
are cured by Arsenicum or greatly mitigated in broken down consti-
tutions. The attempt to cure a cluronic sick headache should be made



SANCUINAAIA


814

before the senile decline.

'‘Pulsations in the head with bitter vomiting ; aggravated by mo-
tion.’’ The headache is generally aggravated by motion, but not so
strikingly as in Bryonia. When the Sanguinaria headache increases
towards the afternoon or night, it becomes so severe he must go to
bed ; and the head becomes sore, and then a step or jar is extremely
painful A severe headache is likely to be disturbed by light, noise,
motion, etc.

“Headache as if forehead would burst with chill, and burning in
stomach.” “Headache over right eye.” This is a characteristic fea-
ture. “Periodic sick headache ; begins in the morning, increases dur-
ihe day, lasts till evening ; head feels as if it must burst, or as if
eyes would be pushed out ; throbbing, lancinating pains through brain,
worse on the right side, especially in the forehead and vertex ; followed
by chills, nausea, vomiting of food or bile ; must lie down or remain
quiet ; ameliorated by sleep.” Some of these things are not found in
every case, but they all go to make up a Sanguinaria headache.

All sorts of neuralgic pains ; cutting, tearing, lacerating pains ; as if
the muscles were torn, or put on a stretch. Tearing pains anywhere,
neuralgic or rheumatic. Pains about the scalp, but more particularly
about the shoulder and neck ; stiff neck ; cannot turn over in bed ; can-
not raise the arm, though he can swing it back and forth. Pain streaks
up the neck ; pain in the deltoid. It prefers the right side, but also
cures the left side. Rheumatic pains in the right shoulder so that ho
cannot raise the arm, and all the muscles of the neck and back of the
neck become involved ; stiff neck. If the pain comes on in the day it
increases as the day advances to night. Complaints are worse at night
in Sanguinaria,

A patient comes to you after exposure to cold ; he cannot raise the
arm ; it hangs by his side ; pain worse at night in bed, worse turning
over (as he uses the shoulder muscle to turn over). It is probably in
the deltoid, but you need not speculate on the tissues involved.

It competes with Ferrum. All red-faced, highly-flushed people, who
cannot raise the arm and have pain which is worse in the daytime, not
night, and ameliorated by slow motion need Ferrum. Sanguinaria is
not relieved by motion ; it is aggravated by such motion as calls the arnu
into use. Ferrum has relief from slow motion, aggravated from rapid
motion and the pain comes in the daytime. While Ferrum has a uni-
formly red, plethoric face, Sanguinaria has a pale face. In the chest
complaints Sanguinaria has a circumscribed red spot over the malar
bones, such as seen in hectic patients.

Headache from stomach disturbances, overeating, rich food, drink-
ing wine. Almost as useful as Nux in old drinkers. Those who dis-
order their stomachs and weaken their digestion by beer drinking ; they



SANGUINARIA


815


cannot eat ; vomiting of even a teaspoonful of water. No food or
drink stays on the stomach. Headaches associated with such troubles.
Vomiting and diarrhoea with complaints.

Catarrhal affections are prominent. Chronic catarrh of the throat ;
apparent thickening of the mucous membranes of the throat. Nose
and pharynx fill with mucus. He hawks it out ; there is a dry burning
sensation, but the burning is most marked every time he takes a fresh
cold.

Acridity of discharges is another feature. Acrid mucus forms in
the nose, causing burning in the throat. Acrid, hot fluids eructated
from the stomach, excoriating the throat and mouth. The diarrhoea
Is accompanied By an acrid watery stool ; especially in infants ; the
nates become raw and red. This burning extends all through the bow-
els ; burning in the abdomen and stomach in old gastric troubles ; vom-
iting of even a teaspoonful of water with burning ; old gastric irrita-
tion ; dyspepsia ; all sorts of disorders of the stomach.

Tongue red and burns as if in contact with something hot. Burning
in pharynx and oesophagus, burning in roof of mouth. Tonsillitis
with burning. "'Heat in throat, ameliorated by inspiring cold air;
throat so dry it seems as if it would crack.'' This burning excoriated
feeling applies to all the mucous membranes affected.

Patient suddenly taken to bed with a chill ; burning in the chest ;
symptoms of pneumonia ; rusty expectomtion ; violent cough ; every
cough felt as a concussion at the bifurcation of the trachea ; as if a
knife were in the parts ; as if tom asund^jr ; and after the cough copi-
ous, loud, empty eructations. No other remedy has this,

‘'Nausea with burning at the stomach, with much spitting." Nausea
not relieved by vomiting. Keeps on vomiting and retching. Burns as
if on fire. Arsenic is often given by mistake, because of the great
burning.

"Vomiting of bitter water ; of sour, acrid fluids ; of ingesta ; of
worms ; preceded by anxiety ; with headache and burning in stomach ;
head relieved afterwards ; with prostration.'" Such symptoms occur in
headache, disordered stomach, sour stomach. The sour stomach is
manifested by sour eructations or sour vomiting, A patient often
speaks of "a sour stomach," and you must find out whether he means
sour eructations or sour vomiting. He says he "spits up" sour food.

With the headache and many complaints Sanguinaria has a faint-
ness ; like a hunger, yet not for food. A sinking, faint, "all gone,'*
empty feeling. It is like Phosphorus with its "hungry headache."
Psorinum leads all others in "hungry headaches," but Psorinum wants
to cat and cannot get enough. Sanguinaria has a hunger, but it is not
for food ; aversion at the thought and smell of food. Psorinum can
cat a wolf meal, and so can Phosphorus. It is a false hunger with the



8i6


SARSAfiARILLA


headache in Sanguinaria. "'Burning in stomach ; with headache and
chill"

Belching up of acrid fluids in asthma ; hay asthma. Sanguinaria
palliates asthma associated with stomach disorders. Do not forget
Ntix in asthma from stomach troubles.

Liver complaints ; pains and aches and sense of fulness. Bilious
trouble described in general terms. It seems as if the liver makes an
enormous quantity of bile, but there is a gastro-duodenal catarrh, so
that the bile is regurgitated into the stomach instead of going down,
and it is eructated as bitter, green, yellow fluid ; vitiated bile. This is
a peculiar thing. If you watch a chronic Sanguinaria patient you will
notice that the stomach will be disordered for a week ; spitting up bile ;
much flatulence ; sour hot eructations ; then all at once this will disap-
pear, and a diarrhoea, which fairly floods him, comes on suddenly ; a
bilious, liquid, gushing stool. Natrum stilph., Sanguinaria, Pulsatilla
and Lycopodium cure this alternation of diarrhoea and constipation.

"Os uteri ulcerated ; foetid, corrosive Icucorrhoea.'’ "Distension of
abdomen in the evening and flatulent discharges by vagina from os
uteri, which was constantly open ; at same time a pain passing in rays
from nape of neck to head.**

"Chronic dryness in throat, sensation of swelling in the larynx and
expectoration of thick mucus when associated with dryness, rawness,
burning and smarting.^' "Whooping cough ; constricted, spasmodic
action across throat beneath jaws ; cough worse at night with diar-
rhoea."' Cough worse at night with diarrhoea is the feature this rem-
edy is prescribed for. "Severe cough occurring after whooping cough
when patient takes cold, which partakes of the spasmodic nature of
whooping cough.’" An adult takes cold and has a spasmodic cough,
like whooping cough. He says it is a stomach cough, because there is
a gagging with it. In all there is burning and diarrhoea.

"Distressing, dry, spasmodic, exhaustive coughs, especially in chil-
dren ; worse towards night, lying down, going into a cold room to
sleep ; feeling of rawness and burning in bronchi." The trachea seems
so sore, and it is sore ; a bolus of food passing down the oesophagus
can be plainly felt ; he can outline the part where the food passes.

SARSAPARILLA*

Sarsaparilla is suitable in low forms of chronic disease, especially in
complex states resulting from mixed miasms ; especially in cases of
sycosis and syphilis ; cases made complex by Mercury , sycosis syphilis,
and psora. Weakness stamps itself on the whole economy, as in Merc.,
Lack, and other remedies. The tissues become flabby, refuse to heal
when injured, ulcerate from. slight cau^s, . After an injiuy an open



SARSAPARILLA


817

sore remains and is indolent or becomes phagedenic and spreads like
Letch and Mctc, cot, W^eakness over the whole body ; a para-
lytic feeling. In the mental sphere it manifests itself in a dazed state,
he is unable to comprehend, the mind is slow, it is a weakness border-
ing on imbecility, which in the end it may reach. Weakness of the
mind and the tissues.

All the organs are slowed down, weak, sluggish, become congested.
Weakness and dilatation of the veins, tendency to form varices in the
limbs, varicose ulcers, haemorrhoids, varicose veins of the face and
body. The face is often red and discolored in patches. When the
circulation is feeble the parts turn blue, over the shin bones ; on the
backs of the feet, toes ; blue spots like approaching senile gangrene.
Useful in old age when black and blue spots appear on the backs of the
hands and elsewhere.

Moist, itching, scurfy, and scabby eruptions. The skin of the backs
and the palms of the hands becomes thick and indurated with a bran-
like scurf resembling psoriasis, intermingling with blue spots.

This remedy has many features as to cold and heat. The use of heat
internally aggravates all complaints, but there is an external coldness
relieved by heat ; taking warm food and drink aggravates ; wants cold
food, but heat applied externally is grateful.

Stcale also produces great weakness of tissue, with venous stasis,
ulceration and gangrene. But the two Remedies, though similar in ap-
pearance, differ in regard to heat and cbld.

The stomach is in a most miserable qondition. Flatulence, continu-
ous nausea, eructations and vomiting of sour food. Always complain-
ing of fermentation and uneasiness of the stomach as if he had over-
eaten or as if the food had spoiled ; digestion is slow and feeble.

Organs become tumid and congested. The throat, tongue, and
mouth look as if about to ulcerate ; purple spots look as if they would
break down, but remain intact for weeks and months.

OEdema of tissues, of lower extremities, pitting on pressure ;
dropsical conditions ; Bright’s disease.

Suitable in old syphilitics whose complaints have been suppressed by
Mercury ; mind and body in a state of prostration ; paralytic weakness
of the lower extremities, no endurance ; the heart palpitates on exer-
tion ; suffocation on the least exertion ; always tired ; ulcers here and
there on the body; the skin is flabby and full of distress at night.
Bone-pains worse at night, Sars. antidotes the Merc, and establishes
reaction.

Marasmus of children from hereditary syphilis ; emaciation about the
neck ; dry, purple, copper-like eruptions ; no assimilation.

The child is always passing sand in its diaper, yellowish, or whitish
like chalk ; the child s<:ream8 when it is about to urinate, because it
103



8i8


SARSAPARILLA


remembers how painful the passing of urine is. Sometimes at the
close of urination it gives forth an unearthly yell. This symptom is
found in old broken down constitutions, a clutch in the bladder just as
it shuts down causes him to carry out ; pain at the end of urination.

Old debauches, enfeebled by wine and women, with weak heart,
lungs, brain, and bladder, emaciated and shrivelled. Prematurely old,
a man of forty looks to be eighty, feet swollen, totters about on a staff.
Nux will palliate in early periods of breakdown, but the time comes
when he is weak in body and mind and must have such remedies as
Sars., Lack., Secale, etc.

Children emaciated ; face looks like old people ; big belly ; dry, flabby
skin ; mushy passages.

Eruptions appear in the Spring. All the venous remedies are braced
up by Winter and go down in the Spring, as Lack., Secale and Hamam-

Catarrh of the bladder and kidneys. Involuntary urination of chib
dren at night in bed, in feeble children. There is a spasmodic condi-
tion of the sphincter when sitting to urinate, which makes the act im-
possible in that position, but when he stanch up the urine flows freely.
This is especially important when the symptom occurs in women, be-
cause they have great difficulty in urinating while standing. Copious
urine at night ; he floods the bed, but during the day he can pass it
only when standing.

It is fifteen years since I reported the following case and the man
has remained well ever since: ‘‘A man, a?t. 52, addicted to whiskey for
years, had a copious flow of blood from the bowels some four months
ago ; the exertion of walking a few blocks causes suffocation ; after the
loss of blood, feet began to swell, both limbs to middle of thigh very
oedematous, has had two or three nondescript chills ; a few months ago,
sudden paralytic weakness of left arm and leg, passed off in three
hours, leaving a numbness in left hand and a tearing pain in left side
of face and head ; no appetite ; bloody discharge with stools ; feels as if
in a dream all the time ; loss of memory ; face covered with varicose
veins and very red ; general venous stasis ; feeling on the top of the
head as if struck with a hammer ; must pavss urine several times in a
night ; urine thick and cloudy after standing ; but clear when first
passed ; has had much worry from financial troubles ; cannot pass urine
when sitting at stool, but flows freely when he is standing, albumen in
the urine.*’ When Sars. can take such a man, 52 years old, and restore
him to health it is worth considering.

“Jerking sensation along the male urethra.” “Each time she makes
water, air passes out of the urethra with a gurgling noise.’* This
symptom is common in catarrh of the bladder ; it is caused by fermem
tation of the mucus and consequent formation of gas. “Frequent in-
effectual urging to urinate with diminished secretion.*'



SECALE CORNUTUM


819


This medicine has many times dissolved a stone in the bladder ; it so!
changes the character of the urine that it is no longer possible for the
stone to build up, and it grows smaller by the continual dissolving off
from the surface. I have seen the high colored, bloody, and mucous
urine cleared up after the administration of Sars., but on standing, the^
sand would appear. When the urine again becomes cloudy, it is time
for another dose. The urine holds in solution, that is, actually dis-
solves the substance of the stone.

Some years ago there was an old man upon whom a surgeon was
expected to operate. They had sounded his bladder and said that he
had a stone, but he came to the conclusion that he would not permit
the operation. In spite of their warnings he sent for me and I took
charge of his case. His symptoms called for Sars. The enormous
amount of sand he passed in the next year was wonderful. It miti-
gated the catarrh and kept the bladder comfortable. At the end of a
year, after a night of great suffering, he passed a stone the size of a
pea. He passed several small stones after that and then returned to
health.

A young man passed so much crusty deposit that I ordered him to
use one commode and let it settle, pouring off the urine. At the end
of a month there was a layer a sixteenth of an inch thick. This patient
under Sars. had no stone. The sand continued to pass, but was held
in solution and deposited only on coding. In the course of time it
disappeared. He was of a gouty nature and this was relieved.

Sars. has gouty nodes with extreme soreness. After the remedy has
been given, tlierc is a deposit of sand in the urine, which shows the
good action of the remedy and should not be stopped.

‘‘Obstinate constipation with violent urging to urinate ; urging to
stool with contraction of the intestines ; excessive pressure from above
downward, as if the bowels were pressing out ; during stool, violent
tearing, cutting, in the rectum. Stool small, with much bearing down.’'

“Old, dry, sycotic warts remaining after Mercurial treatment for

gouty pains.”


SECALE CORNUTUM

The best provers of Secale, those who are most susceptible to its
action, are scrawny people, and they arc the ones who will most likely
need it as their curative remedy. Of course, it is not necessarily con-
tra-indicated in fat people. Certain constitutions are mentioned in
connection with a remedy as being suited to it, but it must not be in-
ferred that no action will result in others when the symptoms agree.
Scrawny people arc especially related to Secale*

Emaciated, withered, wrinkled, unhealthy appearance of the skin ;



820


SECALK CORNUTOM


purplish, bluish skin, general or in spots ; purplish spots on withered
skin, especially where the circulation is feeble as on the back of the
hands and feet and on the tibia. These parts become numb, tingle and
wither. The extremities prickle, burn, and tingle ; creeping and crawl-
ing, as of insects under the skin, as if between the skin and the flesh ;
numb, dead, wooden sensation in the fingers and especially in the toes.
The toes become black, gangrenous. A senile withering, such as is
found in feeble old people ; the blood-vessels close up ; no blood goes
to the toes and they become numb and black, devoid of sensation.
Hence, Secale improves the circulation of the aged and postpones
senile gangrene.

Burning is a feature of this remedy ; the skin burns ; the extremities
burn, sensation of burning when the parts feel cold to the touch and
really are cold, a sensation of heat with coldness. Burning, especially
of internal parts. Dryness with burning ; burning in the stomach and
bowels ; dryness and burning in the mouth and throat, the nose and air
passages ; burning in the lungs.

This remedy produces ulceration even to sloughing. Old ulcers take
on a strange, withered appearance ; diymess with no granulations ; a
shiny, blackish aspect and all at once blackish granulations shoot out,
indolent, and finally forming a black sphacelus which slowly separates ;
the part is dry ; there is no discharge except now and then a little bleed-
ing of black blood.

Oozing of black, liquid blood, oozing when there is no inflammation ;
nose-bleed of dark, venous, offensive, fluid blood, bleeding from the
throat, lungs, bladder, and rectum, of dark blood ; urine like ink. Pro-
longed uterine haemorrhage so that one menstrual nisus runs into an-
other ; withered subjects ; considerable flow on the first day, fluid, and
blackish ; this goes on for a couple of weeks and then a dark, watery
flow cpmes on which lasts until the next period. Then comes the
thick, black, fluid, horribly offensive flow again. Such a state is found
in the woman who has taken ergot to produce abortion, or in sensitivel
women who have been dosed with it to facilitate delivery. Of course,
if the woman is not sensitive you will not get the lingering provings^

Some women are so insane that though they die they will get rid of
their offspring. On all hands women say, “I have had no health since
I aborted.’" The worst state of health is produced by ergot ; it estab-
lishes a miasm as deep as psora itself. The desire to destroy the off-
spring is an engraftment on psora and by ergot she takes on a miasm)
as dangerous as sycosis or syphilis.

1 have patients who took ergot to cause abortion, and I can do noth-
ing more than palliate them. They have Secale symptoms, sequellae,
and their psoric symptoms are suppressed, held down, just as syphilis
holds down psoric manifestations ; only by covering the Secale miasm



SECAIhB cornutum


Sat

and getting at the psora can we help the patient. They have placed
themselves beyond the help of the physician and the ergot will shorten
their lives many years unless they are fortunate enough to have care-
ful prescribing continuously while they live.

The general constitutional state is aggravated from heat ; there are
only a few exceptions to this. Wants cold though the limbs are cold
as ice, wants to be uncovered, wants the windows open ; a patient with
haemorrhages wants the covers off though the room is cold. A patient
with ulcers wants to be uncovered ; in inflammatory condition of the
stomach and bowels, wants the abdomen uncovered.

At times there is a lingering state of heat of the skin and the patient
wants to be covered up ; there are also sharp, stinging neuralgic pains,
which burn like fire and cut like a knife and are relieved by the appli-
cation of heat ; headache worse in cold air. But the general state is
ameliorated from uncovering, in a cold room, and from cold air blow-
ing on the patient.

Violent inflammation of any part of the body ; gangrenous pneumo-
nia ; gastritis ; peritonitis ; inflammation of the uterus and ovaries. In
inflammatory conditions it competes with Ars. The symptoms are so
nearly alike in both that it is difficult to differentiate ; both have vio-
lently distended abdomen ; tympanites ; burning like coals of fire ; vio-
lent thirst : extreme sensitiveness and tenderness to touch, so that mo-
tion or jar is unbearable ; vomiting of t)lood ; expulsion of blood-clots ;
horrible, offensive, bloody discharge hpia the bowels ; but they are dif-
ferent in the generals. Ars, wants to he covered up, to be kept warm ,
to have hot applications, cither wet or dry, while Secale warn s to Ec
unc overed, wants~the cold air.

Convulsions of single parts or of the whole muscular system ; opis-
thotonos ; cramps in the calves, thighs, soles of the feet, and hands :
hysterical contractures, a hysterical diathesis. Convulsions begin in
the face. Active manias with great excitement ; exposes her body and
tears at the genitals ; puts her finger in the vagina and scratches until
the lips bleed ; all idea of modesty lost.

The spasms, nervous, and mental symptoms are worse while she is
flowing, so that a puerperal convulsion comes on in the midst of a
hsemofrhage.

From the haemorrhagic tendency and the ability to destroy the red
blood corpuscle, there is anaemia. The face looks like dried beef,
wrinkled, shrivelled, scrawny, as if it had not been washed ; as if grey
dirt had dried on the skin, and this especially on the extremities a
dirty, grey appearance.

Catarrhal affections of all mucus membranes ; they are dry and
bleed ; blood oozes from the catarrhal surfaces, liquid, black, and of-
fensive, coagulating slowly or not at all. “Nosebleed, blood dark, runs


$22


SELENIUM


continually, with great prostration, small thread-like pulse ; in old
people or drunkards ; of young women ; from debility/’

Those poisoned by ergot become victims of opacity of the lens as
in senile debility ; cataract of old persons.

The withered scrawny person with tendency to ulcerations, un-
healthy skin and aggravation from heat, is striking in both acute and
chronic states.

Chronic diarrhoea exhaustive, watery discharges, cholera. It is re-
lated to Camphor. Scrawny people take cholera, skin cold and blue ;
better from cold. Violent and continued thirst.

Diarrhoea and haemorrhages are likely to come together ; diarrhoea
of bloody water or dark liquid blood.

Large doses produce such contractures of the uterus that its contents
arc expelled and an exhausting haemorrhage follows ; expulsion of large
clots and in the early stages mixed with some red blood, but the most
striking feature is liquid, black discharge.

“Asiatic cholera with collapse, sunken, distorted face, particularly
the mouth, crawling sensation as of ants.”

Paretic condition : paralysis of lower extremities ; of one side ; of
one arm or one leg ; paralysis of the upper extremities with tingling,
numbness, and prickling. Numbness and burning down the whole
length of the spine ; general emaciation or only of diseased part.

Eruptions, abscesses, boils carbuncles ; green pus discharged ; a
green, purplish appearance ; boils small with green contents, mature
and heal slowly.

Establishes sterility ; so weak is the uterus that it can never hold thd
foetus, hence the value in sterility and repeated abortions.

Dwindling of the mammae. Absence of milk after confinement.

“Thin, scrawny children with shrivelled skin, spasmodic twitchings,
sudden cries, feverishness.”

Purpura haemorrhagica. Paralysis of the extremities. Spinal irri-
tation. Cachectic females with rough skin, pustules tending to gan-
grene.


SELENIUM

Marked mental and physical weakness following prolonged fevers,
after sexual excesses, from secret vice, from exposure to the heat of
the sun in summer. Great fatigue from which he seems unable to
recuperate from rest. Slight exertion brings great fatigue and weak-
ness and especially in hot weather. Sudden weakness in hot weather.
Great weakness in the back, almost paralytic after typhoid fever or
other temporary diseases. Extremely sensitive to a draft of air, cool,
warm or damp. Marked general emaciation, also special emaciation of



SELENIUM


823


face, thighs and hands. The diseased limb withers. The hair falls
out all over the body, head, eyebrows, whiskers and genitals. All his
nervous symptoms are aggravated after coition. Pulsation in all the
limbs and in the abdomen after eating. Extreme sadness. Some com-
plaints are worse from wine, tea and lemonade. It is of great value in
drunkards. Irresistible desire for alcoholic stimulants. Symptoms
worse after sleep, especially on a hot day. Irritable after emissions.
He Ts indifferent to his surroundings and his mind is dull and in con-
fusion. He is very forgetful during his waking hours, but in sleep
he dreams what he has forgotten. Makes mistakes in syllables and
mispronounces words. Stammering speech. Often fails to under-
stand what he hears or reads. He has become unfit for his business.
He is excitable and talkative in the evening. Mental exertion is ex-
haustive and he dreads company. His mind dwells on lascivious
thoughts, yet he is sometimes impotent. All the mental symptoms are
worse after coition.

Vertigo on rising from bed or seat, on moving about, with nausea,
vomiting and faintness, worse after breakfast and dinner.

Headaches from strong odors, after wine, tea, lemonade and alco-
holic stimulants, violent stinging over left eye when walking in the heat
of the sun. Increased flow of urine in headaches. Headaches in old
drunkards.

The hair falls out from the whole head, leaving the scalp smooth and
hairless ; also the hair falls from the!, eyebrows and face, giving a
strange appearance. In syphilitics it often checks the falling of the
hair. It has cured eczema, tingling and itching of the scalp. The
scalp feels as though tightly drawn over the bones of the skull.

Itching vesicles on the edges of the eyelids and spasmodic twitching
of left eyeball.

The ear is stopped and ear wax becomes hard, from which he has
hardness of hearing.

Dark clotted blood from nose. Nose full of thick, yellow, jelly-like
mucus. Itching of nose and he bores into his nose with the fingers.
Chronic obstruction of nose. Coryza followed by watery diarrhoea.

The face is sickly, looking greasy and shiny. Great emaciation of
the face. Twitching of the muscles of the face.

Toothache from drinking tea.

Aversion to food much salted. White tongue and he docs not relish
his breakfast. Irresistible longing for strong drink. After eating
pulsation all over the body, especially in the abdomen. Symptoms are
worse from sugar, salt food, tea and lemonade.

Soreness in liver from pressure and inspiration, with rash over the
right hypochondrium. Searching pain in right hypochondrium, worse
on deep breathing. The liver is enhrged. Stitching pains in liver



SELENIUM


8^4

from motion and pressure.

Constipation with inactivity of the rectum. Most difficult stool, even
impaction. Stool large, hard and very dry, requires mechanical aid.
Softy pasty stool. Watery diarrhoea.

Involuntary urination while walking, after urination and after stool.
Twinge of pain outward along the urethra with a sensation as though
drops were pouring out. Sensation as if biting drop was forcing it-
self out. The urine is dark, scanty, red in evening. Sediment coarse,
red and sandy. It has caused inflammation of the prostate gland. In,
chronic gonorrhoea it is a very useful remedy.

Extreme weakness of the male genitalia. Though the desire is
strong there are no erections, or the act of coition is unsatisfactory and
incomplete. Frequent emissions and constant flow of prostatic fluid.
Erections in the morning without sexual desire, but on attempting coi-
tion the penis becomes relaxed. Itching and formication of genitalia.

Menses copious and dark. Pulsating in the abdomen during preg-
nancy, worse after eating.

The weakness and failure of the voice is in keeping with the general
weakness. Hoarseness on beginning to use the voice. Hoarseness
from weakness after over-use of the voice for a long time. Much
clear, starchy mucus scraped from tlie larynx. Must frequently clear
the larynx. It is a very useful remedy in tubercular laryngitis, glands
of neck large and hard.

Dry, hacking cough in the morning, weak feeling in the chest. Ex-
pectoration of lumps of bloody mucus. Difficult breathing from any
excition and from mucus in the chest and air passages. Pain in right
side of chest under lowest ribs extending to kidneys which are tender
to pressure.

Weak back and spine as if he would be paralyzed after typhoid fever,
and other lingering diseases. Stiffening neck on turning head ; lame-
ness in back in the morning.

It has cured syphilitic psoriasis of the palms. Itching palms.
Hands withered. Tearing pains in hands at night.

Emaciation of the legs. Great weakness of lower limbs. Itching
of the ankle in the evening, blisters on the toes. Flat ulcers on the
legs and about the ankles. Cramps in calves and soles.

He is sleepless until midnight. Sleeps in short naps. Awakens
early and always at same hour. Symptoms worse after sleep.

Chill alternates with heat. Burning heat in spots. Sweat, profuse
on chest, armpits and genitals staining yellow. Sweat from least ex-
ertion.

Moist itching spots here and there on the skin and tingling after
eruptions have been treated locally. Flat ulcers. Itching about finger
joints and between .fingers.



SENECIO AUREUS


825


It is said to be incompatible with China, It is much like Sulphur in
general action, and Phos. acid in its action upon the nervous system and
genitals. The chest symptoms and expectoration arc like Argentum
met,, Stannum, Its constipation is much like Alumen and Alumina,
It should be carefully compared with these remedies,

SENECIO AUREUS

In some parts of the country where it grows it is called Golden Rag-
wort, in others Huckleroot, It is an old domestic remedy and one only
proved in a fragmentary way. Many of these medicines that have
become household remedies should be properly proved. Only in this
way can their power and influence be known, i, e,, they can be used
properly only when indicated by the symptoms they can produce.

Senecio is to be studied in relation to young girls with menstrual
irregularities. Those who have suppression of the menstrual flow
from getting wet, from getting the feet wet, those who have menor^
rhagia, a copious menstrual flow which continues until they are anae-
mic ; and those also who suffer from dysmenorrrhoea, the pains being
most violent. In this remedy, with these general features, the young
girl gradually tends toward catarrhal phthisis. The menstrual flow is
suppressed sometimes many months, she begins to look pale, has a dry,
hacking cough, with bleeding from th^ lungs instead of the menstrual
flow, a vicarious spitting of blood. Tjiiere is a catarrhal state through-
out the chest. They are pallid and \feakly girls. They tell you they
have lost their menstrual flow, and have a chronic cough, are sensitive
to every draft of air, are always taking cold and finally expectorate
profusely. The phthisis may go on as catarrh of the chest for years,
but at last a miliary tuberculosis sets in and takes the patient off with
what is known as acute consumption. Especially is this condition as-
socited with disorder of the menstrual flow and a general catarrhal
state. ''Phthisis, with obstructed menstruation.'' When the symptoms
agree in this kind of a case Senecio is a most useful medicine for
establishing the menstrual flow. You will know that it is acting well
by the fact that the cough gradually diminishes. Of course a great
many medicines will be suited to such general states, but this one has
an unusually marked and special relation to these cases. In certain
regions Senecio has been used as a domestic medicine, an old woman's
remedy for bringing on the menstrual flow.

You will be struck on reading over this remedy with the tendency to
haemorrhage from all the mucous membranes of the body. There is
coryza Avith nose-bleed ; spitting of blood from the throat and chest ;
haemorrhage from the lungs ; a catarrhal condition of all the mucous
membranes with a tendency to haemorrhage : congestion and itiflatn*

ia{



816


SENECA


niation of the kidneys with haemorrhage. You know how commonly
these cases end in dropsy. These waxy, anaemic, chlorotic girls, who
have lost their menstrual flow, become dropsical after slow haemorrhage
from the uterus, kidneys and bladder. “Dropsy from anaemia.” It is
a medicine of the highest order for haemorrhages in catarrhal condi-
tions.

It hasi also in its proving many distressing symptoms of the urinary
organs. Painful urination. Uncomfortable heat in the neck of the
bladder. Renal colic, the pains being so great that they produce nau-
sea. Renal dropsy. Intense pain over right kidney, etc. The whole
urinary tract is painful and subject to bleeding. But bleeding espe-
cially in the absence of the menstrual flow is the feature of this rem-
edy. Wherever there is an inflammatory spot or catarrhal condition
of the mucous membrane it will bleed in case the menstrual flow does
not appear. We have other medicines having the symptoms of vica-
rious hsemorrhage, such as Hamamelis, Phosphorus and Bryonia, but
Senecio has this condition strikingly and is one of the newer remedies
for such condition.

“Dysmenorrhoea with urinary symptoms ; cutting in sacral and hyjx)-
gastric regions.” “Hacking cough at night.” “Amenon*hoea from a
cold ; nervous irritability ; lassitude ; dropsy.” “Menstrual irregularities
in consumptive patients.” “Mucous rattling with suppressed cough.”

Leucorrhoea especially in chlorotic girls. It is a marked remedy in
chlorosis, in the anaemic state with a green hue, called “green sickness”
by the laity.


SENEGA

Senega is an old lung tonic, and I suspect it has been an ingredient
in most of the lung medicines for the last one hundred years. It has
been only partially proved, and needs further proving to bring out its
particulars. When a medicine has been fully proved, it can be said of
it that its symptoms are so well known that they can be examined as an
image, i. e., the drug has affected all portions of man in such a manner
as to stamp itself upon all of his natural actions and functions in a way
peculiar to itself. This remedy has done some wonderful things, and
these results in many instances can be only attributed to mere guess-
work. This is about all that can be said in favor of careless and loose
prescribing.

Senega is more especially a chest medicine. It is full of chest symp-
toms, and its relation to the air passages makes it worthy of considera-
tion, although many of the individualizing symptoms have not yet been
brought out. From its most striking action on the mucous membrane
of. thd ait passages, ats chie£ use h^> been in ^hest complaints,, asthmatic



SENEGA


827


complaints, in various forms of dyspnoea, cardiac and asthmatic.

There arc violent pains in the chest, especially like those of pleurisy.
It has also symptoms like pneumonia ; one of its most useful spheres
is in pleuro-pneumonia. The pleuro-pneumonia of cattle has almost
found its specific in Senega. The finding of specifics is more likely
to be true of animals than of human beings, as a remedy that is only
partially indicated may cure an animal, but it requires much finer dis-
crimination among remedies in dealing with human beings. A violent
attack of pleurisy associated with pneumonia, too deep and too vicious
for Bryonia, often finds its remedy in Senega. Senega is a sort of
cross between Bryonia and Rhus tox. The violent symptoms are those
of Bryonia, yet it is worse from rest, unlike Bryonia. The symptoms
of Senega are not so much like Rhus tox., but it has an amelioration
like that of Rhus tox., better from motion, the pains being worse when
at rest. The chest pains, rheumatic pains and inflammatory pains are
worse during rest, but the cough is made worse from motion and the
asthmatic troubles are made worse from the slightest motion. The
Senega patient cannot walk up hill ; he cannot walk against the wind,
because it brings on chest symptoms and dyspnoea.

The rattling in the chest is as marked as in Antimonium tartancum
the tenacious mucus is as copious, as gluey and stringy as in Kali bi-
chromicum, so much is this the case that he can get it only part way
up, and with a spasmodic effort he shallows it, like Spongia and Caus-
ticuni. Senega is a remedy of dc<|>i; action, as well as an acute rem-
edy. It is filled with shar|> and acu^ Sufferings, sufferings that come
on with rapidity, from taking cold, or from a cold that involves the
whole chest.

There are some eye symptoms in the text that are worthy of atten-
tion. ‘Taralysis of the muscles of the eyes.*' “Iritis and specks upon
the cornea.” ‘Taresis of the superior oblique.” ^'Aching over the
orbits.” “Eyes pain as if pressed out.” “Blepharitis.” It has cured
opacity of the vitreous humor.

Of the larynx the text says, ‘'Aphonia from severe cold or excessive
use of the voice.” “Constant tickling and burning in the larynx, leav-
ing the patient not a moment’s rest and preventing him from lying
down ; fear of suffocation.” When Senega is indicated there is a dry-
ness in the mouth and throat, and the cough is incessant ; there is a
constant metallic coppery taste in the mouth and throat, as if he were
coughing up pulverized copper. A very little of this medicine in prov-
ing will produce such a dryness and metallic taste in the mouth, and
such a tickling at the root of the tongue, the pharmx and larynx, and
it will finally end in a copious, thick, gluey discharge. “Grippe, with
stitches in right eye when coughing.” “Laryngeal phthisis.” “Copi-
ous accumulation of tough mucus in air-tubes, which Causes the great-



8a8


SENEGA


est, often ineffectual, efforts at coughing and hawking for its expul-
sion/' This thick, tough mucus will lead most routine prescribers to
give such medicines as Kali bichromicum, Lachesis and Mercurius cot^
rosivuSy entirely overlooking the usefulness of Senega.

It is a remedy of very wide range in complaints of the chest, larynx
and trachea, in the severe ‘‘colds’* that settle in these parts, especially
when associated with tenacious mucus, so tenacious that he cannot
cough it up ; it seems at times that he will strangle ; he will cough and
vomit in the effort to expel the mucus, but it seems to disappear and
he docs not know where it goes.

“Sensation as if the chest were too narrow.” “Most violent suffo-
cation with asthma." “Short breathing and oppression of chest when
going up stairs.” “Dyspnoea especially during rest.”

“Dry cough with aphonia ; worse in cold air and from walking,” is
like Phosphorus and Rumex, Those two remedies cause a cough,
which commences when he first goes into the air. Senega has another
feature like Phosphorus, in that the cough is so violent that it makes
him shake from head to foot ; it brings on a tremulous feeling all over
the body. He coughs from inhaling cold air ; the cough is violent and
the expectoration most difficult. In old, chronic catarrh of the chest
for the earlier stages of which Bryonia was the most similar remedy,
with this thick, tough, ropy mucus. Senega is most suitable, and even
when the patient is in the last stages of consumption. The symptoms
become most troublesome, the gagging and coughing and effort to ex-
pectorate because of the thick, ropy mucus, are very distressing. He
breaks out in a cold sweat, especially on the upper part of the body.
The chest is full of coarse rales from the tough mucus which he can-
not expectorate. We think in such a case of remedies like Antirno-
nium tartaricurri, Pyrogen, Kali bichromicum, etc., but this remedy is
just as suitable, especially when there is a great amount of dryness in
the throat and larynx, dryness in the throat during sleep and observed
on waking, and inability to expectorate the tough ropy mucus. “Shak-
ing cough,” 2. e», the cough is so violent that it shakes the whole frame.
The concussion from the cough causes discharge of urine involuntarily
and causes violent pains in the head and over the eyes. Senega is
called for especially in those cases where the pleura has been involved
at one stage or the other. The pains are increased and it seems as if
the chest would be torn on coughing. “Walls of the chest sensitive
or painful when touched.” "'Profuse secretion of mucus in lungs of
old people/^ Senega is one of the leading remedies for the tough
mucus and coarse rales in old people without any other symptoms. It
very often clears the throat and helps to patch up an old man when he
is breaking down. “Great rattling of naucus in chest and flying pains
in chest.”



It has sometimes cured pleuro-pneumonia when there was the ex-
treme exhaustion of Phosphorus and Arsenicum. In such cases Sen-
ega has caused reaction ; it has such weakness. Especially is it suited
in the advanced cases of phthisis, when those symptoms that I have
mentioned are present. It acts as a palliative. It does excellent patch
work without serious aggravations, as it relates more especially to
superficial conditions. It is not as deep acting as Sulphur and Silicca.
We give such remedies only when we have a. reasonable assurance that
we can cure, when the patient is yet curable. But when we have given
up all hope, then we pay more attention to the most painful parts ; we
pay more attention to the local symptoms, to the group which causes
the most suffering and attempt to do patch work. If the sufferings
in the chest and the exhaustion become most severe it is true that
Arsenicum will patch him up a little and make him feel more like life,
and he will go on to the end with more comfort. If the pains in the
chest are most severe such medicines as Senega or Bryonia will help
him ; if he is sore and feels as if bruised and he most move from
side to side Arnica will relieve ; but these are not the remedies to go
deep into the life and eradicate a deep-seated disease like phthisis.
Yet with these one may take a consumptive patient in comfort to the
very grave, by simply patching him up and prescribing for his imme-
diate sufferings. Homoeopathic remedies give these incurable suffer-
ers much greater comfort than sprays and anodynes.

The pains of the chest are worle during rest and on inspiring.
Stitching pains in the chest when Iyii% on the right side. Great sore-
ness in the walls of the chest. Palp* under right scapula when cough-
ing. The chest pains are better while walking in the open air

SEPIA

Sepia is suited toi tall, slim w^omcn with narrow pelvis and lax fibers
and muscles ; such a woman is not well built as a woman. A woman
who has the hips of a well-built man is not built for child bearing, she
cannot perform the functions of a woman without becoming relaxed
in the pelvic organs and tissues. Such a build is a Sepia build, very tall,
slim, narrow, straight from the shoulders all the way down.

One of the strongest features of the Sepia patient is found in the
mind, the state of the affections. To a great extent, the remedy seems
to abolish the ability to feel natural love, to be affectionate. To illus-
trate it in the language of the mother : ‘1 know I ought to love my
children and my husband, I used to love them, but now I have no feel-
ing on the subject.’^ The love does not go forth into affection, there
is a lack of realization, a lack of ability to register such affections ; the
love does not manifest itself. Upon reflection it will be seen that the



830


SEPIA


love itself cannot be so changed, but the affections can be as they are
the expression of the love. It is a striking feature of this remedy that
the affections are stilled ; all things seem strange ; she does not realize ;
she may even be estranged and turned aside from those she loves.
This is on the border land of insanity ; it is quite a different state of
affairs from that when a woman abused by her husband knows in her
rational mind that she docs not love him.

This state is brought out in a woman during confinement, after uter-
ine and other haemorrhages, after prolonged indigestion ; high living
with disturbance in the circulation, pallor, enfeeblement of body and
mind. It is seldom manifested in a man, but it is a striking feature in
the woman. It often comes on when nursing a child, from nursing
an over-vigorous child or twins who require much lacteal fluid and
drag her down. It may be brought out in a woman who has an over-
vigorous husband. Excessive sexual excitement and over-indulgence
brings on coldness and she becomes a cold woman.

She who has been excitable, nervous, and fidgety becomes the oppo-
site, cold, takes on a stoical state of mind. Yet Sepia has all the ex-
citability of any medicine, aggravated by noises, excitement, company,
extreme irritability of tissue and mind ; an excitable suicidal patient ;
melancholy, sits and says nothing ; taciturn ; answers questions in
monosyllables when pressed to answer. An absence of all joy, ina-
bility to realize that things arc real ; all things seem strange ; no affec-
tion for the delightful things of life ; no joy ; life has nothing in it for
her. She is worse in company yet dreads to be alone ; and when she
is in company she is spiteful, in the midst of her dullness of mind she
is spiteful ; she vents her spite on those she loves best. The Sepia
woman permits no opposition to her opinions. The best impression of
her is lost if controversy arises.

The next most general state is a peculiar sallowness which you will
need to see to fix in your mind. Sepia has jaundice, yet this peculiar
sallowness is a waxy, anaemic appearance, mottled with yellow, a yel-
low, sallow tint across the nose and the cheeks described as a yellow
saddle across the nose and down the sides of the face. It is also com-
mon for the whole face to be covered with enormous freckles, great
brown patches as in pregnancy, brown spots on the cheeks, brown
warts, warts that have been red or pink become pigmented ; liver spots
on the face, chest, and abdomen. The skin of the face is sallow and
doughy, looks as if the muscles were flabby : you will seldom see Sepia
indicated in the face that shows sharp lines of intellect ; a person who
has been thinking a long time has the lines and sharp angles of a
thinking person, of one who possesses will and intellect. The Sepia
subject is one who is rather stupid and dull, thinks slowly and is for-
getful ; the mind is anything but active and we see it in the face. _ In



many instances, however, the Sepia patient is a quick patient, but the
dullness of intellect is the most striking feature and it reflects itself
upon the face. The face is generally puffed, often smooth and rounded
and marked by an absence of intellectual lines and angles.

This patient is anaemic, pale lips and ears, pale, sallow face, fingers
and hands become shrivelled, sallow, waxy, bloodless. Sepia estab-
lishes a progressing emaciation of the body and the skin becomes
wrinkled ; the person looks prematurely old ; wrinkles intermingled
'With sallow spots on the face in one who is 35 years of age, making
him look as if he were fifty. A child looks like a shrivelled dried up
old person.

With all complaints there is constipation. The bowels lose their
ability to expel their contents and the patient is always constipated ;
constipation during pregnancy ; slow, difficult stool ; stool like sheep
dung. Always has a feeling of a lump in the rectum, never able to
empty the bowels ; though he goes to stool there is always a sensation
of a lump remaining in the rectum. When the stool passes into the
lower bowel, it is not expelled until there is an accumulation, which
presses the stool out.

Another feature present in most Sepia patients is a gnawing hunger,
seldom satisfied ; even though he eats plentifully he feels a gnawing,
empty, hungry feeling in the stomach, not relieved by eating or re-
lieved only for a moment. This is striking especially when associated
with the constipation and the peculiar state of the affections.

When these symptoms are associalied with prolapsus, Sepia will cer-
tainly cure, no matter how bad the prolapsus has been or what kind of
displacement there is. It is the result of the state of relaxation of all
the internal parts as if they were let down, wants a bandage to hold
the parts up or wants to place the hand or napkin on the parts ; a
funncling sensation, better sitting down and crossing the limbs.

When these symptoms group themselves together, the gnawing hun-
ger, the constipation, the dragging down, and the mental condition, il
is Sepia and Sepia only. One is not sufficient but it is the combination.

Sepia has a marked catarrhal tendency, tendency to milky discharges
from mucous membranes. Long after disgestion has ceased and the
stomach is empty comes nausea and sometimes vomiting. It is a ca-
tarrhal state of the stomach and when it persists with the milky vomit-
ing, Sepia is very valuable. This is not an uncommon feature in the
vomiting of pregnancy. Vomits up food and after emptying the stom-
ach of its contents, vomits or eructates a milky fluid ; morning vomit-
ing, first of food, then a milky substance. Do not confound this with
vomiting of milk. Some medicines vomit milk alone and Sepia does
this also.

-Whitishj milky disc^ajges fruiu the posterior nares, from, the vagina,



83a


SEPU


excoriating, milky leucorrhoea, which at times takes on the appearance
of curds, thick, cheesy, and horribly offensive ; it has also thick, green
and yellow discharges ; it has dry crusty formations on mucous mem-
branes.

Prolonged inveterate catarrh of the nose, thick, green, and yellow
crusts are blown from the nose and sometimes are hawked from the
posterior nares, thick, leathery formations. Loss of taste and smell.
The smell of cooking food, meat and broth causes nausea. Catarrh of
the chest with thick, tenacious, ycllov/ expectoration, accompanied with
a violent cough, retching, gagging, violent prolonged retching, vomit-
ing ; dry cough and yet there is rattling. Whooping cough ; asthmatic
cough with retching and loss of urine. The cough is a violent one.
Cough during first sleep [Lack,, in irritable children Cham,). Tuber-
culosis. Quick consumption after a suppressed gonorrhoea ; if given
soon enough it will check. Spasmodic dry cough in the evening until
midnight ; holds the chest during the cough {Bry., Natr. sulph,, Phos.)

Eruptions of the skin. Tendency to produce herpetic eruptions
about the genitals, lips and mouth ; ring-worm upon the face and body.
It has cured zona, and herpetic eruptions of the labia and foreskin.
Vesicular eruptions in the axilla, upon the tips of the elbows ; eruptions
that pile up in great crusts on the elbows ; thick crusts form upon the
joints ; eruptions between the lingers ; moist eruptions that pour out a
watery fluid, or thick, yellow, purulent fluid.

Sepia produces the induration that belongs to some forms of erup-
tion like epithelioma ; indurations will form on the lips and crack and
bleed. The scaly eruption that looks like epithelioma is especially
Sepia. When the scales come off a yellow, green, ichorous base re-
mains, and as soon as one crust peels off, another forms ; finally if torn
off prematurely, it bleeds. Sepia has cured epithelioma of the lips,
wings of the nose, and eyelids It has cured old indurations caused
by the use of a clay pipe, where it continues to form, and beneath it is
seen this thick, yellow, purulent exudation. It is indicated in lumps
and lupoid formation on the skin, where there is infiltration ; sometimes
healing from the centre to form a ring ; this is a typical Sepia condi-
tion. The hardness and purple color are what are peculiarly Sepia.
Sepia stands on a par with Lack, for this purple aspect.

Sepia has a hysterical diathesis. Breaks out in spells of weeping,
is sad one minute, gentle, yielding, and in another she is disagreeable,
excitable, obstinate. You do not know what she is going to do next.
She says and does strange things, makes errors, no dependence can be
placed on her ; no mental endurance ; no affection for her family ; whole
mind weak and disordered, not when there is fever, but it is a chronic
manifestation of psora or sycosis. Fear of ghosts ; that something un-
usual will happen ; atmosphere full of figures, not seen, but she knows



SEPIA


833


that they are there, departed friends or other forms and very often in
accordance with religions belief. Never happy unless annoying some
one ; relating her grievances ; sarcastic ; insulting ; fear of insanity,
poverty. 'Tears to starve, is peevish and feels mortilied, easily fright-
ened and full of forbodings.’’ "Passionate, irritable ; the greatest
irritability from slight causes, very easily offended. Vexed and dis-
posed to scold.’’

The headaches are nervous, bilious, periodic, violent, involving the
whole head ; congestive. Generally better lying down, keeping per-
fectly quiet ; worse from ordinary motion, but relieved by violent mo-
tion, like most Sepia symptoms in general ; she can walk off her suffer-
ings. Stasis of the brain, slowness of thought, mind will not work and
mental labor aggravates the headache. A good substantial sleep re-
lieves it, but if she is awakened after sleeping a short time, the head-
ache is worse. The same is seen in regard to motion ; moving the eyes,
head, or body, moving about in a warm room aggravates the pain, but
a good, long walk in the open air until she becomes heated up, relieves.
It is a sluggish state of the body which requires exercise, and violent
exercise to keep it in a state of comfort. The Sepia symptoms are
worse in the open air unless combined with continued motion, better
from exercise in the open air and worse in the house. The headache
is worse from stooping, motion, coughing, going up stairs, jarring,
light, turning the head, lying on the back and from thinking, but con-
tinued, hard exercise relieves, as does a tight bandage, and the applica-
tion of heat, though worse in a warm loom.

There are Sepia headaches that particularly affect the occiput, worse
in the morning ; great pain through t3ie eyes and temples ; relieved by
sweat, worse on beginning to move ; throbbing felt on stooping, worse
on going up stairs.

The Phos, headache is relieved by sleep, but continued, rapid mo-
tion aggravates. Cannot endure it. Sepia is suited to the old fash-
ioned bilious headaches. It is better from vomiting ; the pain gradu-
ally increases, loathing of food, ilien nausea, vomiting and the patient
falls asleep and wakens without the headache. Sang, resembles it, is
better vomiting, better in a dark room ; the direction is different, how-
ever.

Neuralgia of the head ; periodic sick-headaches in gouty people ; vio-
lent, congestive headaches in young women sensitive to noise, w^omen
of extremely delicate fiber, especially those with dark eyes, dark skin,
and who become sallow from sickness. Jaundice often sets in with the
headaches ; at the close of the headache vomiting, and in a few days
jaundice, which passes away but returns again with the next headache.
Headache every morning with nausea ; the smell of food repulsive.

Sepia takes on a stupid state of mind as mentioned above ; will not



834


SEPIA


work ; will not answer questions ; as if intoxicated,, benumbed ; eyes
and face swollen, sclerotics yellow and jaundice. This sometimes
ends in violent vomiting spells. Craves spicy, pungent, bitter things
like beer — in old drunkards with headache ; threatening apoplexy-
‘‘Apoplexy in men addicted to drinking and sexual excesses, with a
disposition to gout and haemorrhoids, etc.” “Threatening apoplexy in
a dissipated, middle-aged man, who is subject to arthritic and haemor-
rhoidal complaints ; they have usually passed through several light at-
tacks of apoplexy and are frequently visited with prodromic symp-
toms.”

Under external head we have eruptions and falling out of the hair ;
yellow crusts ; oozing of pus and other fluids ; vesicles : eczema of in-
fants.

Eyes ; catarrhal symptoms with vesicles and pustules ; granular lids ;
ulcers and psoric manifestations ; various infiltrative conditions of thei
eyes and about the eyes ; pustules on the margins of the lids, pustules
on the globe of the eye, seems as if looking through a gauze ; tarsal-
tumors, agglutination of lids, styes, etc.

The ears discharge thick, yellow pus ; offensive.

The nose is a favourite* locality ; loss of smell ; yellow or green thick
crusts fill the nose and cannot be blown out ; inveterate discharge of
thick yellow pus. ‘'Large offensive-smelling plugs from the nose,
often so large that they have to be drawn back into the mouth and
expectorated, causing vomiting. Di*y coryza especially of left nostril.
Blowing of large lumps of yellow or green mucus or yellow-green
cursts with blood from the nose.” This is descriptive of the worst
forms of catarrh ; very few will let it run on thus far, they apply lo(;al
treatment and heal the nose up, and, the process at once going to the
chest, phthisis pituitosa comes on.

The gums settle away from the teeth. Toothache and neuralgia
from taking cold.

Sensation of a lump in the throat (like Lack,), but the latter is bet-
ter from swallowing. (The same in worm troubles indicates Cina.)
Uneasiness of the collar and corsets like Lach^ Worse in the first
sleep like Lack.

Sepia brings out many things in connection with the appetites, thirst,
eating, drinking and stomach, etc. The Sepia patient is generally con-
scious of a spoiled stomach, sour and bitter eructations of food, of
mucus and bile, sour and bitter vomiting of food and mucus ; all-gone,
hungry, empty feeling in the stomach sometimes not relieved by eating.
At times a gnawing pain, a sinking, a gnawing hunger which is not
always relieved by eating. Almost constant nausea, especially in the
morning, nausea and eructations and vomiting of milky fluid ; when the
stomaeh is empty, vomiting, spitting up, eructations of milky fluid.



SEPIA


835


Aversion to food, to the smell of food cooking, like Colch. and Ars.
The patient gets up in the morning with an all-gone feeling, distress
and fulness in the stomach followed by belching and uprisings of mu-
cus, and milky fluids ; vomiting of pregnancy ; vomiting of milky water
in the morning ; this is a characteristic of Sepia.

Acrid, burning eructations ; heartburn ; rancid eructations, excoriat-
ing the throat ; pyrosis which is another form of eructation ; acrid,
sour fluids burning all the way up, causing contraction, tingling, smart-
ing.

Nausea violent ; deathly sinking accompanied with an awful anxiety
in the stomach.

Phos, has more of the typical hunger which is relieved by eating.
The Ignatia patient is always sighing ; cannot get rid of ‘‘that feeling.*'

Oleander has an all-gone empty feeling as if he would die ; food
docs not relieve, is not digested, but passes undigested the next day.

Lyc, has an all-gone feeling sometimes not better by eating, felt as
markedly before as after earing, and after eating there comes a throb*
Wng.

Kali curb, has it also, without the amelioration from taking food ; it
is even intensified by eating, which is followed by a sensation of fuh
ness and throbbing.

In severe liver and heart affections the stomach is not able to keep
up assimilation : palpitation, great weakness, liver congested, white
stool. Digitalis comes in here with dts deathly sinking not better by
eating. In Sepia this symptom is fessociated with the loss of affec-
tions, the lump in the rectum, with the constipation, etc.

“Pain in the stomach after the simplest food. Stitches and burning
in the stomach. Pain in the stomach worse by vomiting.” This is
peculiar, for vomiting usually relieves the distress. The Sepia stom-
ach becomes like a leather bag, fill it up and the food comes up just as
eaten or at times sour or mixed with bile.

Inflammation of the liver, enlargement with jaundice, pain, fulness,
distension, distress in the region of the liver.

Abdomen distended with flatus, rumbling and distension. These dis-
turbances are often chronic as in pot-bellied mothers ; abdomen cov-
ered with brown spots.

Sepia has removed tape-worm.

Chronic diarrhoea, stools jelly-like, lumpy ; alternating diarrhoea and
constipation ; a great amount of mucus with the stools, whether consti-
pated or diarrhoeic ; hard stool covered with a great quantity of jelly-
like mucus. Goes for days without a stool and then sits and strains
until a copious sweat breaks out and yet no stool, but after assistance
with the finger and prolonged strain a little stool is passed, followed
by a cupful of jelly-like mucus, yellow or yellow-white and very offensive.



836


SEPIA


The acute diarrhoeas and dysenteries with jelly-like stools are more
in keeping with Kali bi, and Colch, This is chronic diarrhoea or in
constipation with stool covered with or followed by jelly-like mucus
is Sepia.

Do not confound with Graph,, which has an enormous stool with
much straining and sweating, and coated with and mixed with a sub-
stance looking like the cooked white egg, as if covered with albumen.

In Sepia there is much offensiveness ; the odor of the stool is un-
usual, loose stools horribly offensive, foetid ; the sweat is foetid, the
urine is foetid. “The stool has a putrid, sourish, foetid smell, expelled
suddenly and the whole of it at once.’* Sepia is given in a routine
way for constipation, when there are few symptoms. There is always
a sense of fulness in the rectum after stool ; ineffectual straining and
sweating in the effort because the patient is weak and exhausted.
Sepia has the ineffectual urging like Nux. She may go for days with
no urging and then the effort is as if she were in labor. Prolapse of
the rectum. Weight as of a ball in the anus not relieved by stool.
Soreness of the anus. Expulsion of ascaridcs. Oozing moisture from
the rectum, soreness l>etween the buttocks.

Haemorrhoids soon form when the rectum is so packed with faeces,
and they give additional trouble.

There is much urinary trouble ; involuntary urination as soon as the
child goes to sleep at night. Sepia is compelled to keep the mind on
the neck of the bladder or she will lose the urine ; urine is lost when
coughing, sneezing, laughing, the slam of a door, a shock, or when the
mind is diverted. Frequent, constant urging to urinate with milky
urine that burns like fire and after standing a while a milky, greyish
deposit will form which is hard to wash off the vessel. Bloody urine,
scanty and suppressed, great pain in the kidneys and bladder with great
bearing down ; sudden desire with tenesmus as if the uterus would
come out. Sudden desire to urinate with cutting like knives and chill
all over the body, if unable to pass it, as a lady in company. I remem-
ber a pitiable case. A saleswoman was obliged to go to the closet
every few minutes ; a violent pain like a knife cutting came with the
desire to urinate, and if the urine was not passed this pain would hold
tight on. She was compelled to keep her mind on the urine or she
would lose it. She was tall, slim, with sallow face, distressed look,
worn and tired. Sepia cured her and she was never troubled again.

The Sepia patient aborts at the third month. All sorts of ulcerative;
conditions, displacements, dragging down and relaxations. Retained
placenta. Subinvolution, all the pelvic organs arc tired and weak.
Metrorrhagia during the climacteric or during pregnancy, especially
at the fifth and seventh months.

Both male and female have aversion to the opposite sex. In the?



SEPIA


837


female there is a state as if she had indulged to excess, when this is
not the case. No endurance, tired after coition, sleepless nights, sleep
full of dreams, jerking of muscles, twitching, leucorrhoca, congestion
of the pelvis. A woman who has been normal in her relations with
her husband brings forth a child, and then the thought of sexual rela-
tions causes nausea and irritability.

The menstrual symptoms are of all sorts, no particular derangement
characterizes Sepia. At one time it was thought that scanty menstrua-
tion was the more striking feature, but this is not necessarily so ; from
provings and clinical observations, it has cured profuse as well as scanty
flow.

Most violent dysmenorrhoea in girls of delicate fiber, sallow girls.

Sepia comes in when the woman ought to menstruate when the child
ceases to nurse ; sometimes the child dies and menses ought to be es-
tablished but do not appear, and the mother runs down, pines away ;
Sepia will establish the flow\

Calc, is the opposite ; the menses come on while the child is nursing.,
Thick greenish acrid or milky Icucorrhtra. Leucorrhcea in little girls.

In the male, old sycotic discharge that has resisted injection. Pro-
fuse yellow, or milky discharge from the urethra, or the “last drop,''
painless. Gonorrhoea after the acute symptoms have subsided. Urine
loaded with urates, stains everything red and often excoriates, very
foetid, associated with prostatitis. ‘‘Gleet ; no pain ; discharge only
during the night, a drop or so staming the linen yellowish ; yellowish
discharge, no burning or urinating ; |)ainless ; of a year and a half's
standing ; orifice of urethra stuck together in the morning, particularly
when the sexual organs arc debilitated by long continuance of disease
or through frequent seminal emissions."

Warts on the genitals ; Sepia is useful when these organs have been
overused and take on such an appearance. Impotence in the male,
loss of sexual feeling in the female.

The close relation between this remedy and Mur ex is worth consid-
ering. The muscular relaxation, dragging down in the abdomen and
pelvis, aggravated from exertion and walking, ameliorated by sitting
with the limbs crossed and ameliorated l)y pressure on the genitalia
would be like both remedies ; but add to this copious menstrual flow'
and violent sexual desire and Murex must be considered and Sepia
eliminated. Both have extreme empty feeling in the stomach. Sepia
has diminished sexual desire and often aversion. Murex has great
soreness and congestion of the uterus, and she is constantly reminded
of the uterus. Murex has acute pain in right side of uterus which
crosses the body diagonally upward to left side of chest, or left breast.
It cures violent dysmenorrhoea. It has been useful in cancer of the
uterus. Watery, greenish, thick, bloody leucorrhoea, causing itching.



838


SILICA


One of Sepia’s most general characteristics is the amelioration from-
violent exercise ; worse on beginning to move but better by getting
warmed up. This condition is closely related to the back symptoms.
There is a great amount of soreness in the back, the spine aches all the
way down. Pressure on the spine reveals sore places, spinal irritation.
Aching in the back mostly from the loins to the coccyx, often coming
on from sitting, and ameliorated from violent exercise. A peculiar
feature is amelioration from hard pressure. The patient commonly
puts a book low down on the chair and presses the back against it.
Sepia does not seem to get the amelioration from lying upon the back
as Natrum mur, does. Stooping aggravates the backache. ‘'Backache
worse from kneeling.’"

Under symptoms of the lower extremities we find great numbness of
the feet. ''Coldness of the legs and feet especially in the evening in.
bed ; when the feet get wram the hands get cold ; icy coldness of the
feet ; profuse sweat of the feet or sweat of unbearable odor causing
soreness between the toes. Swelling of the limbs better while walking.’"

The sleep is full of dreams and distress ; cannot sleep Upon the left
side because of palpitation of the heart. Palpitation in sleep, with
pulsations and trembling all over the body, pulsations to the finger tips.

In old cases of suppressed malaria. Sepia brings back the chill, but
its most useful sphere is after a bad selection of the remedy and the
case becomes confused. Where a remedy has been selected for only
a part of the case and changed it a little but the patient gets no better.
It will be seen that the fever, chill, and sweat are just as erratic as can
be. Natrum mur, is one of the greatest malarial remedies, but it is
full of order like China, Sepia is full of disorder. In a case confused
by remedies think of Calc., Ars., Sulph., Sepia and Ipecac. Never give
China or Natrum mur. for irregular symptoms and stages.

Sepia is complementary to Natrum mur. Aside from the stupid
condition of the mind it has an excitable condition of the general ner-
vous system that is often marked in Natrum mur. as, for instance,
being disturbed by a noise, the slam of a door, etc. It produces jerk-
ing of the muscles in sleep ; constantly wakes from imaginary noises,
thinks someone has called her ; the last disturbance about the house
wakens her.

Worse before and during menses ; during pregnancy; after eating ;
during first sleep ; change of weather ; during a thunderstorm ; over-
whelming fear.


sn.icA


The action of Silica is slow. In the proving, it takes a long time to
develop the symptoms. It is, therefore, suited to complaints that de-



SILICA


839


velop slowly. At certain times of the year and under certain circum-
stances peculiar symptoms will come out. They may stay with the
prover the balance of his life. Such are the long-acting, deep-acting
remedies ; they are capable of going so thoroughly into the vital order
that hereditary disturbances are routed out. The Silica patient is
chilly ; his symptoms are developed in cold, damp weather, though
often better in cold, dry weather ; symptoms come out after a bath.

The mental state is peculiar. The patient lacks stamina. What
Silica is to the stalk of grain in the field, it is to the human mind.
Take the glossy, stiff, outer covering of a stalk of grain and examine
it, and you will realize with what firmness it supports the head of grain
until it ripens ; there is a gradual deposit of Silica in it to give it stam-
ina. So it is with the mind ; when the mind needs Silica it is in a
state of weakness, embarrassment, dread, a state of yielding. If you
should listen to the description of this state by a prominent clergyman,
or a lawyer, or a man in the habit of appearing in public with self-confi-
dence, firmness and fulness of thought and speech, he would tell you
he had come to a state where he dreads to appear in public, lie feels
his own selfhood so that he cannot enter into his subject, he dreads it,
he fears that he will fail, his mind will not work, he is worn out by
prolonged efforts at mental work. But he will say that when he forces
himself into the harness he can go on with ease, his usual self-command
returns to him and he does well ; he: does his work with promptness,
fulness, and accuracy. The peculiar Silica state is found in the dread
of failure. If he has any unusual libental task to perform, he fears
he will make a failure of it, yet he xiocs it well. This is the early
state ; of course there comes a time when he cannot perform the work
with accuracy and still he may need Silica.

Another case is illustrated in a young man who has studied for years
and is now nearing the end of his course. He dreads the final exam-
inations but he goes through them all right, then a fatigue comes upon,
him and for years he is unable to enter his profession. He has this
dread of undertaking anything.

Irritable and irascible when aroused ; when let alone he is timid,
retiring, wants to shirk everything : mild, gentle tearful women. The
Silica child is cross and cries when spoken to. It is the natural com-
plement and chronic of Puls, because of its great similarity ; it is a
deeper, more profound remedy. Religious melancholy, sadness, irri-
tability, despondency. Lyc, is stupid, the dread of undertaking any
thing in from a general knowledge of inability. In Silica it is imaginary.,

Silica is not suitable for the irritability and nervous exhaustion com-
ing on from business brain-fag, but more for such brain-fag as belongs
to professional men, students, lawyers, clergymen. A lawyer says, “I
have never been myself since that John Doe case.” He went through



840


StIUCA


a prolonged effort and sleepless nights followed. Silica restores the
brain.

The remedy produces inflammation about any fibrinous nidus and
suppurates it out. It acts upon constitutions that are sluggish and in-
flarnes fibrous deposits about old imbedded missiles. Slow nutrition ;
if the individual receives a slight injury it suppurates and the cicatrix
indurates, is hard and nodular. Along the track of a knife-cut, is a
fibrinous deposit due to inferior and slow nutrition. An old ulcer heals
with induration. Where cicatricial tissue forms, it is indurated, shiny,
glassy. If Silica is given in such cases, it will throw out abscesses in
these cicatrices and open them out. It will open up old ulcers and heal
them with a normal cicatrix.

In ordinary people if a splinter lodges in the tissues, a suppuration
will slough it out, but in these feeble constitutions a plastic deposit
takes place about it and it remains. This is not the highest state of
order. Suppuration takes place about a bullet and pushes it out, that
is the best state that can be asked for.

Silica, therefore, hastens the formation of abscesses and boils. It
suppurates out old wens and indurated tumors. It has cured recur-
rent fibroids and old indurated tumors.

It there is a deposit of tubercle in the lungs, Silica establishes an
inflammation and throws it out, and if the whole lung be tubercular
a general suppurative pneumonia will be the result ; hence, the danger
of giving such remedies and the danger of repeating them in advanced
stage of phthisis. Not only Silica but many other remedies have the
power to suppurate out deposits, the result of poor nutrition.

Warty growths on the skin, moist eruptions, pimples, pustules, ab-
scesses. Suppurating cavities. It establishes healing in old fistulous
openings with indurated margins. Catarrhal suppurations ; copious
muco-piirulent discharge from the eyes, nose, ears, chest, vagina, etc.

Complaints from the suppression of discharges ; suppressed sweat.
These suppressions produce a slate in the economy that threatens what
little order is left. An offensive foot-sweat ceases after getting the
feet wet, and is followed by chills and violent complaints. Silica cures
long lasting foot-sweat when the symptoms agree, or complaints that
have lasted since the suppression of a foot-sweat. Thick, yellow ca-
tarrhal discharges. They say, '1 have had this discharge so many
years,” and when you investigate, you find that there has been some
shock, a cold, that suppressed the foot-sweat and it has not appeared
since. Silica will bring back that sweat, cause the catarrhal discharge
to cease and in time cure the foot-sweat. Catarrhal discharges from
the nose and other places, indurations, tumors, chronic gastritis, brain-
fag, all dating back to the suppression of foot-sweat or otorrhc 3 ea, or
to the healing up of a fistula.



SlUCA


841


Chronic sick-headache attended with nausea and even vomiting.
Headache commencing in the back of the head in the morning or
towards noon going to the forehead, worse towards night, from noise ;
better from heat ; supr^i-orbital neuralgias ; better from pressure and
heat and attended with profuse head-sweat. Cold, clammy, offensive}
sweat on the forehead. When a Silica patient exerts himself he sweats
on the face, the lower part of the body is, dry or nearly so. It requires
great exertion to produce general sweat. A striking feature is the
sweat about the upper parts of the body and the head. Headache once
a week (Gels., -Lyc., Sang., Siilph.). Headache up through the back
of the neck and especially to the right side of the head. Resembles
Sang. Weight in the occiput as if it would be drawn back, with a
rush of blood to the head, like Carbo veg. and Sepia. Headache worse
from cold air. Psor. wears a fur cap even in summer. Magn. mur.
is better from wrapping up the head but still wants to be in the air.
Rhus sweats on the body ; the head is dry. Puls, sweats on one side
of the head.

Vertigo to fainting ; with nausea ; vertigo creeping up the spine into
the head.

It is especially necessary for the Silica patient to avoid the cold air,
(must have the head well wrapped up, especially the part that is painful,
and this part perspires copiously.

“Headache worse from mental exertion, excessive study, noise, mo-
tion, even jarring from foot-steps, U|ht, stooping, pressing at stool,
talking, cold air, touch.’' "

Moist, scaly eruption on the scalp, eczema capitis.

Silica is suited to the phagedenic ukers of syphilis, eating and spread-
ing ulcers on the scalp. Inflammatory conditions between the scalp
and skull, tumors forming, filled with a grumous fluid ; as in infancy,
it will remove blood tumors. Cephalatoma neonatorum, enchondroses.
Silica is especially of use in the treatment of affections of the carti-
lages, growths about the joints, about the fingers and toes.

The complaints of Silica are associated with hardened glands, but
especially about the neck, the cervical, salivary, and particularly the
parotid glands ; large, hard parotids. The parotids enlarge from every
cold and get hard, (Bar. carb.. Calc., Sulph.)

Puls, suits the acute inflammation of the parotid, but Silica is indi-
cated in the more chronic forms due to psora, “scrofulous glands."

Many inflammations and conditions of the eyes. Ulcers on the cor-
nea ; pustujes on the lids, falling of the lashes, suppuration of the mar-
gins of the lids with burning, stinging and redness. Intense photo-
phobia in all eye complaints. Scrofulous cases with sore eyes ; the
most inveterate and. chronic cases; suppuration; thin, watery, copious
discharge, or bloody, thick and yellow like pus, with ulceration.

106



842


SXUGA


Syphilitic iritis. “Perforating or sloughing ulcer on the cornea.
Spots and cicatrices on the cornea. Fungus haematodes. Eyes in-
flamed from traumatic causes ; foreign particles have lodged in the
eyes ; abscesses ; boils around the eyes and li^ds ; tarsal tumors, styes.
Affections appearing in the angles of the eyes ; fistula lachrymalis ;
stricture of lachrymal duct.” This is a general survey of the eye af-
fections in Silica.

There is no deeper remedy than Silica in eradicating the tubercular
tendency, when the symptoms agree ; most tubercular cases are worse
from cold, wet weather ; better in cold dry weather.

The most inveterate cases of catarrh of the ear ; old offensive, thick,
yellow otorrhoea ; following scarlet fever ; all sorts of abnormalities in
hearing, even to deafness. Roaring in the ears associated with many
diseases and hardness of hearing ; hissing, roaring like steam ; like a
train of cars, many times from mechanical cause and other times from
a condition of the nerves. It is commonly the beginning of a dry
catarrh of the middle ear ; the remedy is especially useful when, in
catarrh of the middle car and Eustachian tube, the deafness goes on
for some time and the hearing returns with a snap, due to the escape
of the accumulation of fluids somewhere and described by the patient
as a snap or report. Sudden reports in the ear like a cannon, distant
noises with return of hearing. “Otorrhoea, offensive, watery, curdy,
with soreness of inner nose and crusts on upper lip, after abuse of
Mercury, with caries.” Caries of bone in any part of the body, but
especially of the small bones of the ear, nose and mastoid process,
“Scabs behind the ears.” Rupture of the drum of the ear. Catarrhal
conditions of the internal ear and Eustachian rube, with “feeling of
sudden stoppage in the ear, better by gaping or swallowing.”

Especially with ear troubles, there will be associated indurated paro-
tid glands.

Accumulation of hard crusts in the nose, loss of taste and smell ;
epistaxis, thickening of the mucous membrane ; most vicious catarrh
with discharge of bone from the nose. Horrible, foetid ozaena, old'
syphilitic cases where the nasal bones are destroyed and the nose be-
comes a flabby bag, is sunken in or ulcerated away, leaving an open-
ing. Silica may cure and an artificial nose be made afterwards.

Hepar competes with Silica in syphilitic nasal catarrhs where the
parts are phagedenic ; Hepar, Merc, cor, and Ars,, are the principal
antisyphilitics when there is phagedenic ulceration of the nose. Babies
suffer from bloody nasal discharge. This is often Calc, suL

The aspect of the Silica face is silky, anaemic, waxy, tired. Pustu-
lar and vesicular eruptions spread over the face, the wings of the nose
crack, the lips easily fissure ; crusts form on the margin between the
mucous membrane and the skin ; eruptions and crusts, indurations form



SIUCA


843


under the crusts, they peel off and there is no healing. These indura-
tions are the same kind of inferior tissue that is found under lupus and
epithelioma, a low tissue formation, a low state of eczema that favors
infiltration. The small blood-vessels that lead to them become thicker
and thicker until they become gristly. There is a tendency to make
the soft tissues harder and the hard tissues harder.

In childhood the bones become softer and even necrose or there is
an inflammation of the peristeum and a consequent necrosis. Caries
of the shaft of the long bones, the head of the bones and the cartila-
ginous portions ; abscesses in cartilages, enchondromata. Bones break
down and form fistulous openings. Necrosis of the jaw, the joints,
the hip-joint, the tibia, necrosis of the spine, of the vertebrae, so that
there is curvature of the spine, lateral especially. The homoeopathic
physicians may treat these affections of the bones with the help of ac-
cessory contrivances or supports.

The Silica patient has rough lips, they crack and peel ; rhagades.
Scaly appearances at the margins of the lips, fissures in the corners
of the mouth that indurate. There is often a line of fissure about the
margin of the crust. Little crusts like epithelioma form upon the
wings of the nose and when picked ofE leave a raw surface with no
tendency to heal. Crusty formations upon the ears.

The teeth break down, lose their enamel surface ; the dentine is made
up largely of the silicate of lime and the surface of the tooth becomes
rough, loses its shiny appearance and caries sets in. This often takes
place at the margin of the gum ; ulcers form on the tip of the fangs.
The teeth suffer when it is cold or damp ; toothache in wet weather,
and the teeth arc yellow, decay rapidly, and the gums settle away from
them. All the neuralgias and toothaches are better in a warm room
and from hot drinks. Abscesses about the gums and face, better by
warmth. Severe pain in the jaw, rending, tearing at night, better
from heat ; these pains often end in abscesses about the teeth. Some-
times relieved by pressure unless the part is extremely sore from in-
flammation.

The tongue takes on inflammation of gouty character ; inflamma-
tion with threatening abscess, it fills the whole mouth ; rending, tear-
ing pains, worse at night and better from heat.

In the throat and neck we have inflammation and swelling of all the
glands, external and mternal, all at once or singly. Quinsy with great
pain in the tonsils, one or both ; threatening suppuration. Inflamma-
tion of the parotid, sublingual and much less frequently the submax-
illary and cervical glands ; painful, tumid and hard, with pain in the
neck, shoulders and head, even in acute inflammations. But then we
have the opposite state of affairs. In an old chronic case broken down
with suffering the symptoms are worse after a bath, he wants warmth,



844 siucA

dreads the cold, is always shivering. But when in the neck there is an
acute inflammation the very opposite is present ; he suffers from flushes
of heat, an irregular, flushing fever, cold extremities while the upper
part of the body is hot, sweat about the head and neck, sensation of
heat and suffocation in a warm room. This wifl. be present in quinsy
and abscesses of the glands of the neck, if acute. Silica here shows
its relation to Puls, The latter in its chronic manifestations is over-
burdened with heat, but in an acute trouble is chilly. They are re-
versed as to their acute and chronic slates. Puls, in the beginning is
chilly and sweating.

Silica is full of throat symptoms but is seldom indicated in acute
forms because its pace is too slow ; it comes on after there has been a
series of colds, such colds as are ameliorated a number of times by
Bell, or other acute remedies, but still continue to settle in the tonsils
and in the glands of the neck. Silica breaks up the tendency. There
is a catarrhal state in the throat that is roused up by every cold into
an increased flux, with hoarseness, settling back into the chronic state
again ; chronic catarrhs of the pharynx. It competes with Natrum
mur. in inveterate sore throat.

Silica disturbs the stomach, causes hiccough, nausea and vomiting ;
disturbs the liver. All these symptoms are connected and are hard to
separate. Decided aversion to warm food, desires cold things, wants
his tea moderately cold, he is willing to have his food cold, dislikes
warm food. Sometimes there is a decided aversion to meat, but if he
does take it, he prefers cold, sliced meat. He likes ice cream, ice,
water, and feels comfortable when it is in the stomach ; it is sometimes
impossible for him to drink hot fluids, they cause sweat about the face
and head and cause hot flushes. (Bar, c,)

Silica is disturbed by the extremes of heat and cold, easily affected
in changes even of a few degrees ; he has complaints from being over-
heated ; he gets overheated easily, sweats easily from a slight change
in the temperature and comes down with a cold.

Case: A physician waiting on an obstetrical case, had a little diffi-
culty in the last stage and he became overheated ; putting on his over-
coat and hat he went out on the porch to cool off and was taken down
with asthma, violent cough, copious expectoration with gagging and
vomiting which lasted him for months. The acute remedies he had
taken only palliated, but a dose of Silica cured him almost as quickly
as he was taken down ; he could not tolerate a warm room ; the acute
complaints of Silica are often worse in a warm room and from heat.

Silica has an aggravation from milk. Many times the infant is un-
able to take any kind of milk and, hence, the physician is driven to
prescribe all the foods in the market if he does not know the right
remedy. Natrum carb, and Silica are both useful when the mother^s



SIUCA


84s


milk causes diarrhoea and vomiting. Tlie routinist is likely to give
such medicines as ^.thusa, entirely forgetting Silica. The latter, as
well as Natrum carb., has sour vomiting and sour curds in the stool.
“Aversion the mother’s milk and vomiting.” “Diarrhoea from
milk.” Put these two together.

Although the patient has an aversion to hot things and desires to eat
cold things, yet in chest complaints cold water, ice cream and cold
things in general, increase the cough to gagging, and then the retching
is dreadful ; violent, retching, gagging cough. Retching from an en-
deavor to expectorate is usually controlled by Carlo veg., but Silica
has it.

“Water brash, with chilliness, with brown tongue ; nausea and vom-
iting of what is drunk, worse in the morning ; water tastes bad ; vomits
after drinking.”

The Silica stomach is weak, in a do-nothing state ; old dyspeptics
that have been vomiting a long time, especially those who have ani
aversion to hot food, who cannot take milk, are averse to meat, where
the mental and bodily symptoms agree.

Silica was one of the greatest remedies for the chronic diarrhoea in
the soldiers of our Civil War. It cured a fair percentage of those sick
from sleeping on damp ground, eating all sorts of food until the stom-
ach and bowels were prostrated, from long marches, from going into
the South from the cold North, from becoming overheated. It is like
Sulphur in these symptoms.

Silica has some pain in the stomach and bowels, but there is more
soreness to pressure ; colic and flatulijnee and tenderness to pressure ;
a chronic soreness in the stomach and if it goes on too long, a tuber-
cular state comes on. Abdominal pain relieved by heat ; distension of
the bowels with flatulence and rumbling. Enlarged abdomen in chil-
dren and adults (Bar. c.) ; tightness across the abdomen. Disturbed
by the pressure of the clothes and worse after eating ; the decided
feature is the amelioration from heat.

Constipation from inability of the rectum to expel the faeces. It is
seldom that the stool lies in the rectum without urging like Alumina;
there is much urging to stool but inability to expel. The stool may
be in small balls or large and soft or large and hard, but there is much
straining and sweating about the head and great suffering while strain-
ing ; the rectum becomes impacted, he strains until he is weak and ex-
hausted, the stool slips back ; and he gives up in despair. The only way
he can relieve himself is by some mechanical method. Great straining
at stool belongs to many remedies, but especially to Alumina, Alumen,
China, Natr. mur., Nux vom., Nux mosch., and Silica.

Silica has removed tape-worm, when the symptoms agree (Calc.,
Sul.).



846


SIUCA


It has also cured fistulous openings. Patients who have a tendency
to phthisis are subject to abscesses about the region of the rectum, that
break inside or out and form complete or incomplete openings. These
seem to take the place of what would otherwise come, and if healed by
operation or other external means, the tendency is to end in chest
trouble, either in form of a fixed catarrh or tubercular infiltrations.
Silica is one of the remedies that turns the constitution into order and
in one to five years the opening ceases to be necessary and it will heal.
Surgeons heal it up at once, and for a time the patient is comfortable,
Init in a few years he breaks down.

Caust., Bcrb.^ Calc, r., Calc, p/ios , Graph., Stdph,, etc., arc suitable,
in such cases. Silica here follows Thuja well.

Siij)purative conditions in the urinary tract, catarrh of the mucous
membranes ; old inveterate catarrh of the bladder with pus and blood
in the urine ; copious, stringy deposits in the urine. Prostatitis, sup-
puration, thick, foetid pus from the urethra. Gonorrhoea, pus, or pus-
like discharge from the urethra, slight, shreddy discharge, bloody, pur-
ulent discharge. It is sometimes thick, or is curdy ; this is from any
mucous membrane.

Abscesses along the penis, in the pciincum, prostate gland, testes^
Chronic inllammation and induration of the testes with much pain ;
testes feel as if squeezed, sensitive, painful. Hydrocele in boys or
adults.

In the male, impotence, weakness of the genitals after coition, easily
exhausted, lacks power ; exhausted if he has coition with anything like
ordinary frecjucncy ; it takes him a week or ten days to rest up (Agar,).
Much sweating of the genitals with exhaustion, tired out in the spine,
weak back.

Involuntary discharge of urine at night ; enuresis in little boys and
girls.

In women a prostrated condition of the sexual functions. Serous
cysts in the vagina, fistulous openings and abscesses about the vulva,
w^hich heal with hard nodules or do not heal at all ; little oozing fistulae,
offensive, cheesy discharge. They heal in little nodules and theni
break out again in the same nidus. Women who are subject to these
abscesses.

Bloody discharge between the periods. In Silica there is very easy
flow of blood from the uterus ; a haemorrhagic flow comes on before
the menses from excitement, and especially when nursing ; when the
child is put to the breast a flow of blood starts. Notice the distinction
between Calc, and Silica. Calc, has a tendency to flow during lacta-
tion, but not when the child is put to the breast.

Silica cures hydrosalpinx and pyosalpinx, with copious, watery dis-
charge from the uterus. Sometimes a woman has a lump on one or the



SILICA


847


Other side of the uterus, which steadily increases and all at once there
is a flooding of watery, bloody, purulent fluid and the lump disappears,
soon to fill up again and empty in the same way in a gushing flow.
Such are the manifestayons of hydrosalpinx and pyosalpinx.

Entire absence of the menses for months : amenorrhoea.

Serous cysts in the vagina as large as a pea or an orange, projecting
from the vagina or projecting upwards and flail cned out in conforma-
tion with it. Many little cysts like hickory-nuts grouped together.
Rhod. and Silica have cured these even when there is a paucity ol other
symptoms.

'‘Leucorrhoea, profuse, acrid, corroding, milky, preceded by ciirting
around the navel, causing biting pain, especially after acrid food ; dur-
ing urination : in gushes ; with cancer of the uterus. Hard lumps in
the mamma;.’'

Threatened abscesses of the breasts. If the remedy is given in time,
if will abort the entire trouble. Where the remedy has come too late
and suppuration is inevitable, Silica comes in for its share. There may
be throbbing, tenderness, and weight, yet the remedy controls the pain,
hastens the conclusion, and the opening comes naturally, discharges
little and closes at once. As sure as an anodyne is given, a hot poultice
applied, you will fail with your remedies. There is too much blood in
the part, and the application of a poultice increases the trouble ; it
causes an increased determination of jblood to the part, and if suppura-
tion takes place it causes more breaking down of tissue. Instead of a
thimbleful of pus you will have cupfiils for days and half of the gland
is destroyed.

Women who are so weak they tend to abort, or no conception takes
place. It would seem if the organs were tired out and unable to
perform their functions.

The infant has all sorts of troubles. It grows up sickly ; cannot
tolerate itvS mother’s milk or indeed any kind of food ; vomiting and
diarrhoea. A healthy child will digest even unwholesome milk.

The Silica cough is a dangerous one ; the remedy suits the early
stage of phthisis, when the lung is not extensively involved ; it suits
a cough of catarrhal character when the symptoms agree. If there is
a small abscess in the lung with no tendency to heal, it brings about
repair, causes contraction of its walls. Inveterate cases of catarrh of
the chest with asthmatic wheezing, overexertion. After violent exertion
and overheating, gets in a draft, or takes cold from a bath, becomes
chilled. Humid asthma, coarse rattling, the chest seems filled with
mucus, seems as if he would suffocate. Especially the asthma of old
sycotics, or in children of sycotic parents. It competes with Natr, sul
in such cases. The patient is pale, waxy, anaemic, with great prostra-
tion and thirst.



848


SPIGELIA ANTHELMINTICA


Asthmatic attacks from suppressed gonorrhoea, with liability to de-
velop complaints from over-exertion and over-heating, as in most
sycotics.

Dry, teasing cough with hoarseness, threatening tuberculosis of the
larynx, peculiar cracked voice from thickening of the laryngeal mu-
cous membrane or tubercular involvement ; soreness of the chest threat-
ening miliary tuberculosis, with aggravation from cold and ameliora-
tion from warm drinks. Pulmonary affections in stone-cutters. The
fine dust causes chronic irritation. Silica establishes a suppuration and
throws off these particles of stone.

Expectoration profuse, foetid, green, purulent ; only during the day ;
viscid, milky, acrid mucus, at times pale, frothy blood.

Chronic tendency for colds to settle in the chest and bring on asth-
matic symptoms. Chronic bronchitis ; inflammation of the lungs with
suppuration. Silica especially suits the later stages of pneumonia and
the old, chronic complaints following pneumonia. Slow recovery after
pneumonia (Lyc., Sulph,, Phos., Sil., Calc.). Flushes, rattling in the
chest. Flushes in the face during the day (Sulph.^ Sep., Loch.), rat-
tling like Ant. tart., flushes like SuJph. and Lyc.

Phthisis ; thick, yellow, green, foetid sputa, more pronounced cold-
ness than Calc., and head sweat, pains in the lungs, sore lungs, stitches.

In the extremities we have inflammation of the periosteum. Corns
{Ant. cr.. Graph.). Ingrowing toe-nails. Rheumatism of the soles
of the feet. Cannot walk {Ant. cr., Med., Rnta, Sil).

Begins to sweat as soon as he falls asleep {Puls., Con.).

Epilepsy ; aura in the solar plexus creeping into the chest and
stomach.

Complementary to Calc., Puls., and Thuja.

SPIGELIA ANTHELMINTICA

Spigelia is especially known by its pains. It is indicated in persons
who are debilitated from taking cold and who have become rheumatic,
run down, victims of pain. Hardly a nerve in the body escapes ;
shooting, burning, tearing, neuralgic pains ; they are most marked
about the eyes and jaws, neck, face, teeth, shoulders, burning like hot
needles through the face and neck in any direction, stitching, tearing,
worse from motion, from doing anything, even thinking, mental exer-
tion, worse from eating. Pains in the neck and shoulders arc better
from heat ; those about the eyes are better from cold.

Shooting, tearing pains in the extremities like hot wires. Some-
times the pains are worse from lying down, but most commonly better
from keeping still ; worse from light, eating, motion, jarring ; so sore
in the painful region that any gentle exercise like going up or down



SPIGELIA ANTHELMINHCA


849


stairs, or riding in a carriage that jars, makes the pain unbearable*

The Spigelia patient is sensitive to cold, to atmospheric changes, he
is a rheumatic patient, but the nerves are attacked by neuralgia.

Violent pains about the eyes. Routine practice limits the use of the
remedy to this region. Worse from hard pressure though sometimes
better from it, if gentle and prolonged, firm pressure, but any move-
ment of the pressing hand aggravates. The part is turgesced and
inflamed. Eyes red and engorged.

Neuralgic affections of the muscles of the chest. Many of the
Spigelia pains in the chest are attributed to the heart, but there is in-
tercostal neuralgia ; tearing pains shooting into the shoulders and neck,
especially the left side and down the arm. Pains shooting hither and
thither.

Irregularity of the heart. Painful complaints associated with val-
vular troubles, especially growing out of rheumatism. Pericarditis
and endocarditis of rheumatic character. Thrusting pains in the chest
like a knife, in the eye like a knife.

This remedy needs further proving, its mental symptoms are scarcely
known. "‘Weak memory ; disinclination to work ; restless and anxious,
solicitude about the future ; gloomy, suicidal mood : afraid of pointed
things, pins, etc. ; easily irritated or offended.'' This is all that is
thought worthy of admission into the Guiding Symptoms, showing
that the mental state has not been well brought out.

Many complaints are manifested in^the morning ; tired in the morn-
ing and full of tearing pains. '•

Old anicmic subjects where there has been a transfer of the com-
plaints to the nerves ; broken down, pallid, nervous, with neuralgia,
palpitation, irregular pulse. Vertigo on rising ; gets up with violent
pains and dizziness. So nervous that she must “fly,” full of excite-
ment, cannot keep still, cannot keep control of herself.

Pulsating and stitching in the head ; sometimes better lying with the
head high ; worse from stooping, motion, and from noise. Sometimes
better from washing in cold water when the pain is about the eyes and
head, but worse after washing ; better while the cold water is applied.
With these headaches and neuralgias there is stiff neck and shoulders,
an apparent stiffness in that he cannot move on account of pain. He
sits in a chair as if transfixed, is aggravated from noise, light, from
seeing things move in the room, which he must follow with his eyes.
*‘Fine burning, tearing pains in the brain." It seems to be in the brain^
but is more likely in the nerves of the scalp. “Violent pain in the left
parietal bone on motion or walking or making a misstep ; toward even-
ing — ^violent pressure and pressing outward in the forehead, worse
from stooping, worse from pressure with the hand ; tensive tearing
pain in the forehead, especially beneath the frontal eminence, extend-
107



852


SPONGIA TOSTA


deeper in its action than Aconite, Its cardiac diseases tend to develop
slowly, with actual tissue changes, enlargement of the heart, it takes on
a steady growth and the valves become changed, do not fit, hence, there
are blowing and whizzing sounds, regurgitation with the mental symp-
toms. The two are similar in croup, but Spbngia is deeper, slower in
onset, taking several days for its development. Aconite from expo-
sure to a dry cold wind takes a cold to-day and, of course, comes down
with croup to-night in the first sleep. Before midnight has a dry spas-
modic cough ; hoarse cough ; Spongia has taken a cold yesterday or the
day before. First there is roughness and dryness of the mucous mem-
branes, sneezing. Both remedies have croup before midnight with
dry, hoarse, barking cough, sawing respiration and dry air passages.
They are so similiar that when Aconite only partially controls the con-
dition and it returns the next night, or lasts on beyond midnight, Spon-
gia becomes its natural follower. Spongia comes in because it was
probably the remedy in the beginning. Cases that grow v>^orse each
succeeding night, hoarse barking and crowing before midnight, though
it also has a croup aftci midnight. It is a deep-acting remedy though
its complaints sometimes come on suddenly.

Hepar is worse at night and in the morning. And when Aconite has
apparently controlled, but the croup returns the next morning, Hepar
comes in. Or if it comes on again the next evening with rattling
Hepar will also be suitable. Dry, with no rattling is Spongia. If the
child wants to be covered or says that it is chilly, Hepar, If it says the
room is too warm and kicks the covers ofF, it needs Calc, sul.

The Spongia patient is worse from a warm room, from heat. Wants
to be cool like Iodine, but is better from warm drinks, like Ars,, Nux,
Lyc,

The tendency to affect the glands is striking. As a matter of fact
all the glands are affected ; they gradually enlarge and become increas-
ingly hard. Glands that have undergone inflammation and are in-
creased in size become hard, or they take on hypertrophy. Hyper-
trophy of the heart {Kalmia, Sepia, Naja). Spongia has cured endo*^
carditis, cardiac croup and many other inflammatory diseases of the
heart resulting from rheumatism. Hypertrophy of the thyroid, goitre,
when the heart is affected and the eyes protruding. Cervical glands
enlarged ; inveterate cases of enlarged testes ; orchitis from a sup-
pressed gonorrhoea, a cold or other causes ; gradually increasing hardness.

The whole respiratory apparatus is acted upon ; cardiac dyspnoea
and the most severe forms of asthma. Dryness of the air passages with
whistling and wheezing, seldom rattling, must sit up and bend forward ;
at times after great dyspnoea, white, tough mucus forms in the air
passages, difficult to expectorate ; it comes up and often has to be swal-
lowed (Arn., Caust,, Lack,, Kali c,, Kali $., Nux mos,, Sep,, Staph,y



SPONOIA TOSTA


853


Dyspnoea worse lying down. The modality is common to its other
complaints ; violent, basilar headache forces him to sit up in I)ed and
keep still. Holding the head in the upright position relieves the dull
pressure in the occiput.

There are many headaches. In the occiput, in the forehead, con-
gestive headaches, but most of them are associated with goitre, cardiac
affections and asthma ; they arc due, probably, to sluggish circulation
in the brain.

Face distressed in croup ; anxious ; livid ; pale and bloated ; blue,
pale with sunken eyes ,* red with anxious expression ; alternating red
and pale ; cold sweat. These symptoms are the natural effects of diffi-
cult breathing and are, therefore, not essential in the selection of a
remedy. As primary symptoms, they would probably indicate Ars.^
but when due to cardiac difficulties, they are unimportant.

“Sore throat worse after eating sweet things. Thyroid gland swol-
len even with the chin ; at night, suffocating .spells, barking cough, with
stinging in the throat and soreness in the abdomen.” Enlargement of
the tonsils. Difficult swallowing.

Spongia is the remedy w^hen dyspnoea and cough arc relieved by
warm food ; may be better from warm drinks.

Laryngeal troubles with great hoarseness, in individuals tending
towards phthisis, with tubercular heredity, cachectic aspect, weak lungs,
but no deposit of tubercle. But all at once hoarseness sets in. There
is a tendency for the larynx to becoitie involved in phthisical patients
that need Spongia. This patient takifs an acute cold and it settles in
the larynx with hoarseness. Look Oi|t for that patient, for there is a
tendency for tubercles to deposit where there is inflammation, and the
infiltration instead of being fibrinous may become tubercular. Tend-
ency for the larynx to be first involved in phthisical patients.

In Spongia do not look for the exudative, but tlic infiltrative form
of croup.

Hoarseness with loss of voice, great dryness of the larynx from a
cold ; coryza, sneezing, the whole chest rings, is as dry as a horn ; voice
hissing, croupy, nose dry. There is very little accumulation of mucus,
but at a late date ulceration begins and then there may be a copious
expectoration of mucus. In proportion to the extent of rattling, this
remedy is decreasingly indicated, Hepar has the coarse rattling with
much mucus.

At times an adult takes cold and rawness of the larynx and trachea
is the result. On going to bed she is taken with a spasmodic constric-
tion of the larynx. Laryngismus stridulus is commonly found in
women, fgw.. Gels,, Lauroc, and Spongia. Ign, and Gels, will cure
eight out of ten cases.

The larynx is sensitive to touch in croup, etc., like Phos,



854


SQUILLA


Dry, spasmodic cough, troublesome cough ; cold things taken into
the stomach aggravate. (Veralr. is better from cold water, but the
cough is worse.) If the room becomes too warm, there is a dry, tick-
ling, teasing, croupy spasmodic cough.

In cardiac and asthmatic troubles it resembles Lack,, in the rousing
up from sleep in suilocation ; after the sleep the dyspnoea is worse.

The Phos. dyspnoea is often increased after sleeping, with suffoca-
tion. Loch, has it in a marked degree ; in phthisis when the patient
is about to die, there is sweat on going to sleep ; dyspnoea on going to
sleep and on waking. Lack, palliates and must be repeated.

Cardiac affections accompanied with thick, green or yellow expec-
toration like pus and dyspnoea on falling to sleep so that he must keep
awake as long as he can, fear of sleep in advanced chest troubles.
Grindelia rohnsta will palliate such a case and if the condition is only
catarrhal and not tuberculous, it will cure.

Study especially the cardiac symptoms. ‘The symptoms of circula-
tion are worse ; from mental lassitude, from coughing, from lying on
the right side, before menses, after lying down, sitting bent forward,
from smoking, from going up stairs. Awakens in fright and feels as
if suffocating. Falling asleep early at night, suffocation awakens.*'
I have mentioned these symptoms, but read them for emphasis.

Ebullitions, distended veins ; dropsy in cavities of the body. Es-
pecially suits young persons of tubercular parents, who remain weak,
are pallid and do not thrive. Tubercular diathesis.

Itching but no eruption. Seems always ready for an eruption to
appear. Has only simplest herpetic eruptions. Itching all over and
no visible eruption.

In acute endocarditis, the principal remedies are Spongia, Ahrot,^
Sepia, and Kalmia. Naja in valvular diseases.

SQUILLA

Squilla was given in the olden times by the old school in all lung,
bronchial, and kidney affections ; pneumonia, asthma, scanty urine and
dropsical affections.

Cough; Has a loose morning cough and a dry evening cough {Alum,,
Carbo veg,, Phos, ac,, Sep,, Stram,, Puls., Squilla). Puls, and Squil,
being strong here, but Squil. has a hard cough ; coughs, gags, sneezes ;
urine escapes and quite frequently fasces ; the patient coughs until he
is covered with sweat ; he gags and coughs and finally succeeds in rais-
ing two or three little lumps of white, tenacious mucus ; it is a spas-
modic cough caused by mucus in the trachea or a tickling, creeping
sensation in the chest.

The loose morning cough is worse than the dry evening cough. Pa-



STANNUM METALUCUM


855


tient chilly ; cannot have the least draft ; wants plenty of clothing and
is very sensitive to cold ; not so in Puls. Urine is generally copious,
watery, colorless.

About II A. M. to 12 or 1 p. M. there is the most dyspnoea from lilh
ing up of the chest with mucus ; this same feeling returns during the
hour, but it is from cardiac weakness. Copious, colorless urine is one
of its important symptoms and resembles Ign., but Squil. is not a hys-
terical patient like Ign^ Quite similar to Can. IncL or Gels, in brain
affections, but Squil. has not many brain affections nor many febrile
symptoms. Phos. has inflammation of the brain and w'hen the danger-
ous turn comes this increase of urine is a bad sign. Puls, tearful, then
couious urine. Squil, copious colorless urine in diabetes ; when this
seems to disappear and chest symptoms appear, these troubles disap-
pear and kidney troubles appear, these would disappear and dropsy
comes up; when the urine would get copious again these dropsical
symptoms would disappear and Squil. acts a long time.

There is a copious, colorless flow from the nose, more especially in
the morning ; the cough is similar to Tart. emet.

Squil. in its internal nature is quite like Thuja in regard to its suprt-
ing urine and its spasmodic cough ; with the escape of urine there is
more or less of escape of faeces of a dark brown or black fluid in frothy
bubbles, very offensive, painless, involuntary.

Respiration difficult with stitches in the chest when breathing and
coughing. Great dyspnoea, the child ; cannot drink ; seizes the cup
eagerly, but can drink only in sips ; fir^|uently obliged to take a deep
breath which provokes a cough ; shortiKJss of breath on every exertion.
Pains in the chest aggravated in the tnbrning. Dull rheumatic pains
aggravated when exercising ; ameliorated while at rest. Evening dry
cough with sweetish expectoration. Great heat in the body. P'ollows
well after Bry. Absolute lack of sweat is a characteristic.

Dry cough at 1 1 p. m. worse from cold water and cold air (Rumex).
Bell, has cough at 11 p. m. worse from uncovering, red face, conges-
tion in head. Loch, soon after going to sleep, which may be ii p. m.

Nasal discharge acrid, corroding, worse in the morning ; violent
sneezing. Stool dark brown or black.

Seldom much cough during day. Pneumonia : Stitches when inhal-
ing, jerking pains ; always right side ; catarrh of the chest and threat-
ened pneumonia after haemorrhage from the lungs. Soreness in the
chest, worse from motion. Bry. will often palliate and the case will
go into Squilla.


STANNUM METALLICUM


Stannum is especially suited to persons who have long been grow-



8j6 STANNUM METALUCUM

ing feeble. This is so striking that it may be said that some deep-
seated constitutional state must be present. There is a history of
increasing weakness, cachexia, catarrhal conditions, and neuralgia dating
back over years. There is sensitiveness to pain and an increasing aversion
to doing anything, aversion to business in a man, and in a woman, to
going about her housework ; always tired, all work becomes irksome.

The countenance becomes increasingly sallow, even to a waxy,
cachectic aspect. Once who has been growing weaker and develops
neuralgia of the face, eyes, stomach, and intestines ; not the shooting,
tearing pains often described, but a pain beginning gradually, increas-
ing steadily and then diminishing gradually. The pain sometimes be-
gins with sunrise, increases until noon and gradually diminishes, and
ceases with sunset. On the other hand, it may begin at any time, as
often at lo a. m. and increasing for ten or twenty minutes, then grad-
diminishing, but especially worse at noon. Cactus has a sun head-
aches. Kalmia has a similar headache, not so regularly increasing and
diminishing, but especially worse at noon. Cactus has a sun head-
ache. Natrum mur, has never been known to cause it, but has cured
it especially when beginning at lo a. m. and worse from 2 to 3 P. M.
Sang, headache coming and going with the sun.

The phthisical tendency of Stannum is closely allied to the neural-
gias. If these patients settle down into a neuralgic constitution, the
deposit of tubercles is postponed, but most of them then seek pallia-
tion with the inevitable result of hastening the end. If the Stannum
neuralgia is suppressed, we will see phthisis making its appearance,
particularly phthisis pituitosa. Nature seems to be able to throw off
effects through mucous discharges. If the neuralgia is not permitted
to have sway the patient becomes oversensitive to .cold, takes cold
easily. When let alone every cold settled in the nerves and every
draft caused neuralgias about the eyes, sensitive to every change in the
weather, the hydrogenoid constitution of Grauvogl. But when palli-
ated in any way by Quinine and inappropriate homoeopathic remedies
that have the tendency to catch cold in the chest like Phos,, he after a
while does not get over his cold, but there is a continuous catarrh of
the chest, and later he will die of miliary tuberculosis. Stannum is
useful in warding off phthisi.s, and is a wonderful palliative in that
disease.

The pain has been likened to the pulling of a string, gradually in-
creasing and gradually letting up.

The Puls, pain is somewhat similar in its first half ; it gradually
becomes intense, but suddenly lets up with a snap ; comes gradually
and stops suddenly.

Remember what is said about the Bell. pain. It comes suddenly and
reaches its intensity at once, where it may remain for hours, but ceases



STANNUM METAUJCUM


8s7


suddenly.

The Stannum pain is at times so severe that there is a throbbing
pulsating intermingled with it, and the mind seems stunned.

^'Headache every morning, over one or the other eye, mostly the
left, gradually extending over the whole forehead and increasing and
decreasing gradually, often with vomiting/' “Violent, glowing, beat-
ing pain.'' It is sometimes attended with burning. “Felt as if the
head would burst with inward blows. Neuralgia of the left eye grad-
ually increasing from lo a. m. to noon, then gradually decreasing, with
lachrymation during pain. Intermittent supra-orbital neuralgia from
lo A. M. to 3 or 4 p. M., gradually increasing and attaining its acme,
and then again gradually decreasing, after the abuse of quinine.'’
This is when the body is weak, with sallow countenance and tendency
to phthisis, full of pain, and the earlier history shows that instead of
taking cold in the chest or nose, as others take cold, every cold settles
in the nerves. Finally he begins to take cold in the chest, with dysp-
noea, violent, racking cough, gagging, retching, vomiting, and the most
intense sufferings. Copious, thick, yellow-green, bloody expectora-
tion, which tastes sweetish (Phos), Retching when coughing is
marked ; thick, white, yellow or green tenacious mucus. Cannot walk,
cannot do anything without cough. Always tired ; it is an effort
to work. Wakens in the morning with the chest filled with mucus,
and coughs and expectorates, and yet some remains; he gags, retches
and vomits, and it strings out of the mouth tasting sweetish, sometimes
salty or sour. [

This great weakness is manifested |in the voice ; hoarseness, loss of
voice ; the vocal cords will not respond ; a paralytic weakness. Talk-
ing makes him feel weak, especially ! in the chest. “Hoarseness, weak-
ness, emptiness in the chest on beginning to sing, so that she was con-
stantly obliged to stop and lake a deep breath ; at times a few expul-
sive coughs removed the hoarseness for a few minutes. Rawness in’
the larynx." Rawness in the trachea and smarting all the way down
when coughing. Irritation to cough, as from mucus in the trachea ;
or breathing, with cough either loose or dry, felt more while sitting
bent over than when walking. “Accumulation of great quantities of
mucus in the trachea, easily thrown off by coughing. Oppressed
breathing from ascending, from the slightest movement, when lying
down, in the evening, from coughing." “Cough in fatiguing parox-
ysms ; epigastric region painful as if beaten ; violent, shattering, deep,
short, from time to time, as from weakened chest, with a hoarse, weak
sound. Cough caused by talking, singing, laughing, lying on the side
and from drinking anything warm." “Sputa like white of egg ; yel-
low, green pus ; sweetish, putrid, sour or saltish during day. Chest so
weak that he cannot talk ; empty feeling in the chest," This remedy
io8



858


STAPHISAGRU


is frequently indicated in cases where the routinist would prescribe
Bry., etc., in low potencies to loosen the cough. Stannum is not dan-
gerous in phthisis, and will palliate the case if it is incurable. It will
not rouse up the whole economy like Silica, but there may be an ag-
gravation of the nervous symptoms ; if there il anything to build on
it will cause the patient to rally. If it brings back his old neuralgic
pains, and you know he has not a long time to live, and seems to suffer
much. Puls, is the natural antidote.

When a loose, easy cough is turned into one that is violent, dry and
racking under Stannum, and seems to be inclined to be prolonged,
Puls, will restore the loose cough. This is not a good action of the
remedy ; in incurable cases you can get the best results by not going too
high.

Another feature is seen in women. If you ever meet with a case
who has suffered with violent neuralgia and she says since the oblitera-
tion of these pains she has had a copious, thick, yellow, green leucor-
rhcea, think of Stannum. There is great weakness, which seems to
proceed from the chest. The leucorrhcea has saved her from con-
sumption.

Menses too early and too profuse ; bearing down in the uterine re-
gion : prolapsus uteri and vaginae.

Paralytic symptoms ; writers' cramp ; women cannot let go of the
broom (Dros. cures most cases).

“Constipation ; stools hard, dry, knotty, or insufficient and green.”
Inactive rectum, i. e., a paralytic state ; even though there is much
there is inability to pass the stool, which at times is soft. Colic
better from pressure, lying on the stomach {Coloc., Cupr.); worse
from motion ; better from bending double.

“Very much exhausted from talking or reading aloud. Great lassi-
tude from walking ; weariness of the whole body, especially when as-
cending stairs ; great sense of weakness in larynx and chest, thence all
over the body ; trembling worse from slow exercise.”

STAPHISAGRIA

The mental symptoms are very important, and the impressions made
upon the mind and thence upon the body guide to Staphisagria as a
remedy. Excitable, easily aroused to anger, but seldom irascible, that
is, easily disturbed and excited, but seldom manifests it. Suitable in
cases where complaints come from pent up wrath, suppressed anger,
suppressed feelings. The person becomes speechless from suppressed
indignition, anger with indignation. Complaints brought on by these
causes ; irritable bladder with frequent urging to urinate, lasting many
days after suppressed wrath, after insults. “Great indignation about



STAPmSAGKU


859


things done by others or by himself ; grieves about consequences.”

A gentleman comes in contact with one beneath his station and an
altercation takes place, an argument which ends in insult, and the
gentleman turns his back on the other. He goes home and suffers ;
he does not speak it out, but controls it and then suffers from it. He
has sleepless nights and many days of fatigue, brain-fag ; for days and
weeks he fcannot add nor subtract, makes mistakes in writing and
speaking, has irritability of the bladder, colic, etc. Loss of memory
with a sense of weight between the eyes ; it is difficult to say whether
this is a feeling in the head or an effort to describe a dullness of mind.
Feels as if a ball of wood were in the forehead, or as if the whole
cerebrum were made of wood ; it feels numb. It is difficult to state
whether it is a condition of the mind or head. Accompanying this
sensation of a lump in the forehead is a feeling as if the whole back
of the head were hollow ; the patient may describe it as a feeling of
numbness or a lack of sensation.

“Indifferent, low-spirited, dulness of mind after onanism.^ Staph,
cures these conditions when they are the result of sexual excitement,
masturbation, excesses in venery, allowing the mind to dwell too much
on venereal subjects. Thinking on sexual relations. These patients
are irriable, easily fatigued, most excitable, and when they have to
control their emotions they suffer intensely. One who is in health can
easily put aside a controversy, knowing that he has done what is right,
but a Staph, patient when he has to control himself goes all to pieces
trembles from head to foot, loses hk Jiroice, his ability to work, cannot
sleep and a headache follows. i

Many a time a man has come im:d my office with blue lips, trembl-
ing hands, pains about the heart and' all over, and he thinks he is going
to die. He tells a story of an altercation and pent up wrath, and Staph,
stops his trembling and quiets him. Without it he would have sleep-
less nights, brain-fag, prostration and headache. This state belongs
especially to those who have indulged in sexual excesses.

Now, the next step. The senses are in this same irritable state, so
that the tips of the fingers are sensitive, the ears are sensitive to noise,
the tongue is sensitive to tastes and the nose to odors ; so sensitive that
everything is painfully sensated. Every little inflamed spot will have
in its center sensitive points, little nerve spots ; ulcers when touched
cause the patient to go all to pieces and a convulsion threatens.

Haemorrhoidal tumors are so sensitive that they cannot be touched.
Little nerve tumors form in the skin, little polypoid growths the size
of a wheat grain and denuded of epithelium, covered with moisture,
red, inflamed, blue, and a mere touch will throw the patient into con-
vulsions and suffering for days and nights. A hyper-sensitive nerve
growth will come out on the hand or on the back. Sometimes it turns



86o


STAPmSAGRU


black. Again, a little wart will come out, especially about the genitals
and anus, little caruncular growths about the urethra and vagina, so
sensitive that if nipped between the fingers the patient will go into
spasms, especially if a woman.

Staph, suits all three of the miasms.

These nervous states run all through the complaints. Look for a
case of Staph, where the whole mind and nervous system are in a fret.

The Staph, headache is a numb, dull pain in the occiput and fore-
head, especially in these nervous constitutions. “Sensation as of a
round ball in the forehead, sitting firmly there even when shaking the
head.” Headaches from vexation and indignation.

Crusty, squamous eruptions on the scalp. “Painful sensitiveness of
the scalp, skin peels off, with itching and smarting, worse in the even-
ing and from getting warm.” The scales are lifted up by a watery
exudate and the denuded surface is extremely sensitive to touch.

New growths about the lids and balls of the eyes, extremely painful
t<» the touch. Meibomian tumors (Cow., Thuja), in irritable children
^Kreos.y

Another feature in Staph, is its action on the glands ; scrofulous
glands ; glands of the neck enlarge ; enlarged and indurated ovaries
and testes ; stitching, tearing pains in the glands everywhere. Hard-
ness and chronic induration.

Stitching, tearing pains along the course of the nerves ; in the heart,
and as in such a nervous patient the mind is likely to be on the heart,
the stitching pains in the intercostals are supposed to be in the heart.
Stitching pains directly through the chest to the back.

Swelling of the tonsils after the abuse of Mercury. Chronic ton-
silitis, tonsils arc not large but hard from previous attacks of acute
tonsilitis ; strumous diathesis ; cross and irritable. “Pains come on
after eating.”

The Staph, patient has much difficulty in the bowels. Subject W
chronic diarrhoea and to constipation. Colic, twitching, tearing pains
in the abdomen. Diarrhoea from cold water, from eating, from indig-
nation, anger, with flatulence of a terribly offensive odor like spoiled
eggs. “Chronic diarrhoea or dysentery of weakly, sickly children after
anger ; after being punished, after emotions.” (Coloc. and Cham.)

Staph, and Coloc. resemble each other. In both, eating and drink-
ing cause griping and stool, both have colic as if stones were squeez-
ing ; Staph, in the intestines, head and testes ; Coloc. in the intestines
and ovaries ; both are worse from anger. Caust., Cole, and Staph,
follow each other like Sulph., Calc, and Lyc.

It often happens that nervous women soon after marriage arc at-
tacked with frequent and painful urging to urinate which becomes
extremely troublesome and may last many days. Staph, is very com-



STAPfflSAGRIA


86i

forting to the young wife. Great teasing and tearing all night long ;
bloody urine ; involuntary discharge of urine, acrid and corroding, with
burning, worse from motion. Profuse discharge of pale urine with
burning and urging. Burning during and after urination.

Staph, has cured Enlarged prostate with frequent urging to urinate,
especially in old men ; continued teasing with dribbling. “Frequent
urging to urinate, with a scanty discharge in thin stream or dischargo
of urine in drops ; may be followed by a sensation as if the bladder
were not fully emptied.

The most distressing symptom of the male genitals is excitability,
but there is also impotence, great weakness of the sexual organs ; the
sexual desire is greatly increased but there is impotence. Useful in
the results of secret vice, long practiced. “Seminal emissions followed
by great chagrin and mortification, prostration, dyspnoea. Effects of
onanism or sexual excesses ; loss of memory, hypochondriasis, taci-
turnity, face sunken, abashed look, nocturnal emissions, backache,
weak legs, relaxed organs, deficiency of vital heat and tendency to
take cold, deep sunken, red, and lusterless eyes, hair falls out ; loss of
prostatic fluid and impairment of sexual desire ; dull and contusive
pains in the testicles, voluptuous itching of the scrotum, atrophy of
the testicles.^’ Think of the extremely nervous patient.

Dry, sensitive warts about the genitals, from sycosis or from the
abuse of Mercury, which cause a tendency to warty growths. Moist
red, offensive warts belong to Thuja. [

The testes dwindle as well as liecotne inflamed and swollen ; genitals
waste away. :

Sensation as if there were worija^ crawling over him. Crawling,
etc., in the female external genitals^ Coff,, Plat,, Petrol, Apis, Tarant.
Hisp,, the latter has: While outer parts feel as if insects were biting
and crawling, better from heat or cold.

In the female there is violent sexual excitement, nymphomania with
extreme mental and physical impressions ; mind has been dwelling too
much on sexual subjects. “Very sharp, shooting pains in the ovary,
which is exquisitely sore to touch ; pains extend along crural regions
and thighs. Menses irregular, late and profuse, sometimes wanting ;
first of pale blood, then dark and clotted. Scorbutic diathesis, vegeta-
tions of the vagina ; stinging, itching of the vulva, “

Stitching in the region of the heart ; trembling of the body with
nervous excitement is an excellent indication for Staph.

Effects from loss of blood, shock, from surgical operations, injuries
from sharp instruments, incised wounds. Stinging, etc., in surgical
wounds, cuts ; colic after lithotomy, urging to stool, qualmishness,
worse from drinking.

Tetter on the hands, itches and bums in the evening after scratch-



862


STRAMONIUM


ing ; numbness in the tips of the fingers ; arthritic nodosities on the
fingers. I remember a patient suffering from gouty nodosities ; he
had lived a life of peculiar continence, dwelling on his vices, broken
down in body. Staph, brought out an eruption on his legs as high up
as the knees that looked like a pair of trousers.^ One continuous coat
of crusts which lasted a year before it dwindled, but he was greatly
improved in his body and his enlarged joints gradually improved.
The eruption was yellow, crusty, tough, leathery, and, when lifted up
by the moisture beneath, it had to be cut off like a bandage ; he was
practically crippled ; new crops came out on the parts clipped off. It
was with difficulty that he walked, for the crusts cut him.

Bone troubles, exostoses, inflammation of the periosteum.

Acute articular rheumatism of fast or debilitated men, with shifting
pains. Mercurial bone diseases, ulcers, caries, injuries caused by
sharp, cutting instruments. Nightly bone pains. {Asaf,, Merc,, Sil)

STRAMONIUM

When considering Stram. the idea of violence comes into mind.
One cannot look upon a patient who needs Stram., or who has been
poisoned with it, without wondering at the tremendous turmoil, the
great upheaval taking place in mind and body. Full of excitement,
rage, everything is tumultuous, violent ; the face looks wild, anxious,
fearful ; the eyes are fixed on a certain object ; face flushed, hot rag-
ing fever with hot head and cold extremities, violent delirium. In his
anxiety he often turns away from the light, wants it dark, is aggra-
vated especially if the light is bright. High fever with delirium ; the
heat is so intense that it may be mistaken for Bell,, but it is usually a
continued fever, only at times remittent, while the intense fever of
Bell is remittent always,

Stram. is like an earthquake in its violence. The mind is in an up-
roar ; cursing, tearing the clothes, violent speech, frenzy, erotomania,
exposing of the person. These symptoms are found in continued
fevers, insanity, cerebral congestion. It is useful in violent typhoids.

It is useful in mania that has existed for some time ; attacks of
mania coming on in paroxysms, appearing with more or less sudden-
ness, so that a single attack would look like Bell, but the history dif-
ferentiates. Bell would hardly be more than a palliative in the first
attack, and the second exhibition of it would do nothing.

When the delirium is not on, the patient has the appearance of great
suffering, forehead wrinkled, face pallid, sickly, haggard. In head-
pains this anxious look, indicative of intense suffering from meningeal
involvement.

"‘Delirium bland, murmuring ; violent, foolish, joyful, loquacious.



STRAMONIUM


863


incoherent chattering with open eyes ; vivid ; merry with spasmodic
laughter ; furious, raving, wild ; attempts to stab and bite ; with queer-
est notions ; with sexual excitement ; fear as if a dog were attacking
him.”

Strange ideas about the formation of his body, that it is ill-shapcn,
elongated, deformed ; strange feelings concerning his physical state.
All sorts of illusions and hallucinations. One must distinguish be-
tween these states. An illusion is an appearance in the vision or mind
which the patient knows is not true. A hallucination is a state that
appears to be true. A delusion is a more advanced state, when the
patient thinks it is true and cannot be reasoned out of it. Fear and
great anxiety on hearing running water.

He sees animals, ghosts, angels, departed spirits, devils, and knows
they are not real, but later he is confident of it. He has these hallu-
cinations especially in the dark. At times he has an aversion to a
bright light which is painful, and again he must sit and look into an
open fire, but this may cause cough and other symptoms.

“Sings amorous songs and utters obscene speech. Crazy with dis-
tress, jumps out of bed, acts as if the bed were being drawn from
under him. Screams until he is hoarse or loses his voice. Screaches
and screams day and night with fever, with forms of mania. Hasty,
hurries with all his might if he wants to go to another place.” Violent
laughter with sardonic expression on his face.

“Child awakens terrified, knows no one, screams with fright, clings
to those near.”

Hyosc. has wild maniacal delirium, | but with very little fever. In
Stram. there is considerable fcv'er. Id Bell, the fever is in the after-
noon and evening, 9 p. m. to 3 a. m., and then a remission.

Violent convulsions involving every muscle of the body, opisthoto-
nos, violent distortions, contraction of the limbs, biting of the tongue
and bleeding from the pas.sages. During spasms, covered with cold
sweat ; sometimes almost as cold as ice ; cold sweat in mania ; this feat-
ure is equalled only by Camphor.

Hysterical convulsions of long standing, associated with spinal
trouble ; worse from fright. Convulsions in nervous, excitable people
brought on by fright.

Puerperal convulsions and insanity. It has the septic nature.
Those cases going on for a while as melancholic, low spirited ; she
believes she has sinned away her day of grace, yet she has lived an
upright life : sad : imagines strange things, does strange things, until
finally violent delirium comes on ; she screams aloud ; exhorts people
to repent ; face red, and eyes flashing ; exhorts and prays in incoherent
speech. In such cases Stram. should be compared with Veratr.

In cerebral congestions, the delirium subsides into unconsciousness ;



864


STRAMONIUM


the patient has the appearance of profound intoxication ; pupils dilated
or contracted (in Bell, they are dilated). Marked stupor, stertorous
breathing, lower jaw dropped. So in typhoid and the low forms of
fever, foetor, oozing of blood from the mouth and other passages.
Throat and mouth dry, tongue dry, swollen, sO that it fills the mouth,
pointed, red like a piece of meat, bleeding from the mouth, sordes on
the teeth, lips dry and cracked ; at times violent thirst yet dread of
water. Diarrhoea copious, involuntary ; abdomen tympanitic, involun-
tary urination.

Basilar meningitis from suppressed ear-discharge. The Old School
have no remedy for such cases. Forehead wrinkled, eyes glassy, star-
ing. dilated pupils and scarcely any fever ; awful pain through the base
of the skull and there is a history of necrosis about the ear.

Violent headache from walking in the sun, and from the heat of the
sun. Aggravated all day and at night the patient must sit up because
of increased pain on lying down ; he is worse from every motion on
jar ; eyes fixed and glassy, face flushed, but later it is pale, eyes fixed
on a corner of the room, motionless ; delirium, says strange things.
Pain in the occiput.

High grade inflammation which it carries to the finish. Pus forms,
abscesses with excruciating pain (Hepar, Merc,, SiL, Sulph,), Violent
catarrhal inflammations, vicious, septic states. Chronic abscesses, car-
buncles, boils, abscesses in the joints, the left hip-joint is a special
locality. You will often be able to abort a case of hip-disease, and
even when pus is present or fistulous openings have formed it is very
useful. Fulness, suppuration, and pain in the cartilages.

Stram. stands alone among the deep acting remedies, in its violence
of mental symptoms.

Stram. cures eye troubles and irritation of the brain from over-
study ; in students who are obliged to do much night work to keep up
with day lectures. The patient seems almost blind ; there is much pain
in the eyes in dim light, relieved in intense light. The mental symp-
toms, cough, headache, etc., arc worse from light.

''Dryness of throat and fauces^ not benefited by any sort of drink.
Swallowing difficult and impeded with stinging pain in the throat, with
pain in the submaxillary glands with convulsions ; particularly fluids
from constriction of throat."' Choking on attempting to swallow*
water. It has done some good work in hydrophobia. (Hyosc,, Bel,,
Canth,, Hydroph,)

In old cases of suppuration of the lungs where the cough is worse
from looking into the light, Stram. is often a great palliative and
causes no aggravation.

Retention of urine, cannot pass it if he ceases to strain ; old men
who have lost power over the bladder, stream flows slowly, cannot



SULPHUR


865


make haste.

Cardiac affections with great constriction of the chest, mental irri-
tability, delusions as to personal identity, inability to sleep in the dark,
great anxiety when on a train going through a tunnel, pulse irregular,
heart feeble.

Sleep full of dreams and turmoil.

SULPHUR

Sulphur is such a full remedy that it is somewhat difficult to tell
where to begin. It seems to contain a likeness of all the sicknesses
of man, and a beginner on reading over the proving of Sulphur might
naturally think that he would need no other remedy, as the image of
all sickness seems to be contained in it. Yet you will find it will not
cure all the sicknesses of man, and it is not well to use it indiscrim-
inately any more than you would any other remedy. It seems that
the less a physician knows of the Materia Medica the oftener he gives
Sulphur, and yet it is very frequently given, even by good prescribers ;
so that the line between physicians’ ignorance and knowledge cannot
be drawn from the frequency with which Sulphur is prescribed by
them.

The Sulphur patient is a lean, lank, hungry, dyspeptic fellow with
stoop shoulders, yet many times it must be given to fat, rotund, well-
fed people. The angular, lean, stoc^shouldered patient, however, is
the typical one, and especially when has beconte so from long peri-
ods of indigestion, bad assimilation an4 feeble nutrition. The Sulphur
state is sometimes brought about by being long housed up and adapting
the diet to the stomach. Persons who lead sedentary lives, confined
to their rooms in study, in meditation, in philosophical inquiry, and
who take no exercise, soon find out that they must eat only the simplest
foods, foods not sufficient to nourish the body, and they end up by
going into a philosophical mania.

There is another class of patients in whom we see a Sulphur appear-^
ance in the face ; dirty, shriveled, red-faced people. The skin seems
to be easily affected by the atmosphere. He becomes red in the face
from riding in the air, both in very cold and in damp weather. He
has a delicate, thin skin, blushing on the slightest occasion, always red
and dirty looking, no matter how much he washes it. If it be a child,
the mother may wash the face often, but it always looks as if it had
been perfunctorily washed.

Hering called the Sulphur patient **the ragged philosopher/^ The
Sulphur scholar, the inventor, works day and night in threadbare
clothes and battered hat ; he has long, uncut hair and a drity face ; his
study is uncleanly, it is untidy ; books and lonres of books ate piled

109



866


SULt>HUR


up indiscriminately ; there is no order. It seems that Sulphur pro-
duces this state of disorder, a state of untidiness, a state of uncleanli-
ness, a state of “don’t care how things go,” and a state of selfishness.
He becomes a false philosopher, and the more he goes on in this state
the more he is disappointed because the world does not consider him
the greatest man on earth. Old inventors work and work, and fail.
The complaints that arise in this kind of case, even the acute com-
plaints, will run to Sulphur. You take such a patient and you will
notice that he has on a shirt that he has worn many weeks ; if he has
not a wife to attend to him, he would wear his shirt until it fell off
from him.

Cleanliness is not a great idea with the Sulphur patient ; he thinks
it is not necessary. He is dirty ; he does not see the necessity of put-
ting on a clean collar and cuffs and a clean shirt ; it does not woiTy
him. Sulphur is seldom indicated in cleanly people, but it is commonly
indicated in those who are not disturbed by uncleanliness. When at-
tending the public clinic I have many times noticed that after Sulphur
an individual begins to take notice of himself and puts on a clean shirt,
whereas his earlier appearances were in the one same old shirt. And
it is astonishing how the Sulphur patients, especially the little ones,
can get their clothing dirty so fast. Children have the most astonish-
ing tendency to be filthy. Mothers tell you of the filthy things that
little ones will do if they be Sulphur patients. The child is subject to
catarrhal discharges from the nose, the eyes and from other parts, and
he often cats the discharge from the nose. Now, that is peculiar,
because offensive odors arc the things that the Sulphur patient loathes.
He is oversensitive to filthy odors, but filthy substances themselves he
will eat and swallow. He becomes nauseated even from the odor of
his own body and of his own breath. The odor of the stool is so
offensive that it will follow him around all day. He thinks he can
smell it. Because of his sensitiveness to odors he is more cleanly
about his bowels than anything else. It is an exaggerated sense of
smell. He is always imagining and hunting for offensive odors. Hef
has commonly such a strong imagination that he smells the things which
he has only in memory.

The Sulphur patient has filthiness throughout. He is the victim of
filthy odors. He has a filthy breath, he has an intensely foetid stool ;
he has filthy-smelling genitals, which can be smelled in the room in
spite of his clothing, and he himself smells them. The discharges aro
always more or less foetid, having strong, offensive odors. In spite of
constant washing the axillae give out a pungent odor, and at times the
whole body gives off an odor like that coming from the axillae.

The discharges of Sulphur from every part of the body, besides

dxt . excoriating^ ^ Tb« Sulpbnr j)ajientJs^ai)0|icted with



SULPHUR


867


catarrhs of all mucous membranes^ and the catarrhal discharges every-
where excoriate him. Often with the coryza the discharge excoriates
the lips and the nose. At times the fluid that remains in the nose
smarts like fire, and w^en it comes in contact with the child’s lip it
burns, so acrid is it ; almost like the condition under Sulphuric acid,
so red will be the parts that are touched by it. There is copious leu-
corrhoea that excoriates the genitals. The thin faeces cause burning
and rawness around the anus. In women if a drop of urine remains
about the genitals it will burn ; very often it is not sufficient to wipe
it away, it must be washed away to relieve the smarting. In children
we find excoriation about the anus and between the buttocks ; the
whole length of the fissure is red, raw and inflamed from the stool.
From this tendency a keynote has been constructed, and not a bad one
either, *'all the fluids burn the parts over which they pass,” which is
the same as saying that the fluids are acrid and cause smarting. This
is true everywhere in Sulphur.

The Sulphur patient has all sorts of eruptions. There are vesicular,
pustular, furuncular, scaly eruptions, all attended with much itching,
and some of them with discharge and suppuration. The skin, even
without any eruption, itches much, itches from the warmth of the bed
and from wearing woolen clothing. Many times the Sulphur patient
cannot wear anything except silk or cotton. The warmth of the room
will drive him to despair if he cannot get at the itching part to scratch
it. After scratching there is burning ^ith relief of the itching. After
scratching or after getting into the^ warmth of the bed great white
welts come out all over the body, with much itching, and these he
keeps on scratching until the skin becomes raw, or until it burns, and
then comes a relief of the itching. This process goes on continuously ;
dreadful itching at right in bed, and in the morning when he wakes up
he starts in again and the eruptions itch and ooze. Crops of boils and
little boil-like eruptions come out and this makes it useful in impetigo.

This remedy is useful in suppurations. It establishts all sorts of
suppurating cavities, small abscesses and large abscesses ; abscesses
beneath the skin, in the cellular tissues and in internal organs. The sup-
purative tendency is very marked in Sulphur. The glands become
inflamed and the inflammation goes on to suppuration.

Wherever there is a Sulphur complaint you will find burning:
Every part bums ; burning where there is congestion ; burning of the
skin or a sensation of heat in the skin ; burning here and there in spots ;
burning in the glands, in the stomach, in the lungs ; burning in the
bowels, in the rectum ; burning and smarting in the haemorrhoids ;
burning when passing urine, or a sensation of heat in the bladder.
There is heat here and there, but when the patient describes something
especially typical of Sulphur she says: ‘^Burning of the soles of the



868


SULPHUR


feet, in the palms of the hands, and on the top of the head/’ Burning
of the soles of the feet will very often l>e noticed after the patient
becomes warm in bed. The Sulphur patient has so much heat and
burning of the soles at night in bed that he puts the feet out from
beneath the clothes, sleeps with the feet outside the covering. The'
soles and palms of the Sulphur patient when examined present a thick
skin which burns on becoming warm in bed.

Many complaints come ton from becoming warm in bed. The Sul-
phur patient cannot stand heat and cannot stand cold, though there is
a strong craving for the open air. He wants an even temperature ; he
is disturbed if the temperature changes much. So far as his breath-
ing is concerned, when he has much distress he wants the doors and
windows open. Tlie body, howevei, he is frequently forced to have
covered, but if he is warmly clad he is bothered with the itching and
burning of the skin.

As to time aggravations, nightly complaints are a feature. Head-
aches begin after evening meal and increase into the night ; he cannot
get to sleep because of the pain. There is nightly aching and nightly
thirst ; nightly distress and symptoms of the skin coming on after be-
coming warm in bed. 'Intermittent periodic neuralgia, worse every
24 hours, generally at 12 a . m . or 12 p . m .’^ Midday is another time of
aggravation of the Sulphur complaints. It has chills at noon, fevers
increase at noon, increase of the mental symptoms at noon, headache
worse at noon. Complaints that come otice a week, a seven-day ag-
gravation, is another peculiar condition of Sulphur.

It is a common feature for a Sulphur patient to have a peculiar kind
of diarrhoea which has been long known as "a Sulphur diarrhoea,’^
though many other remedies have a similar condition, viz.: diarrhoea
coming on early in the morning. The Sulphur diarrhoea belongs to
the time between midnight and morning, but more commonly the time
that he begins to think about rising. The diarrhoea drives him out of
bed. It is generally thin, watery ; there is not much gushing, and it is
not very copious, sometimes quite scanty, sometimes yellow faecal.
After this morning stool he has, in many cases, no further trouble till
next morning. There are many people who go on year after year
with this urging to stool driving out of bed in the morning. The
patient suffers from pain, griping, uneasiness, and burning soreness
through the bowels. The stool burns while it is passing, and all parts
that it comes in contact with are made sore and raw, and there is much
chaHng.

The Sulphur patient is very thirsty. He is always drinking water.
He wants much water.

He also speaks of a hungry feeling, a desire for food, but when he
comes to the table he loathes the food, turns away from it, does not



StLPHUR


869


want it. He eats almost nothing, takes only the simplest and lightest
things. There is a craving for stimulants, for alcohol, and an aver-
sion to milk and meat ; these latter make him sick and he loathes them.
One of the old men invented out of these things the keynote “drinks
<much and eats little.'’ This is true under Sulphur, but many other
remedies have the same thing. As to the use of keynotes I would im-
press on you that it is well to gather together all the symptoms with
their associations. It will not do to place much dependence on one
little symptom, or even on tw^o or three little symptoms. The symp-
toms of the whole case must be considered and then, if the keynotes
and characteristics and everything else cause the remedy to be well
rounded out and full, and to look like the whole patient, only then is it
suitable.

There is emptiness occurring at 11 o'clock in the forenoon. If there
is any time in the whole twenty-four hours that he feels hungry it is
at 1 1 o’clock. It seems as though he cannot wait for his dinner.
There is this also about the Sulphur patient: he is very hungry about
his customary mealtimes and, if the meal is delayed, he becomes weak
and nauseated. Those that are accustomed to eat at about 12 o'clock
will have that all-gone hungry feeling at ii a. m. Those accustomed
to eat about i or 1-30 will have it about 12 o’clock. The all-gone sen-
sation is about one hour before the accustomed time of eating with
ntany people.

In a sort of condensed way a strO|ig Sulphur group is this: an all-
gone hungry feeling in the stomach lit ii a, m., burning of the soles
and heat in the top of the head. Uilse three things have been looked
upon as a sine qua non of Sulphur, biit they are scarcely the beginning
of Sulphur.

There is an unhealthy condition of the skin in Sulphur aside from
the eruptions. The skin will not heal. Small wounds continue to
suppurate ; abscesses formed under the skin become little discharging
cavities with fistulous openings, and these leak and discharge for a
long time.

Sulphur produces an infiltration in inflamed parts, so that they be-
come indurated and these indurations last for years. When the in-
flammation is in a vital organ, like the lungs, this infiltration cannot
always be endured ; it leaves infiltrations after pneumonia called hepati-
zation. Sulphur produces this same tendency in inflamed parts
throughout the body and hence its great use in hepatization.

Sulphur is a very useful remedy when the patient does not react
after a prolonged disease, because of a condition in the economy, a
psoric condition. When a patient is drawing near the end of an acute
disease he becomes weak and prostrated. The inflammatory state ends
in suppuration and infiltrations ; the patient is in a state of weakness,



870


SULPHUR


much fatigued and prostrated, and has night sweats. He docs not
convalesce after a typhoid or other acute disease. There is slow re-
pair and a slow, tired economy, and order is not restored after the
acute disease. Sulphur often becomes very useful in such conditions.
Old drunkards become debilitated and have violent craving for alco-
hol ; they cannot let liquor alone. They crave strong and pungent
things, want nothing to eat, but want cold water and alcoholic drinks.,
They go on drinking till greatly exhausted and then their complaints
come on. Sulphur will for a while take away this craving for drink
and build him up.

The tissues seem to take on weakness, so that very little pressure
causes soreness, sometimes inflammation and suppuration. Bed sores
come on easily in a Sulphur patient, as there is feeble circulation. In-
duration from pressure is also a strong feature. Sulphur has corns
from pressure, callosities from pressure. These affections come easily.
Jf a shoe presses anywhere on the skin a great corn or bunion devel-
ops. Where the teeth come in contact with the tongue and other parts
of the buccal cavity nodules form and these little nodules in course of
time commence to ulcerate. It is a slow process with burning and
stinging. They may go into cancerous affections. They may be post-
poned for a long time and afterwards take on a state of malignancy.
Cancer is an outgrowth of a state in the body, and that state may come
on from a succession of states. It is not one continuous condition, but
the malignant state may follow the benign. Sulphur removes these
states when the symptoms agree.

We notice a marked evidence of disturbance of the veins under Sul-
phur. It is a venous remedy, has much vein trouble. The veins seem
to be relaxed and there is sluggish circulation. There is a flushed
appearance of the face here and there from slight irritation, from the
weather, from irritation of the clothing. Tumefaction of the face.
Sulphur has varicose veins ; most marked of these are haemorrhoidal
veins, which are enlarged and burn and sting. Varices of the extremh
ties. The veins even ulcerate, rupture and bleed. When going out of
a cold into a warm atmosphere the patient suffers from enlarged veins,
from puffiness of the hands and feet, from a sense of fulness through-
out the body.

The Sulphur patient emaciates, and a peculiar feature is the emacia-
tion of the limbs with distended abdomen. The abdomen is tumid,
with rumbling, burning and soreness, and with the distended abdomen
there is emaciation of all other parts. The muscles of the neck, back
thorax and limbs wither, and the muscles of the abdomen are also
wasted, but there is much distension of tht abdomen itself. This con-^
dition of affairs is found in marasmus. You will find a similar state
under Calcarea; and, in women needing Calcarea, you will notice great



SULPHUR 871

cnlRrgcmcnt, distension and hardness of the abdomen with shriveling
of all other parts of the body.

Under Sulphur there arc flashes of heat to the face and head, like
those which women have at the climacteric period. The flash of heat
in Sulphur begins som^here in the heart region, generally said to be
in the chest, and it feels as if, inside the body, a glow of heat is rising
to the face. The face is red, hot and flushed, and finally the heat ends
in sweat. Flashes of heat with sweat and red face ; the head is in a
glow. Sometimes the patient will describe a feeling as if hot steam
were inside the body and gradually rising up, and then she breaks out
in a sweat. At times you will see a woman having little shiverings
followed by flashes of heat and red splotches in the face, and then she
fans vigorously ; cannot fan fast enough, and she wants the doors and
windows open. Such is Sulphur as well as Lachesis and many others.
When the flashes begin in the chest, about the heart, it is more like
Sulphur, but when in the back or in the stomach it is more like Phos-
phorus,

Among other general aggravations wc have an aggravation from
standing in Sulphur. All complaints are made worse by standing for
a length of time. Standing is the most difficult position for a Sulphur
patient, and there is an aggravation of the confusion of mind, dizzi-
ness, the stomach and abdominal symptoms, and a sense of enlarge-
ment and fulness of the veins and dragging down in the pelvis in
women, from standing. The patient ^must sit down or keep moving,
if on her feet. She can w^alk fairly t^ell, but is worse when standing
quiet. , J

An aggravation after sleep fits into many of the complaints of Sul-
phur, but especially those of the mind and sensorium. Most of the
complaints of Sulphur are also worse after eating.

The Sulphur patient is aggravated from bathing. He dreads a bath.
He does not bathe himself and from his state in general he belongs to
“the great unwashed.” He cannot take a bath without catching
“cold.”

Children’s complaints. Dirty-faced, dirty-skinned little urchins,
who are subject to nightly attacks of delirium, who suffer much from’
pains in the head, who had brain troubles, who are threatened with
hydrocephalus, who had meningitis, need Sulphur. Sulphur will clear
up the constitutional state when remedies have failed to reach the
whole case because they are not deep enough* If the infant does not
develop properly, if the bones do not grow, and there is slow closing
of the fontanelles, Calcarea carbonica may be the remedy and Sulphur
is next in importance for such slow growth.

You would not suppose that the Sulphur patient is so nervous as he
•jB4.bjut.hft. is- fuJI‘.*of .Qxdtemcnb easily. atartjftd jby nojsc^ wakjeiiB from



872


SULPHUR


sleep in a start as if he had heard a cannon report or seen a *'spook/*
The Sulphur patient is the victim of much trouble in his sleep. He is
very sleepy in the fore part of the night, at times sleeping till 3 a. m.,
but from that time on he has restless sleep, or does not sleep at all
He dreads daylight, wants to go to sleep again, hnd when he does sleep
he can hardly be aroused, and wants to sleep late in the morning.
That is the time he gets his best rest and his soundest sleep. He is
much disturbed by dreadful dreams and nightmare.

When the symptoms agree, Sulphur will be found a curative medi-
cine in erysipelas. For erysipelas as a name we have no remedy, but
when the patient has erysipelas and his symptoms conform to those of
Sulphur, you can cure him with Sulphur. If you bear that distinction
in mind you will be able to see what Homoeopathy means ; it treats the
patient and not the name that the sickness goes by.

The Sulphur patient is annoyed throughout his economy with surg-
ings of blood here and there — surging, with fulness of the head, which
we have heretofore described as flashes of heat. It has marked febrile
conditions and can be used in acute diseases. It is one of the natural
complements of Aconite, and when Aconite is suitable to the acute ex-
acerbations and removes them, very often Sulphur corresponds to the
constitutional state of the patient.

Sulphur is suitable in the most troublesome '^scrofulous'* complaints
in broken-down constitutions and defective assimilation. It has deep-
seated, ragged ulcers on the lower extremities, indolent ulcers, ulcers
that will not granulate. They bum, and the little moisture that oozes
out burns the parts round about. It is indicated often in varicose
ulcers that bleed easily and bum much.

In old cases of gout, Sulphur is a useful remedy. It is a deep-acting
remedy, and in most instances it will keep the gout upon the extremi-
ties, as its tendency is outward from centre to circumference. Like
Lycopolium and Calcarea, when suitably administered in old gouty
conditions, not where there is much organic change present, it will keep
the rheumatic state in the joints and extremities.

Sulphur, like Silicea, is a dangerous medicine to give where there is
structural disease in organs that are vital, especially in the lungs.
Sulphur will often heal old fistulous pipes and turn old abscesses into
a normal state, so that healthy pus will follow,’ when it is indicated by
the symptoms. It will open abscesses that are very slow, doing noth-
ing, it will reduce inflamed glands that are indurated and about to
suppurate, when the symptoms agree. But it is a dangerous medicine
to administer in advanced cases of phthisis, and, if given, it should not
be prescribed in the highest potencies. If there arc symptoms that arc
very painful, and you think that Sulphur must be administered, go to
the 3bth or 200th potency. Do not tindettake to with Sulphxur



SULPHUR


«73


the morning diarrhoea that commonly comes with phthisis. Do not un-
dertake to stop the night swears that come in the advanced stages,
even if Sulphur seems to be indicated by the symptoms ; the fact is, it
is not indicated. A remedy that is dangerous in any case ought not
to be considered as indicated, even though the symptoms are similar.

In old cases of syphilis^ when the psoric state is uppermost, Sulphur
may be needed. Sulphur is rarely indicated when the syphilitic symp-
toms are uppermost, but when these have been suppressed by Mercury
and the disease is merely held in abeyance, Sulphur will antidote the
Mercury and allow the symptoms to develop and the original condi-
tion to come back in order to be seen. The great mischief done by
allopaths is due to the fact that they want to cover up everything that
is in the economy ; they act as if ashamed of everything in the human
race ; whereas Homoeopathy endeavors to reveal everything in the
human race and to antidote those drugs that cover up, and to free those
diseases that are held down. It is true that many patients will not
have Homoeopathy because they do not want their syphilitic eruption
brought to view ; they do not want the evidences of their indiscretion
brought to light ; but Homoeopathy endeavors to do that. Conditions
that arc in the economy will come out under proper homoeopathic treat-
ment. Sulphur brings complaints to the surface, so that they can be
seen. It is a general broad antidote. It is a medicine often called for
in the suppression of eruptions from cold and from drugs, and even
from Sulphur. It is a great medicine to develop these things which
have been covered up, hence you wiil| see Sulphur in all the lists of
remedies useful for suppressed eruptions or for anything suppressed
by drugs. Even when acute erupti<m« have been suppressed Sulphur
becomes a valuable remedy. In suppressed gonorrhoea Sulphur is
often the remedy to start up the discharge and re-establish the condi-
tions that have been caused to disappear. Symptoms that have been
suppressed must return or a cure is not possible.

Sulphur has been the remedy from the beginning of its history, from
the time of Hahnemann, and on his recommendation, to be thought of
^hen there is a paucity of symptoms to prescribe on, a latent condi-
tion of the symptoms due to psora. In this state it has been admin-
istered with so much benefit that the routine prescriber has learned the
fact. When apparently (superficially) well-indicated remedies fail to
hold a patient, and symptoms cannot be found for a better remedy, it
is true that Sulphur takes a deep hold of the economy and remedies act
better after it. This is well established from experience. You will
find at times when you have given a remedy which seems well indi-
cated, that it does not hold the case, and then you give the next best
indicated remedy, and then the next, with the same result. You will
begin to wonder why this is, but you will see that, although the case

I lO



874


SULPHUR


does not call clearly for Sulphur, yet on its administration it so closely
conforms to the underlying condition (and psora is so often the under-
lying condition) that it makes the remedies act better. This is an ob-
servation that has been confirmed since the time of Hahnemann by
all the old men. Such things arc only necessary when there is a
paucity of symptoms, where after much study it is necessary to resort
to what seem the best measures, measures, justifiable to a certain ex-
tent, based upon observation and upon a knowledge of the conditions
underlying the constitution of the whole race. We know that under-
lying these cases with few^ symptoms there is a latent condition, and
that it is either psora, syphilis or sycosis. If it were known to be
syphilis we would select the head of the class of remedies looking like
syphilis. If known to be sycosis, wc would select the head of the
class of remedies looking like sycosis. Sulphur stands at the head of
the list of remedies looking like the underlying psora ; and so, if the
underlying constitution is known to be psoric, and it is a masked case,
Sulphur will open up the latent cause, and, even if it docs not act on
a positively curative basis, it is true that a better representation of the
symptoms comes up. And as Sulphur is to psora, so is Mercurius to
syphilis, and Thuja to sycosis.

In the coal regions of Pennsylvania, those who work in the mines
and those living in the vicinity of the mines often need Sulphur. Wc
know that the coal is not made up of Sulphur ; there is a good deal in
it besides ; but those who handle the coal often need Sulphur. Per-
sons who are always grinding kaolin and the various products that are
used in the manufacture of china, and the workers among stone, espe-
cially require Calcarea and Silicea, but those who work in the coal
mines often need Sulphur. The patients look like Sulphur patients ;
they have the aspect, and even when their symptoms arc localized and
call for other remedies, you will get no good action from these reme-
dies until you give them a dose of Sulphur, after which they go on
improving. Some believe this is due to the fact that there is so much
Sulphur in the coal. Wc may theorize about these things as much as
we have a mind to, but we do not want to fall into the habit of anti-
doting the lower potencies with the high. Only use that method as a
dernier ressort. When there are no symptoms to indicate the remedy,
then it is time for us to experiment, and then it is justifiable only
when it is carried on by a man of the right sort, because such a man
keeps within the limit. He knows how to give his remedy. Such a
man is guided by the symptoms in each case so far as symptoms speak

In inflammatory conditions a purplish appearance of the inflamed
parts, a venous engorgement, is seen under Sulphur, Measles, when
they come put with that purplish cplor, very often require Sulphur.



SULPHUR


875


Sulphur is a great remedy in measles. The routinisi can do pretty
well in this disease with Pulsatilla and Sulphur, occasionally requiring
Aconite and Euphrasia. Especially will Sulphur modify the case when
the skin is dusky and ,the measles do not come out. This purplish
color may be seen anywhere, in the erysipelas, in the sore throat, often
on the forearms, legs and face.

The dreadful effects of vaccination are often cured by Sulphur. In
this it competes with Thuja and Malandrinum.

In the mental state, which gives out the real man, shows forth the
real interior nature, we see that Sulphur vitiates his affections, driving
him to a most marked state of selfishness. He has no thought of any-
body’s wishes or desires but his own. Everything that he contem-
plates is for the benefit of himself. This selfishness runs through the
Sulphur patient. There is absence of gratitude.

Philosophical mania is also a prominent feature. Monomania over
the study of strange and abstract things, occult things ; things that are
beyond knowledge ; studying different things without any basis to fig-
ure upon ; dwelling upon strange and peculiar things. Sulphur has
cured this consecutive tracing one thing to another as to first cause.
It has cured a patient who did nothing but meditate as to what caused
this and that and the other thing, finally tracing things back to Divine
Providence, and then asking '‘Who made God?” She would sit in a
corner counting pins and wonder, pondering over the insolvablc ques-
tion of “Who made God?” One woman could never see any handi-
work of man without asking who ma^e it. She could never be con-
tented until she found out the man Who made it, and then she wanted
to know who his father was ; she would sit down and wonder who he
was, whether he was an Irishman, and so on. That is a feature of
Sulphur. It is that kind of reasoning without any hope of discovery,
without any possible answer. It is not that kind of philosophy which
has a basis and which can be followed up, reasoning in a series, rea-
soning on things that are true, but a fanatical kind of philosophy that
has no basis, wearing oneself out. Sulphur has an aversion to follow
up things in an orderly fashion, an aversion to real work, an aversion
to systematic work. The Sulphur patient is a sort of inventive genius,
When he gets an idea in his mind he is unable to get rid of it. He
follows it and follows it until finally accidentally he drops into some-
thing, and many times that is how things arc invented. Such is a Sul-
phur patient. He is often ignorant but imagines himself to be a great
man ; he despises education and despises literary men and their accom-
plishments, and he wonders why it is everyone cannot see that he is-
above education.

Again, this patient takes on religious melancholy, not meditating
upon the rational religion, but on foolish ideas about himself. He



876


SULPHUR


prays constantly and uninterrputedly, is always in his room, moaning
with despair. He thinks he has sinned away his day of grace.

A patient needing Sulphur is often in a state of dulness and con^
fusion of mind, with inability to collect the thoughts and ideas ; lack
of concentration. He will sit and meditate orf no one thing continu-
ously, making no effort to concentrate his mind upon anything. He
wakes up in the morning with dulness of mind and fulness in the head
and vertigo. Vertigo in the open air. In the open air comes on coryza
with this fulness in the head and dulness, so that there is a confusion
of the mind.

In the books there is an expression that has been extensively used.
“Foolish happiness and pride ; thinks himself in possession of beauti-
ful things ; even rags seem beautiful.'’ Such a state has been present
in lunatics, and in persons who were not lunatics in any other way ex-
cept on that one idea.

The Sulphur patient has an aversion to business. He will sit around
and do nothing, and let his wife take in washing and “work her finger-
nails off’ taking care of him ; he thinks that is all she is good for. A
state of refinement seems to have gone out of the Sulphur patient.
Sulphur is the very opposite of all things fastidious. Arsenicum is
the typical fastidious patient, and these two remedies are the extremes
of each other. Arsenicum wants his clothing neat and clean, wants
everything hung up well upon the pegs, wants all the pictures hung up
propertly upon the wall, wants everything neat and nice ; and hence
the Arsenicum patient has been called “the gold-headed-canc patient,"
because of his neatness, fastidiousness and cleanliness. The very op-
posite of all that is the Sulphur patient.

“Indisposed to everything, work, pleasure, talking or motion ; in-
dolence of mind and body.” “Satiety of life ; longing for indolence of
mind and body.” “Satiety of life ; longing for death.” “Too lazy to
rouse himself up, and too unhappy to live.” “Dread of being washed
(in children).” Yes, they will cry lustily if they have to be washed.
The Sulphur patient dreads water and takes cold from bathing.

As to its relationship, Sulphur should not be given immediately be-
fore Lycopodium. It belongs to a rotating group, Sulphur, Calcarea,
Lycopodium. First Sulphur, then Calcarea and then Lycopodium,
and then Sulphur again, as it follows Lycopodium well. Sulphur and
Arsenicum are also related. You will very often treat a case with
Sulphur for a while and then need to give Arsenicum for some time,
and then back to Sulphur. Sulphur follows most of the acute remedies
well.

The Sulphur patient is troubled is with much dizziness. When ho
goes into the open air or when he stands any length of time, he becomes
dizzy. On rising in the morning his head feels stupid, and on getting



SULPHUR 877

on his feet he is dizzy. He feels stupid and tired, and not rested by
his sleep, and “things go round.’’ It takes some time to establish an
equilibrium. He is slow in gathering himself together after sleep.
Here we see the aggravation from sleep and from standing.

The head furnishes many symptoms. The Sulphur patient is sub-
ject to periodical sick headaches ; congestive headaches, a sensation of
great congestion with stupefaction, attended with nausea and vomit-
ing. Sick headache once a week or every two weeks, the characteristic
seven-day aggravation. Most headaches coming on Sunday in work-
ing men arc cured by Sulphur. You can figure this out. Sunday is
the only day he does not work, and he sleeps late in the morning and
gets up with a headache that involves the whole head, with dullness and
congestion. Being busy and active prevents the headache during the
week. Others have periodical headaches every seven to ten days, with
nausea and vomiting of bile. Again he may liave a headache lasting
two or three days ; a congestive headache. Headache with nausea
and no vomiting or headache with vomiting of bile. The headache is
aggravated by stooping, generally ameliorated in a warm room and by
the application of warmth ; aggravated from light, hence the desire to
close the eyes and to go into dark room ; aggravated by jarring, and
after eating. The whole head is sensitive and the eyes are red, and
there is often lachrymation, with nausea and vomiting. Headaches at
times in those who suffer constantly from great heat in the vertex ;
the top of the head is hot and hurnsb and he wants cold cloths applied
to the top of the head. These headajehes associated with heat arc often
ameliorated by cold, but otherwise tl^e head is ameliorated in a warm;
room. The head feels stupid and sometimes he cannot think. Every
motion aggravates and he is worse after eating and drinking, worse
from taking cold drinks into the stomach and better from hot drinks.
When the headaches are present the face is engorged ; bright red face.
Headaches in persons who have a red face, a dirty face or sallow, a
venous stasis of the face ; the eyes are engorged and the skin is en-
gorged ; the face is puffed and venous in appearance. Sulphur is use-
ful in persons who get up in the morning with headache, dizziness and
red face ; in pensons who say they know they are going to have the
headache some time during the day because the face feels very full
and is red in the morning, and the eyes are red. Before the headache
comes on there is a flickering before the eyes, a flickering of color.
Scintillations, stars, saw teeth, zig-zags are forewarnings of a head-
ache, Some Sulphur headaches that I have known present a peculiar
appearance before the eyes ; a rhomhoidal figure, obliquely placed, with
saw teeth on the upper side and the body filled with spots. Sometimes
this figure is seen toward one side of the object looked at, sometimes
on the other side, but it is seen equally distinct with both eyes at the



88o


SULPHUR


especially when eating or blowing one’s nose.” “Sounds in ears,” In-
flammation of various kinds. Discharges from the ears in a Sulphur
patient. You see I have avoided saying that Sulphur is a remedy for
the ears. Many times you will cure patients of these ‘iocal diseases”
if you select remedies for the patients, when ihh local symptoms would
never have led you to the remedy. You would never have thought of
Sulphur for the ear alone, or for the prolapsus of the uterus, yet the
patient needs Sulphur, and, having given it, you are astonished to see
how the organs are turned into order after the constitution of the
patient has been made orderly. Now and then pains that are located
here and there in the body arc prescribed at by the physician, and
failure follows. He hunts a remedy through and through to find some
particular kind of pain that resembles the pain which the patient has.
You should treat the patient and not bother about trifling pains. Leave
it out if you w^int to, but get a remedy for the patient. If that pain
is in the remedy well and good, but if not do not bother about it. Do
not bother about the little symptoms. You may even leave out a most
prominent keynote in treating the patient. Sometimes that particular
pain is the only symptom the patient wants cured, but if it is an old
symptom, it will be the last thing to go away. Under such circum-
stances the patient will bother your life out wanting to know when
that pain is going to be cured, but if you have knowledge of the matter
you will not expect to relieve that pain the first time ; if you do relieve
it you know that you have made a mistake, for the later symptoms
should all go away first. It is sometimes necessary, in order to hold
a patient, to say, ”That sympto.m must not be cured first, but these
little symptoms that you do not care much about will go away first.”
You will hold that patient for life simply because you have told the
truth, simply because you have exhibited to her that you know. Such
business is honestly acquired business.

The catarrhal affections of the nose are extremely troublesome in
Sulphur. “Smell before the nose as of an old catarrh,” and so trouble-
some is the Sulphur nose, so troublesome is this catrrhal state that
with odors he is made sick. He thinks he smells his own catarrh, and
thinks others also smell it. The smell of this old catarrh, or of filthy
things, keeps him nauseated. He is subject to coryzas ; constant sneez-
ing, stoppage of the nose. Under coryza we read “fluent like water
trickling from the nose.” All the nasal discharges are acrid and
burning.

This is a state in Sulphur. Every time he takes “cold,” it brings on
a coryza. He cannot take a bath, he cannot become overheated, he
cannot get into a cold place and cannot overexert himself without
getting this ”cold in the nose.” Changes of the weather establish a
new attack. I have observed in numbers of those old people who arc



SULPHUR


88 1

in the habit of taking large quantities of Sulphur in the spring for
boils, and as a spring cleanser, that for the rest of the year they suffer
from coryza and the various complaints of Sulphur. If you can
hunt out some of these old Sulphur takers, you will have a very good
picture of Sulphur, interesting for the homoeopathic physician to look
upon. He is also subject to nose-bleed, dry ulcers and scabs in the
nose*

I have cjuite sufficiently described the general aspect of the face in
Sulphur, but we must especially remember the venous stasis, the dirty
appearance, the red spots, the sickly look, the appearance of false
plethora. It is a face that changes from pale to red, a pallid face that
becomes easily disturbed, flushed from excitement, flushed in a warm
room, flushed from slight stimulation, especially flushed in the morn-
ing. Eruptions upon the face.

Periodical neuralgias of the most violent character, especially on the
right side of the face. Long and tedious right-sided neuralgias. Per-
sistent neuralgias in those that live in a malarial climate, when the
short-acting remedies given ^or the neuralgia, such as Belladonna and
Nux vomica, have only for a short time mitigated the suffering. If
upon studying the whole case you find he turns out to be a Sulphur
patient, Sulphur will permanently cure the neuralgia.

Sulphur cures erysipelatous inflammation of the face. In Sulphur
the erysipelas commences on the right side of the face and about the
right ear, and there is considerable welling of the right ear, and it
spreads slowly, moves with sluggishnei and is unusually purple. The
whole patient is an offensive, filthy jiatient ; in spite of washing, his
skin looks wrinkled, shriveled and like dried beef. Sulphur is not so
suitable in the cases that come on with rapidity and great violence,
with vesicles and enormous blebs, but it suits those cases in which
at first there is the appearance of a mottled dusky red spot on the face,
and a little distance from it another spot and the another, and these,
as it were, all run together, and after a week or so it develops into a
sluggish erysipelatous state, and the veins seem to be distended, and
he is passing into a state toward unconsciousness. You will be as-
tonished to see what Sulphur will do in such a case, which comes
slowly as if there were a lack of vitality to develop it, a slow, sluggish,
erysipelatous inflammation. Whereas, if it be Arsenicum, Apis or
Rhus tox,, it spreads with rapidity. Arsenicum and Apis burn likd
fire and Rhus has blisters upon the erysipelatous patches.

The whole face in Sulphur is covered at times with patches of
moist, scaly, itching, eczematous eruptions. Crusta lactea that involves
the scalp and the ears, with moisture, thick yellow crusts, piling up,
with much itching, which is worse when warm in bed. The child
sleeps without covers. If there is itching in parts that arc covered,

III



882


SULPHUR


when the parts become warm the itching increases. These eruptions
are associated with eye diseases, catarrhal affections of the eyes and nose.

The Sulphur patient has thick incrustations upon the lips, scabby
lips, chapped lips, cracks about the lips and corners of the mouth. The
saliva oozes out of the mouth making red Streaks. Eruptions with
itching and burning about the lower part of the face. Herpetic erup-
tions about the mouth. All of these burn and become excoriated from
the fluids of the mouth. Round about the under jaw there is swelling
of the glands. Swelling and suppuration of the sub-maxillary glands ;
swelling of the parotids. The glands of the neck are enlarged.

In the Sulphur constitution the teeth become loose ; the gums settle
away from the teeth and bleed and burn. The teeth decay. There is
a general unhealthy condition of the mouth and tongue. Foul taste
and foul tongue. Ulceration of the mouth and burning in the ulcers.
In the aphthae there is burning, stinging. White patches in the mouth.
Sulphur is a very useful remedy in sore mouth of nursing infants, and
such as occurs in the mother during lactation. It has also deep-seated
phagedenic ulcers that eat around the inner surface of the check. Pe-
culiar little nodules form upon the tongue and upon the sides of the
mouth where the unhealthy teeth press. When these nodules come
along the edge of the tongue they are so painful that he cannot talk
and cannot swallow. He must live on substances that he can take
without having to move the tongue. Sometimes they involve the whole
tongue, and have been called cancerous affections even when benign.

Sulphur is a wonderful medicine for chronic sore throat when the
symptoms agree. The old Sulphur patient suffers from a general
catarrhal state, as has been said, and the throat symptoms are of that
sort. There is a catarrhal state which goes on even to ulceration. The
tonsil is enlarged, and of a purplish aspect lasting for weeks and months,
a general sore and painfully sensitive condition of the throat ; but
it has also an acute sore throat. It is especially useful in inflam-
mation of the tonsil with suppuration, when the aspect is purplish,
venous, and not a bright red inflammation. The purplish, dusky
color is especially a Sulphur color. There is often burning in the
throat, stitching, rawness, smarting, inflammation and difficult swallow-
ing. It has cured diphtheria.

I have sufficiently covered appetite, desires and aversions under the
generals. The Sulphur patients are commonly dyspeptics, patients
who can digest almost nothing. They must live on the simplest forms
of food in order to have any comfort at all ; cannot digest anything
like ordinary diet. The stomach is sensitive to touch with the all-gone
hungry feeling before mealtimes. The Sulphur patient cannot go long
without eating ; he becomes faint and weak. Great heaviness in the
stomach after eating but little, after eating meat, or after eating foods



SULPHUR


883


that require a healthy stomach to digest. Then he becomes the victim
of pain. He will describe the pains in his stomach as burning pains
and great soreness ; he has a morbid feeling in the stomach ; smarting
and rawness in the stomach. He will describe this sensation a» ‘Tain
in the stomach after eating. Sensation of weight in the stomach alter
eating/’ etc. The Sulphur stomach is a weak stomach, is slow in
digesting. There is acid and bilious vomiting, as a result of the dis-
ordered stomach. Sour taste in the mouth from the welling up of
acids from the stomach.

The liver is a very troublesome organ. There is enlargement and
induration, with much painfulness, pressure and distress. With con-
gestion of the liver, the stomach also takes on its usual symptoms, or,
if present already, they are aggravated. The patient becomes jaun-
diced, with sensation of engorgement or fullness of the liver, dull aching
in the liver. He is subject to gall stones ; tearing pains in the region
of the gall duct, coming periodically, attended with much increase of
his sallowness. The Sulphur liver patient is the victim of chronic
sallowuicss, which increases and decreases. When this patient takes
‘'cold” it settles in the liver ; every ‘'cold,” every bath he takes, every
change of weather, aggravates his liver symptoms, and when these are
wOTse he has less of other troubles. It localizes itself in attacks of
bilious vomiting, in attacks of “bilious headaches,” as he calls them.
At times the stool is black as tar, at others it is green and thick, and
there are times when the stool is white. These stools alternate and
change about with the engorgement of his liver, and then he is subject
to gall stones. ‘

The Sulphur patient suffers from great distension of the abdomen ;
lolling in the abdomen ; soreness in the abdomen. He cannot stand
because the abdominal viscera hang down so; they seem to be falling.
There is rawness, soreness, distension and burning, with diarrhoea
with chronic diarrhoea, and then this goes on to more serious trouble,
towards tubercle in the abdomen. The mesenteric glands become in-
filtrated with tubercle. There is nightly itching with the eruptions
upon the abdomen, the itching being worse when warm in bed. Shingles
come out about the sides and seem inclined to encircle the body.

He is also a flatulent patient. There is much belching, much dis-
tension, much rumbling and passing of flatus. He has spells of colic
without being flatulent ; the wind is confined. Dreadful spells of colic,
cutting, tearing pains relieved in no position ; burning and smarting in
the whole abdomen and soreness of the intestines. Catarrh of the
whole intestinal tract. That which he vomits is acid and smarts the
mouth, and that which he passes by the anus is acrid and makes the
parts raw. The liquid stool bums while it is passing, and there is
much burning when passing moist flatus. He is often called to stool.



884 SULPHUR

but while sitting at stool he passes only a little fluid or a little moisture
with flatus, and that fluid burns like coals of fire, and the annus
becomes raw.

The stool may be thin faeces, yellow, watery, mucous, green, bloody,
excoriating. The stool is offensive, often sickening, of a penetrating
odor which permeates the room, and ‘'the smell of the stool follows
him around, as if he had soiled himself.

The diarrhcea comes on especially in the morning and it is commonly
limited to the forenoon. It drives him out of bed in the morning ; as
soon as he wakes up and moves in bed, he feels the urging to stool and
must make great haste, or he will lose it ; it is with difficulty that he
can hold it until he reaches the commode. The morning is the typical
time, but a diarrhoea that comes on any time after midnight, from’
midnight till noon, may be a Sulphur diarrhoea. Very seldom would you
expect to cure with Sulphur a diarrhoea that is in the habit of coming
on during the afternoon. Sulphur has some evening aggravations in
diarrhoea, but these are exceptions ; it is the morning diarrhoea that we
look to Sulphur to cure.

Sulphur is a wonderful remedy in cholera and in those cases of
diarrhcea that occur in cholera times, when the diarrhoea begins in the
morning. It is also of great value in dysentery, when the stool is
bloody mucus with constant straining. As in Mcrcitrius he must sit
long at stool because of a feeling as if he could not finish. Such is the
typical Mercurius state — a slimy stool with the sensation as if he could
not finish. Sulphur often cures this slate after Mercurius fails. It is
the natural follower of Mercurius when the latter has been misunder-
stood and given. In dysentery, when this tenesmus is of the most
violent character, when the stool is pure blood, when it is attended
also with much urging to urinate. Mercurius corrosivus gives the
quickest relief. If the tenesmus is less violent, and there is not much
straining to urinate, or it is altogether absent, Mercurius solubilis is the
more natural remedy. These medicines run very close to Sulphur in
dysentery, but are more commonly indicated than Sulphur. In Sulphur
patients of course Sulphur will Idc the suitable remedy in dysentery.

He is subject to haemorrhoids, external and internal ; great bunches
that are sore and raw, burning and tender, and that bleed and smart
with the liquid stool.

The urinary symptoms, and those of the bladder and male sexual
organs, combine to give a very important group in Sulphur. There
is a catarrhal state of the bladder, constant urging to urinate and burn-
ing and smarting while urinating. The urine scalds the urethra while
passing and the smarting is so great that it lasts a long time after
urination. It is indicated in broken-down constitutions, in old in-
ventors, in old philosophers who have been leading sedentary lives,



SULPHUR


885


who suffer from enlarged prostate, burning in the incthra during and
after the flow of urine, and a urethral discharge not unlike gonorrhoea,
but really a chronic catarrhal state, hlucus in the urine, sometimes
pus. In old cases of ^leet, in old broken-down patients, when tho
ordinary gonorrhoea remedies, and the remedies especially fitted to the
discharge itself, only palliate; when the patient himself is a Sulphur
patient. Such a patient has had a gonorrhoea and has been treated
by remedies adapted to the new appearance, to the discharge itself, but
a catarrhal state of the urethra follows, with burning in the urethra,
swelling of the meatus, a red, swollen, pouty condition of tlie meatus,
and only a drop collects, just enough to soil the linen, and this keeps
up week after week, and sometimes for years ; he will be cured of this
discharge by allowing potentized Sulphur to act long enough.

Sulphur has cured patients with sugar in the urine, in the early
stage of diabetes. Sulphur cures involuntary urination during sleep.
It cures troubles brought on by taking “cold.” Every “cold” in some
patients settles in the bladder. This is like Dulcamara, and when
Dulcamara will no longer hold, or when it has l>een suitable in earlier
stages. Sulphur follows it well. Continuous smarting of urine and
frequent urging ; burning, stinging, smarting in the urethra for a long
time after micturition.

On the genitals there are many eruptions. Itching of the genitals,
worse from warmth of the bed ; much sweat about the genitals ; cold-
ness of the genitals. In the male, Impotency ; the sexual desire is
fairly strong, but he is unable to scoire suitable erections ; or there is
discharge of semen before intromissttXjt, or too soon after intromission,
There is an inflammatory condition around the glans and foreskin.
Herpetic eruptions under the foreskin, itching and burning. This
patient has much annoyance from itching eruptions on the genitals.
The prepuce becomes narrow and cannot be drawn back ; inflammatory
phimosis ; thickening or restriction of the prepuce. Inflammatory
phimosis can be cured by remedies, if the phimosis depends upon some
trouble that is in itself curable. Congenital phimosis cannot be cured
by remedies. The genitals are extremely offensive both to the patient
and to the examining physician. The patient is likely to be very un-
cleanly ; he does not bathe himself, and tlie genitals accumulate their
natural filth. Discharge of prostatic fluid when at stool.

Under female sexual organs we have sterility. We have irregularity
in the menstrual flow, menstrual flow suppressed from the slightest
disturbance. Haemorrhage in connection with the menstrual flow ;
uterine haemorrhage ; prolonged uterine haemorrhage.

In an abortion you may have selected Belladonna, which w'as suitable
while the woman was aborting, and it may have overcome the present
state ; or you may have selected Apis or Sabina, which was suitable



886


SULPHUR


for the early state, and it either postpones or checks the hcemorrhage
for the time or hurries the expulsion of the foetus ; but the haemor-
rhage starts in again and with its return we have prolonged tribulation.
In many of these cases we can do nothing unt^ wc put the patient on
Sulphur. If the symptoms are masked, Sulphur stands very high.
When Belladonna has been given you will often have to follow it with
Sulphur. Sabina, which has the most violent gushing haemorrhage in
abortions, very commonly needs to be followed by Sulphur. In such
haemorrhagic afEections, however, i.e., in a prolonged recurring haemor-
rhage, a chronic condition, not in the first or most exciting time, not
in the time of the earliest gushing, there arc two very frequently indi-
cated remedies, viz.: Sulphur and Psoriniim. The flow keeps coming
back in spite of ordinary remedies, and in spite of remedies selected
upon the group of symptoms related to the pelvis. In many insiances
we go to a haemorrhage and the pelvic symptoms are prominent and
all other symptoms clouded ; there is a gushing flow, the blood is hot,
etc., and there are only a few symptoms ; but the next time you
see the woman she is quiet enough to give other symptoms, and in the
course of a few days more symptoms come out, as the haemorrhagic
state is an outcome of the chronic condition. This is unlike measles.
You do not have to look into the chronic state until the measles or
scarlet fever or small-pox is finished ; these are acute miasms. But
the haemorrhage is a part of her constitutional state ; it is not a miasm ;
and hence when it is violent, calling for a remedy, probably the best
adapted will be the short acting remedies, such as Belladonna or even
Aconite ; but then look into the constitutional state for it is likely some
remedy will have to follow the Acofiitc or the Belladonna, and com-
monly it is Sulphur ; the acute remedy being suitable to the violent
action and then followed by its complementary medicine.

Women needing Sulphur are full of hot flashes, such as they are
likely to have at the climateric period, and here it competes with
Lachesis and Sepia, Sulphur and Sepia are suitable in the most
violent cases of dysmenorrhoea in girls and even in those of advanced
age. Most violent cases that have existed a long time, since the
beginning of menstruation, in women who always needed Sulphur.
If you select a remedy merely on the kind of pain, on the sensitiveness
of the uterus, on the appearance of the flow, i.e., on the pelvic symp-
toms, you will make a failure. You must treat the patient, even if the
pelvic S3rmptoms do not fall under the generals ; when the generals
agree Sulphur will cure dysmenorrhoea even though you cannot fit it
to the pelvic symptoms. The generals always precede and rule in
every case.

Sulphur has violent burning in the vagina. Troublesome itching
of the vulva. Great offensiveness from the genitals. Perspiration



SULPHUR


887


copious and foetid coming from about the genitals, down the inside of
the thighs and up over the abdomen. She is so offensive that the odors
nauseate her, and this general state is true, it is not the imagination.
Remember the oveiVsensitiveness ^to odors. Leucorrhoea copious, of-
fensive, burning, sticky* it may be whitish or yellow ; it is offensive,
acrid, and causes itching about the part and excoriation.

There is much nausea during gestation, or only during the early
period of gestation. In those women needing Sulphur, it will stop
the nausea, and they will go into labor easily, with few protracted
pains ; they will go through their labor with only the contractions,
and these comparatively painless. The only pains in such cases will
be those from the pressure of the child’s head. Labor is painful we
know, but it is comparatively easy when the woman is upon a suitable
remedy. Sulphur is indicated then in women who have suffered from
the most dreadful agony in confinement ; prolonged labor. Trouble-
some after-pains. Suitable also in swelling of the mammary glands.

Then we have septicxmic conditions, with purulent lochia or sup-
pression of the lochia. You may go to a case in which, on the third
day, there has been a chill, the lochia has been suppressed, the woman
has a high temperature and is covered from head to foot with sweat.
As you put your hand under the covers you feel steam come up from
the body so that you want to take your hand away, it is so hot. She is
dazed and is sensitive over the whole abdomen. You know now
the meaning of the suppression of thfe lochia ; you have a puerperal
fever on hand. Study closely for Sulphur instead of hunting around
among Aconite, Bryonia, Belladonna^ Opium, etc. With these you
will make a total failure in most instances, but Sulphur fits into just
such a state and has cured many cases of puerperal fever. If it is
but a milk fever or mammary indisposition and the chill is only acute,
then your short-acting remedies will do very well and even Aconite
has been useful, but when it is a case of septicaemia Sulphur goes to
the very root of it. When the feet burn, when there is a hungry feel-
ing in the stomach, the night aggravation with sinking and exhaustion,
and when throughout the body there is a sensation of steam rising or
hot flashes, one after another, you must give Sulphur. Now, on the
Other hand, if in such a case, with the hot sweat and other general
features, you have one rigor following another in rapid succession and
no end to them, you cannot get out of that case without Lycopodium.
which goes as deeply into the case as Sulphur, When there is a con-
tinuous intermingling of little chillinesses and little quiverings through-
out the body and the pulse has lost its proper relationship to the tem-
perature, Pyrogen must be administered. If there is a purplish ap-
pearance of the body, cold sweat all over, if there are remittent or
intermittent chills^ with thirst during the chill, and at no other time,



888


SULPHUR


and the face is red during the chill, you must give Ferruni, as no other
remedy looks just like that. When one side of the body is hot and the
other side is cold and you find the woman in a tearful state, trembling
with fear, nervous excitement and restlessness, give Pulsatilla^ which
also has a septic state and is sufficient to overcome the septic condition.

Sulphur is suitable in surgical fever when it takes this form of
flashes of heat and steaming sweat.

In these deep-seated septic states, somewhere from beginning to
end, Sulphur will most likely be wanted. You may see in the earlier
stages of that septic state a number of Bryonia symptoms, but Bryonia
cannot take hold of that case. Remember that in a septic state you
want to get ahead of it in the first twenty-four hours ; you do not w^ant
to let it run on, and if Bryonia has only mitigated it in its beginning
then it is too late for Sulphur. Go to Sulphur at once. Now, another
thing, even if you have made a mistake in giving Sulphur and you
find it does not take hold of the case, it always simplifies it, does good
and never spoils it. It gives you a good basis to begin on. It goes
to the bottom and simplifies the matter, and, if you have mental and
nervous symptoms left still you have overcome that violent septic state
which must be met at once, and the remaining symptoms in many in-
stances are simple. Sulphur is a general remedy to begin with in
those cases where the symptoms are not perfectly clear for another.

This remedy is full of difficult breathing, shortness of breath from
very little exertion, copious sweat, so erhausted ; asthmatic breathing
and much rattling in the chest. Every time he gets '‘cold'" it settles
Jn the chest or in the nose. In both these instances the catarrhal state
hangs on and holds a long time ; it seems never to be finished, always
remains as a catarrhal state. ‘‘Every cold he takes ends in asthma,''
calls for Dulcamara, but very often the fag end of that attack will
remain and the physician has to give a deep-acting remedy. After
Dulcamara has done all it can do Sulphur comes in as its complemen-
tary remedy. Calcarea carb, has a similar relationship to Dulcamara,

The nose, the inner chest and lungs furnish us localities for much
trouble. The patient has had pneumonia and it has gone on to the
period of infiltration ; you have taken the case in this advanced stage
after Bryonia has overcome the threatening features, and now when
the patient should rally he does not rally ; he perspires all over, is tired
and has a strange and singular consciousness that “there is something
wrong in there ; a load in there difficult breathing ; flashes of heat
and yet not much fever ; sometimes coldness alternating with flashes
of heat. I have often heard them say, “There is a great load in there,
doctor. I cannot get rid of it." Upon close examination you find
there is hepatization and now comes the time for such remedies as
Phosphorus, Lycopodium and Sulphur, and Sulphur leads them all



SULPHUR


889


When Bryonia has been sufficient for the earlier symptoms, or when
Aconite has cleared them up, there has been too much for these
remedies to relieve, then hepatization comes on. If this is confined to
only a small area it w^l keep up quite a chronic course, but Sulphur
will clear it up. If, however, it is a double pneumonia, or the hepati-
zation involves a considerable portion of the lung, and the remedy
given has not been sufficient, and the case is advancing towards a fatal
issue, it may be that all at once at one, two or three o’clock in the
morning, he begins to sink, his nose becomes pinched, his lips are
drawn, he takes on a hippocratic countenance, is covered with cold
sweat, he is too feeble in every part of his body to move ; he only
moves his head a little in a restless manner. Unless you are called at
once and give him a dose of Arsenicum he will die. You give the
Arsenicum, and you have done well, but Arsenicum has no ability to
remove the results of inflammation. But though it cannot cure that
hepatized lung it acts as a vital stimulant ; it warms up the patient and
makes him feel he is going to get better ; but, mark this, in twenty-
four hours he will die unless you follow the Arsenicum with the proper
remedy. You must not wait on your remedy too long in these cases.
Just as soon as he rallies and the reaction is at its highest pitch, give
him the antidote and natural follower of Arsenicum^ which is Sulphur,
and in twenty-four hours the patient will say, “I am getting better.”
As sure as you exist today, it will do just that thing. There arc
times when you will see clearly that Phosphorus is the medicine to
follow Arsenicum with. If such a patient, rallying under Arsenicum,
goes into a fever, if a hot fever comes on with burning thirst and he
cannot get enough ice-cold water, you must follow it with Phosphorus,
and it will do in that case what Sulphur will do in the other. You will
not see these cases in your own practice because you will not let your
cases get into that state ; if such cases have power enough to live when
prescribed for properly in that state, they have power enough to let
you break up the whole nature of the case in the beginning. But go
back to that patient who had only a circumscribed hepatization and
felt well enough to get up and go around. He has a lingering cough,
and now six months or a year after the attack he says. '‘Doctor, I have
never been right since I had an attack of chest trouble. The doctor
called it pneumonia.” He can tell you about the rusty sputum and the
other little things that belong to pneumonia ; that is all you need to
know. He has had a chronic cough ever since that attack and now
he has chilliness. There is fibrinous infiltration, not a tuberculous
state, but the remains of hepatization that nature could not cure. If
that is allowed to go on he will go into catarrhal phthisis, asthmatic
conditions of chronic bronchitis and troubles of various sorts, and
finally he will di^ from these. Sulphur will very often conform to all
iia



890


SULPHUR


of his symptoms ; it especially has the ability to clear up the lungs that
were not properly cleared up at the time of his illness.

Sulphur cures bronchitis. It cures asthmatic bronchitis when the
symptoms agree. Sulphur has a most violent cough that racks the
whole frame ; it seems that the head will fly orf ; pain in the head when
coughing ; the head is jarred by the cough. Then he has expectoration
of blood, bleeding from the lungs ; in all of these cases threatening
phthisis, when there is yet not too much deposit of tubercle, when
there is only the beginning of tubercular deposit. The low, stricken-
down constitution, the emaciated subjects that have inherited phthisis
who have the all-gone hungry feeling in the stomach, heat on the top
of the head and uneasiness from the warmth of the bed. These cases
would be better if they had plenty of eruptions come out upon the
body ; but as a matter of fact the skin has no eruptions ; there is no
relief ; it is all going on in his internals and he is gradually breaking
down. Sulphur will in such instances rouse that patient out of his
phthisical state and he will return to health, or, if he is too bad for that
he may be kept for years from his troubles. l^ook out for it in the
advanced state of phthisis. You have had sufficient said concerning
its administration in such a condition. It increases the suppuration,
and brings on little pneumonias wherever there is a tubercle ; it tends
to suppurate these out. Every cell that is incapable of carrying on its
function will be sloughed out by Sulphur.

The striking thing in Sulphur as to the back is pain in the back on
rising from a seat, compelling him to walk bent, and he can only
straighten up slowly after moving. The pain is principally in the
lumbo-sacral region.

The extremities are covered with eruptions. Eruptions upon the
back of the hands and between the fingers, and sometimes upon the
palms ; vesicular and scaly eruptions which itch ; pustules, boils and
little abscesses ; irregular erysipelatous patches here and there upon
the extremities ; a dirty appearance of the skin. Itching of the skin
from the warmth of the bed. Enlargement of the joints. Rheumatic
affections ; great stiffness of the joints ; tightness in the hollow of the
knees ; tightness of the tendons, of rheumatic and gouty character.
Cramps in the legs and soles of the feet. Burning of the soles of the
feet in bed ; he puts them out of bed to cool them off. The soles cramp
and burn and itch. At times you will find the soles are cold, and then
again burning, and these states alternate with each other. Distress
of the body with coldness of the limbs, but after going to bed they
burn so much that he must put them out. The corns, which he is a
victim of and suffers from almost constantly, burn and sting in the
warmth of the bed.

The skin of a Sulphur patient ulcerates and suppurates easily ; a



SULPHURIC ACID 89 1

splinter under the skin will cause it to ulcerate ; wounds heal slowly
and fester. Every little prick of a pin festers as in Hepar.

The eruptions of Sulphur are too numerous to mention. They are
of all sorts, but there are a few characterizing features in all, such as
the burning, stingiijg and itching and the aggravation from the warmth
of the bed. The skin is rough and unhealthy. Upon the face are
many '‘black-heads,'' acne, pimples and pustules. Sulphur is full of
boils and abscesses in all parts of the body, squamous eruptions, vesic-
ular eruptions, etc. They are all present in Sulphur and they burn and
sting.


SULPHURIC ACID

The sensation of quivering all over the body and in the limbs with-
out visible trembling is a very strong symptom of Sulphuric acid, and
especially if it is associated with weakness that has been of long stand-
ing. The exhaustion, excitability and hurried feeling arc constant
factors. The haemorrhagic disposition with many complaints. Black
fluid blood from all the orifices of the body. Small red spots enlarg-
ing rapidly to resemble purpura haemorrhagica. Blue-black spots on
the skin from slight injury. Blood-red spots on the skin like those on
a brook trout sometimes after injuries. Chafing easily, followed by
ulceration. Boils and bedsores. It has many of the complaints found
in old people. The morning aggravation of symptoms is also a strong
feature. Sensitive to cold and eniaciation. The pains are bruised,
burning, tearing, stitching, shooting^ and jerking. The pain comes on
slowly and departs suddenly. The discharges are dark, thin blood or
blood-streaked ; or thin, yellow and bloody. The discharges are ex-
coriating. General sweat after eating. The symptoms predominate
on the right side. It is often indicated in sour-smelling babies like
Hepar, and it is as sensitive to touch and nearly as sensitive to cold.
When it has cured the sensitiveness to cold the patient often becomes
worse and requires Pulsatilla, which is the complement and antidote.

Prostration of mind and body, with extreme sadness, weeps continu-
ously. Nothing can be done to please him. Fretful and irritable over
the slightest cause. He cannot eat and work fast enough. No one
does anything to please him ; in such a hurry if doing anything or
going anywhere. All things must be done at once. Unwilling to
answer. Irresolution.

Vertigo in close room. Better walking in the open air. Better
lying. Sometimes compelling him to keep his bed.

Tension in the forehead with coryza.

The brain seems loose and seems to fall to side lain on, better sitting
perfectly still, worse walking. The blood flows strongly to the head



892 SULPHURIC ACm

and the feet become cold. Electric shocks in forehead and temples in
forenoon and again in evening. Sensation as though a plug werd
being driven into the skull by strong blows. The pains in the head
come on slowly and cease suddenly. Violent headaches in debilitated
people. Extreme soreness in the periosteum such as is found in
syphilis. The hair falls out or turns gray. Ulceration of the scalp.
Extremely sensitive eruptions. Lachrymation when reading. Chronic
inflammation of the eye, with enlarged veins and ulceration. Sensa-
tion of foreign body in right outer cantluis. Soreness in the eyes with
coryza.

Severe ear pains that increase gradually and cease suddenly. Grad-
ual loss of hearing. Bloody discharge from ear. Buzzing in the ear.

Slowly oozing, dark, thin blood from the nose in the evening. It
cures acrid, bloody discharge from nose in feeble patients when the
generals are covered by it. The coryza is dry or fluid with loss of
smell and taste.

The face of the Sulphuric acid patient is a most sickly one. Pale,
sickly and sometimes jaundiced. The expression of long suffering is
marked. The deep lines of pain, depiction and emaciation. Tension
of the face or a sensation as though white of egg had dried on it.
Violent neuralgic pains of the face coming on gradually and ceasing
suddenly, ameliorated by warmth and lying on the painful side. Small
red spots or specks on the face gradually increasing in size. Inflam-
mation of the submaxillary gland.

The teeth decay early. Violent neuralgia of the teeth, coming on
slowly and ceasing suddenly. Wo rse from cold and bet ter f rorj^i ,„heat,.
worse in the evening in bed. The teeth arc on edge. Loss of tastq
during coryza. The sore ipn?irh is onp_ of its most importan t features.
It is our most frequently indicated rem e dy fo il, n ursmg sor e mg utji .
Th^^j O^hthous^ j^uth of infant or^ jnthpr wi^b or wKitigh

ukergg^Bloody saliva from mouth ; vesicles in the mouth. Breath
very offensive. Bleeding from the raucous surfaces of mouth and
gums with or without purpura hccmorrhagica. Rapidly spreading ul-
cers in the mouth.

Inflammation of the throat that h aphthous or follicular. Denuded
mucous membrane. Diphtheritic exudate yellowish or white with
aphthous surroundings and bleeding from nose, gums or other parts.
Diphtheria with more than ordinary exhaustion and foetor. The uvula
is oedematous. The throat is full of spreading ulcers. Painful sort
throat with painful, difficult swallowing. During the throat troubles
fluids drunk run out of nose. Salivation, glands of throat swollen and
there is great swelling of the tonsils, soft palate and throat in general.
Dark fluid blood from throat and mouth.

He craves brandy and fruit. Loss of appetite and progressive weak-



sxjtmmic ACID


893


ness arc strong features. Aversion to the smell of coffee. He can-
not drink cold water, as it feels so cold in the stomach and makes him
chilly. Violent, spasmodic hiccough, such as occurs in drunkards.
Chronic heart burn. Sour belching. Sour vomiting. The teeth are
always on edge from sour eructations. Sour vomiting during preg-
nancy. Vomiting of drunkards in the morning. (Compare Arsen-^
nicum) Sour and very foul. Nausea and shivering. Coughing and
belching sour fluids. The stomach seems to hang down a.s if relaxed.
Vomiting after drinking cold water. Violent, spasmodic pains in the
stomach. The gains come gradually and cease suddenly. The sour
vomiting is most like Robinia,

She does not vomit food, but cannot eat. as it causes pain in stomach
and she vomits mucus.

After intermittent fever had existed some time the spleen enlarges,
and is painful on coughing and sore to touch. Stitching pains in
spleen and liver. It has many times overcome the poison of lead and
lead colic. Sinking, weak feeling in abdomen after stool. Weak feel-
ing in abdomen, as though menses would come on. Labor-Iikc pains
in abdomen, extending to hips and back.

Diarrhoea with great general weakness and sensation of trembling.
With weak, sinking sensation in the abdomen after stool. Chronic
diarrhoea with much suffering. Excoriating stools, burning in rectum
during stool. Diarrhoea brought on from the least indiscretion in eat-
ing, after fruit, especially if uni^pe, after oysters. Stool watery
orange yellow, stringy, mucous, mixed with blood, greenish, black,
undigested smelling like spoiled c^s. Hiemorrhoids very sore, itch-
ing, painful during stool, in drunkards. In constipation the stool is in
small balls.

Pain in the bladder if the desire to pass urine is postponed. It has
cured diabetes. Scanty urine. Bloody urine. Cuticle in the urine.

The menses are too frequent and copious and the flow is dark and
thin. Many symptoms come before the menses. Nightmare before
menses. Has nightmare at the close of the menses. The vagina is
prolapsed and gangrenous. Leucorrhoea bloody, acrid, milky or albu-
minous, yellow. The woman at the climacteric period has many symp-
toms peculiar to Sulphuric acid. The flashes of heat, weakness, sensa-
tion of trembling, a nervous hurry in all her actions and feelings,
bleeding from uterus and other parts of blood that does not coagulate,
and constipation with small, hard balls like sheep^s dung are symptoms
common to the critical period. It often causes the vomiting of preg-
nancy. Vomiting preceded by cough.

It has cured sterility when it was supposed to depend upon the copi-
ous and frequent menstrual flow. Violent itching of the vulva.

Pain and soreness in the larynx. Pain in the larynx on swallowing.



894 SULPHURIC ACID

Hoarseness with a dry feeling and sensation of roughness in the larynx.

Weak chest and great dyspnoea. Rapid movement of the wings of
nose like Lycopodium. Rapid moving up and down of the larynx
during the dyspnoea. Short of breath.

Kxcept in the morning the cough is dry and hacking. Sometimes
in two coughs. He coughs in the open air, either walking or riding,
worse from cold drinks and from the odor of coffee. Cough followed
by itching and vomiting. The irritation is felt in the chest. The ex-
pectoration is in the morning of dark, thin blood, or of thin, yellow-
ish, blood-streaked mucus tasting sour.

Weakness in the chest with burning and stitching pain. Pressure
on left side of chest. Profuse haemorrhage from the lungs of dark
fluid blood, after pneumonia, and during the climacteric period. Ul-
ceration of lungs (compare Kali carb.). Oppression of the chest and
suffocation unless he lets the legs hang down. It has been a very use-
ful remedy in the first steps of phthisis with profuse sweat and great
weakness, but where given in the last stage it has appeared to bring
on haemorrhage and increase of the inflammatory condition in the
lungs. Stitching pains in the heart, palpitation. It has been useful
in pleuritic exudation.

Great weakness in the spine, felt mostly when standing and sitting.
Pain in the lumbar region. Soreness between shoulder blades when
coughing. Stiffening of the back in the morning on rising. Large
abscess on the right side of the neck.

Black and blue spots on the limbs. Stitching pain in the shoulder
joint on lifting the arm. Stitches in finger joints. Chafing of thighs
after rising. Marked weakness in knees and ankles. Swollen veins of
feet. Chilblains of frost-bitten parts. Twitching if fingers during sleep.

Late falling asleep and wakens too early. Nightmare before
menses.

It has chilliness, flashes of heat with sweat. Copious sweat, mostly
on upper part of body, from motion, sour, cold, after eating warm
food. Morning sweats. Night sweats. Typhoid fever with great
prostration. Bleeding from capillaries. Dark, thin blood.

Haemorrhage of dark, thin blood from the bowels. Putrid forms of
continued fever. Cadaveric countenance.

Echymoses, purpura haemorrhagica. Old cicatrices turn red and
become painful. Itching and prickling with eruptions. Pimples.
Red itching blotches on the skin. Livid spots. Contusions, bedsores.
Boils and abscesses. Nodular urticarias. It cures old indolent ulcers
that bleed easily dark blood. Sensitive painful spreading ulcers.
Stinging burning pain in ulcers. It has cured putrid ulcers on legs.
It is useful in ulcers of drunkards, in ulcers following a low form of
fever. Thin yellow or bloody discharge.



SYPHILINUM


895


SYPHILINUM

Whenever the symptoms that are representative of the patient him-
self have been suppressed in any case of syphilis, and nothing remains
but weakness and a few results of the storm that has long ago or re-
cently passed, this nosode will cause reaction and restore order and
sometimes do much curing, and the symptoms that must always be
present, that represent the disordered state of the economy will appear
to guide to a restoration of health. When a syphilitic patient has suf-
fered from a course of typhoid he may be very slow in convalescing,
but a single dose of Syphilinum high will cause him to eat and feel
stronger and gain rapidly. How does the old school treatment of
syphilis diflFer from barbarism ? one might well ask. The strong drug-
ging by Mercurius and iodides so debilitate that all who pass through
arc invalids and weak ; even then they are not cured of syphilis — if
they were cured we could not cause to come back the symptoms that
have been removed. Syphilinum often does bring back the ulcers in
the throat and the eruptions. When there are violent neuralgias of
the head, in sides of head and over the eyes, great soreness in bones
of legs and head, and the multitude of symptoms of nerve syphilis all
nondescript, then it is that the patieat will be made free from suffer-
ing, and given sleep, strength and appetite. But the ulcers and erup-
tions will come back in some cases, apd it is all the better if they do.
It is by no means limited to patients, who have had syphilis. It can
be used like any remedy against the symptoms of the provings, or such
as are similar to symptoms common to the disease or against the symp-
toms like the numerous verified clinical symptoms. Many symptoms
are worse at night in bed, many come on in the evening and last till
morning. From sundown to sunrise marks the time of many violent
pains and sufferings. Some are better from heat, and some are better
from cold air and cold applications. There is great prostration in the
morning on waking. It has cured many cases of epilepsy. Epileptic
convulsions after menses. Sleeplessness, V'Omctimes only one-half of
the night, again the whole night. The blood feels hot flowing through
the arteries during the night. Wandering pains here and there all
over the body. Pain in the periosteum, nerves and joints. Pains
sometimes increase gradually and decrease gradually. Sharp pains
here and there. Complaints worse in the cold weather of winter and
heat of summer. Extreme emaciation. Abscesses. Paralysis of
limbs. Caries of bone. Curvature of spine. Gummata. Dwarfish
children. Curvature of bones. Enlarged glands. Offensive odor of
the body. Soreness to touch in many parts, especially bones. It has
often been observed that in syphilized invalids remedies act but a few
days and must be changed. This always calls for the nosode. When



896


SVPHILINUM


there is only great weakness and few symptoms it will act well When
there is ulceration of legs, throat, mouth or other parts with no repair.
Fistulous openings, exostoses, fissures, tubercles and warts have been
cured promptly. When it has been used against the primary mani-
festations of the disease and in the earlier phenomena it has generally
resulted in failure. It is seldom the best remedy for syphilis per se,
but for marked and suppressed syphilis it seems to restore a sort of
order and bring better reaction. The author has many times observed
that gummata in throat and anus will take on destructive ulceration in
old broken down cases after Sulphur has been given, and that Syphil-
inum will restrain it and establish repair. Sulphur often produces
prolonged aggravation when there are many tissue changes in advanced
cases of syphilis. Such changes are most likely gummata. The effort
of Sulphur is to remove the results of disease, which the patient can-
not stand. It often causes suspicion of latent syphilis when such ag-
gravations are very severe after Sulphur high. Sulphur low will not
he followed by such results. After such prolonged aggravations
Syphilinum should be considered. Latent syphilis often exists where
it is least expected. This nosode should be used only in high potencies.

Forgetful. Weak minded. Laughing and weeping without cause.
He cannot remember faces, names, dates, events, books or places. Ho
cannot calculate. Despair of recovery Melancholia. Fears he is
going insane. Imbecility. Indifferent to his friends, and feels no
delight in anything. Dreads the night and dreads the morning, as the
weakness and soreness are worse on waking. He always says he is not
himself and he cannot feel like himself. A middle-aged man who had
suffered many years from latent syphilis abandoned his business and
remained at home lamenting and sad. His wife supported the family
by keeping boarders. After receiving a few doses of Syphilinum he
took on new energy and became industrious and prosperous. Much
vertigo. Aphasia. In some of these cases of brain syphilis. Sulphur
and Causticum have caused prolonged suffering and weakness. Syph-
ilinum will act favorably.

Syphilitic invalids are often sufferers from violent neuralgic head-
aches. Violent pains in sides of head, forehead or temples. Pain
from temple to temple, from ear to ear, one eye to occiput ; supraorbital
pains. Pain sometimes ameliorated by warmth. Bursting pains ; full-
ness of head. Maddening pains all night, causing sleeplessness.
Headache and delirium. Neuralgia of head beginning at 4 p. M.,
growing gradually worse until midnight and then gradually better,
ceasing at daylight. Great soreness of the pericranium. Many pains
are confined to a direct line and are called linear headaches. Violent
crushing pains in occiput. Stupefying headaches in the forehead or
cwxiput. Cutting pains in occiput. Headache through the temples,



SYPHILINUM


897


thence vertically, like an inverted letter T. Headaches involving the
whole top of the head as if head would be crushed in. Violent pain
in whole head with red face, enlarged veins of face, restlessness and
sleepless nights. Aggravated nights. Tubercles all over the scalp.
Exostoses in the cranium, very sore and painful. The hair is falling out.

Paralysis of the eye muscles is common. Strabismus. Diplopia.
Amaurosis. Atrophy of the optic nerve. The retina is pale, gray and
spotted. Myopia. Iritis. Ptosis. Paralysis of the superior oblique.
Chronic recurrent phlyctenular inflammation of the cornea, Conjimc-
tivities with ulceration. Ulceration of the cornea. Interstitial kera-
titis. Spots on the cornea. Left eye covered with fungus-like
growth, pain intense, aggravated at night. Acute ophthalmia neona-
torum when one of the parents has had syphilis. Copious purulent
discharge from eyes. Lids enormously swollen. Eyes cannot be
opened because of swelling. Iritis with intense pain at night, and
photophobia. Pain in eye from sundown to sunrise. Scalding tears.

Sharp pains in ear. Purulent watery discharge from car. Caries
of mastoid. Paralysis of auditory nerve. Calcareous deposit on
tympanum.

This remedy has cured many cases of offensive green or yellow dis-
charge from nose in children with specific history. Dryness of nose ;
obstructed at night, Freejuent attacks of coryza. Always taking cold
in nose. Syphilitic ozacna. Bones of nose destroyed by caries and
nose depressed. Hie whole nose destroyed by ulceration. Epistaxis
from ulcers. Hard plugs in nose. ;

Neuralgia of face. Paralysis of esne side of face. Tubercles and
copper-colored eruption on face. It has palliated cancerous ulceration
of face. Scabby eruption on face. It has cured rupia on the cheek.
Papules and pustules. The lips are fissured and ulcerated. Ulcers on
chin, lips, and wing of nose. Wing and side of nose eaten away by
an ulcer. It has cured many cases of lupus of face.

The teeth are deformed, distorted, spotted ; decay early ; cup shaped
in children. Violent pain in teeth. Crawling in the roots of the teeth,
like a worm.

Mouth and tongue ulcerated. Breath foetid. Tongue soft, spongy,
easily indented in persons who have long taken Mercury. Paralysis
of tongue, one-sided. Tongue red, excoriated, cracked and sore.
Patches on tongue. Denuded patches. Red spots. Copious viscid
saliva in mouth. Ulceration of 'soft palate. Caries of hard palate^
Soft palate entirely destroyed. Bleeding from ulcers.

Throat studded with ulcers. Inflammation of throat and tonsils.
Soft palate swollen and nodular. Post nasal catarrh and ulceration.
Posterior nares plugged with crusts.

The appetite is perverted. Longing for strong drink. Thirst.
*13



898


SYPHlLINt^M


Aversion to food, to meat. No desire to eat. All food disagrees.
Flatulence. Heartburn ; nausea ; vomiting. Ulceration of stomach*

The rectum is the seat of many symptoms and conditions. Ulcera-
tion, fissures, piles, nodules, gummata ; copious bleeding ; cutting, burn-
ing pains. Cbndylomata. Constipation. Par^ilysis of rectum ; pro-
lapsus of anus. Relaxed protruding rectum.

This nosode has cured nodular formations in testes, spermatic cord
and scrotum. It has cured herpetic eruptions on prepuce and scrotum.
Induration of testes and spermatic cord.

Nodular formations in vagina and labia. Ulceration of os uteri,
Induration of cervix uteri. Copious yellow-green leucorrhoea. Leu-
corrhoea in little girls, of specific history, acxid water, leucorrhoea ag-
gravated nights from warmth of bed. Pain in ovaries during the
night. Itching in the vulva. Sharp pains in uterus. Cystic ovaries.
Ovarian tumor. Cutting pain in ovary during coition at moment of
orgasm. Uterine and ovarian complaints when there is a specific
history.

Ulceration of larynx and loss of voice. Aphonia before menses.
Continuous sharp pain in larynx from evening to sunrise every night
compelling him to walk the floor all night cured by Syphilinum very
high, one dose".

Asthma in warm damp weather during night. Dyspnoea. Attacks
of spasmodic bronchial asthma for twenty-five years : at night in bed
or during a thunderstorm, preventing sleep for many nights. Dysp-
noea from I to 4 A. M.

Cough at night. Dry rasping cough during the night. Rawness in
chest. Thick purulent expectoration. Dry cough from lying on right
side. Mucopurulent expectoration, grayish, greenish, greenish-yellow,
tasteless. Clear white mucous expectoration. Rattling in the chest.
Pain and pressure behind the sternum. Eruptions on the chest.

Rheumatic stiffness and lameness in back. Aching in whole spine.
Pain in region of kidneys, aggravated after urinating. Pain in sacrum,
aggravated while sitting. Caries of cervical and dorsal verte-
bras, Enlarged glands of neck. It has cured indurated cervical
glands. Pain in back, hip and thighs during the night. It has cured
Hodgkin’s disease.

Inflammation of joints. Rheumatism, muscles are caked in hard
knots or lumps. Pain in limbs ameliorated by heat, aggravated from
sunset to sunrise. Stiffness of all the joints. Rheumatic pains and
swelling of joints of upper limbs. Rheumatism of deltoid, painful on.
raising the arm. Pains in arms on motion. Ulcers on back of hands.
Nightly pain and swelling in legs. Pains in lower extremities, pre-
venting sleep, aggravated from hot applications, ameliorated by pour-
ing cold w^atcr on them. Weakness in knees and hips. Severe bone



TARENTU 1 .A HISPANiCA


899


aches in legs at night in bed. Pain in back of feet and toes at night
in bed. Pains often aggravated in warm bed at night. Pains drive
him out of bed at night. Tearing in hip and thigh, aggravated during
night, ameliorated at ^ay-break, ameliorated by walking, not affected
by weather (improved by Syph.). Ulcers on the legs. Large crusts
on the legs. Tubercles on the lower limbs. Tension of the tendons
of the legs and soles. The extremes of cold and heat often bring out
the symptoms of these old sufferers. Neuralgia of limbs gradually
increasing, aggravated as the night goes on. Extreme sensitiveness
of the tibia.

There are fevers, chilliness, but the night sweats and great weakness
are striking.

The eruptions are numerous, but may be studied better by consult-
ing the numerous works on syphilis, as this is not a study of the dis-
ease, but the nosode.


TARENTULA HISPANICA

This terrible poison should never be used except in attenuations.
The nervous manifestations of this remedy are almost indescribable
and too numerous to mention. Anxiety and restlessness are words
that prevail through all the conditions in it. It is much like Ars,
The anxiety is felt sometimes in the mind, sometimes in the whole
body, sometimes in the limbs and ki the stomach. Cardiac anxiety
is a strong feature. A strong aversfcn to colors, such as green, red
and black. Depraved imaginationa* prevail through all the proving.
Loss of all shame. Desire to run About, to dance and jump up and
down. Great fantastic dancing. Sometimes music ameliorates all tlie
symptoms and at other times it aggravates them. He becomes violently
excited from music.

Emaciation is so marked that it may be said sometimes that the flesh
falls off from him. Creeping and crawling in the skin all over the
body. Paralysis of any part of the body, or of all the limbs. Trem^
bling and jerking convulsions. It has an appearance very much like
St. Vitus* Dance and hence has cured chorea when it was better from
music. But it will also cure when worse from music. The extreme
restlessness of the limbs is like Ars. and it is a deep acting medicine
like Ars,, and it sometimes has cured where Ars. has failed, although
it seemed well selected. Anxiety, restlessness, constant motion of the
arms, legs, trunk and head. Restlessness of the limbs in the evening,
in bed before going to sleep, like Ars, and Lyc, It is full of pains in
the body and limbs ; pains in the bones ; pains in the arms and in the
joints. Periodicity is so well marked that it has been a marked cura-
tive remedy in intermittent fevers with restleness of limbs, with



900


TARENTULA MISPANICA


aching of the bones, with stitching pains, with the anxiety, especially
when these come in the evening and the fever lasts all night. Chill
dn the evening followed by fever without sweat is a marked feature.

The patient himself is always sensitive to c^ld, so the pains in the
limbs are worse in cold air and from becoming cold. Cold damp
weather aggravates all his symptoms. Walking in the open air
w^hen not cold ameliorates most of his symptoms. Open air amelior-
ates, rubbing ameliorates. There is weakness of all the limbs. Violent
pains in the bowels and in the bladder. Burning is a strong symptomi
in many parts, but especially in the rectum ; in the palms and soles
and in the uterus. It is one of our high grade remedies for hysterical
women. He is inclined to walk in his sleep. Excessive hyperaes-
thesia ; all the symptoms are worse from grief and excitement. When
choreic symptoms are present he can run better than he can walk.

Impairment of memory. Great irritability. In the hysterical symp-
toms she is better from music. Her motions arc ludicrous and she is
even lascivious in her conduct. Great excitement from music ; she
sings until she falls with exhaustion. Fox-like tunning and destruc-
tiveness. Paroxysms of insanity with restlessness of the legs and
threatening words. When questioned she does not answer. Fre-
quently imagines that she has been insulted. Dementia with great
sadness. Excitement with singing, dancing and weeping. She sees
monsters, animals, faces, insects and ghosts. She secs strangers in the
room. Tarentula patients feign all sorts of sickness, especially faint-
ing. They not only imagine themselves sick, but they pretend to be
sick when they are not. Aversion to red, green and black and all
striking colors. She pulls her own hair and presses her hands upon
her head. Constantly complaining and threatening ; threatents her
nurse and her attendants ; she strikes her head with her hands ; she
strikes her body ; strikes her attendants and her best friends. Violence
is a strong feature of the remedy. Violence with anger. Tears his
clothing. Consolation causes weeping.

The mental symptoms are better in the evening after eating. Many
physical symptoms are worse in the evening, especially the febrile con-
ditions.

A desire to lie down in the dark and not be talked to. She has many
insane ideas, one is that she wants to hide because she imagines that
she will be assaulted. Angered from contradiction.

Frequent attacks of dizziness, even so great that she falls to the
ground. Dizziness comes on in the night ; when descending stairs.
Dizziness with rush of blood to the head and dizziness when fixing the
eyes upon objects.

The head symptoms are also very numerous. Contortions and jerk*
ing of the head. Constantly rubs the head against something, some*



TARENTULA HlSPANICA


901


times it is the pillow when in bed. Throws the head from side to
side, here and there. She has a sensation of hammers in the head.
Burning heat in the head. Headache in the evening ; in the morning
on waking. Cannot qpen the eyes. Bending head forward aggravates.
Pains are pressing and often wander around from place to place in the
head ; violent pain in the occiput and temples at the same time.

Eyes are staring, spasmodically wide open. Dim vision usually
worse in the right eye. Severe pain in the right eye. Sensation of
sand or splinters in the eyes. Itching in the eyes. Burning, worse in
the right eye. Photophobia is marked. It will therefore be seen that
the right eye is more affected. Many symptoms of the body are con-
fined to the right side.

Discharge from the ears profuse. Violent pains in the ear. Sting-
ing in the meatus. Dullness of hearing. Dull pains in the right ear :
tearing pains in the right ear. Buzzing and whizzing and dizziness.
Ringing as of bells in the ear on waking in the morning. The right
ear is most affected.

It has many catarrhal symptoms in the nose. Dryness and burning ;
sneezing with the coryza and bleeding from the nose. The acute and
chronic nasal symptoms arc worse on the right side.

The face looks sickly and has the appearance of terror.

Tearing pains in the teeth. Pain in the angle of the inferior max-
illa as if the teeth would fall out.

There is inflammation of the thfoat and tonsils, worse on the right
side. Pain in the right tonsil ext€|iding to the ear. Shooting pain
in the throat. Pain and constriction on swallowing. It has cured
diphtheria. The throat is much swollen externally and there is high
fever.

Aversion to food ; aversion to meat especially, though craves raw
food. Thirst for cold water. Has nausea and vomiting. Has bitter
leructations. Has an empty all-gone feeling in the stomach, an anxious
feeling in the stomach. Vomits all food taken. Burning pain in the
stomach.

There is burning in the abdomen that extends down through the
intestines. Burning in the rectum. Sharp pain in the spleen. The
liver is painful to touch and is swollen. Pain in both sides of the
abdomen. The abdomen is distended with flatus. Subject to much
colic. Shooting pains in the abdomen, anus and vagina at the same
time. Women who have been poisoned by the Tarentula were found
to have fibroid tumors in the abdomen and uterus. Severe pains in
the lower abdomen.

It has cured most terrible and alarming constipation after cathartics
and injections failed to effect a movement. The symptoms that guide
to it are the continual tossing, anxiety, restlessness, rolling from side



TARENlTJLA HlSPANlCA


901

to side and rubbing the head against the pillow* There is no desire
for stool. With the stool there is much blood. In the rectum there
is pain, smarting, tenesmus and in the abdomen colic. Most difficult
stool. It also has diarrhoea with nausea and vomiting. Diarrhoea has
been brought on after washing the hair attended with dark foetid stool.

Many toxicological symptoms are found. Sugar in the urine and
it has cured diabetes ; diabetes with grief, anxiety, weakness and
bruised pain all through the body. There is involuntary urination
when coughing. Many pains in the kidneys. Most difficult urination
and it has cured renal colic. In the pathogenesis the symptoms are
much like cystitis and it has cured inflammation of the bladder. In
keeping with these general symptoms there is spasmodic action of the
bladder; spasmodic retention ot urine; copious urine with emaciation
and sugar. Pain in the urethra, drawing after urination. Copious
sand in the urine, and the urine is foetid.

There is uncontrollable sexual desire and he seems in a stale of mind,
wherein he has no desire to control himself and his sexual passions ;
lasciviousness almost to insanity. Onanism followed by prostatic
troubles. Seminal emissions ; semen is bloody ; pain in the genitals ;
testes relaxed and painful ; pain in the groin ; the penis is swollen ;
tumor in both testicles ; pains in the spermatic cords and testes with
swelling ; drawing pains in the spermatic cords.

In the female also there is violent, uncontrollable sexual erethism.
Menstrual flow too early and copious. Violent itching of the genitals
extending far up into the vagina, worse at night. Pain and violent
cramps in the uterus. Nymphomania has been cured by this remedy.
Coition intensifies the desire and is followed by no relief. Extreme
hyperaethesia of the genitals. Fibroid tumors have been cured.
Great relaxation of the muscles and displacement of the uterus.
Strong bearing down feeling in the pelvis. Burning in the uterus ;
swelling and induration of the uterus. Violent cramps with burning
in the uterus with nausea and vomiting. The uterus is extremely sen-
sitive to pressure. Contracting pains of the uterus are labor-like and
such as are often found in abortion. Shooting pains in the genitals.

It has been a very useful remedy in complaints of the air passages,.
Constantly scraping of larynx and trachea to clear them of mucus.
Loss of voice and hoarseness ; loss of voice when talking. Dryness
in the larynx and trachea. Burning from the throat down into the chest.

It is very rich in cough symptoms. Dry frequqent cough, worse in
the evening dry spasmodic cough with retching, with gagging on
every effort to expectorate : cough with involuntary urination ; cough
wdth smarting in the larynx and bronchial tubes ; night cough. Again
idry cough in the morning. It has a loose cough with thick yellow
expectoration in the morning.



TAKEN TULA HISPANICA


903


It has great difficulty in breathing very much like that which is
found in cardiac troubles, such a pressure upon the chest with panting
respiration and suffocative catarrh. Oppression in the chest when
raising the arms and when lying on the left side. Rheumatic pains.
Many pains through and in the chest.

It has numerous heart symptoms It has cured palpitation with
mitral murmurs and sensation of trembling in the heart with irregular
pulse ; extreme anxiety in the heart ; tumultuous beating of the heart ;
sudden thumping in the heart as from fright but when not frightened.
Constant want of air and desire for fresh air and sensation as it the
heart turned over ; a sensation as if the heart were sciueezed or com-
pressed. It has cured angina pectoris and it has many symptoms of
the heart like angina pectoris.

Upon the back there are boils, abscesses and carbuncles, especially
on the back of the neck and between the shoulder blades. Violent pain
in the lumbar region. Violent pains under the scapulae, worse from
motion. Rheumatic pains in the whole back. Pain in the shoulder
blades. Neck is stiff and painful on motion. It is a great remedy
for soreness of the spinal column, or spinal irritation, pressure aggra-
vates and touch aggravates.

The symptoms of the limbs are too numerous to mention ; only a
few can be spoken of. Weakness, numbness and restlessness arc al-
ways present. Rheumatic pains are numerous. The pains of the
limbs are so great that he cannot stand the weight of the clothing.
Heaviness and numbness of the upper limbs. Pain in the arm as if
S([ueczed. Heart pains and many ^ains of the shoulders. Burning
pains are very numerous ; rheumatic tearing pains. Must move the.
hands constantly and pick the firtgers from nervousness. There is
numbness of the left upper extremity and right lower. Paralysis
of the low'er limbs with pain in the back on motion. Restlessness of the
lower limbs with constant desire to cry. (/Ir5.) Fatigue and pain
in the evening. In the lower limbs there is numbness which changes
to a drawing in the muscles. Restlessness in the lower limbs with
aching pain during the chill in ilermittent fever. Hard pain in the
hips during the night. Pain in the hips and coccyx in the evening
while sitting ; strong desire to jump. Pains in the nates beginning at
6 A. M. and lasting until evening. Pain in the thighs as if bandaged
when walking ; shooting pains in the thighs. He is moving the legs
constantly ; heaviness in the legs ; bruised pains in the legs ; shooting
pains in the right tendo-Achilles ; he must walk the floor in the eve-
ning, like Ars, It is much like Ar$.^ from chair to chair and

from bed to bed, walking the floor.

Sleeplessness before midnight is very marked.

Itching, bitting and creeping all over the body, marked in the limbs.



904


THERIDION


Itching and burning. It h\s cured a dry itching eczema of the ex-
tremities and other parts of the skin after Afs, and Sulph. have failed.
It is a very deep acting, long acting remedy and a most useful remedy
in skin affections.


THERIDION

Hysterical sensitivity with extreme aggiavation from noise, motion
and exertion marks this remedy as unique. The pains are aggravated
from noise, and motion, and the nerves are in such a state of sensi-
tivity that a painful thrill passes over the body in waves and nausea
follows. Nausea from noise is strikingly strange. It cures the most
stubborn cases of spinal irritation, when the symptoms agree. Chronic
catarrh of the nose. Necrosis of bone. Quick consumption. Ema-
ciation. Enlargement of glands. Constant hunger and thirst. It
was a remedy with the old masters for scrofulous conditions. Great
lassitude. Complaints are ameliorated by warmth, and during rest.
Fainting from least exertion. Chilliness, trembling and anxiety. So*
restless that she must keep busy, though she accomplishes nothing.
The bones are sore.

Sadness and mental depression. Hysterical conduct, hilarity.
Aversion to work, and to his business. Joyousness and singing with
headache.

Vertigo on closing the eyes, from motion, from stooping, on board
a vessel, from every noise, with nausea, vomiting, and cold sweat.
Awakens at ii p. m. with vertigo and slow pulse. Vertigo with dim
vision and pain in eyes. Vertigo and nausea from closing the eyes
when kneeling in church. Vertigo like sea-sickness.

The headache is most violent, aggravated on motion, aggravated
talking, aggravated from warm drinks, with nausea and vomiting.
Sensitive to light and noise. Pain in forehead extending to occiput,
aggravated from noise, motion, and cold air. Headache on beginning
to move. Sensation as if vertex did not belong to her, as though she
could lift it off. Pain deep in eyes. Complaints from sunstroke.
Pressing pain in temples. Pulsating pain over left eye and across
forehead. Cannot lie down with the headache. Itching of scalp, and
nape in evening.

This remedy cures many nervous eye symptoms. Flickering, even
when eyes are closed. Like a veil before the eyes. Double vision.
Sensitive to light. Diplopia. Fluttering. Nausea, and cold hands.
Pressing pain behind eyes. On closing eyes, nausea and vomiting.

The hearing is very acute. Every least noise penetrates the whole
body, especially the teeth, aggravates vertigo and causes nausea.
Rushing noises in ears like a waterfall. Pressure about the ears.



THUJA OCCIDENTAUS


9^5


Fullness behind the ears.

It has cured most obstinate catarrh of nose with offensive thick yel-
low or greenish yellow discharges. Pressing pain at root of nose^
Dryness in nose. Paroxysms of violent sneezing.

The face is pale an3 sickly. Lockjaw in morning on waking. Foam*
at mouth with chill. Teeth sensitive to cold water and shrill sounds.
Toothache causes W'eeping. Burning in teeth. Salty taste in mouth.
The tongue feels as if burnt. Mouth feels numb. Taste impaired.

Desires wine and sour drinks. Much thirst. Desires food, but
does not know what.

Nausea with many complaints and from many causes. Nausea in
the morning on rising, from noise, on closing the eyes, when looking
too long at one object, on motion, from talking, from fast riding in a
carriage, fromi riding on the cars or on a ship. Nausea with headache,
with vertigo ; nausea aggravated from warm drinks. In seasickness
of nervous women, when they close the eyes to get rid of \he motion
of the vessel they become deathly sick. Tenderness of stomach.

This is a useful remedy in many liver conditions, with burning pain,
aggravated from touch, motion and noise, and bilious vomiting.

Pain in groin in a man after coitus ; on motion, and on drawing up
the limb. Constipation, with difficult, soft stool. Contraction of anus.
Enlarged prostate gland with sensation of a lump in perineum.

Must arise several times during the night to pass urine. Copious
urine during the night.

Feeble erection and diminished desire. Seminal emissions during
sleep in the afternoon. >

Sore bruised pain in the ovarikn region, aggravated by motion.
Menses suppressed.

Sighing and short breath on ascending stairs.

Stitching in chest beneath left shoulder to throat. Quick consump-
tion, Anxiety about heart.

Very sensitive spine, aggravated from motion, noise, a jar, stepping.
Pain between scapulae. Spinal anaemia. Itching of back and nape.

Drawing in thigh with a cold sensation, ameliorated by warmth.
Violent itching of calf. Swelling of feet. Heaviness of the limbs.
Pains in bones as if broken.

Shaking chill. Sweats easily. Icy cold perspiration with fainting,
vertigo and vomiting at night.

Violent itching of skin.

THUJA OCCIDENTALIS

The general appearance of the Thuja subject, if he has a charac-
teristic picture, is that of a waxy, shiny face, it' looki? as if it had been

114



9o8 ' THUJA OCCIDENTAUS

tearing, burning, bursting pains, as if the parts were being torn out,
makes her cry aloud, she goes into a hysterical state. This a very
strong Thuja group. It has the opposite of Zinc, and Lachesis, for
in these, relief comes with the flow.

Many women suffer from grumbling pains in the ovaries all the
time, they have a sense of the organ, which they should not feel ; pain
from taking cold or in change of weather ; the increase of the pain in
the left ovary is the first sign ; sometimes the pain is so severe that
the right one suffers apparently from sympathy. Where the ovaries
have been affected for some time there will be mental symptoms, a
most violent irritability, jealousy, quarrelsomeness, ugliness. This ir-
ritability is likely to be shown towards individuals about the house,
toward the husband and the mother ; she is yet able to control herself
among strangers and the doctor may not be able to find out about it,
because she has in her nature a disposition to cheat ; she wants to be
alone and takes upon herself fixed ideas, that she is pregnant, or that
an animal is in her bowels, she feels the motion of a child’s arm, thinks
she is followed, or that someone is walking beside her, thinks that soul
and body are separated.

Now, these are fixed ideas, and there is no use trying to reason
them out of her. It seems to her that she is very delicate, that she
is made of glass and that she will break. The idea is that she will
break, and not that she is transparent. Associated with this condi-
tion, we have violent, intense, tearing headaches, tearing in the eye,
ameliorated by heat. The eye-ball pains are better from heat and the
rest are better in the cool open air.

Pain localized in small spots. A nail driven in the head, side of
head and forehead, like Ignatia and Anacardium, These pains are
intensified into tearing pains, and affect the eye-ball, making it so sore
that it can hardly be touched ; worse from heat and worse from lying
down ; worse in a warm room and better in the open air.

Rheumatic head symptoms are worse in damp air. They are worse
from sour things and also from stimulating and exciting things.

Crude drugs do not impress the vital force so lastingly, but an indi-
vidual who is thoroughly sensitive and properly sensitive, as sensitive
as contagion, then if you undertake to prove by giving it night and
morning, you will rivet upon him a life-long miasm.

If you have given a medicine, wait for the symptoms to come and
go in the natural manner. To a great extent, this is the tendency with
sycosis, the tendency is rather outward.

We see in the proving of a drug what we see in disease. When a
gonorrhoea is contracted, it goes through the prodromal period and
then comes the disease, which, if let alone, has in its nature a tendency
to eradicate itself from the economy, and then the patients do not suf-



thuja OCClOENTALlS 909

fer from lasting conditions.

In the old school, they always suppress the discharge, and there arc
those in the new school who do little better.

The frequent repetition by which one is exposed, would not increase
the gonorrhoea itself, because the susceptibility is satisfied.

Tlie taking of more of the drug to prove it does not do so much
harm, provided the one who is directing the proving realizes when
the symptoms begin to rise, and then stops the drug. Now if we go
pn with the proving by repeating the doses after the symptoms come
on, we force the drug into the economy when he is already poisoned,
and by this means we get a confusion in the symptoms, the drug dis-
ease engrafted upon that individual for life.

Many of the provings of Thuja give us that kind of confusion, so*
that we see only now and then symptoms cropping out that arc strik-
ing ; in fact, the great bulk of the Thuja provings has been wasted,
because there is so much confusion in the great number of symptoms,
while the earlier provings brought out many of the characteristics, the
Vienna provings, to a great extent, confused the image of Thuja. So
that, by clinical experience only, we have been able to draw out the
finer features of Thuja. It requires more than a school boy to do that.

The new provings must be carried on in a different manner.

Thuja has some striking bowel symptoms ; gushing, watery morning
diarrhoea, like water coming out of a bunghole.

There is also a general catarrhal condition running through the
body ; catarrh of the nose, cars andkhest. In the catarrh of the chest
it produces an intense hacking cough, with expectoration in the morn-
ing of greenish mucus, sometimes a copious expectoration.

It is often suited to old cases of pneumonia, in such individuals as
have suppressed gonorrhoea, fig-wart gonorrhoea.

The kidneys and urinary symptoms arc also striking ; congestion and
inflammation of the kidneys, sharp pain in the kidneys ; burning urine ;
inflammation of the bladder and urethra that is not gonorrhoeal ; pus
from the bladder ; paralysis of the bladder, must wait a long time for
the urine to start ; retention of urine, continuous urging to urinate,
tearing in the urethra, feeling as if the urine were constantly running
along the urethra, like Kali bich, and Petros.

In the urethral disease of sycotic character, Thuja leads all other
remedies. In the non-sycotic variety, Cannabis sativa is sufficient, but
those cases that have proved to be sycotic Cann, sat. left uncured, it
ameliorated the burning during and after urination and the thick yel-
lowish-green discharge, but some other remedy had always to follow,
when they were shown to be sycotic. It is not so with Thuja, because
it is capable of finishing the case.

In the most violent cases, with bloody urine, extreme salacity, great



910


WBERCULtNtTM BOVlNtTM


torment, bloody, watery discharge from the urethra and bladder, no
rest day or night, Cantharis comes in, it is capable of finishing the
case in a few days. Such a patient must be in excellent health, which
is not generally the case. They are drinking men and smokers. To-
bacco is one of the most troublesome things you* will run across, many
cases will not recover promptly if they are tobacco users and great
smokers, wine drinkers or convivial men, they run around a good deal
and are high livers and with such you have a slow case on hand.

With the system so broken down from high living, you may not get
a decided curative action until you have forced him to abandon his
way of living. Put him on light diet, diminish his smoking, get rid
entirely of the drinking, and put him on a perfectly bland living.
This is the first thing. If he is a man of family we have to contend
with great mental distress, and not less so if a woman. So it may well
be said, that usually the sycotic miasm is a troublesome one to l)egin
with and one that will bother the young physician.

You cannot substitute the right method for a wTong one, which will
make him a cripple for life.

The suppression of the disease, as usually tried, cannot be thought
of by the sincere and earnest homoeopath.

If he wants it checked suddenly, let him go somewhere else, but
warn him what will take place, and that he will have untold disease
and suffering.


TUBERCULINUM BOVINUM

I want to take up the study of Tuberculinum. The preparation
which I use is a little different from that which is generally found in
the market. This preparation I procured through a Professor of
Veterinary Surgery. In Pennsylvania there came a time when a hand-
some herd of cattle had to be slaughtered because of tuberculosis.
Through the Veterinary Surgeon of the Pennsylvania University I
secured some of the tubercular glands from these slaughtered cattle.
I selected from these the most likely specimen. This was potentized
by Boericke & Tafel as far as the 6th, and has since been prepared on
the Skinner machine, the 30th, aooth, loooth and the higher potencies.
This preparation I have been using for fifteen years. Many of my
friends have been using it, as they have procured it from me.

From observing the effects of this preparation I have been gather-
ing these notes in my inter-leaved Hering’s Guiding Symptoms, and
they now guide me in the use of Tuberculinum. I do not use Tuberc,
merely because it is a nosode, or with the idea that generally prevails
of using nosodcs ; that is, a product of the disease for the disease, and
the results of the disease. This I fear is too much the prevailing



TUBDRCULINUM BOVINUM


911

thought in using nosodes. In certain places it prevails and is taught
that anything relating to syphilis must be treated with Syphilinum;
that anything relating to gonorrhoea must be treated with Meclor-
rhinttm, anything psoric must be treated with Psorinum, and anything
that relates to tuberculosis must be treated with Tuberculinum. That
will go out of use some day ; it is mere isopathy, and it is an unsound
doctrine. It is not the better idea of Homoeopathy, It is not based
upon sound principles. It belongs to a hysterical Homoeopathy that
prevails in this century. Yet much good has come out of it.

It is hoped that provings may be made so that wc may be able to
prescribe Tuberc. on the symptoms of Tuberc. just as we would use
any drug. It is deep acting, constitutionally deep, because it is a
product of disease from a very deep-seated constitutional condition,
like Silica and Sulphur. It goes deep into the life : it is antipsoric ; it
is long acting, and it affects constitutions more deeply than most
remedies ; and when our deepest remedies act only a few weeks, and
they have to be changed, this remedy comes in as one of the reme-
dies — when the symptoms agree — and brings a better state of reac-
tion, so that remedies hold longer. It may well be considered a spe-
cies of Psorinum.

One of the most prominent uses of this remedy is in intermittent
fever. Some of our most stubborn cases of intermittent fever will
relapse and continue relapsing, even when such remedies as Silica and
Calcarea and the deeper-acting remedies have been indicated, have
acted well, have broken the fever, mttii in a few weeks, from exposure
to cold, from sitting in a draft, froHii becoming fatigued, from mental
exertion, from over-eating and from disordering the stomach this aguq
has returned. Any of these circumstances will bring back these stub-
born cases of intermittent fever when Tul>erc. is needed. When a
patient is travelling toward phthisis and he is exposed and intermittent
comes out. He is of a feeble constitution and his complaints have a
tendency to relapse, and remedies w’^ell selected do not hold long,
though they act well at first — they must soon be changed — changing
symptoms.

It is not an indication for Tuberc. when the well selected remedy
fails to act. Well selected is a relative expression and involves too
much of human opinion. It may be thought to be well selected
when it is not related to the case. When the well selected remedy
has acted and the constitution shows a tendency to break down, and
the well selected remedy does not hold, because of vital weakness and
because of deep-seated tendencies ; then it is that this remedy some-
times fits in. Such a case is often tuberculous in inclination, even
though no evidence is present of a patholbgical character.

Burnett dropped an idea, that has been confirmed many times. Pa-



TUBERCUUNUM BOVIKUM


912

tients who have inherited phthisis, patients whose parents have died
of phthisis are often of feeble vitality. They do not throw off their
inherited tendencies. They are always tired. They take on sicknesses
easily. They become anaemic ; nervous ; waxy or pale. These condi-
tions are sometimes met, when the finer syifiptoms agree, although
Burnett evidently used this medicine in a sort of routine way for this
kind of constitution, which he called ‘‘Consumptiveness.” Persons
who had inherited phthisis, who were debilitated and anaemic.

It seems from looking over the record of many cures that this rem-
edy has been given many times for just that state on a paucity of
symptoms, and if the records can be believed it has many times bal-
anced up to the constitution in that anaemic state, where the inheritance
has been phthisis. It is not the best indication for Tuberc., but where
the symptoms agree in addition to that inheritance, then you may have
indications for the remedy.

If Tuberculinum bovinum be given in lom., 50m. and cm. potencies,
two doses of each potency at long intervals, all children and young
people who have inherited tuberculosis may be immuned from their
inheritance and their resiliency will be restored. It cures most cases
of adenoids and tuberculous glands of the neck.

The nodes that have guided me to its use 1 will attempt to explain.
The mental symptoms that I have seen give way while the patient was
under treatment, and the mental symptoms that I have seen crop out
under the provings, and the mental symptoms that I have so often seen
associated when the patient is poisoned by the tubercular toxines are
such as belong to many complaints and are cured by Tuberc. Hope-
lessness in many complaints. Aversion to mental work. Anxiety
evening, until midnight. Anxiety during fever. Loquacity during
fever. Weary of life. Cosmopolitan, Tormenting, persistent
thoughts during the night. Thoughts intrude and crowd upon each
other during the night. These I will say are the common mental
features, and have often yielded when the remedy has been prescribed.
Anyone who has inherited phthisis, anyone who has been in a state
of debility, who has had intermittent fever with continual replases,
and these mental symptoms are present, you may think of Tuberc.
Loquacity during fever is a common feature in hectic fever when the
patient is decidedly affected by the toxines of tuberculosis. A person
gradually running down, never finding the right remedy, or relief only
momentarily ; has a constant desire to change, and travel, and go
somewhere, and do something different, or to find a new doctor. The
desire to travel, that cosmopolitan condition of the mind belongs so
strongly to the one who needs Tuberc. It comes out so often in clin-
ical experience, is found so often in the Calcareas, and especially in
Calc, phos,, alwjays wanting to go somewhere.. Such is -the condition



TOBERCUUNUM BOVINUM


9^3


of those about to go into insanity, about to go into some lingering dis-
ease. Persons on the border-land of insanity. It is true that phthisis
and insanity are convertible conditions, the one falls into the other.
Many cases that are treated and cured, and phthisis of the lungs has
just been turned aside, finally become insane. Persons who have been
cured of insanity go into phthisis and die, showing the deep-seated
character of their nature. The intellectual symptoms and the lung
symptoms arc interchangeable.

Tuberculinum cures the most violent and the most chronic periodical
sick headaches, periodical nervous headaches. Coming every week ;
every two weeks ; and the irregular periodicity coming under certain
conditions, in damp weather, after overwork, from mental excitement,
from overeating, disordered stomach — Tuberc. breaks up the tendency
to this chronic periodical headache when the symptoms agree.

It has been observed in the hands of good prescribers that when
chronic constitutional headaches have been broken up sometimes the
patient has a tendency to lose flesh and become feeble. An entire
transformation scene takes place ; a cough sets in ; the headache has
been removed, but the patient is feeble. Whenever that takes place
Tuberc. is a most useful remedy. A new manifestation comes ; a new
organ is affected.

Sore bruised feeling all over the body. Aching of the bones. Sore
bruised condition of the eyeballs, sensitive to touch, and on turning the
eye sideways. Persons who have long felt the weakness of tubercu-
losis, tubercular conditions, and are suEbjcct to cold sweat on the head.
This was brought out in the provings? of Calcar ca^ and those about to
go into phthisis have many times been cured by Calcarea, The rela-
tionship between Tuberc. and C^c, is very )close. They are inter-
changeable ,* that is, the one may be indicated for a while, and then the
other. They are both deep-acting remedies — also Silica is closely
related to Tuberc., on the same plane of action, going deep into the
life in a similar way ; Calcarea, Tuberc. and Silica, and the Silicates.

In the Guiding Symptoms is a record, “Pain in the head, as if the
head had a tight hoop of iron around it,” an iron band.

Headache, with frequent sharp cutting pains. Headache, worse
from motion. In the Guiding Symptoms, “A sullen, taciturn, irrita-
ble” condition of mind. “Screams in his sleep. Is very restless at
night. Sister died of tubercular itieningitis.” That symptom was
given by Burnett. It has cured hydrocephalus.

Many years ago Doctor Biegler cured a case of tubercular meningitis
with Tuberc. In many instances it has cured tubercular meningitis
and tubercular diseases of the brain in the early stages.

The face becomes red, even to purple, during the chill, and during
the heat. Aversion to all foods, Suda aversion to meat that it be-



VALERIAN


918

all the senses ; great nervous restlessness* All these general symptoms
come on during rest, and are relieved by motion and moving about.
Fainting easily. Slight exertion brings on symptoms. Complaints
change about, and pains wander from place to place. It is a great
remedy for the numerous nondescript nervou^i manifestations that
come in spinal irritation when there is amelioration by motion and
aggravation by much exertion. Exertion brings on headache in these
cases. Stitching pains all over the body during rest.

The mental state is often ecstatic or hysterical. The mind under-
goes rapid changes in disposition and ideas. The mental symptoms
come on at night ; sees images, animals and men. The mental state is
one of extreme activity — tension, excitement, passes from one subject
to another. Erroneous ideas ; thinks she is some one else, moves to
the edge of the bed to make room ; imagines animals lying near her
which she fears she may hurt. Fear in the evening in the dark.
Symptoms aggravated in the dark. Great sadness and irritability.
Morose, easily exasperated. Mental symptoms come on during rest,
while sitting and lying, and go off on walking about.

Vertigo when stooping. Feels light as if floating in air.

Violent nervous headaches in evening during rest, ameliorated by
motion. Stupefying pains in head. Stitching, tearing pain. Sensa-
tion of great coldness in head. Headache from exposure to the heat
and light of the sun. Aggravated in the open air and from a draft.
Pain in forehead and through the eyes. Tension and constriction of
the scalp. Icy coldness in vertex.

Wild look in the eyes. Flashes of light before the eyes in the dark.
Pressure in the eyes in the morning. Smarting in the eyes. Vision
very sharp.

Hearing acute. Jerking pains Hissing and ringing in ears.

Face red and hot in open air. Stitching in face and teeth. Sudden
jerking pain in the face. Twitching in the muscles and drawing pain
in face. Neuralgia of face, aggravated during rest.

Thickly coated tongue ; rancid taste. Flat taste in mouth on waking.

Sensation as if a thread were hanging down the throat with saliva-
tion and vomiting.

Voracious hunger with nausea. Symptoms aggravated when stom-
ach is empty, ameliorated after breakfast. Complaints from fasting.
Eructations, like spoiled eggs, morning. Eructation of rancid fluid.
Nausea, faintness, body ice cold. Child vomits as soon as it nurses
after mother has been angry. Child vomits curdled milk in lumps.

Distended abdomen. Cutting pain in abdomen. Colic. Cramps
in hysterical women, in evening in bed and after dinner.

Watery diarrhoea with curds in infants. Greenish japescent stool
and blood with cramp in abdomen and tenesmus, in children. Worms



VERATRUM ALBUM


9«9


in the stool. Prolapsus of the anus when straining to pass uriiic.

Copious frequent urination in nervous women. Sediment of urine
red and white.

Menses late and scanty.

Choking in throaf pit on falling asleep ; wakens as if sutlocaiing
Inspirations grow less deep and more rapid until they cease : then she
catches her breath by a sobbing effort, in spells. (Compare Ignatia,
Ox. ac.). Paroxysmal respiration in hysterical and very nervous
w’omen. Globus hystericus.

Jerking stitching pain in chest. Oppression of the chest with lump
in the throat. Stitching in right side of chest and liter. Stitching in
heart with pulse quick, small and weak.

Pain in small of back during rest, ameliorated by walking. Rheu-
matic pains in scapulae.

Rheumatic pains in all the limbs, aggravated during rest after pre-
vious exertion, ameliorated walking. Drawing, jerking of limbs, and
twitching of muscles during rest. Heatiness in limbs, drawing, feels
as though must move the limbs but cannot. Darting pains in arms
and shoulders. Drawing in the muscles with stitching pains in arms.
Hysterical contractures in hands and arms. Crampy darting, tearing,
like an electrical shock, repeatedly through the humerus, intensely pain-
ful. Cramp in biceps when writing. Pain along the sciatic when
standing, ameliorated walking. Tearing pain in thigh upward to hip.
Tearing in calf when crossing lim^. Tearing in muscles of thighs
during rest. Violent drawing, jerWng pains in lower limbs during
rest. Drawing in thighs, legs and iendo-Achillis when sitting, ameli-
orated walking. Pain in ankles j^ter exertion, ascending stairs, ame-
liorated walking. Drawing in tarsal joints when sitting. Pains in heel
during rest. Violent drawing, jerking pains in lower limbs and
hip, aggravated standing. Hysterical cramps in lower limbs, calves
and feet.

Sleepless before midnight. Cramps in hands and feet prevent sleep.
Vivid dreams. Symptoms aggravated on walking.

VERATRUM ALBUM

You will be astonished at the wonderful coldness running through
this remedy. Hardly a group of symptoms will arise without this
accompanying coldness. Coldness of discharges, coldness of the body.
You would also wonder at the remarkable prostration attending tlie
various groups of symptoms, complete relaxation and exhaustion, cold-
ness. Profuse sweat, vomiting and diarrhoea.

Profuse watery discharges. These conditions occur without appar-
ent provocation. In cholera or cholera morbus, it seems that the



9^0


VERATRUM ALBUM


fluids run out of the body. Lies in bed, relaxed prostrated, cold to
the finger-tips, with corresponding blueness, fairly purple ; lips cold
and blue, countenance pinched and shrunken ; great sensation of cold-
ness as if the blood were ice-water ; scalp cold ; forehead covered with
cold swxat ; headache and exhaustion ; coldness Li spots over the body ;
extremities cold as death. Full of cramps ; looks as if he would die*
This state comes out during the menses, during colic with nausea, with
mania and violent delirium, with headache, with violent inflammations.

Is it any wonder that Hahnemann predicted that Veratrum, Cam-
phor^ and Cuprum would become remedies in the cure of cholera : he
saw in their nature the ability to cure. He saw the similitude.

In cases of this sort wdiich are characterized by superabundance of
cramps, Cuprum is the simillimum. For those with coldness and blue-
ness and scanty sweat, \omiting. and purging, Camphor is the remedy.
These are called “dry cholera they sink down and die without ex-
haustive discharges. In proportion as there are coldness, blueness and
scanty discharges, Caynphor is indicated. In proportion as copious-
ness, blueness, and coldness are present, Veratrum is indicated. Sccah
has something of cholera in it. Podo. has exhaustive stools: Ars,
anxious restlessness.

The mental symptoms are marked by violence and desti uctiveness ;
he wants to destroy, to tear something ; he tears the clothes from the
body. Always wants to be busy, to carry on his daily work. A cooper
who was suffering from the Veratrum insanity would pile up chairs
on top of one another. When asked what he was doing, he replied
that he was piling up staves. When not occupied wdth this he was
tearing his clothes, or praying for hours on his knees, and so loud that
he could be heard blocks away.

Exalted state of religious frenzy, believes he is the risen Christ ;
screams and screeches until he is blue in the face ; head cold as ice,
cold sweat, reaches out and exhorts to repentance.

Exhorts to repent, preaches, howls, sings obscene songs, exposes the
person. Fear and the effects of fear ; fear of death and of being
damned ; imagines the world is on fire.

“Mania with desire to cut and tear everything, especially the clothes,
with lewdness and lascivous talk. Puerperal mania and convulsions,
with violent cerebral congestion ; bluish and bloated face ; protruding
eyes ; wild shrieks, with disposition to bite and tear. Loquacity, he
talks rapidly. She is inconsolable over a fancied misfortune ; runs
around the room howling and screaming or sits brooding, wailing and
weeping.*’ Alternate states of brooding, screaming, and screeching,
A few such remedies would empty our insane asylums, especially of
recent cases. Insanity is curable if there are no incurable results of
disease.



VERATRUM ALBUM


921


Full of despair and hopelessness with approaching insanity. ‘'De-
spair of his recovery, attempts suicide.’' Insane people are not hope-
less, those approaching insanity are, but after they become insane, they
thiiik that everybody i^ crazy except themselves. Those bowed down
by great grief and despair are likely to go into a state of violent
mania. Veratrum carries them through the state of despair. “Melan-
cholia, head hangs down, sits brooding in silence.”

Young girls go on for years with menstrual difficulties, and preced-
ing each menstrual nisus is a state of despair ; never smiles, the world
seems blue, everything is dark ; these are preparing for a marked state
of insanity. Veratrum is a remedy that would keep many women out
of the insane asylum, especially those with uterine troubles. Girls at
puberty suffer with dysmenorrhoea, hysterical mental states, diarrhoea,
and vomiting. During the menses they become cold as death, lips blue,
extremities cold and blue, dreadful pains, sensation of sinking, mania
to kiss everybody, hysteria with coldness at the menstrual period, copi-
ous sweat, vomiting, and diarrhoea, etc.

Veratrum has troublesome headaches, neuralgic, of great violence,
accompanied with coldness, vomiting of bile and blood, great exhaus-
tion, profuse sweat. Vomiting and retching after the stomach is
empty ; spasmodic retching and cramping of the stomach ; you can see
the effort to empty the stomach and every little while a mouthful of
bile comes up.

Violent rush of blood to the head, congestion of the head with cold-
ness of the extremities. Head feels; as if packed with ice, feels as if ice
lay on the vertex and occiput tension in the head as if the

membranes were drawn tighter about the brain ; compressive pains.

I remember a farmer who consulted me in the Summer, He had a
strange sensation when he drank water, as if it ran down the outside
and did not go down the oesophagus. It was so marked that he re-
quested his friends to see if it did not run down the outside. Vera-
trum 2m. cured him. No remedy has produced that sensation, but I
figured it out by analogy.

Violent thirst for cold water and for ice. “All fruits cause painful
distension of the stomach.”

“Vomiting forcible and excessive. Nausea with weakness ; is
obliged to lie down ; hysterical cramps in the stomach ; cramps in the
muscles of the abdomen like colic. Gastric catarrh, great weakness,
cold, sudden sinking,”

Full of rheumatic and neuralgic pains in the extremities ; worse
from the warmth of the bed ; they drive him out of bed at night into
the cold room and he must walk the floor for relief. You would nat-
urally suppose that heat would be comforting ; so it is at times to the
abdomen and other parts when there is coldness, but it aggravates the

u6



922


ZINCUM METALLICUM


pains [Merc).

“Painful paralytic weakness in the limbs.”

“Chill and heat alternating, now here, now there, on single parts.
Internal sensation of chilliness running from head to toes coming on
when drinking.” Many of the complaints of Veratrum are aggravated
when drinking.

Burning while in cold sweat. In the chronic mental troubles, the
skin is dusky and dry with the exception of that on the forehead. But
in acute complaints where physical symptoms predominate, as in dys-
menorrhoea, acute insanity, etc., there is profuse sweat.

Gnawing hunger in spite of nausea and vomiting. Empty, all-gone
feeling in the abdomen after stool.

ZINCUM METALLICUM

Zinc, has a full and substantial proving, including symptoms of
every part of the body. It is an antipsoric, suitable in broken down
constitutions, feeble constitutions ; enfeeblement characterizes the
whole proving.

The Zinc, patient is nervous and extremely sensitive, excitable,
trembling, quivering, twitching of muscles, tearing pains along the
course of the nerves, tingling, excited on the least provocation ; over-
sensitiveness in one part and lack of feeling in another. This extreme
oversensitiveness is like Nux ; which is inimical. The overworked and
excitable persons belong to Nux and Zinc. Nux is sensitive to the
higher potencies. Further, there is paralytic weakness, emaciation,
prostration ; full of brain and spinal symptoms.

All the functions are slow ; eruptions appear slowly. The whole
economy seems to be tired and feeble, so that when a girl approaches
puberty and it is time for the menses to be established, but the flow
docs not appear, she goes into a decline ; she begins to manifest choreic
symptoms, jerking and twitching, soreness in the back of the neck,
burning of the whole spine, creeping and crawling of the extremities,
hysterical manifestions of all sorts. Sensitive to every little noise,
to people talking in the room, to crumpling of paper. “Talking or
listening is distressing ; much talking of other people, even of those of
who he is fond, affects his nerves and makes him morose.”

Feeble children, feeble girls, mind feeble, memory poor. Tendency
to be docile, but when aroused irascible. If the child comes down with
scarlatina or measles, it goes into a stupor. The eruption does not
come out. There is a tendency to convulsions, drawing in the extremi-
ties, suppression of urine, rolling of the head from one side to the
other, and from stupor it goes into complete unconsciousness ; inability
to throw eruptions to the surface.



ZINCUM METALUCUM


9*3


liie stomach is slow in digesting ; sour vomiting. The intestines are
sluggish. The, j’cctum becomes impacted. Difficult expulsion of
urine ; paralysis of the bladder and tedious constipation associated with
spinal symptoms ; urine ^low in starting ; can pass it only when sitting
and in some cases only when sitting leaning back against the seat with
hard pressure. Aching in the dorsal, lumbar, and sacral re^ons ; bet-
ter when walking and worse from rising from a seat. (In Rhus, the
aching is in the sacral region, and better when walking and coming on
while sitting. Calc., Rhus, Phos., Sulph. and Sepia have this in the
highest degree. Zinc, occupies a lower grade in the aggravation when
rising from a seat, as do Petr, and Ledum.) , v.

Numbness of the soles of the feet, with cutting pain and soreness
in the heel when stepping ; fulgurating pains, stitching, stabbing, and
tearing ; tabes dorsalis.

Limbs paralyzed ; paresis and finally paralysis of one or both sides ;
jerking, trembling and prostration. Shocks and jerking during sleep.

Trophic centers in a state of anaemia ; emaciation throughout the
body ; the skin looks withered ; the face pallid, wrinkled, unhealthy,
sickly. Always chilly ; sensitive to the cold. Full of neuralgic pains ;
tearing pains in all parts of the body when exposed to a draft ; tension
and drawing in various places. Strange drawing about the eyes as if
strabismus would come on ; drawing in the muscles ; neck drawn back ;
tension and drawing everywhere. When he comes to rest, the limbs
want to draw up, hence, hysterical cohtractures ; drawing the fingers
all out of shape.

The mind is slow and the patient is Weak and tired ; weak memory ;
forgetful. “Repeats all questions befoire answering them.” When an
individual does this it is to make the mind comprehend. He must first
realize what it means and then answers. Such a symptom is found in
typhoid, when the patient does not convalesce ; in a child after brain
affections. Nervous prostration ; waits a moment, looking blank, then
the face lights up and he answers. If you look at the Zincum patient
and do not address him, you would not realize that he was so weak,
but put a question to him and he stares at you in perfect amazement,
then says, “Oh,” and answers.

Zinc, is not suitable in those who are naturally feeble-minded, when
the child is in a state bordering upon idiocy. Baryta curb, feeds such
a mind. He rouses out of a semi-slumber and stares a moment with-
out answering.

Stupor*; aroused by every little noise, startles, twitches all over ; but
soon he goes beyond this, becoming less and less excitable, and finally
passes into unconsciousness and cannot be aroused.

You will find some deep-seated brain troubles that will try your
patience. Some cases go slowly and gradually into unconsciousness ;



ZINCUM METALLICUM


924

rolling of the head for days ; eyes lusterless ; body emaciated, involun-
tary discharges of faeces and urine in the bed ; tongue dry and parched,
so shriveled that it looks like leather, lips also ; face withered and
each day looks older ; paralysis of one band pr one foot, or it seems
that the whole muscular system is paralyzed. Screaming out in pain
although not so shrilly as in Apis. A dose of Zinc, will sometimes
bring this patient back to life. In a few days after the remedy there
will be a jerking and quivering in the parts that were motionless, or its
action will be shown in a copious sweat, much vomiting ; sudden arous-
ing that is alarming, for it looks like a threatened sinking, but this is
the beginning of reaction. Now, for days and nights while this little
one is coming back to consciousness, the restoration of sensation in the)
parts is accompanied with the most tormenting formication, tingling,
prickling, creeping, and crawling. The mother and the father and the
neighbors will want something done for it, but if you antidote, the
case will return to where it was before. This suffering is but the
awakening to life. It will go on in this way for a week or two and
then will begin to show signs of falling back ; it needs another dose
of Zinc., which will again be followed by a sweat, vomiting, etc. You
will see this in spinal meningitis. The early stage will be that of con-
gestion, and Bell, may palliate, but with the onset of the symptoms
enumerated above. Zinc, is the only remedy that will cure. The Bell,
case will have flushed face, hot head, rolling of the head, flashing eyes,
throbbing carotids. The Bry, case will be docile, stupid, purple,
sleepy ; ameliorated by quiet. The Helleborus case will exhibit but
little fever ; cold extremities, tossing of the head, dilated pupils, un-
consciousness, can hardly be aroused ; rolling head from side to side,
but when the reflexes are abolished. Zinc, comes in.

After the relief from Gels,, Bell,, or Bry, give Zinc. Rugged little
fellows who hang on for weeks in this state, emaciating and uncv.n-
scious.

You must take the mother aside and inform her what will happen
if the child returns to consciousness. If you do not, you may be
turned out of the house. A person advanced in years cannot stand
such an ordeal, but it is astonishing how the little ones can endure the
prolonged congestion and inflammation. After scarlet fever and badly
treated meningitis ; tubercular meningitis. I have carried these severe
forms of brain disease through on Phosphorus, which has a picture
somewhat like that of Zincum. There is no record of any recovery
from tubercular meningitis, but a homoeopath can cure some of these
cases, though it may take two or three months to go down and come
up out of it, with two or three relapses.

Among the eye symptoms we have a peculiar thickening and opacity
of the conjunctiva, which is infiltrated, leathery, has yellow spots on



ZINCUM METALUCUM


925


it and the corners are thickened like pterygium. Dunham made a
remarkable cure of pterygium. The report of the case in the Guiding
Symptoms is as follows: “Pterygium in right eye just encroaching on
cornea ; in left eye extending to the pupil from the inner canthus,”

“Itching and stinging plain in inner angles of eyes with cloudiness
of sight. Much burning* of the eyes and lids in the morning and in
the evening with feeling of dryness and pressure in them.”

Zinc, has cured distressing thickening of the lids, ectropion and en-
tropion ; granular thickening of the lids. In a severe case of entropion
where the lashes were playing up and down the ball with lachrymation,
great inflammation and redness, Zinc, removed the whole trouble-
Violent photophobia ; it seems as if the light would blind him. Zinc,
and Euphr. are closely related in eye troubles.

Strabismus after brain troubles. Ever since scarlet fever, he had
strabismus. She has much trouble with the menses ; dysmenorrhoea.
But here is a striking symptom ; no matter what the violent symptoms
are, pain in the ovaries, in the uterus, hysterical excitement ; as soon
as the menstrual flow appears there is relief. Violent pains in the
ovaries relieved by the flow. This is a great contrast to Cimicifuga,
which has nervous excitement and hysteria during the flow, and the
more copious it is, the more violent are the pains. The Lack, and
Zinc, symptoms are worse before, and better with the flow, but in the
former the pains all return when the flpw slacks up again. Cimicifuga
has at times an intermittent flow, then pain ceasing with each intermis-
sion. returning when the flow again appears.

The great nervousness of Zinc, is linifested in the feet. You will
notice a child or a woman keeping one foot going all the time, cannot
keep it still. Many medicines have nPrvous feet and many have relief
of symptoms by motion of the feet. But this is marked in Zinc. A
girl about twelve years of age had no congruity of symptoms and I
co*ld not find the remedy. The mother said the child mortified her
by keeping one foot constantly going in church. On asking why she
did this, she replied that if she stopped she would lose her urine.
Zinc, cured the whole patient. In the text we find double-lined the
two words, “Fidgety feet.”

Zinc, has some striking heart symptoms. Constriction of the whole
chest in weakly subjects.



INDEX


Abies nigta. 717.

Aln’Otanum. 9, 534, 585, 776.

Acetic acid. 10.

Aconiium napel. 11, 46, 49, 50, 52, 91, 118, 180, 146, 199, 230, 236, 239,
260, 316, 320, 375, 475, 498, 503, 540, 586, 658, 689, 800, 803, 886,
887, 889, 852, 872, 875.

Acuea racemosa. 23, 560.

iEsculus hippo. 28, 50, 62, 221, 347, 385, 851.

AEthusa cynapium. 38, 845, 761.

Agaricus muse. 35, 32, 112, 710, 728.

Agnus castus. 41.

Ailanthus gland. 42.

Allium cepa, 46, 447, 774, 807.

Aloe. 60, 38. 546. 717, 762, 766.

Alumen, 54, 58, 64, 66, 114, 120, 137, 294, 825, 845.

Alumina. 69, ,58, 114, 121, 204, 408, 757, 766, 767, 825, 845.

Ambra grisca. 71, 162.

Ammoniacum. 92, 184

Ammon, carb. 76, 82, 610, 778.

Ammon, mur. 81,

Anacardium orient. 83, 387, 806, 906.

-■^nagallis. 424.

Ancistrodon contortrix. 415,

Anthracinum. 419, 783.

Antim. crud. 86,92, 93, 94, 95, 218, 307, 385, 631, 745, 848.

Antim. tart. 90, 58, 80, 117, 307, 539, 626, 827, 828, 848.

Apis mellif. 96, 36, 104, 105, 106, 107, 213, 240, 415, 498, 545. 611, 617,
655,721,720,762,881,861.

Apocynum cann. 104, 100.

Argentum met. 109, 68, 69, 84, 640, 643, 710, 801, 825.

Argentum nit. 117, 111, 112, 38, 228, 478, 507, 661, 691, 707, 708, 713
802, 915.

Arnica raont. 124, 23, 138, 155, 259, 347, 420, 443, 520, 521, 522, 611, 63'J
718, 766, 783, 801, 804, 829, 852.

Arsenicum alb. 130, 31, 37, 64, 86, 88, 93, 122, 125, 126, 127, 148, 15f
173, 203, 246, 265, 266, 278, 290, 305, 315, 878, 385, 410, 419, 42(

444, 445, 446, 448, 449, 465, 495, 531, 532, 537, 634, 686, 646, 65<

659, 671, 682, 709, 710, 736, 739, 774, 775, 778, 780, 783, 800, 80

807, 813, 815, 817, 829, 821, 881, 889, 893, 899. 903, 920, 885, 83

842, 860, 863, 876.

Arsenicum iod. 148, 775.

Arum triph. 154, 46, 208, 213, 244.



iNoex


947


Asafoetida. 168, 606, 606, 862.

Aurum met. 162, 9, 158. 160, 172. 213, 278, 4fl4, 497, 498. 529, 585.
Aurura mur. 170, 160.

Aurum m. n. 319, 709.

Bacillinum. 914, 916.

Badiaga. 120. •

Baptbia. 173, 42, 45, 202, 244, 420, 639. 766, 783, 784.

Baryta carb. 178, 5.5, 64, 253, 292, 294, 923, 841, 844.

Baryta iod. 282.

Baryta mur. 187, 183, 184.

Belladonna. 191, 23, 45, 46, 52, 84, 91, 129, 177, 185, 192, 285, 236, 242,

260, 262, 268, 284, 287, 317, 320, 329, 363, 366, 373, 390, 399, 407,

408, 410, 440, 497, 515, 516, 542, 556, 586, 608, 638, 661, 689, 748,

762, 7a5, 767, 781, 644, 809, 886, 887, 924, 844. 862, 864.

Beilis. 730.

Benzoic acid. 215, 220, 586.

Berberis. 220, 846.

Borax. 228, 64. 292, 384, 682.

Bromium. 230, 636, 780.

Bryonia alb. 235, 9, 23, 52, 91, 101, 129, 134, 1.55, 173, 195, 210, 229, 265,
268, 317, 365, 366, 430, 439, 450, 4,54, 457, 477, 585, 659, 689,
714, 715, 716, 717, 748, 780, 800, 827, 832. 888, 889, 924, 858.

Bufo. 262.

Cactus grand. 258, 56, 477, 623, 856.

Cadmium sulph. 265, 658.

Caladium. 267, 614.

Calcarea carb. 270, .35, 55, 74, 100, 128, 141, 167, 179, 212, 215, 247, 303,
313, 368, 384, 446, 471, 478,' 507, 520, 576, 585, 686, 593, 634, 643,
668, 709, 768, 800, 887, 918, 915, 921, 923, 837, 888, 841, 846, 848,
860, 872, 874, 876.

Calbarea ars. 289.

Calc, fiuor. 291.

Calc. iod. 56.

Calc. phos. 292, 482, 543, 629, 763, 781, 912, 846.

Calc, sulpli. 296, 842, 845.

Calendula. 613, 612.

Calomel. 505, 663, 761.

Camphor. 8<», 31, 428, 429, 610, 822, 920, 863.

Cannabis Indie. 807, 308, 855.

Cannabis sat. 308, 780, 909.

Cantharis. 810, 102, 304, 473, 515, 910, 864.

Capsicum. 818, 266.

Carbo animal. 817, 158, 188, 386, 523.

Carbo veg. 819, 9, 15, 122, 158, 183, 305, 386, 353, 395, 438, 442, 488, 490,
491, 498, 524, .561, 566, 689, 727. 774. 775, 776, 799, 841, 845, 851.
