• 


-THE  PRAYERS  OF  THE  LIFTING  OF  THE  HAND. 


THE  CUNEIFORM  TEXTS  OF  A  GROUP  OF  BABYLONIAN  AND  ASSYRIAN 
INCANTATIONS  AND  MAGICAL  FORMULAE  EDITED  WITH  TRANS- 
LITERATIONS TRANSLATIONS  AND  FULL  VOCABULARY 
FROM   TABLETS   OF   THE   KUYUNJIK   COL- 
LECTIONS   PRESERVED    IN    THE 
BRITISH  MUSEUM 


LEONARD  W>   KING,  M.A., 

Assistant  in  the  Department  of  Egyptian  ana  Assyrian  Antiquities, 
Btiiish  Museum. 


(o<]ao 


Uon&on 
LUZAC  AND  CO. 


1896. 
[All  Rights  JReserred.] 


I  DEDICATE  THIS  BOOK 

TO 

THE    REV.    A.    F.    KIRKPATRICK,    D.D., 

REGIUS  PROFESSOR  OF  HEBREW  AND  FELLOW  OF  TRINITY  COLLEGE 

CAMBRIDGE  ; 

CANON  OF  ELY  CATHEDRAL, 
ETC.,  ETC.,  ETC., 

AS  A  TOKEN  OF  REGARD  AND  ESTEEM. 


PREFACE. 


4  ' 

The  object  of  the  present  work  is  to  give  the  cunei- 
form text  of  a  complete  group  of  tablets  inscribed  with 
prayers  and  religious  compositions  of  a  devotional  and 
somewhat  magical  character,  from  the'  Kuyunjik  collections 
preserved  in  the  British  Museum.  To  these  texts  a  trans- 
literation into  Latin  characters  has  been  added,  and,  in 
the  case  of  well  preserved  or  unbroken  documents,  a 
running  translation  has  been  given.  A  vocabulary  with 
the  necessary  indexes,  etc.  is  also  appended.  The  cunei- 
form texts,  which  fill  seventy-five  plates,  are  about  sixty  in 
number,  and  of  these  only  one  has  hitherto  been  published 
in  full;  the  extracts  or  passages  previously  given  in  the 
works  of  the  late  Sir  HENRY  RAWLINSON,  DR.  STRASSMAIER, 
and  Prof.  BEZOLD  will  be  found  cited  in  the  Introduction. 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  greater  number  of  the  texts 
formed  parts  of  several  large  groups  of  magical  tablets,  and 
that  certain  sections  were  employed  in  more  than  one  group. 
As  they  appear  here  they  are  the  result  of  the  editing  of 
the  scribes  of  Ashurbanipal,  king  of  Assyria  about  B.  C. 
669 — 625,  who  had  them  copied  and  arranged  for  his 
royal  library  at  Nineveh.  There  is  little  doubt  however 
that  the  sources  from  which  they  were  compiled  were  Baby- 
lonian. The  prayers  and  formulae  inscribed  on  the  tablets, 
which  bore  the  title  of  "Prayers  of  the  Lifting  of  the 


VI  PREFACE. 

Hand",  were  drawn  up  for  use  in  the  private  worship, 
either  of  the  king  himself,  or  of  certain  of  his  subjects.  Some 
of  the  tablets  are  inscribed  with  single  prayers,  and  these 
appear  to  have  been  copied  from  the  larger  compositions 
for  the  use  of  special  individuals  on  special  occasions.  As 
examples  of  this  class  of  text  K  223,  K  2808,  and  K  2836 
may  be  mentioned,  which  contain  Ashurbanipal's  personal 
petitions  for  the  deliverance  of  Assyria  from  the  evils  which 
had  fallen  upon  the  land  in  consequence  of  an  eclipse  of 
the  moon. 

Unlike  the  prayers  of  many  Semitic  nations  the  com- 
positions here  given  are  accompanied  by  an  interesting 
series  of  directions  for  the  making  of  offerings  and  the 
performance  of  religious  ceremonies,  and  they  show  a  re- 
markable mixture  of  lofty  spiritual  conceptions  and  belief 
in  the  efficacy  of  incantations  and  magical  practices,  which 
cannot  always  be  understood.  In  language  closely  resem- 
bling that  of  the  penitential  psalms  we  find  the  conscience- 
stricken  suppliant  crying  to  his  god  for  relief  from  his 
sin,  while  in  the  same  breath  he  entreats  to  be  delivered 
from  the  spells  and  charms  of  the  sorcerer,  and  from  the 
hobgoblins,  phantoms,  spectres  and  devils  with  which  his 
imagination  had  peopled  the  unseen  world. 

The  scientific  study  of  the  Babylonian  and  Assyrian 
religion  dates  from  the  publication  of  the  Kosmo logic 
der  Babylonier  by  Prof.  JENSEN  in  1890.  In  this  work 
the  author  grouped  and  classified  all  the  facts  connected 
with  the  subject  which  could  be  derived  from  published 
texts,  and  it  was  evident  that  no  farther  advance  could  be 
made  until  after  the  publication  of  new  material.  It  then 
became  clear  that  the  science  could  be  best  forwarded  by  a 
systematic  study  of  the  magical  and  religious  series,  class 
by  class,  rather  than  by  the  issue  of  miscellaneous  texts 


PREFACE.  VII 

however  complete  and  important.  Following  this  idea  in  the 
present  year  DR.  TALLQVIST  produced  a  scholarly  monograph 
on  the  important  series  called  by  the  Assyrians  Maklu,  and 
it  is  understood  that  Prof.  ZIMMERN  is  engaged  on  the  pre- 
paration of  an  edition  of  the  equally  important  series  called 
Shurpu.  Since  this  little  book  has  been  prepared  on 
similar  lines  and  deals  with  a  connected  group  of  religious 
texts,  it  is  hoped  that  it  may  be  of  use  to  those  whose 
studies  lead  them  to  the  careful  consideration  of  the  an- 
cient Semitic  religions  of  Western  Asia. 

My  thanks  are  due  to  Prof.  BEZOLD  both  for  friendly 
advice  and  for  help  in  the  revision  of  the  proofs;  I  am  also 
indebted  to  Prof.  ZIMMERN  and  a  few  private  friends  for 
suggestions  which  I  have  adopted. 

LEONARD  W.  KING. 
November  13  th,  1895. 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 

Preface        V— VII 

Introduction  XI— XXX 

List  of  Tablets       XXXI 

Transliteration,  Translations  and  Notes  I  —  129 

Vocabulary  131  — 181 

Appendixes  - 

I.    Proper  names        182  — 186 

II.    Numerals 186 

III.    Words  and  ideographs  of  uncertain  reading  187  — 194 
Indexes  — 

I.    Tablets  and  duplicates 195 — 197 

II.    Registration -numbers        198 — 199 

Cuneiform  texts PLATES    i — 75 


INTRODUCTION. 


The  clay  tablets,  from  which  the  texts  here  published 
have  been  copied ,  are  preserved  in  the  British  Museum  and 
belong  to  the  various  collections  from  Kuyunjik.  The  ma- 
jority are  of  the  K.  Collection,  but  some  have  been  included 
from  the  Sm.,  D.T.,  Rm.,  81—2 — 4,  82 — 3  —  23,  83  —  1  — 18  and 
Bu.  91  —  5—9  collections.  The  tablets,  to  judge  from  those  that 
are  complete,  are  not  all  of  the  same  size  but  vary  from  about 
4-|  in.  X  2f  in.  to  g^  in.  X  3f  in.  All  contain  one  column  of 
writing  on  obverse  and  reverse,  and,  with  one  exception,  are, 
inscribed  in  the  Assyrian  character  of  the  Vllth  century  B.C., 
the  longest  complete  inscription  consisting  of  one  hundred  and 
twenty-one  lines,  the  shortest  of  twenty-nine  lines.  They  were 
originally  copied  for  Ashurbanipal,  king  of  Assyria  from  about 
669  to  625  B.C.,  and  were  stored  in  the  royal  library  at  Ni- ^ 
neveh;  many  of  them  contain  his  name  and  the  colophon  which 
it  was  customary  to  inscribe  on  works  copied  or  composed  for 
his  collection.  The  tablets  are  formed  of  fine  clay  and  have 
been  carefully  baked,  and  those  that  escaped  injury  at  the 
destruction  of  Nineveh,  and  have  not  suffered  from  the  action - 
of  water  during  their  subsequent  interment,  are  still  in  good 
preservation. 

The  principal  contents  of  the  tablets  consist  of  prayers 
and  incantations  to  various  deities,  which  were  termed  by  the 
Assyrians  themselves  "Prayers  of  the  Lifting  of  the  Hand". 
It  is  not  difficult  to  grasp  the  signification  of  this  title,  for  the 
act  of  raising  the  hand  is  universally  regarded  as  symbolical 
of  invocation  of  a  deity,  whether  in  attestation  of  an  oath,  or 


XII  INTRODUCTION. 

in  offering  up  prayer  and  supplication.  With  the  Babylonians 
and  Assyrians  the  expression  "to  raise  the  hand"  was  fre- 
quently used  by  itself  in  the  sense  of  offering  a  prayer,  and 
so  by  a  natural  transition  it  came  to  be  employed  as  a  syno- 
nym of  "to  pray",  i.  e.  "to  utter  a  prayer".  Sometimes  the 
petition  which  the  suppliant  offers  is  added  indirectly,  when  it 
is  usually  introduced  by  aSSu1 ,  though  this  is  not  invariably 
the  case2.  In  other  passages  the  phrase  introduces  the  actual 
words  of  the  prayer ,  as  at  the  beginning  of  the  prayer  of 
Nebuchadnezzar  to  Marduk  towards  the  end  of  the  East  India 
House  Inscription*.  In  accordance  with  this  extension  of  mea- 
ning the  phrase  nis  kati,  "the  lifting  of  the  hand",  is  often  found 
in  apposition  to,  or  balancing,  ikribu,  supu,  etc.,  and  in  many 
instances  it  can  merely  retain  the  general  meaning  of  "prayer", 
or  "supplication"4.  In  the  title  of  the  prayers  collected  in  this 
volume,  however,  there  is  no  need  to  divorce  the  expression 
from  its  original  meaning;  while  the  phrase  was  employed  to 
indicate  the  general  character  of  the  composition,  we  may  pro- 
bably see  in  it  a  reference  to  the  actual  gesture  of  raising  the 
hand  during  the  recital  of  the  prayer5. 

The  title  was  appended  to  each  prayer  as  a  colophon-line 
together  with  the  name  of  the  deity  to  whom  the  prayer  was 
addressed;  it  is  always  found  following  the  composition,  and  is 
enclosed  within  two  lines  ruled  on  the  clay  by  the  scribe:  — 

i    JT  ^wm  r   «f e^ 


1  Cf.,  e.  g.,  Annals  of  Sargon,  1.  55  f.  (WJNCKLER,  Die  Keilschrifttexte  Sar- 
gons,  I,  p.  12):    ana  Attur   biliya  allu    turri  gimilii  Mannai  ana  isir  Allur  turri 
kdti  aSiima;    and  Cyl.  B  of  Esarhaddon,  11.  3  ff.    (Ill  R,   15):    aSSu  ipi*  Sarruti  bit 

abiya ana  Aiiur  Sm  Samal  Btl  Nabu   u  Nirgal  litar  Sa  Ninua  fitar   Sa 

Arba'ilu  kdti  allima. 

2  Cf-t  e-  g->  Sargon  Cyl.,  1.  54. 

3  Col.  IX,  11.  45  ff. :    ana  Marduk   biliya  utnin  kdti  a«*  Marduk  bilu  mudu 
ildni  etc. 

*  In  some  colophon-lines  it  is  employed  in  the  sense  of  "prayer",  or  "in- 
cantation", cf.  IV  R,  pi.  18,  no.  2,  1.  15,  and  pi.  53  [60],  Col.  IV,  1.  29;  see  also 
IV  R,  pi.  55  [92],  no.  2,  Rev.,  1.  6,  where  the  phrase  INIM.INIM.MA  $U  IL.LA 
is  combined  with  the  usual  title  of  a  penitential  psalm. 

5  See  below,  p.  13.  On  cylinder-seals  a  suppliant  is  frequently  represented 
with  one  or  both  hands  raised. 


INTRODUCTION.  XIII 

The  five  dots  mark  the  space  where  the  name  of  the  god  or 
goddess  is  inserted.  In  the  case  of  prayers  to  astral  deities  the 

name  of  the  deity  is  preceded  by  the  determinative  KT|*->y-, 
while  occasionally  the  suffix  ^[  [  takes  the  place  of  the  more 

usual  ^£±1-  With  these  exceptions,  however,  the  form  of  this 
colophon-line  is  invariably  the  same1  and  furnishes  one  of  the 
most  distinctive  characteristics  of  the  present  collection  of 
texts2.  It  may  perhaps  not  unfairly  be  compared  to  the  title 

\|*~  I  |F[  HPH  35  which  generally  accompanies  the 
"Penitential  Psalms"  together  with  a  note  as  to  whether  the 
tablet  is  to  be  confined  to  the  worship  of  a  particular  deity 
or  is  suitable  for  general  use. 

A  further  resemblance  to  the  "Penitential  Psalms"  may 
be  seen  in  the  fact  that  the  "Prayers  of  the  Lifting  of  the 
Hand"  do  not  form  a  series  of  tablets  labelled  and  numbered 
by  the  Assyrians  themselves,  such  as  the  Ma&tu-Series,  or  the 

Surpu-Series,  or  the  series  fr!gT<H^f  ^Itf  TJ  ]»»-.  Strictly 
speaking  they  do  not  form  a  series  but  merely  a  class  of 
tablets,  which  can,  however,  be  readily  distinguished  from  other 
religious  texts  not  only  by  their  writing  and  arrangement  but 
also  by  their  style  and  the  recurrence  of  certain  fixed  colophon- 
lines  and  formulae.  A  somewhat  similar  "class"  of  texts  which 
is  not  a  "series"  may  be  seen  in  the  "Hymns  in  paragraphs"4, 
the  greater  part  of  which  have  been  published  by  BRUNNOW  in 
the  Zeitschrift  fur  Assyriologie*.  The  Assyrian  prayers  to  the 
Sun-god  published  by  KuuDTzoN6,  which  also  form  a  class  but 
not  a  -series,  can  hardly  be  cited  in  this  connection  in  view  of 
their  special  scope  and  character. 

One    of  the  principal  guides  in  the  selection  of  tablets  of 


1  In  No.  51,  1.  9  the  title  is  not  essentially  different,   but  merely  did  duty 
for  two  incantations  addressed  to  the  same  astral  deity. 

2  The  colophon-line  is  very  rarely  found  in  texts  belonging  to  other  classes; 
but  see  K  2538  etc.  (cf.  infra,  p.  15);  Sm.  290,  obv.,  1.4;  Sm.  1025,  1.9;  Sm.  1250, 
1.  3,  etc. 

3  See  ZIMMERN,  Babylonische  Busspsahncn,  pp.  I,  53,  66,  8l. 
*   Cf.  BEZOLD,   Catalogue,  passim. 

5  See  ZA  IV,  pp.  I  ff.,  225  ff.,  and  ZA  V,  pp.  55  ff. 
c  Assyrische  Gebete  an  deti  Sonnengott,  Leipzig,   1893. 


XIV  INTRODUCTION. 

this  class  is  to  be  found  in  the  distinctive  colophon-line  or  title 
already  referred  to,  and  the  fact  that  BEZOLD  in  his  Catalogue 
of  the  K.  Collection  has  given  where  possible  the  colophon- 
lines  and  titles,  which  occur  on  religious  texts,  has  proved  of 
material  assistance.  This  title  taken  in  conjunction  with  certain 
resemblances  in  the  style  of  the  compositions,  the  shape  and 
quality  of  the  tablets  and  the  character  of  the  writing  renders 
the  recognition  of  the  class  comparatively  simple.  It  is  true 
that  in  such  a  process  of  selection  resemblances  in  style  and 
writing  are  of  no  slight  importance1,  but  taken  by  themselves 
they  prove  unsafe  guides;  and,  although  the  collection  might 
have  been  largely  increased  if  a  resemblance  in  these  two 
particulars  had  been  deemed  sufficient  to  warrant  the  inclusion 
of  a  tablet,  yet  an  element  of  uncertainty  would  by  this  plan 
have  been  necessarily  introduced2.  In  the  first  five  Sections 
therefore  only  those  tablets  are  included  in  which  the  distinctive 
colophon-line  occurs.  Such  has  been  the  method  of  selection, 
and  by  its  adoption  it  was  found  necessary  to  include  a  few 
tablets  which  had  been  already  partly  published  or  referred  to. 
Of  four  of  the  texts  here  published  in  full  extracts  are  to  be 
found  in  STRASSMAIER'S  Alphabetisches  Verzeichniss*;  the  nearly 


1  A  practical  illustration  of  this  statement  may  be  seen  in  the  fact  that  my 
selection  of  tablets  on  these  principals  has  resulted  in  over  forty  "joins",  and  the 
recognition  of  several  duplicates. 

2  Among  the  fragments  thus  rejected    are  some  with  additional  recommen- 
dations, e.  g.  K  3310,  1.  2  of  which,  the  first  line  of  an  incantation,  agrees,  so  far 
as  it  goes,    with  the  catch-line  of  No.  n ;    K  13231,  1.  4   of  which  corresponds  to 
the  catch-line  of  No.  16  ;    and  K  9252,  the  first  line  of  which  corresponds  to  1.  5 
of  K  2832  etc.,  the  catalogue  of  incantations  published  below.     Since  printing  off 
I    have    come   across    a    prayer    on    K  10695    which    is    probably    of  the    class    of 
"Prayers  of  the  Lifting  of  the  Hand",    as  11.  13  and  14    contain  traces   of  the  di- 
stinctive colophon-line  and  rubric ;  only  a  few  signs  of  the  prayer  have  been  pre- 
served,   from  which    it  would  appear   to    have  been  directed  against  various  forms 
of  sickness;    the  tablet,    the  surface    of  which    has  suffered  considerably    from  the 
action  of  water,  must,  when  complete,   have  resembled  No.  33  in  size.     The  frag- 
ment   Km.  446    may    possibly    have    belonged    to    a    "Prayer  of  the  Lifting  of  the 
Hand  to  lStar" ',    though  too  little    of  the  tablet  has  been  preserved  to  admit  of  a 
certain  decision;  its  colophon  of  five  lines,  in  which  Ashurbanipal  names  himself  the 
son  of  Esarhaddon,  and  the  grandson  of  Sennacherib  does  not  occur  elsewhere  in 
prayers  of  this  class;  the  fragment  K  10757  probably  belonged  to  a  similar  tablet. 

3  Of  K  140,  which  forms  part  of  the  text  here  published  as  No.  22,  11.  1  —  12 


INTRODUDTION.  XV 

complete  tablet  K  163  +  K  218  (No.  12)  has  been  published  in 
IV  R1  64  and  repeated  in  IV  R2  57,  while  the  reverse  of  K  2379, 
part  of  its  duplicate  which  is  cited  as  C,  is  to  be  found  on 
p.  1 1  of  the  Additions  to  IV  R2;  finally  BEZOLD  in  ZA  III,  p.  250 
has  published  K  9490,  which  contains  the  conclusion  of  the  text 
of  No.  50". 

Although  the  "Prayers  of  the  Lifting  of  the  Hand"  do  not 
consist  of  a  series  of  tablets  numbered  by  the  Assyrians  them- 
selves, there  are  not  lacking  indications  that  groups  of  them 
were  arranged  in  some  definite  order  or  sequence.  What  modi- 
fications and  changes  their  original  arrangement  has  undergone 
will  be  apparent  after  a  brief  examination  of  the  data.  The 
most  obvious  indications  of  arrangement  are  the  catch-lines 
which  are  found  on  all  the  tablets  the  ends  of  which  have  not 
been  broken  off.  As  these  repeat  at  the  end  of  one  tablet  the 
first  line  of  the  next,  they  point  to  some  definite  arrangement 
of  the  texts.  The  following  is  a  list  of  those  catch-lines  which 
have  been  preserved:  — 

J»    53  Siptu  btlu     muS-ti-Sir     kiS-Sat     nisi*1     gi-mir     nab-ni-ti 

6,  132  Siptu       i/u       Su  -  pu  -  u  [. .] 

ii,    46  [siptu .]       si-i-ru      git-ma-lu       Si-tar-lfu 

12,121  inn  ma   amilu    kakkad-su    ikkal-Su    lisanu-Su  u-zak-kat-su 

1 6,     12  [siptu .]  Sami         u         ir$iti 

1 8,  20  Siptu  ga  -  as  -  ru        $6  -  pu  -  u        i  -  dil       'lulgigi 

19,  34  Siptu  ru  -  ba  -  tit     rabitu(tn)     i  -  lat    Si  -  ma  -  a  -  ti 

21,  93    ilu       bilu        Su-pu-u       git- ma- 1 um       Hani*1       ra-$iib-bu 

22,  70    Siptu       ilu[Na-bi-um        a-Sa-ri-du        bu-kur]       lluMarduk 

29,  3    [siptu .]  ti-iz-ka-ru  bu-kur  tlu[. .] 

30,  30    siptu     il  -  ti     *lulgigi     bu  -  uk  -  rat    [ .] 


and  62—66  are  cited  in  AV,  nos.  8247,  8297,  8510  and  9071;  of  K  155  (No.  i), 
11.  I— 10,  23  —  25  and  43—45  are  given  in  AV,  nos.  6700,  7845,  8063  and  8297; 
of  Iv  2396,  which  contains  part  of  the  text  of  No.  8,  11.  22  —  24  are  quoted  in 
AV,  no.  6043;  and  of  K  3283,  a  duplicate  of  No.  II,  11.  6  — 10  are  given  in  AV, 
nos.  7586  and  8483. 

1  For  the  quotations  made  by  SAYCE,  DELITZSCH  and  SCHRADER  from  K 
2836  (a  dupl.  of  No.  27)  and  K  3358  (No.  32),  see  BE/.OLD,  Catalogue,  pp.  480, 
526.  Moreover  DEI.ITZSCH,  in  the  first  two  parts  of  his  Handvorterbuch  which 
have  at  present  appeared,  quotes  from  K  155  (No.  i),  and  TALLQVIST  in  Die  assy- 
rt'sche  Besch-worungsserie  Maqlu  cites  passages  from  K  235  (No.  Ii). 


XVI  INTRODUCTION. 

33,  47  [siptu •]    Sar-rat   kib-ra-a-ti   i-lit   bi-li-i-ti 

35,  15  [siptu .}  safr(r)  ki-bit  ana  A.BA  L  DA.RA 

36,  10  '  [siptu ilu]Igigi    biituktu    ba-si-[. .] 

38,  5  Siptu        Sur  -  [. •] 

41,  3    [Siptu ]   Sarru    ni-mi-ki   ba-nu-u    ta-Sim-ti 

42,  26    Siptu      il"Marduk      bilu      rabu       [. J 

47,  8    [Siptu •]    gaS  ~  ru  ~  u  ~  ** 

48,  17    Siptu     bilu     Sur-bu-u     Sa     ina     Samt-i    Su-lub-tju-Su    illu 
50,  29    Siptu    at-ta   kakkabuKAK.SLDI  iluNINIB    a-Sa-rid    Hani*1 

rabuti*1 

52,     5    Siptu  Sarru  ilanipl  gaS-ru-u-ti  Sa  nap- bar  ma-a-ti  Su-pu-u 

iluIMINA.BI  at-tu-nu-ma 

Even  fewer  beginnings  of  tablets  have  been  preserved.  In  the 
following  list,  however,  the  first  line  of  any  incantation,  without 
regard  to  its  position  on  the  tablet,  is  included  for  comparison 
with  the  catch-lines  given  above:  — 

i,     i  Siptu     iluSin     iluNannaru     ru-Su-bu     u-[. ] 

1,  29  siptu    ka  -  rid  -  tu    'l"ls  -  tar    ka  -  nu  -  ut    i  -  [Id  -  a  -  ti] 

2,  ii  siptu       ap  -  lu      gaS  -  ru  bu  -  kur  iluBU 
2»  43  [siptu .]    kib-ra-a-ti    i  -  lat    bi-li-i-ti 

3,  10  [siptu    ap-lu   gas-ru]    bu-kur   iluBil   £  Sur-bu-u  git-ma-lu 

i-lit-ti  I.SAR.RA 

4,  9  Siptu     il"Dam  -  ki  -  na      Sar  -  rat    kal     Hani*1     la  -  tu 
4,  24  [siptu    il"Ba'ii]    biltu    Sur-bu-tu    a-ti-bat    Sami-i    [illuti*1] 
5,11  [Siptu]     ka  -  rid  -  turn     iluls  -  tar     ka  -  nu  -ut     i-ld-  a-[ti] 

6,     i  siptu       bilu       Sur  -  bu  -  [it J 

6,   1 8  siptu     iluNusku     Sur  -  [bu  -  u     i  -  lit  -  ti     Dur  -  iluKI] 

6,  36  siptu  iluSin  na     -     [. } 

6,  71  siptu   lluBa'u    biltu   Sur-bu-tum   ummu  ri-mi-[ni-tum  a]-Si- 

bat  $aim-i  illuti^1 

6,  97    siptu  Sur-bu-u  git-ma-[lu  a-bt-rum  iluMardiik .] 

7,  9    Siptu  lluBi-lit  Hi  biltu   Sur-[bu-tum  ummu  ri-mi-ni-tum  a- 

Si-bat  Samt-i  illutipl] 

7,  34    Siptu   kakkabuhbara     [. j 

8,  22    siptu    at-tu-nu    kakkabani  Sar-bu-tum  Sa  mu-[. .] 

9,  i    [Siptu      ga  -  as  -  ru       sii  -  pit  -  u       i  -  dil      aluASSur] 
9,  28    [siptu J  fir-turn  SA.  TAR  i-[. .] 

io,     7    Siptu  Sur-bu-u  git-ma-lu  a-bt-rum  iluMarduk  [. J 


INTRODUCTION.  XVII 

11,  i    [siptu]     karradu     ll"Marduk     sa     i  -  sis  -  su     a  -  bu  -  bu 

12,  i    inuma       lumnn        mnrsi       DI.PAL.A       ZLTAR.RU.DA 

KA.LU.BI.DA  dubbubu  ana  ami  In  ul  iti/fi 

12,    17    Siptu    lluMarduk   bil  matati  sal~[ba-bu ]-ru-bu 

12,  105  Siptu  ai-ta  AN.HUL  ma-sar  snlmi(mi)  sa  tl"l-a  u  ll"Marduk 

J3>   15    [siptu]      bi-lum      iluMarduk      mu-di-i    [. ] 

14,   14    [siptu .]  -  bu 

20,  8    Siptu       sur  -  bu  -  u      git  -  ma  -In       [. .] 

21,  34    [Siptu]          Sur    -    bu    -    u          [. .] 

21,  76    [Siptu]     iluRaminanu    [. .]-ta-az-nu    Su-pu-u 

ilu  gas-ru 

22,  i    Siptu           rubii           asaridu          bu     -     kur         tluMarduk 
22,  35    siptu       bit      mi  -  ru      ab  -  kal       [. .]  -  u 

27,  i    siptu    bi-lum  gas-ru  ti-iz-ka-[ru  bu-kur  {l"NU.NAM.NIR] 

28,  7    [siptu .]  -  u     ilu    ri- mi -nu -it 

31,  ii    [siptu .]GLGI     bu-uk-rat      iluSin      ti-li-tu 

32,  6    [Siptu J-na     ilulstar    ka-rid-ti    i-ld-a-[ti] 

33,  i    [siptu ]-zu-zu    i-lat    mu-na-[. .] 

37,     7    [siptu biltu]   sur-bu-tum   ummu  ri-mi-ni- 

lum  a-[Si-bat  Sami-i  illuti*1] 

39,     6    [siptu 7  kakkabanit1  i-lat  sar-[. .] 

46,   1 1    Siptu  iluNirgal  btl  [. J  kakkalniPi^i  ti-i/j.  sami-i 

u  irsitim(tim) 
50,     i    [siptu    kakkatuSIB.ZLAN.NA .] 

A  glance  will  show  that  not  many  lines  in  the  two  lists  cor- 
respond. In  fact,  of  the  twenty-one  catch-lines  that  have  been 
preserved  only  one  corresponds  to  the  first  line  of  any  of  the 
tablets,  it  being  probable  that  No.  29,  1.  3  should  be  restored 
from  No.  27,  1.  i1;  the  catch-line  of  No.  48  may  indeed  refer  to 
No.  6,  1.  i,  though  this  is  far  from  certain  as  only  two  words 
of  the  latter  have  been  preserved.  A  comparison  of  the  catch- 
lines  therefore  with  the  beginnings  of  the  tablets  does  not  throw 
much  light  on  the  question  of  their  original  order.  Some  few 
of  the  catch-lines,  however,  may  possibly  be  referred  to  incan- 
tations which  do  not  occur  at  the  beginnings  of  tablets;  the 
catch-line  of  No.  u,  for  instance,  may  possibly  correspond  to 

1   Cf.  infra,  p.  92. 


XVIII  INTRODUCTION. 

No.  14,  1.  14,  or  that  of  No.  i6r  to  No.  46,  1.  1 1  ,  or  that  of 
No.  30  to  No.  31,  1.  11.  The  catch-line  of  No.  33  may  perhaps 
represent  a  variant  form  of  No.  2,  1.  43,  while  the  catch-line  of 
No.  38,  of  which  only  the  first  sign  has  been  preserved,  might 
equally  well  be  referred  to  No.  6,  1.  97,  No.  10,  1.  7,  No.  20,  1.  8, 
or  No.  21,  1.34.  But,  even  if  these  instances  of  correspondence 
were  certain,  they  would  not  assist  us  in  our  inquiry,  as  in  the 
case  of  each  the  context  of  the  catch-line  does  not  correspond 
to  that  of  the  incantation  to  which  it  is  assumed  to  refer;  in 
other  words,  the  incantation  or  ceremonial  section,  which  the 
catch-line  in  question  follows ,  is  not  the  same  as  that  prece- 
ding the  incantation ,  to  the  first  line  of  which  the  catch-line 
corresponds.  The  only  inference  therefore  that  can  be  drawn 
from  these  facts  is  that  the  texts  have  undergone  various 
changes  and  rearrangements  at  the  hands  of  editors  or  redac- 
tors before  they  were  copied  by  the  scribes  of  Ashurbanipal. 
In  this  connection  it  may  be  of  interest  to  refer  to  an 
Assyrian  catalogue  of  incantations  that  has  been  preserved  on 
K  2832  -j-  K  668o2,  as  some  of  the  first  lines  of  compositions 
cited  in  Col.  I  of  that  tablet  correspond  to  certain  of  the  catch- 
lines  and  first  lines  of  the  present  collection  of  texts.  Col.  II 
contains  the  beginnings  of  seven  incantations  which  are  ad- 
dressed in  the  main  to  the  Sun-god  and  probably  have  no 
reference  to  the  "Prayers  of  the  Lifting  of  the  Hand";  the  end 
of  the  last  column,  which  is  all  that  has  been  preserved  of  the 
reverse  of  the  tablet  is  uninscribed.  In  Col.  I,  the  text  of  which 
is  given  on  the  opposite  page,  it  will  be  seen  that  1.  7  corresponds 
to  the  catch-line  of  No.  1 8,  and  1.  1 2  to  the  remains  of  the  catch- 
line  of  No.  42,  while  1. 1 1  is  identical  with  the  first  line  of  No.  9; 
the  first  line  of  the  tablet,  moreover,  contains  the  name  of  the 
series  to  which  No.  i,  according  to  its  colophon,  belongs.  It  is, 
of  course,  possible  that  all  the  incantations  enumerated  in  this 
column  of  the  tablet  belong  to  the  class  of  texts  here  collected, 

1  It  is  possible  that  No.  16  and  No.  42  are  parts  of  the  same  tablet,  as  is 
suggested    by  BEZOLD,   Catalogue,   p.  1186;    in   that  case    the  catch-line    so  formed 
would  not  correspond  to  No.  46,  1.  n. 

2  See  below,  p.  15.    Catalogues  of  tablets  containing  forecasts,  mythological 
legends,  etc.   testify  to  the  activity   of  the  Assyrian  scribes   in  the  collection   and 
classification  of  other  classes  of  texts. 


INTRODUCTION. 


XIX 


10 


M-- 
Hf-- 
Hf-- 


TTTT 
TTTT 


D 


<m 


-ET 


I-f  <T 


f 


-I<T  ^TT 
*TTT      m      --T 
i[*-<tT¥~<«fWTT 

^TTT 


IT 


JiH 


I»ftTTT*StniJI^<tTf 
-II  ET- 


10 


-fll 
l^  ^n  ^ 


though,  in  that  case,  they  have  not  yet  been  recognised,  and  are 
perhaps  not  preserved  in  the  collections  from  Kuyunjik.  It  is 
equally  possible  that  the  incantations,  apart  from  those  already 
identified,  have  no  connection  with  the  "Prayers  of  the  Lifting 
of  the  Hand".  In  the  latter  case  the  tablet  affords  striking 
proof  of  the  manner  in  which  scribes,  either  before  or  at  the 


1  This  character  is  partly  effaced. 


XX  INTRODUCTION. 

time  of  Ashurbanipal,  re-edited  the  older  collections  and  classes 
of  tablets  to  which  they  had  access. 

The  evidence  afforded  by  an  examination  of  their  catch- 
lines  and  first  lines  leads  therefore  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
tablets,  which  have  come  down  to  us,  have  been  subjected  to 
several  processes  of  editing",  the  incantations  having  been  from 
time  to  time  collected,  selected  and  rearranged.  A  noteworthy 
instance  of  the  way  in  which  a  favourite  incantation  was  re- 
copied  and  employed  in  various  connections  is  presented  by 

the  address  to  a  goddess  which  begins:  Siptu biltu  Sur- 

butu  urnmu  rimtmtum  asibat  sami  illuti.  In  No.  6,  11.  71  ff.,  where 
it  is  addressed  to  the  goddess  Ban,  it  is  preceded  by  a  prayer 
to  Sin  and  followed  by  one  probably  to  SamaS,  in  the  dupli- 
cate D  it  is  preceded  by  some  directions  for  ceremonies,  while 
it  forms  the  first  prayer  on  the  tablet  which  is  cited  as  the 
duplicate  E\  in  No.  7,  11.  9  ff.  we  find  the  title  Bilit  Hi  in  the 
place  of  the  name  of  the  goddess  Ban,  the  incantation  is  fol- 
lowed by  one  to  the  astral  deity  fsfrara,  and  it  is  set  aside  for 
use  only  during  an  eclipse  of  the  moon;  in  No.  4  the  version 
presents  so  many  differences  that  it  practically  forms  a  fresh 
incantation.  This  is  the  history,  so  far  as  it  can  be  ascertained, 
of  one  incantation,  and  the  evidence  afforded  by  the  duplicates 
of  other  tablets  is  very  similar. 

Other  evidence  of  this  process  of  editing  is  to  be  found 
in  the  fact  that  some  tablets  are  labelled  as  belonging  to  cer- 
tain series.  No.  i,  for  instance,  is  stated  to  be  a  tablet  of  the 

series  ^JTIT  Of  ^HJX»  though  the  scribe  has  omitted  to  fill 
in  the  number  of  the  tablet;  No.  30  is  the  i34th  tablet  of  the 
series  ]^^~  UH»  the  rest  of  its  title  being  broken;  and  No.  48 
forms  the  eighth  part  of  the  composition  ^TTTT  ^  ^J  J»-  £Jf 
Possibly  in  the  first,  and  certainly  in  the  second  of  these  cases, 
the  series  was  a  composite  one  made  up  of  various  classes  of 
texts,  for  it  is  not  necessary  to  conclude  from  the  evidence  of 
No.  30  that  the  other  133  or  more  tablets  missing  from  that 
series  were  all  "Prayers  of  the  Lifting  of  the  Hand";  more 
probable  is  the  supposition  that  this  class  of  tablets  was  merely 

1  See  below,  pp.  14  ff. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXI 

one  of  several  classes  laid  under  contribution  by  the  compilers 
of  the  series. 

A  still  further  indication  of  editing-  may  be  seen  in  the 
colophons  with  which  the  tablets  conclude.  It  is  true  the 
majority  of  them  end  with  the  formula  which  is  commonly 
found  on  tablets  from  Ashurbanipal's  library,  and  which  may 
be  translated  as  follows:  "The  palace  of  Ashurbanipal ,  king 
of  the  world,  king  of  Assyria,  who  in  A$$ur  and  Btlit  puts  his 
trust,  on  whom  Nabu  and  TaSmitu  have  bestowed  broad  ears, 
who  has  acquired  clear  eyes.  The  valued  products  of  the 
scribe's  art,  such  as  no  one  among  the  kings  who  have  gone 

before  me  had  acquired,  the  wisdom  of  Nabu ,  as  much 

as  exists,  I  have  inscribed  on  tablets,  I  have  arranged  in  groups1, 
I  have  revised,  and  for  the  sight  of  my  reading  have  set  in  my 
palace,  I,  the  ruler,  who  knoweth  the  light  of  Attur,  the  king 
of  the  gods.  Whosoever  carries  off  (this  tablet),  or  with  my 
name  inscribes  his  own  name,  may  A$$ur  and  Bilit  in  wrath 
and  anger  cast  him  down,  and  destroy  his  name  and  seed  in 
the  land!"  This  colophon  is  by  no  means  universal  however, 
for  we  find  shorter  ones  on  Nos.  n  and  33,  while  Nos.  18,  35, 
38  and  41  present  various  differences  to  the  normal  conclusion, 
and  No.  10  merely  contains  the  note  that  the  tablet  was  copied 
from  an  older  original.  The  reason  that  no  colophons  occur 
on  Nos.  19,  29  and  50,  the  ends  of  which  are  left  blank,  is  to 
be  sought  in  the  fact  that  these  tablets  contain  single  prayers 
extracted  from  the  larger  tablets  for  some  temporary  purpose2. 
The  evidence  of  catch-lines,  duplicates,  series  and  colophons 

therefore  all  leads  to  the  same  conclusion,   that  the  tablets  are 
/ 

not  arranged  on  one  plan  but  have  undergone  several  redac- 
tions, and  it  is  obvious  that  any  attempt  to  restore  the  original 
order  would  be  fruitless. 

It  was  necessary  therefore  to  arrange  them  for  publi- 
cation on  some  other  principle,  and  the  plan  adopted  has  been 
to  classify  them  according  to  the  deities  to  whom  the  prayers 
and  incantations  are  addressed.  The  fact  that  while  some  of 


1  See  DELITZSCH,  Handworterbuch\  p.  182. 

2  K  3332    (the  dupl.  A  of  No.  i),    and  K  2836  -|-  K  6593  (the  dupl.  A  of 
No.  27),    which    are    also  without  colophons,    contain  similar  extracts.     These  ex- 
tracts from  the  longer  texts  are  inscribed  on  small  tablets  in  rather  large  characters. 

d 


XXII  INTRODUCTION. 

the  tablets  contain  prayers  and  incantations  addressed  only  to 
one  god,  while  the  contents  of  others  refer  to  several  different 
deities  in  succession  furnished  a  basis  for  classification,  and  the 
texts  fell  naturally  into  five  divisions  or  sections.  In  the  first 
are  those  tablets  which  contain  prayers  etc.  addressed  success- 
ively to  each  of  a  group  of  deities;  in  the  second  are  tablets 
the  contents  of  which  refer  only  to  one  god;  in  the  third  the 
suppliant  on  each  tablet  addresses  himself  throughout  to  one 
goddess;  the  fourth  section  consists  of  fragmentary  tablets  from 
which  the  names  of  the  deities  addressed  are  missing,  while  in 
the  fifth  are  collected  prayers  etc.  addressed  to  astral  deities. 
This  method  of  arrangement ,  though  convenient ,  is  open  to 
objection  on  one  point.  The  tablets  are  classified  according  to 
their  contents  at  the  present  moment;  from  many  of  them, 
however,  large  parts  are  missing,  and  it  is  possible  that  when 
complete  they  might  have  fallen  under  different  sections  to 
those  they  now  occupy.  This  objection,  however,  is  not  con- 
fined to  the  present  arrangement  but  might  be  urged  against 
any  alternative  method;  it  is,  in  fact,  a  disadvantage  which  is 
inseparable  from  a  collection  of  tablets  comprising  some  that 
have  not  been  preserved  intact. 

The  uses  to  which  the  "Prayers  of  the  Lifting  of  the  Hand" 
could  be  put  are  somewhat  varied,  corresponding  to  the  scope 
of  the  petitions  and  incantations  they  contain.  With  the  ex- 
ception of  the  tablets  set  aside  for  use  after  a  lunar  eclipse, 
they  appear  to  have  been  intended  for  somewhat  general  use. 
It  is  true  that  from  the  accompanying  ceremonies  we  can  some- 
times gather  further  details  as  to  the  time  and  occasion  suit- 
able for  their  employment,  but  in  the  majority  of  cases  we  are 
dependent  on  internal  evidence  to  ascertain  the  circumstances 
which  attended  their  recital.  In  form  and  structure  they  pre- 
sent a  general  resemblance  to  each  other,  each  prayer  or  in- 
cantation consisting  of  three  principal  divisions,  which  vary 
considerably  in  their  comparative  length  and  importance.  The 
beginning  of  a  prayer  as  a  rule  consists  of  an  introduction  in 
which  the  deity  addressed  is  called  upon  by  name,  his  power 
or  mercy  praised,  and  his  special  functions  or  attributes  referred 
to  or  described.  The  suppliant  then  turns  to  his  own  condition 
of  distress,  and  his  petitions  for  help  and  deliverance  form  the 


INTRODUCTION.  XXIII 

second  main  section  of  the  prayer;  the  conclusion  is  generally 
in  the  form  of  a  short  doxology.  In  the  invocation  of  a  deity 
the  most  extravagant  praise  could  be  employed,  the  suppliant 
in  his  utterances  not  confining  himself  to  strict  theology;  any 
deity,  whose  help  he  sought,  however  unimportant,  was  for  him 
at  that  moment  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  gods.  It  is  true 
that  the  greater  gods  are  praised  for  their  special  powers  and 
characteristics,  but  the  lesser  deities  share  with  them  the  most 
exalted  titles  -  -  a  practice  which  may  have  been  the  result  of 
anxiety  to  secure  by  any  means  the  favour  of  the  deity  ad- 
dressed. 

All  the  prayers  are  for  the  use  of  individuals,  and  in 
many  of  them  a  formula  occurs  in  which  the  suppliant  states 
his  own  name  and  adds  those  of  his  god  and  goddess.  The 
importance  to  a  man  of  the  protection  of  his  patron  deities  is 
obvious  from  the  frequently  recurring  petitions  for  restoration 
to  their  favour,  when  in  consequence  of  some  act  of  sin  they 
have  withdrawn  from  him  their  guidance  and  support,  and  he, 
not  relying  on  his  own  efforts  to  appease  their  anger,  calls  in 
some  more  powerful  god  or  goddess  to  act  as  mediator.  This 
fact  is  not  sufficient,  however,  to  explain  the  addition  of  their 
names  to  that  of  the  suppliant,  for  the  formula  sometimes  oc- 
curs in  prayers ,  in  which  no  other  mention  is  made  of  the 
suppliant's  god  and  goddess.  As  the  prayers  in  most  cases 
have  not  been  expressly  copied  for  any  individual,  the  actual 
names  are  not  inserted  in  the  formula;  an  interesting  exception, 
however,  occurs  in  K  223,  the  duplicate  of  No.  2  which  is  cited 
as  D.  No.  2  is  part  of  a  large  tablet  containing  prayers  to 
TaSmitu,  Ninib,  etc.,  and  K  223  is  a  small  one  inscribed  with 
the  prayer  to  Ninib,  which  has  been  extracted  from  the  larger 
tablet  for  the  private  use  of  Ashurbanipal.  In  place  of  the 
formula  which  occurs  in  No.  2,  1.  26  the  duplicate  D  reads:  "I, 
thy  servant,  Ashurbanipal,  the  son  of  his  god,  whose  god  is 
A$$ur,  whose  goddess  is  ASiuritu"  etc.  It  is  probable  that  no 
one  but  the  Assyrian  king  could  refer  to  A$$ur  as  his  god  and 
to  ASSuritu  as  his  goddess;  this  divine  couple  were  the  peculiar 
patrons  of  royalty,  and,  although  they  looked  after  the  people 
and  land  of  Assyria  as  a  whole,  the  king  was  the  only  indi- 
vidual selected  for  their  special  protection.  The  data  however 

rfa 


XXIV  INTRODUCTION. 

is  insufficient  to  determine  what  gods  the  private  Assyrians  and 
Babylonians  were  privileged  to  regard  as  their  patron  deities. 
It  is  possible  a  solution  of  the  question  might  be  obtained  from 
a  study  of  the  cylinder-seals,  on  which  the  owner,  after  stating 
his  own  name  and  that  of  his  father  frequently  adds  the  name 
of  the  god  of  whom  he  is  the  servant1;  meanwhile  it  may  be 
permissible  to  speculate  whether  each  class  or  trade  had  not 
its  own  patron  deity,  who  was  also  regarded  as  peculiarly  the 
god  of  each  member  of  that  class. 

We  know  that  each  city  had  its  local  god,  who  in  prayers 
sometimes  takes  the  place  of  the  suppliant's  patron  deity2,  and 
it  may  be  that  a  similar  localization  of  deities  existed  with 
regard  to  the  different  trades  and  classes  of  society.  Possibly 
this  suggestion  may  serve  to  explain  in  some  degree  the  vari- 
ous pairs  and  groups  of  deities  whose  blessings  are  invoked 
by  the  senders  of  letters  on  behalf  of  their  correspondents.  It 
is  improbable  that  these  gods  were  selected  merely  at  the  fancy 
of  the  writer,  and  it  is  easier  to  suppose  that  his  choice  was 
restricted  either  by  law  or  custom  to  the  deities  who  were  con- 
nected with  his  own  class  or  profession.  A  striking  instance 
in  point  may  be  seen  in  the  letters  K  501,  K  538,  83—1  — 18,35 
and  80 — 7—19,23  written  by  Arad-Nabii  to  the  king3;  as  the 
letters  deal  with  religious  matters  it  may  be  assumed  that  Arad- 
Nabu  was  a  priest,  and  the  fact  that  he  invokes  such  a  long 
list  of  important  deities  would  on  the  above  assumption  be  an 


1  The  assumption  that  the  god  mentioned  on  a  cylinder-seal  is  always  the 
owner's  patron    deity    is    not   quite    certain.     That    amulets    could  be  worn  which 
were    dedicated    to    other    than    patron  deities    is    proved   by  the  Assyrian  amulet 
95 — 4 — 8,  I.     On  this  little  cylinder  of  clay  the  owner  Samalkilldni  addresses  an 
incantation  to  the  astral  deity  Kak-si-di  in  the  course  of  which  he  states  he  is  the 
son  of  his  god,  with  whom  it  is  evident  the  deity  Kak-si-di  is  not  to  be  identified. 

2  Cf.  K  2493,  1.  17    [ana-ku   puldnu    apil]  puldni  la   ilu  ali-lu  iluMarduk 
UtiUar  ali-lu 

3  The    introductory    phrases    on  83 — i  — 18,35    read  as  follows:    a-na  larri 
bili-ya  arad-ka  mArad-lluNabu  lu  lulmu(mu)    a-na  larri  bili-ya  Allur  lluSin  liuSa- 
mal  iluMarduk  iluZar-pa-ni-tum  iluNabu  iluTai-mi  turn  ilulltar  Id  a^uNinua  ilulltar 
Id  aluArba-ilu  ildnit1  an-nu-ti  rabutiP1  ra-'-mu-ti  larru-ti-ka  C  landtiP1  a-na  larri 
bili-ya  lu-bal-Iif-fu  li-bu-tu  lit-tu-tu   a-na   larri   bili-ya    lu-lab-bi-u  ma-$ar  lul-mi  u 
ba-la-ti  [ina]  libbi  larri  bili-ya  lip-fci-du.     K  501  has  a  similar  introduction,  while 
in  K  538  and  80  —  7  — 19,  23   Sin  is  the  only  god  omitted  from  the  list. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXV 

indication  of  his  high  rank  and  position.  It  may  be  urged 
against  this  theory  that  the  same  writer  does  not  invariably 
invoke  the  same  gods;  many  explanations  might  be  offered  of 
this  fact,  it  being  conceivable  that  the  letters  in  question  were 
written  at  different  periods  of  a  man's  career,  or  that  certain 
higher  positions  included  the  privileges  and  rights  of  those 
beneath  them,  or  that  a  man  of  higher  rank  in  addressing  a 
subordinate  would  not  refer  to  his  own  gods  but  invoke  those 
of  the  latter.  However  this  may  be,  it  is  perhaps  not  impos- 
sible that  in  prayers  and  incantations  the  naming  of  a  suppli- 
ant's god  and  goddess  was  to  his  contemporaries  equivalent  to 
a  declaration  of  his  rank  and  position  in  the  state. 

Following  the  formula  in  which  the  suppliant  states  his 
own  name  and  those  of  his  patron  deities  we  frequently  find 
in  "Prayers  of  the  Lifting  of  the  Hand"  a  statement  that  the 
occasion  on  which  the  prayer  is  delivered  is  after  an  eclipse 
of  the  moon,  the  formula  usually  running  as  follows:  — 

ina  lumun  iluatalt  iluSin  $a  ina  arj}i  pulani  umi  pulani 
iSakna(na)  \  lumun  idati*1  ittati*1  limnitipl  la  tabati*1  \  $a 
ina  ikalli-ya  u  mati-ya  ibasa-a'1 

The  tablets  on  which  the  formula  occurs  can  only  have  been 
intended  for  the  use  of  the  king,  for  no  private  individual  could 
address  a  god  "in  the  evil  of  an  eclipse  of  the  moon  which  in 
such  and  such  a  month  on  such  and  such  a  day  has  taken 
place,  in  the  evil  of  the  powers,  of  the  portents,  evil  and  not 
good  which  are  in  my  palace  and  my  land".  It  is  probable, 
however,  that  only  the  formula,  and  not  the  prayer  or  incan- 
tation itself,  was  composed  for  the  eclipse.  A  great  body  of 
religious  texts  and  incantations,  containing  general  petitions  for 
deliverance  from  evil  influences  and  magical  powers,  would  be 
quite  suitable  for  use  after  such  a  calamity,  and  all  that  was 
needed  in  addition  was  a  formula  which  could  be  inserted  with 


1  See  pp.  7  ff .  On  p.  10  it  is  suggested  that  the  ideogram  777,  in  the  sense 
of  "portent",  should  be  rendered  by  ittu  but  this  rendering  was  not  adopted  in 
the  transliteration  as  I  was  unaware  on  what  grounds  DELITZSCH  based  his  ren- 
dering taktltu.  When  the  early  sheets  of  the  transliteration  had  been  printed  off 
the  first  part  of  the  Hand-worterbuch  appeared  in  which  ittu  takes  the  place  of 
his  former  rendering  of  the  ideogram. 


XXVT  INTRODUCTION. 

the  necessary  details  of  the  month  and  day  on  which  the  eclipse 
had  taken  place.  Such  a  formula  is  the  one  cited  above,  and 
the  fact  that  it  is  found  in  some  copies  of  the  same  prayer  but 
omitted  in  others  proves  that  it  could  be  added  or  removed  at 
pleasure.  Thus  in  the  copy  of  the  prayer  to  Ninib  which  was 
made  from  No.  2  for  the  use  of  Ashurbanipal  (cf.  supra)  the 
eclipse-formula  has  been  inserted  between  the  sixteenth  and 
seventeenth  lines  of  the  prayer,  and  the  same  insertion  has  been 
made  in  K  2836  the  duplicate  of  No.  27  which  is  cited  as  A. 
The  prayer  to  Ban  on  No.  6  does  not  contain  the  formula, 
neither  does  it  occur  in  the  duplicate  D\  we  find  it,  however, 
in  the  same  prayer  on  No.  7,  and  in  the  duplicate  E  it  occurs 
together  with  a  statement  of  the  suppliant's  name  etc.  It  is 
absent  from  the  last  prayer  on  No.  6.  but  it  has  been  inserted 
in  the  duplicate  F  where  it  is  also  preceded  by  the  suppliant's 
name  and  those  of  his  god  and  goddess.  The  eclipse-formula 
may  therefore  be  regarded  as  forming  no  essential  part  of  any 
prayer  or  incantation;  in  fact,  some  of  the  passages  in  which 
it  occurs  would  be  improved  by  its  omission  as  it  interrupts 
the  rythm  or  metre  of  the  lines  on  either  side  of  it. 

A  word  must  be  said  on  the  metre  in  which  the  "Prayers 
of  the  Lifting  of  the  Hand"  are  composed.  It  has  long  been 
known  that  the  poetical  compositions  of  the  Babylonians  were 
cast  in  general  in  a  rough  form  of  verse  and  half- verse;  GUNKEL 
and  ZIMMERN,  however,  were  the  first  to  trace  in  detail  the 
existence  of  a  regular  metre1,  pointing  out  that  each  verse  con- 
tained a  definite  number  of  accented  syllables  or  rythmical  beats 
by  which  it  was  divided,  each  division  or  foot  of  the  verse  consist- 
ing of  single  words,  or  of  two  or  three  short  connected  words, 
e.  g.  particles  with  the  words  that  follow  them,  words  joined  by 
the  construct  state,  etc.  ZTMMERN  further  drew  attention  to  the  fact 
that  the  metre  was  frequently  indicated  by  the  grouping  of  signs 
on  the  tablet,  and  that  in  publishing  a  text  it  was  consequently  of 
great  importance  to  reproduce  the  exact  position  and  form  of  the 
characters.  In  the  plates,  therefore,  I  have  endeavoured  to  give 
as  far  as  possible  a  facsimile  of  the  original  tablets.  It  will  be 

1  See  ZIMMERN,    Ein    rorlaufges  Wort   iibcr  lalylcnische  A/ttrik,    Z/4  "V11I 
pp.  121  ff. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXVII 

seen,  however,  that  only  in  a  comparatively  few  instances  is 
the  metre  indicated  in  this  manner,  and  the  evidence  of  dupli- 
cates goes  to  show  that  different  scribes  attached  different  de- 
grees of  importance  to  the  symmetrical  arrangement  of  their 
lines.  For  instance,  the  carefully  marked  arrangement  of  No.  i, 
11.  i  —  8,  containing  the  invocation  of  Sin,  is  not  reproduced  in 
the  duplicates  K  3332  and  Sm.  1382,  nor  is  the  form  of  the 
lines  on  No.  18  retained  by  the  duplicate  K  6804. 

If,  however,  we  apply  to  the  prayers  and  incantations  the 
rules  which  ZIMMERN  has  adduced  from  a  study  of  Sp.  II,  265 a1, 
we  find  that  great  sections  of  the  various  tablets  fall  naturally 
into  the  four-divisioned  metre.  This  regular  metre  is,  however, 
frequently  interrupted  by  a  line  of  only  three  feet  or  divisions; 
for  instance  four  fifths  of  the  prayer  to  Ninib  on  No.  2  consist 
of  four  feet,  the  remaining  fifth  of  three  feet.  In  many  cases, 
moreover,  the  lines,  though  possessing  a  certain  rythm  cannot 
be  regarded  as  composed  in  metre.  The  conclusion  to  which 
we  are  led,  therefore,  is  that  the  "Prayers  of  the  Lifting  of  the 
Hand",  though  occasionally  running  into  regular  metre,  are  not 
subject  to  the  strict  rules  which  apply  to  the  poetry  of  the 
Babylonians.  It  is  perhaps  not  improbable  that  this  irregularity 
was  intentional  on  the  part  of  their  composers.  In  the  recital 
of  a  prayer  or  incantation  the  irregular  lines  would  form  a 
striking  contrast  or  foil  to  those  in  metre,  and  the  combination 
would  serve  to  mark  the  suppliant's  varying  degrees  of  exaltation. 

The  "Prayers  of  the  Lifting  of  the  Hand"  are  frequently 
accompanied  by  directions  for  the  performance  of  ceremonies 
and  the  observance  of  certain  rites.  The  paragraphs  containing 
these  directions  are  separated  from  the  incantations  by  lines 
ruled  on  the  clay  by  the  scribe  and  they  generally  commence 
with  the  words  ipu$  annam  "Do  the  following"2.  Their  length 
varies  considerably,  ranging  from  rubrics  of  one  line  to  sections 
of  fifteen  lines.  The  rubric  of  one  line  which  is  characteristic 
of  the  "Prayers  of  the  Lifting  of  the  Hand"  is  generally  found 
closely  following  the  title  of  the  prayer,  from  which  it  is  divided 
by  a  line  on  the  clay:  — 


1  Cf.  ZIMMERN,    Weiteres  zur  babylonischen  Metnkt  ZA  X,  pp.  I  ff. 

2  Cf.  infra,   p.  19. 


XXVIII  INTRODUCTION. 


It  will  be  seen  that  after  the  introductory  phrase  the  rubric 
refers  to  two  alternative  rites  which  are  to  be  performed  in 
connection  with  the  recital  of  the  prayer1.  On  one  occasion2 
we  find  this  rubric  directly  following  the  incantation,  and  it  is 
there  expanded  into  two  lines  by  the  additional  injunction  that 
the  incantation  is  to  be  recited  before  Sibziana,  an  addition 
rendered  necessary  by  the  omission  of  the  title. 

Ceremonial  sections  of  two  lines  are  not  uncommon.  They 
are  sometimes  combined  with  the  title  which  they  follow  with- 
out a  break3,  containing  two  or  three  directions  to  the  effect 
that  incense  is  to  be  set  before  the  god  or  goddess,  a  libation 
to  be  offered,  and  the  incantation  to  be  recited  so  many  times; 
or  they  may  follow  the  title  from  which  they  are  divided  by  a 
division -line4;  or  finally  they  may  follow  a  longer  section  of 
ceremonies  when  they  contain  additional  rites  to  be  performed 
in  connection  with  those  that  precede  them5.  Sections  of  three 
lines,  which  are  also  common,  generally  follow  the  title6,  though 
they  are  sometimes  found  in  combination  with  longer  ceremonial 
sections7.  Not  so  common  are  sections  of  four  lines,  which 
follow  the  title  and  are  not  found  in  connection  with  other 
sections8.  The  longer  sections  of  five9,  six10,  seven11,  ten12, 
fourteen13,  and  fifteen14  lines  give  directions  for  offerings  in 


1  See  below  p.  Ji  {.,  where  the  rubric  is  more  fully  discussed  and  a  list  of 
the  passages  given  where  it  occurs. 

2  No.  52,  1.  3  f. 

3  Nos.  2,  1.  9  f.;  6,  1.  95  f.;  8,  1.  20  f. 

4  Nos.  13,  1.  13  f.;   14,  1.  12  f. 
•>  No.  12,  11.  101  f.,   103  f. 

6  Nos.  21,  11.  73  ff.;  31,  11.  8ff.;  32,  11.  38".;  36,  11.  ^  ff.;  44,  11.  3  ff. 

'  Nos.  21,  11.  25  ff.;   33,   11.  44  ff. 

8  Nos.  II,  11.  42  ff.;  22,  11.  31  ff. 

9  Nos.  12,  11.  96  ff.;  33,  11.  39  ff. 

10  Nos.  12,  11.  115  ff  ;   15,  11.  i8ff.;  21,  11.  28  ff. 

11  Nos.  26,  11.  4ff.;  51,  11.  10  ff. 

12  No.  30,  11.  20  ff. 
i»  No.  40,  11.  3  ff. 
14  No.  12,  11.  2ff. 


INTRODUCTION.  XXIX 

greater  detail,  while  some1  cannot  be  classified  as  in  each  case 
only  the  beginning4  has  been  preserved. 

By  far  the  commonest  injunction  in  these  ceremonial  sec- 
tions is  one  to  the  effect  that  the  recital  of  the  incantation  is 
to  be  accompanied  by  the  burning  of  incense.  The  formula 

usually  reads   "a  censer  of  incense  before  the  god shalt 

thou  set",  though  sometimes  the  kind  of  incense  to  be  employed 
is  specified,  and  at  other  times  the  wood  is  mentioned,  from 
which,  when  lighted,  the  censers  are  to  be  kindled.  Certain 
drink-offerings  and  libations  are  also  of  common  occurrence. 
It  is  from  the  longer  sections,  however,  that  we  learn  in  greater 
detail  the  objects  suitable  for  offering  to  a  god.  Water,  honey, 
and  butter  are  frequently  mentioned  together  in  the  lists  of 
offerings;  directions  occur  for  laying  before  the  god  dates, 
garlic,  corn  and  grain,  while  various  flowers,  plants  and  herbs 
play  a  conspicuous  part  both  in  the  offerings  and  the  ritual. 
Offerings  of  various  kinds  of  flesh  are  sometimes  specified,  while 
fragments  of  gold,  lapis-lazuli,  alabaster  etc.  might  be  presented 
by  the  suppliant.  Pure  water  and  oil  are  constantly  mentioned 
in  the  ceremonial  sections;  the  former  might  be  simply  offered 
in  a  vessel  before  the  god,  or  used  for  sprinkling  a  green  bough 
in  his  presence;  the  latter  might  also  form  the  subject  of  an 
offering,  or  be  used  for  anointing,  or  be  placed  in  an  open 
vessel  into  which  various  objects  were  thrown.  In  No.  n,  for 
example,  the  seed  of  the  ma$tafca£-p\ant  is  ordered  to  be  cast 
into  oil,  while  in  No.  12  the  priest  is  to  place  oil  in  a  vessel 
of  ttr&arinnu-wood  and  then  cast  into  it  fragments  of  plaster, 
gold,  the  binu- plant,  the  maStaJkat-plsint,  and  other  plants  and 
herbs.  When  the  rite  of  casting  things  into  oil  is  to  be  per- 
formed, the  amount  of  oil  to  be  used  is  generally  mentioned, 
and  sometimes  the  kind  of  oil  to  be  employed.  The  rite  of  the 
knotted  cord2  frequently  accompanies  the  "Prayers  of  the  Lift- 
ing of  the  Hand",  and  on  one  occasion  the  rite  is  followed 
by  a  magical  formula;  in  No.  12,  a  tablet  intended  for  the  use 
of  a  sick  man,  when  the  priest  loosens  the  knot  he  is  to  utter 
the  words  la  umairanni,  after  which  the  sick  man  is  to  return 


1  Nos.  15,  11.  24  ff.;   17,  11.  6  ff.;  23,  11.  7  ff.;  24,  11.  5  ff.;  25,  11.  6  ff. 

2  See  below,  p.  7 1  f. 

e 


XXX  INTRODUCTION. 

to  his  house  without  looking  backward.  The  occasions  on 
which  the  tablets  might  be  used  are  sometimes  specified  in  the 
ceremonial  sections;  Nos.  12  and  31,  for  instance,  are  to  be 
used  at  night,  No.  30  on  a  favourable  day,  No.  24  during  a 
certain  phase  of  the  moon,  and  No.  2 1  at  night  when  the  wind 
is  in  a  certain  quarter.  The  use  of  the  majority  of  the  tablets, 
however,  appears  to  have  been  unrestricted. 

It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  that  the  ceremonies  which  ac- 
company the  "Prayers  of  the  Lifting  of  the  Hand"  in  general 
character  resemble  those  which  occur  on  other  classes  of  cere- 
monial and  religious  texts.  They  were  not  merely  symbols, 
but  were  regarded  as  potent  in  themselves,  and,  as  the  efficacy 
of  an  incantation  depended  on  its  correct  recital,  so  their  power 
resulted  from  a  scrupulous  performance  of  each  detail.  They 
are,  with  one  exception,  written  after  the  prayer  or  incantation 
they  accompany,  but  in  most  cases  they  describe  rites  which 
are  to  be  performed  before  the  recitation  of  the  prayer.  The 
god  or  goddess  must  be  propitiated  by  the  necessary  gifts 
before  the  suppliant  is  in  a  position  to  make  his  appeal  in  the 
divine  presence;  the  altar  must  be  loaded  with  offerings  and 
the  censers  lighted  before  the  words  of  the  incantation  can  take 
effect. 


LIST  OF  TABLETS. 


No. 

I.  PRAYERS   ADDRESSED  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES:  — 

1.  Sin,  IStar  and  TaSmitu             i 

2.  Ninib,  TaSmitu  and  another  goddess             ...  2 

3.  Ninib  and  Damkina        3 

4.  la,  Damkina  and  Ba'u 4 

5.  Di-kud  and  IStar            5 

6.  Anu,  Nusku,  Sin,  Ba'u  and  SamaS 6 

7.  Bilit  ili,  ISfoara  and  a  god        7 

8.  I§tar  and  certain  stars 8 

9.  Marduk  and   Bilit  ili      9 

10.  Marduk  and  SamaS        10 

II.  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS:  — 

1.  Marduk n  — 18 

2.  Bil             19 

3.  Ramman                20 — 21 

4.  Nabti         22 

5-  Sin             23—26 

6.  Nirgal        27 — 28 

III.  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODDESSES:  — 

1.  £a-la         29 

2.  IStar          30 — 32 

3.  TaSmitu 33 

4.  Mi-mi        34 

5-  Bilit           35 

IV.  PRAYERS     ADDRESSED    TO    DEITIES    WHOSE    NAMES 

HAVE  NOT  BEEN  PRESERVED 3°— 45 

V.  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  ASTRAL  DEITIES:  — 

1.  MuStabarru-mutelnu         46 

2.  Mul-mul 47—48 

3.  Kak-si-di              49 

4.  Sibziana 5°-~52 

VI.  PRAYERS  AGAINST  THE  EVILS  ATTENDING  AN  ECLIPSE 

OF  THE  MOON          53~ 62 


Transliteration  Translations 
and  Notes. 

Section  I. 
Prayers   addressed  to   Groups   of  Deities. 

The  plan  on  which  the  following"  pages  have  been  arranged 
requires  perhaps  a  word  of  explanation.  The  tablets  are  num- 
bered and  are  here  treated  in  the  same  order  as  they  occur 
in  the  plates  at  the  end  of  the  volume.  I  have  not  divided 
the  Transliteration,  Translations  and  Notes  into  three  separate 
Sections,  as  I  believe  the  theoretical  simplicity  of  such  an  ar- 
rangement is  purchased  at  a  great  practical  disadvantage,  the 
constant  reference  from  one  part  of  the  book  to  another  tend- 
ing rather  to  weary  than  assist  the  reader.  To  reduce  this 
inconvenience  as  far  as  possible  I  have  collected  together  all 
the  matter  referring  to  each  tablet.  A  full  transliteration  of 
the  text  is  first  given  which  is  followed  by  a  description  and 
translation  of  the  prayers,  incantations  and  ceremonies  that  it 
contains.  The  notes  follow  the  translation,  the  numbers  at  the 
head  of  each  paragraph  referring  to  the  line  of  the  text  with 
which  the  note  in  question  deals. 

In  the  Transliteration  those  portions  of  the  text  that  have 
been  restored  are  placed  within  square  brackets,  while  the  signs 
within  round  brackets  always  denote  phonetic  complements. 
Variant  readings  are  given  at  the  foot  of  the  page,  the  dupli- 
cate tablets  being  cited  by  the  capitals  A,  B,  C  etc.,  the  regis- 
tration numbers  of  which  are  in  each  case  given  in  the  first 

B 


2  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

footnote  to  the  cuneiform  text.  In  transliterating  a  well  pre- 
served tablet  I  have  commenced  a  fresh  line  with  each  line  of 
the  text  and  have  endeavoured  to  retain  as  far  as  possible  the 
original  spacing  and  arrangement  of  the  words  as  they  stand 
on  the  tablet  itself.  As  however  in  the  case  of  broken  tablets 
such  an  arrangement  would  lead  to  a  considerable  waste  of 
space,  I  have  let  the  transliteration  of  those  tablets  run  on 
continuously,  putting  between  each  line  a  space  of  five  dots  if 
only  one  character  is  missing  and  ten  dots  to  indicate  a  gap 
of  two  or  more  characters.  When  the  text  of  such  a  broken 
or  badly  preserved  tablet  is  insufficient  to  furnish  an  intelligible 
translation  I  have  abstained  from  attempting  one ;  in  every  case 
however  a  transliteration  of  the  text  is  given ,  each  word  of 
which  is  cited  in  the  Vocabulary. 

The  texts  have  been  divided  into  Sections,  which  are 
to  some  extent  explained  by  their  titles.  The  first  Section, 
consisting  of  Nos.  i  — 10,  is  composed  of  tablets  on  each  of 
which  are  inscribed  separate  prayers  to  two  or  more  deities. 
In  some  cases  (Nos.  3,  5  and  9)  there  remain  prayers  ad- 
dressed only  to  one  god  and  goddess  but  from  No.  6  it  would 
appear  probable  that  originally  four  or  five  deities  shared  the 
prayers  inscribed  on  each  of  these  tablets.  It  is  possible  that 
some  fragmentary  texts,  at  present  containing  a  single  prayer 
or  incantation  and  therefore  classified  under  Sections  II  and  III, 
formed  part  of  a  large  tablet  which  when  complete  contained 
addresses  to  various  deities,  and  which  would  accordingly  fall 
under  the  present  heading.  The  fact  however  that  such  frag- 
ments present  no  distinctive  characteristic  by  which  they  may 
be  detected  renders  hazardous  any  attempt  at  separating  them 
from  the  texts  addressed  solely  to  one  god  or  goddess.  Under 
these  circumstances  the  only  practicable  course  was  to  ignore 
the  possibility  of  their  belonging  to  the  first  section  and  to 
classify  them  according  to  their  present  contents.1 


1  For  a  fuller  discussion  of  the  classification   of  the  texts   cf.  Introduction. 


PRAYER  TO  THE  MOON-GOD  ETC. 


No.  1. 

Transliteration. 

Obv. 

1.  siptu  llu  Sin  ll"Nannaru  ru-su-bu  u- 

2.  iluSin  id-dis-su-u  mu-nam-mir 

3.  sd-ki-in  na-mir-ti  a-na  nisi*1 

4.  ana  nisi*1  sal-mat  kakkadu  uS-su-ru  sa- 

5.  nam-rat     urru-ka  ina  samt-i 

6.  sar-fyat       di-pa-ra-ka  ktma  tluGibil 

7.  ma-lu-u     nam-ri-ru-ka  irsita(ta)        rapasta  ( ) 

8.  sar-fya  nisi^1  uk-ta-sa-ra  ana  a-ma-ri-ka 

g.  tluA-nim  samt-i  Sa  la  i-lam-ma-du        mi-lik-su  ma- 

10.  sii-tu-rat  urru-ka  kima  tluSamas        bu-uk-ri- 

1 1 .  kan-su  pani-ka  Hani*1  rabuti^1  purus  matati  sakin(in)  ina  pani-ka 

12.  ina  lumun  lluatalt  tluSin  sa  ina  arj}i pulani ' umi pulani isakna(na) 

13.  lumun  idatipl  ITLMIS  limniti^1  la  tabati^1  sa  ina  ikalli-ya  u 

mati-ya  ibasa-a 

14.  Hani*1  rabuti^1  i-sal-lu-ka-ma  tanadin(in)  mil-ka 

15.  izzizu  pu-fyur-su-nu  us-ta-mu-u  ina  sapli-ka 

1 6.  tluSin  su-pu-u  sa  I.KUR  i-sal-lu-ka-ma  ta-mit  Hani*1  tanadin(in) 

17.  bubbulum  u-um  ta-mit-ti-ka  pi-ris-ti  ilanipl  rabuti[^1] 

1 8.  umu  XXXKAN  i-sin-na-ka  it-urn  ta-sil-ti  ilu-ti-[ka] 

19.  lluNamrasit   i-muk  la  sa-na-an   sa   la  i-lam-ma-du   mi-lik-su 

ma- 

20.  as-ruk-ka  si-rik  musi  lallartu  ak-ki-ka  ri-is-ta-a  si-kar 

2 1 .  kan-sa-ku         az-za-az         a-si-  -ka  ka- 

22.  ka-sa  dum-ki  u  mi-sa-ri  sukun(un)  ili-[ya] 

23.  ili-ya  u  ll"istart  $d  is-tu  u-um  ma-du-ti  is-bu-su 

24.  ina  kit-ti  u  misari  lis-li-mu  itti-ya  ^   ur-hi  lid-mi-ik   bad-i$ 

ni- 

25.  u-ma--ir-ma         iluZA.GAR        ilu  sa  Sunati[*1] 

26.  ina  sat  musi  KAB.MIS  dr-ni-ya  lu-us-mi  sir-ti  lu-ta- 

27.  ana  da-ra-ti          lud-lul          dA-li-li-[ka] 

28.  INIM.INIM.MA          SU  1L.LA          il"Sin.[KAN] 

29.  Siptu  ka-rid-tul  iluls-tar  ka-nu-ut  i-[la-a-ti] 

1  B  If a-r id-turn. 

Ba 


4  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

30.  DI.BAR1  Sami-i  u  irsiti(ti)2  Sa-ru-ru  kibrati[*1] '* 

3, -tn-mn-na*  bu-uk-[rat]  {l"Sin  i-lit-tijl«NIN.[GAL] 

32 -mat*  dar-ri  [su-mt-i]  ku-ra-di^  il"SamaS 

33.  [iluls-tar]  a-nu-[ti-ma^  Sami-i]  ti-tii-il-[li]* 

34.  [. iluBU  [ma-li-ki  ta-di-]im-mi  da- 

35.  /"....  .-mu]  ba-an-[tu? « -tu  dan- 


Rev. 

36.  [.  .....  pl  ru-ltu-tu  tu-Sak]-na  panu-[kt     .....  .....  J 

37.  Vl*iTa$-mi-tum  ilat(at)^  su-pi  u  da-di  bi-lit  ........... 

38.  [anaj-ku  pulanu  apil  pulani  Sa  ilu-Su  pulanu  tluistar-su  pu- 

la  n  itu  m[(tu  m)] 

39.  ina    lumun    iluatali    iluSin    Sa    ina    ar&    pulani   umi   pulani 

isakna[(na)] 

40.  lumun  idatit1  ITLMIS  limniti*'1  la  tabati^1  $a  ina  ikalli-ya  u 

mati-a  ibasa-[a] 

41.  asbur-ki          imid-ki          Si-mi-i          a-ra-ti™ 

42.  a-na    ilu  Nabii   fya-*-i-ri-ki™    btlu    aSaridu    mart   riS-ti-i  sa 

I.SAG.ILA  a-bu-ti  sab-[ti-ma] 

43.  li's-mi  zik-riina  ki-bit  pi-ki  £  lil-ki  un-ni-ni-ya  lil-ma-da  su-pi-ya 

44.  ina  zik-ri-su  kabti(ti)  ilu  u  lluistar  lislimu(mu)  itti-ya 

45.  li-in-ni-is-si  mursu  Sa  zumri-yd  £  li-td-kil  ta-ni-bu  Sa  Siri^l-[ya] 

46.  lit-ta-bil  aSakku  Sa  buanipl-[ya] 
47-  Hp-pa-aS-ru  imti*1  imti^1  imtipl  Sa  ibaSu-u  ili-ya 

48.  li-in-ni-is-si          ma-mit™  li-ta-kil^  ni-  ...... 

49.  lit-lu-ud  iluNAM.TAR^  li-sal-    irat-su  £  ina  pi-ki^  liS-Sa-kin 

ba-ni-ti 

50.  ilu  «l6  Sarru  lik-bu-u  damikti(ti)  ina  ki-bit-ki  sir-ti  sa  ul  uttak- 

kamm(rum)  I7 

51.  u  an-ni-ki  ki-nim  Sa  ul  inu-u  iln  Tas-mi-tum 


52.  INIM.INIM.MA          SU  IL.LA          iluTaS-mi-tum.KAN 

53.  siptu  bilu  muS-ti-Sir  kis-sat  ni$tpl  gi-mir  nab-ni-ti 

54.  duppu  _  KAN  bit  rim-ki  ikal  miluAssur-ban-apli  etc. 


1  B -tu.      2  B  ir$itim(tim).      3  B  la-ru-ur  kib-ra-a-tt.      4  B -m- 

nin-ni.        5    B -am-ti.        6   B  ku-ra-du.        7    B  a-na-ti-ma.        8    B  ta-bi-il-li. 

9  C  i-lat.       10   C  as-jiur-kt  Ulti-ya  Si-mi-i  su-[pi-ya].        n   C  ha-i-ri-ki.       12   C  ma- 

mi-tu.         ™    C  lit- l*    C gallu.          15    C  [a-na]  ntiiP1 

a-pa-a-ti.       ™    C  u.        "    c  uttakkaru(ru) .       ™    C  bi-il-tum. 


PRAYER  TO  THE  MOON-GOD  ETC.  5 

No.  i  (K  155)  consists  of  the  upper  part  of  a  large  tablet 
of  which  fully  half  has  been  broken  away.  The  text  in  its 
present  condition  falls  into  three  main  sections:  (a)  11.  i — 27, 
a  prayer  to  Sin  on  the  occasion  of  an  eclipse  of  the  moon, 
(b)  11.  29  —  35,  the  opening  lines  of  a  prayer  to  Istar,  and  (c) 
11.  36 — 51,  the  conclusion  of  a  prayer  to  TaSmitu  which  like  (a) 
is  directed  against  the  evils  resulting  from  a  lunar  eclipse. 
The  prayer  to  Sin  (a)  commences  with  an  address  to  the  god 
describing  his  power  and  attributes.  LI.  12  and  13  state  the 
occasion  of  the  prayer:  an  eclipse  of  the  moon  has  taken  place 
bringing  evil  on  the  land  of  Assyria  and  the  palace  of  the  king 
who  therefore  appeals  to  the  god  of  heaven  and  to  the  Moon- 
god  himself,  whose  prerogative  it  is  to  give  an  oracle  of  the 
great  gods  when  they  so  desire. 

Translation. 

1.  O  Sin\    O  Nannar\    mighty  one 

2.  O  Sin,  who  art  unique,  thou  that  brightenest 

3.  That  givest  light  unto  the  nations 

4.  That  unto  the  black-headed  race  art  favourable 

5.  Bright  is  thy  light,  in  heaven 

6.  Brilliant  is  thy  torch,  like  the  Fire-god 

7.  Thy  brightness  fills  the  broad  earth ! 

8.  The  brightness   of  the  nation   he  gathers,   in  thy  sight  .  .  . 

9.  O  Ami  of  the  sky,  whose  purpose  no  man  learns! 

10.  Overwhelming  is  thy  light  like  the  Sun-god  [thy?]  first-born! 

11.  Before  thy  face  the  great  gods  bow  down,    the  fate  of  the 

world  is  set  before  thee! 

12.  In   the   evil   of  an   eclipse   of  the  Moon  which  in  such  and 
such  a  month  on  such  and  such  a,  day  has  taken  place, 

13.  In  the  evil  of  the  powers,  of  the  portents,  evil  and  not  good, 

which  are  in  my  palace  and  my  land, 

14.  The  great  gods  beseech  thee  and  thou  givest  counsel! 

15.  They  take  their  stand  all  of  them,  they  petition  at  thy  feet! 

1 6.  O  Sin,    glorious    one    of  tknr\    they  beseech  thee  and  thou 

givest  the  oracle  of  the  gods! 

17.  The  end  of  the  month  is  the  day  of  thy  oracle,  the  decision 

of  the  great  gods; 


6  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

1 8.  The  thirtieth   day  is  thy  festival,   a  day   of  prayer  to  thy 

divinity! 

19.  O  God  of  the  New  Moon,  in  might  unrivalled,  whose  purpose 

no  man  learns, 

20.  I  have  poured  thee  a  libation   of  the  night  (with)   wailing, 
I  have  offered  thee  (with)  shouts  of  joy  a  drink  offering  of  .  . 

21.  I  am  bowed  down!    I  have  taken  my  stand!    I  have  sought 

for  thee! 

22.  Do  thou  set  favour  and  righteousness  upon  me! 

23.  May  my  god  and  my  goddess,  who  for  long  have  been'  angry 

with  me, 

24.  In  righteousness  and  justice  deal  graciously  with  me!     Let 

my  way  be  propitious,  with  joy 

25.  And  ZA.GAR,  the  god  of  dreams  hath  sent, 

26.  In    the    night    season my    sin    may    I    hear    my 

iniquity  may 

27.  For  ever  may  I  bow  myself  in  humility  before  thee! 

Of  (b]  the  prayer  to  Is  tar  only  a  few  lines  have  been  pre- 
served containing  the  invocation  of  the  goddess.  She  is  addressed 
as:  "Istar  the  heroine,  strong  among  goddesses!  Lady(?)  of 

heaven  and  earth,  the  splendour  of  the  four  quarters! 

the  first-born  of  Sin,   offspring  of  Ningal\ O  I  star  ^ 

over  these  heavens  dost  thou  rule."  The  reverse  of  the  tablet 
(c)  consists  of  the  last  fifteen  lines  of  a  prayer  to  Tasmttu,  in 
which  the  goddess  is  petitioned  to  intercede  with  her  husband 
the  god  Nabu  and  to  induce  him  to  remove  the  sickness  and 
enchantments  caused  by  the  Moon's  eclipse.  After  addressing 
the  goddess  by  name  her  suppliant  continues:  - 

38.  I  so  and  so,    son  of  so  and  so,    whose  god   is  so  and  so, 

whose  goddess  is  so  and  so, 

39.  In  the  evil  of  an  eclipse  of  the  Moon,    which  in  such  and 
such  a  month  on  such  and  such  a  day  has   taken  place 

40.  In  the  evil  of  the  powers,  of  the  portents,  evil  and  not  good, 

which  are  in  my  palace  and  my  land, 

41.  Have  turned  towards  thee!    I  have  established  thee!    Listen 

to  the  incantation! 

42.  Before  Nabu  thy  spouse,  the  lord,  the  prince,  the  first-born 

son  of  hagila,  intercede  for  me! 


PRAYER  TO  THE  MOON-GOD  ETC.  7 

43.  May  he  hearken  to  my  cry  at  the  word  of  thy  mouth;  may 

he  remove  my  sighing,  may  he  learn  my  supplication! 

44.  At  his  mighty  word  may  god  and  goddess  deal  graciously 

with  me! 

45.  May    the    sickness    of  my   body   be   torn    away;    may   the 

groaning  of  my  flesh  be  consumed! 

46.  May  the  consumption  of  my  muscles  be  removed! 

47.  May  the  poisons  that  are  upon  me  be  loosened! 

48.  May  the  ban  be  torn  away,  may  the be  consumed! 

49.  May ;  at  thy  command  may  mercy  be  established! 

50.  May  god  and  king  ordain  favour  at  thy  mighty  command 

that  is  not  altered 

51.  And  thy  true  mercy  that  changes  not,  O  lady   TaSmztu\ 

The  catch-line  reads:  "O  lord,  that  directest  the  multitude 
of  the  peoples,  the  whole  of  creation!" 

i.  The  word  ni-Su-bu  (=  ruSubii),  if  my  reading  is  correct, 

i  ' ' 

is  an  adj.  of  the  form  Uj*s,  the  usual  forms  of  the  word  being 

rasbu  and  raStibii.  The  character,  however,  which  I  read  as 
»FJ  is  almost  obliterated  and  might  possibly  be  read  ^|- 

6.  sara^u  is  proved  by  JENSEN  to  have  the  meaning  "to 
shine,  be  bright";  cf.  Kosmologie  p.  105  f. ,  where  the  present 
passage  is  quoted  from  STRASSMAIER,  A.  F.,  no.  8063.  For  the 
meaning  of  diparu  "torch",  cf.  JENSEN,  ZK,  II,  p.  53,  and  ZIMMERN, 
EPS,  p.  47- 

Q.  itia-[am-ma-an]  is  the  probable  restoration  of  the  end 
of  this  line  and  of  1.  19.  From  the  end  of  1.  10  only  one  char- 
acter appears  to  be  missing ;  bu-uk-ri-[ka]  would  therefore  be 
a  possible  restoration. 

11.  ina  does  not  occur  in  the  text  with  the  first  pani-ka 
as  we  might  be  led  to  expect  from  the  latter  half  of  the  line: 
for  a  similar  use  of  panu  without  the  preposition  cf.  IV  R  59 
[66],  no.  2,  rev.  1.  18,  pani-ka  lu-kir,  "in  thy  sight  may  I  be 
precious". 

1 2  f.  The  formula  contained  in  these  two  lines,  stating  the 
occasion  of  the  prayer,  is  of  frequent  occurrence  in  these  texts 
(cf.  Introduction}.  The  first  half  of  the  second  line,  which  in 
several  tablets  forms  a  line  by  itself,  is  in  apposition  to  ina 


8  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

lumun  il"atalt  iluSin,  as  indicated  in  my  translation,  and  the 
whole  formula,  which  does  not  represent  a  complete  sentence 
in  itself,  acts  merely  as  an  introduction  to  the  sentence  that 
follows  it.  The  only  difficulty  in  the  two  lines  is  in  connection 

with  the  phrase  S^J  Jw*-*-  ^l^^CITTT  1*^*^-  These  two 
ideograms  occur  together  not  only  in  the  formula  under  dis- 
cussion but  are  occasionally  to  be  met  with  in  prayers  incan- 
tatious  etc.,  and  whenever  they  so  occur  they  are  never  joined 
by  a  copula  but  always  stand  in  apposition  to  one  another  as 
in  the  present  passage,  cf.  No.  12,  1.  64  ai  idifya-a  lumun  su- 
nati*1  ID.MIS  ITLMIS  sa  sami-i  u  irsitim(tim) ,  HAUPT'S  ASKT, 
No.  7,  Rev.  1.  4  f.  ina  lumun  ID. M  IN. MIS  ITLMIS  Si-kin  u$urti*1, 
1.  7  f.  as-sum  lumun  ID. MIS  177. MIS  limmti*1  sa  ina  btti-ya  ba- 
sapl-ma  pal-fya-ku ,  and  1.  9  f .  ina  lumun  ID.MIS  ITLMIS  su-ti- 
ka-an-ni-ma ,  K  6343  ,  1.  6  ID.MIS  ITLMIS  limmti*1  la  tabati, 
K  8005  -j-  K  8845  -|~  K  8941,  a  very  fragmentary  prayer  of 
Assurbanipal  formed  from  three  pieces  I  have  lately  joined,  in 
1.3  of  which  the  phrase  ID.MIS  ITLMIS  occurs,  IV  R  17, 
Rev.  1.  15  f.  mu-pa-aS-Sir  NAM.BUL.BLI  ID.MIS  ITLMIS  lim- 
mtit1 ,  probably  IV  R  60  [67],  Rev.  1.  34  [ID]. MIS  1TL MlS 
BAR.MIS  ana  sarri  u  mati-su  basat>l-a ,  etc.  More  commonly 

however  the  ideogram  \|^t^||  |  is  found  by  itself,  cf.  No.  12, 
1.  65  lumun  IT1  ali  u  mati  ai  iksudanni(ni)  yd-si,  the  passages 
quoted  from  bilingual  incantations  in  BRUNNOW'S  List,  no.  9429, 

IV  R  56  [63],  Col.  II,  i  \b  iluSin mu-kal-lim  ITLMIS, 

K  9006,  1.  5  777  limuttu  sa  ina  su-pu-ri-ya,  K  9594,  1.  2  (pub- 
lished and  transliterated  by  BRUNNOW,  ZA  IV,  pp.  233,  249), 
79  —  7  —  8,  52  a  corner  of  an  incantation  in  11.  3  —  6  of  which 

the  suppliant  prays  for  help  ina  lumun  1TI ina  lumun 

di-bu ina  lumun  asakkti ina  lumun  fyu-us-[su?1, 

the  fragmentary  prayer  82—3  —  23,  57  Rev.  1.  4 ,  K  6187,  a 
Babylonian  ceremonial  text  for  obtaining  magical  results  from 
stones  (cf.  BEZOLD,  Catalogue,  p.  769),  in  Col,  III  of  which  the 
I TI  limuttu (tu)  is  constantly  mentioned,  K  3460,  Col.  I  (cf.  op.  cit. 
P- 535),  79  —  7—8,  115,  I-  16,  Bu.  91— 5  — 9,  14,  1.  10  an  astro- 
logical report  from  IstarSumtris,  K  2 1  (cf.  R.  F.  HARPER,  Assy- 
rian and  Babylonian  Letters ,  Pt.  I,  p.  49)  a  letter  from  Nabu- 
nadinsum  to  the  king  which  concludes  (1.  1 2  ff.)  :  u  ina  Hi  it-tt 
an-ni-ti  sarru  bi-ili -3U  /«-.  .  id-da-ab-bu-ub 


THE  ECLIPSE-FORMULA.  9 

lluBil  u  tluNabu  am-mar  ITI  si-tu-uk-fci  ma-su  a-na  sarru  bili-yd 
u-si-tu-uk-ku  sarru  bi-ili  lu  la  i-pa-lafy,  K  168,  Obv.  1.  i6f.  (a  letter, 
published  by  WINKLER,  Keilschriftt.il,  Leipzig,  1893,  p.  28),  etc. 
Though  the  interpretation  of  the  ideogram  777  is  entirely  depen- 
dent on  the  context  of  the  passages  where  it  occurs,  there  is 
not  much  doubt  as  to  its  meaning.  The  word  is  generally 
rendered  by  some  synonym  of  "sign"  or  "omen"  (cf.  LENORMANT, 
Etudes  accadiennes ,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  136  f. ,  DELITZSCH,  WB,  p.  169, 
SAYCE,  Hibbert  Lectures,  pp.  449,  459,  512,  516,  538,  JENSEN  in 
SCHRADER'S  Keilins.  Bibl.,  Vol.11,  pp.  249,  253,  etc.),  though 
in  ZK\,  p.  303  JENSEN  assigned  to  it  the  active  meaning  "power, 
might  (ops)".  That  the  former  is  the  more  correct  rendering 
of  the  two  is  I  think  put  beyond  a  doubt  by  a  passage  occurring 
in  a  letter  (K  1 12),  the  text  of  which  has  recently  been  published 
by  R.  F.  HARPER,  Assyrian  and  Babylonian  Letters,  Pt.  II,  p.  228, 
London  1894.  The  first  fifteen  lines  of  this  letter  read:  a-na  amik- 
karu  bili-ya  arad-ka  m  lluNabu-zir-isir  lu  sulmu(mu)  a-na  bili-ya 
iluNabu  u  tluMarduk  a-na  bili-ya  (5)  sanati*1  ma-' -da- ft  lik-ru-bn 

v  ^W    ^     ^ 

ITI. MIS  lu-u  sa  samt-i  lu  sa  irsitim(tim)  lu-u  sd  *~<  >-|  »^<  am-mar 
lim-na-ni  a-sa-tar  ina  ba-at-ta-ta-ai  ma-fyar  lluSamas  u-sa-ad-bi- 
ib-su-nu  (10)  ina  karan  sutii-u  ina  mi*1  rimki  ina  sanini^1  pissati^1- 
$u  amiluti^1  (?)  am-mu-ti  u-sa-ab-Si-il  u-sa-kil-su-nu  sar  pu-n-lfi 
$a  m&tAkkadukl  1TI.MIS  us-tafy-ra-an-ni  i-si-si  (15)  ina-a  mi-nu-u 

ITI Though  the  interpretation  of  this  text  is  in  places 

exceedingly  obscure  the  general  drift  of  the  letter  is  clear 
enough.  In  consequence  of  enquiries  concerning  the  777  Nabu- 
zirisir  takes  the  necessary  observations  and  returns  his  report 
to  an  official  styled  the  ikkaru.  After  the  usual  salutations  he 
stales  that  he  has  observed  "the  777,  whether  of  the  sky,  or 

of  the  earth,  or  of  the  +-<  £|  £l^"  (possibly  an  exhaustive 
formula),  and  that  they  are  unfavourable;  and  probably  in 
consequence  of  this  he  has  performed  certain  rites  and  cere- 
monies which  he  proceeds  to  narrate.  It  is  obvious  that  the 
only  possible  meaning  for  777  in  this  passage  is  "sign"  or 
"portent",  a  rendering  that  suits  all  other  passages  in  which 
I  have  met  the  word  including  the  one  already  referred  to  as 
having  been  somewhat  differently  translated  by  JENSEN.'  That 

1   Prof.  BEZOLD  has  called  ray  attention  to  the  use  of  777  in  the  colophon 

C 


10  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

the  word  is  in  itself  colourless  taking  a  favourable  or  un- 
favourable meaning  from  its  context  is  suggested  by  the 
qualifying  phrase  limntli*1  la  tabati*1  inserted  in  the  formula 
under  discussion,  and  this  is  put  beyond  a  doubt  by  Rm.  136, 
a  fragment  of  an  omen  tablet,  in  11.  13  and  16  of  which  we 
find  the  phrase  777  damiktim[(tim?)]  as  well  as  777  limuttim(tim). 
It  is  natural  however  that  in  prayers  for  help  or  deliverance  777 
should  generally  occur  in  an  unfavourable  sense. 

But  while  we  can  assign  a  meaning  to  the  ideogram  with 
something  like  certainty,  we  do  not  meet  with  the  same  success 
when  we  look  for  its  Semitic  equivalent.  DELITZSCH  indeed  in 
AL3,  p.  30,  no.  256  suggests  a  rendering  takiltuij)  and  he  is 
followed  by  LEHMANN  in  his  explanation  of  K  168,  11.  14  and  16 
(cf.  SamaSSumukin,  p.  76  f.),  in  which  he  transliterates  777  with 
the  plural-sign  as  taklati,  tak-li-ta-su-nu  occurring  in  close 
connection  two  lines  above.  But  against  this  rendering  is  to 
be  urged  the  fact  that  wherever  the  sign  occurs  in  bilingual 
incantations  it  is,  as  for  as  I  know,  rendered  not  by  takiltu 
but  by  itlu.  As  however  I  do  not  know  on  what  grounds 
DELITZSCH  bases  his  identification  of  the  ideogram  with  takiltu, 
I  have  throughout  my  transliteration  rendered  the  word  by 
777,  thus  leaving  the  question  in  abeyance. 

The  explanation  of  ID  is  also  conjectural.  Though  ID. MIS 
and  ITI.MIS  are  in  apposition  it  does  not  follow  that  they  are 
synonymous,  as  they  are  taken  by  LENORMANT,  La  Magie,  p.  164 
and  by  SAYCE,  Hibbert  Lectures,  pp.  173  and  538.  It  appears  to 
me  that  DELITZSCH  has  given  the  true  explanation  of  the  word 
in  his  translation  of  the  sentence  as-Sum  lumun  ID. MI  ITI.MIS 
limniti*1  $a  ina  biti-ya  ba$a?l-ma,  to  which  reference  has  already 
been  made  and  which  he  renders:  "von  wegen  (assum)  der  bosen 
Machte,  der  bosen  Zeichen,  die  in  meinem  Hause  sind"  (cf.  WB, 
p.  169).  Here  apparently  he  renders  77?  by  its  most  common 
equi valient  idu,  the  plural  of  which  constantly  occurs  in  the 
sense  of  "forces,  powers",  and  this  view  is  supported  by  the 


of  K  8713,  where  the  word  apparently  refers  to  and  should  be  rendered  by  "astro- 
logical forecasts".  I  think  however  that  the  more  general  rendering  "portent", 
which  would  of  course  include  the  special  meaning  attaching  to  the  word  in 
this  tablet,  is  better  suited  to  many  of  the  other  passages  in  which  ITI  is  to  be 
found;  see  especially  IV  R  3,  Col.  I,  1.  29  f. 


THE  ECLIPSE-FORMULA.  .      I  I 

fact  that  in  the  same  hymn  (cf.  supra  p.  8)  ID  occurs  with 
the  dual  as  well  as  the  plural-sign.1  Morever  in  No.  6,  1.  114  f. 
i-da-tu-u-a  occurs  in  parallelism  with  $unattl-u-a  and  must 
therefore  have  a  somewhat  similar  meaning  to  that  of  ID  in  the 
present  passage.  The  meaning  of  the  formula  may  therefore 
be  regarded  as  practically  settled  though  the  Semitic  equivalent 
of  777  is  still  a  matter  of  some  uncertainty. 

15.  That  £*^|    ^£*~    is    equivalent    to  nazazu   is  clear  from 
BRUNNOW,    List,    no.  4893.     If  on    the    other  hand  we  read  the 
group  phonetically,  the  form  du-bu  must  be  explained  as  Perm. 
II  i  from  dababu,  for  dubbubiP,  dubb-MP;  the  former  explanation 
however  appears   to   me  the   more  probable   of  the  two.     The 
verb  us'ta-um-u  in  the  second  half  of  the  line  I  take  to  be  III  2 
from  I/HEN,  "to  speak",  with  a  causative  signification,  "to  cause 
to  speak",  i.  e.  "petition". 

1 6.  tamitu  in  the  technical  sense  of  "an  oracle''  occurs  in 
the   regular   formulae   of  the   so-called    "Downfall"  tablets,    in 
which  "Izib  7"   commonly  consists   of  the  phrase  izib  $a  i-na  pi 
mar  ambari  ardi-ka  ta-mit  up-tar-ri-du,  "Grant  that  in  the  mouth 
of  the  magician's   son  thy  servant  a  word   (i.  e.   the  oracle  for 
which   we    ask)    may   hasten",    or    in    the    i  st  pers.    ta-mit   ina 
pi-ya  up(or  ip)-tar-ri-du,  cf.  KNUDTZON,  Assyrische  Gebete  an  den 
Sonnengott,  Vol.  II,  p.  42,  Leipzig  1893. 

17.  For  the  explanation  of  bubbulum   as  "the  day  of  (the 
Moon's)  disappearance"  cf.  JENSEN,  Kosmologie,  pp.  91,  106. 

19.  *~*7~  *-  £^»Hl      I  I  have  taken  as  an  abbreviation  of 

HF~*-  *-  ^>@f  *T  ^TI-  It  might  be  possible  to  read  the 
group  ilu  ina  i$id  umi  "o  god!  in  the  foundation  of  (that)  day 
is  a  power  unrivalled  etc.",  referring  to  the  thirtieth  day  of 


1  The   sign   of  the   dual   is  also   to  be  found  with  ID  in  the   name  of  the 
plant  ^TTT^I    ^E^iTYY    T»»     /T^-^^l  T >•»*-,  which  occurs  in  Col.  V, 

1.  4  of  Rm.  328,  a  tablet  in  which  the  names  of  plants  are  enumerated  in  short 
sections  probably  for  use  as  prescriptions.  This  plant  may  have  been  so  named 
from  its  employment  in  warding  off  the  evils  of  the  ID.MlS  ITI.MlS.  That 
certain  prescriptions  were  used  against  such  evils  is  clear  from  K.  6432,  a  tablet 
containing  prescriptions,  one  section  of  which  commences  (rev.,  1.  4)  inuma  ina 

ara>^Nisdni   umi   IKAN  amifu   W.MlS-lu   ITI.MI$-Su  limuttu-[iu?J 

(cf.  BEZOLD,   Catalogue,  p.  787). 

C2 


12  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

the  month  mentioned  in  the  preceding  line.  But  this  explan- 
ation appears  rather  forced,  and  the  parallelism  of  1.  9  seems 
to  indicate  that  the  group  is  the  name  of  a  god.  That  nam- 
ras.it  =  the  New-Moon  has  been  shown  by  JENSEN,  Kosmologie, 
p.  104  f.,  and  the  invocation  of  the  Moon-god  as  the  New-Moon, 
following  immediately  on  the  mention  of  the  end  of  the  month, 
is  singularly  appropriate. 

20.  as-ruk-ka  si-rik',  cf.  No.  35,  1.  9,  as-ruk-ki  si-rik  ad- 
dressed to  Isfyara.  The  suffixes  -ka  and  -ki  are  probably  to 
be  regarded  as  having  the  force  of  ana  ka-a-tu,  ana  ka-a-ti. 
For  a  similar  use  of  the  suffix  cf.  K  541 8  a,  Col.  IV,  1.  7,  quo- 
ted by  BEZOLD,  Catalogue,  p.  715:  biti-si-na  (or  btt-si-na)  i-pu- 
ns-ka  na-Hi-a  as-tur-ka,  "their  house  have  I  made  for  thee,  my 
tablet  have  I  inscribed  for  thee".  A  somewhat  analogous  in- 
stance occurs  in  an  Old-Babylonian  letter  (V.A.Th.  575),  pub- 
lished by  MEISSNER,  Beitr.  z.  Assyr.,  Vol.  II,  pp.  561  f.,  577,  in 
1.  10  of  which  the  verb  i-zi-ba-ak-ku-$u  occurs,  governing  two 
suffixes  however  and  not  a  suffix  and  a  substantive  as  in  the 

present  passage.  VM ]  IF'I  may  be  read  il-lu  in  agreement 
with  mu$i,  "an  incantation  of  the  bright  night".  But  lallartu 
(cf.  BRUNNOW,  List,  No.  11181)  appears  to  me  the  preferable 
reading,  as  it  balances  ri-is-ta-a  in  the  second  half  of  the  line. 
For  a  similar  use  of  the  word  cf.  Sm.  954,  Obv.  1.  33,  quoted 
by  ZIMMERN,  EPS,  p.  95. 

25.  The    title   ilu  sa  sunati*1   occurs   in   IV  R  66,    No.  2, 

Rev.  1.  24,  where  it  is  applied  to  ^>qp  ^J  fc^Ir  which  ZIMMERN 
(op.  cit.  p.  105)  explains  as  meaning  "dream-god".  *-*f-  n  £=^ 
in  1.  1 1  a  of  the  list  of  gods  published  in  II  R  54  is  possibly 
to  be  regarded  as  a  synonym  of  BU,  as  suggested  by  BRUNNOW, 
List,  No.  1 1771. 

26.  The  group  £Ejt£[-ta   in   V  R  20,  3<?   is   read   as  sartu 
"sin"   by  ZIMMERN,   op.  cit.,  p.  12,   while  for  fcJ^tJ-to,   ^^\~ti 
in  IV  R  6 1,  no.  i,  11.  29  and  31    he  proposes   a  rendering  sertu 
"anger,  wrath",    where   the   meaning   "sin"   would   be  inappro- 
priate   (cf.   op.  cit.,   p.  85).     That    "sin"   is    the   meaning    of  the 
word   in    the  present  passage   is    clear  from  the  corresponding 
arniya  in   the  first  half  of  the  line.     For  my  reading  sirtu  and 
not  sartu  or  sartu  cf.  DELITZSCH  in  ZIMMERN'S  EPS,  p.  115. 


INIM.INIM.MA  SIT  IL.LA.  13 

28.  This  colophon  line,  which  is  characteristic  of  the  pre- 
sent collection  of  texts  (cf.  Introduction),  is  with  one  exception 
written  throughout  in  Sumero-  Akkadian,  thus:  INIM.INIM.MA 
SU  IL.LA  ilu  (or  kakkab)  .......  KAN  (or  KID).     The  ex- 

ception occurs  in  1.  14  of  No.  35,  which  reads:  .......... 

ni-is  ka-a-ti  $d  tluBUit.  The  beginning  of  the  line  is  unfortu- 
nately broken  off  and  we  are  consequently  left  in  doubt  as  to 
the  Assyrian  equivalent  of  INIM.INIM.MA.  Our  choice  how- 
ever appears  to  be  restricted  to  amatu  and  Siptu  (cf.  BRUNNOW, 
List,  nos.  588  f.),  and  of  these  the  former  is  to  be  preferred  as 

it  distinguishes  the  ideogram  from  <*"*!     occurring  at  the  com- 
mencement  of  almost   all  these  incantations.     In  Assyrian  the 
line    should    therefore   in   all  probability  run  :    atnat  nts  kati  sa 
nu  (or  kakkab}  ......     The  expression  nts  kati,  "hand-raising", 

has  in  many  passages  almost  lost  its  original  meaning  and  been 
transferred  to  the  utterance  that  generally  accompained  the  act. 
It  is  thus  possible  that  the  colophon-line  in  question  is  simply 
equivalent  to:  "The  words  of  the  prayer  to  such  and  such  a 
god".  My  own  opinion  however  is  that  INIM.INIM.MA, 
whether  considered  the  equivalent  of  amatu  or  not,  has  ac- 
quired in  the  colophons  where  it  occurs  the  definite  meaning 
of  "prayer".1  On  this  assumption  nts  kali  must  be  regarded  as 
retaining  its  original  significance  and  we  must  see  in  the  title 
an  allusion  to  some  act  or  ceremony  accompanying  the  reci- 
tation of  the  prayer  that  precedes  it.  It  may  possibly  be  urged 
against  this  view  that  in  No.  8,  1.  21  SU  IL.LA  III  Sanitu  ipus(us) 
takes  the  place  of  the  more  usual  intnutu(tu)  an-ni-tu  III  Sanitu 
i>ntnu(im)2,  and  should  therefore  be  treated  as  its  equivalent  in 
meaning  and  translated  :  "the  prayer  three  times  perform". 
But  such  an  inference  is  far  from  certain  and  it  appears  to 
me  more  probable  that  in  the  case  of  No.  8  the  act  of  raising 
the  hand  three  times  is  substituted  for  the  threefold  repetition 
of  the  prayer. 

30.  My  translation  of  the  ideogram  DI.BAR  is  conjectural, 
for  the  fact    that    the  sign  -group  »~HP~  ^W1  *T~   occurs  in  a 


1  It  is  possible  that  the  group  should  be  transliterated  by  some  word  with 
the  definite  meaning  of  prayer,  such  as  tislitu  or  ikribu. 

2  For  a  discussion  of  this  phrase  cf.  infra,  sub  No.  2,  1.  IO. 


14  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

list  of  gods  in  II  R  54  as  an  equivalent  of  Bit  (cf.  BRUNNOW, 
List,  no.  9544)  does  not  throw  much  light  upon  its  meaning. 
Of  the  reading  of  the  duplicate  B,  which  probably  gave  the 
phonetic  equivalent  of  the  ideogram  unfortunately  only  the 

ending -tit  has  been  preserved. 

35.  In  the  duplicate  B  the  sign  following  *|  is  written 
very  clearly  thus  t-M  r  This  may  have  been  a  slip  on  the 
part  of  the  scribe  for  ^H  [?  or  possibly  for  £±||>  in  which  latter 

case  the  first  part  of  the  line  should  be  transliterated : 

MU]  BA.AN.UD.DA 

41.  a-ra-ti,  for  arrati,  is  clearly  used  here  in  the  sense  of 
"incantation"  or  "invocation",  as  shown  by  the  duplicate  C, 
which  reads  $i-mi-i  su-[pi-ya].  The  end  of  1.  42  is  restored  from 
the  somewhat  similar  line  in  HAUPT'S  ASKT,  No.  19,  Rev.  1.  5, 
which  reads:  --  ana  kar-ra-di  id-lum  ltHSamas  fya--i-ri  na-ra- 
mi-ki  a-bu-ti  sab-ti-ma.  I  have  adopted  ZIMMERN'S  explanation 
of  the  phrase  in  BPS,  p.  59 ;  abbuttu  he  derives  from 


"to  twist",  explaining  the  word  as  meaning  "chain,  fetter",  and 
to  the  phrase  abbuttu  sabafu  he  gives  the  meaning  "to  go  bail, 
give  security  for  someone,  to  intercede  for  him"  (esp.  of  inter- 
cession to  a  deity).  Cf.  also  DELITZSCH  in  ZIMMERN'S  BPS, 
p.  njf.  and  WB,  p.  75  f.  ,  where  he  derives  the  word  from 


48.  li-tA-kil  I  take  to  be  =  littakil,  IV  2  from  akalu.     If 
the  word  be  read  li-da-gil,   I   i   from  dagalu,   then  li-in-ni-is-si 
must   be   regarded    as   I  2  ,    not  IV   i    from  nisu  ,    and  the  line 
would  run:  "May  he  tear  away  the  sickness  of  my  body;  may 
he   behold   the   sighing   of  my   flesh".     But    the  more  common 
form   of  the  Pres.   of  dagalu  is  idagal,   and  the  reading  of  the 
duplicate  C  seems  rather  to  support  the  former  view. 

49.  ba-ni-ti,  a  subs,  from  banu  "to  shine".    From  the  mean- 
ing "brightness"  the  word  comes  to  signify  "mercy",  cf.  ZIMMERN, 
op.  cit.,  p.  60. 

54.  The  scribe  has  left  a  space  after  duppu  evidently  with 
the  intention  of  subsequently  filling  in  the  number  of  the  tablet. 
Two  other  tablets  of  the  Series  Bit  rimki  are  known  to  us, 
namely  K  3245  etc.  and  K  3392,  which  are  labelled  respectively 


THE  SERIES  BlX  RIMKI.  15 

the  i  st.  and  3rd.  tablets  of  the  series  (cf.  BEZOLD,  Catalogue, 
p.  528  and  Vol. Ill,  p. VIII).  The  fragment  K  6028  is  a  duplicate 
of  K  3392  (cf.  op.  cit.  p.  757)  but  it  is  broken  off  before  the  first 
line  of  the  colophon,  and  of  the  catch-line  the  beginning  only 

is  preserved:   siptu  ga-as-ru  su- Now  K  2538  etc. 

Col.  VI,  1.  i  reads  Siptu  gas-ru  su-pu-u  i-ziz  al"Assur.  Therefore 
on  p.  5  of  the  Additions  to  IV  R,  the  tablet  K  6028  has  been 
published  as  "probably  part  of  the  same  text"  as  K  2538  etc. 
But  K  3392  ,  which  preserves  the  beginning  of  the  colophon 
shows  that  this  is  not  the  case.  The  catch-line  does  indeed 
refer  to  the  first  line  of  the  incantation  contained  in  Col.  VI, 
11.  i — 21  of  K  2538  etc.  but  this  incantation,  which  is  a  dupli- 
cate of  No.  9,  11.  i  —  26,  has  evidently  been  taken  from  the  pre- 
sent class  of  texts  and  inserted  in  the  composite  and  partly 
bilingual  tablet  published  in  IV  R,  pi.  21*.  K  3392  and  its 
duplicate  on  the  other  hand  would  appear  to  belong  to  the 
present  class  of  texts,  for  their  style  and  colophon-line  point 
in  this  direction.  From  the  shape  of  the  tablet  however  it  is 
certain  that  it  originally  contained  four  columns,  two  on  either 
side,  an  arrangement  that  is  never  met  with  in  the  texts  col- 
lected in  this  volume.  The  most  probable  explanation  there- 
fore seems  to  be  that  the  Series  Bit  rimki  was  a  composite 
collection  of  texts  including  among  others  texts  of  the  present 
class.1  It  has  been  already  pointed  out  that  K  2832  +  K  6680 
contains  "a  list  of  the  first  lines  of  various  incantations"  (cf.  BEZOLD, 
Catalogue,  Vol.  II,  p.  XXII),  and  it  is  possible  that  in  Col.  I  we 
possess  a  fragmentary  catalogue  of  the  first  lines  of  some  of 
the  incantations  of  this  series.  The  tablet  in  question  commences 

3MF~  ^ITTT  CT  ^1^1'  while  1.  ii  runs  Siptu  ga-as-ru  $u-pu-u 
i-ziz  "luAssur,  a  commencement  which  is  identical  with  the  catch- 
line  of  K  3392  and  the  first  line  of  the  Obv.  of  No.  9  and  of 
its  duplicate  K  2538,  Col.  VI,  11.  1—21,  and  which  must  there- 
fore refer  to  that  incantation.  The  Bit  rimki  itself,  from 
which  the  series  takes  its  name,  may  possibly  have  been  a 
certain  temple  or  more  probably  a  special  chamber  or  division 


1    K  3392  adds  but  little  to  its  duplicate  K  6028  already  published;   apart 
from    the  beginning    of  the  colophon    its  most  important  addition  is  that  to  1.  10, 

the  end  of  which  it  restores  thus:  *"^T-    ^    C^T^fff    *"*T~        I        Ife* 


1 6  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

of  every  large  temple.  That  it  actually  existed  in  one  or  other 
of  these  capacities  is  clear  from  the  passages  where  it  is 
mentioned  throughout  the  hymn  to  the  Sun -god  published 
in  V  R,  pi.  50  f. ;  in  Col.  Ill,  1.  20  occurs  the  phrase  ina  bit 
rim-ki  ina  i-ri-bi-ka,  "when  thou  enterest  the  house  of  libation", 
and  in  1.  55  ana  bit  rim-ki  ina  ti-fa-ka,  "when  thou  approachest 
the  house  of  libation" ;  cf.  also  Col.  Ill,  11.  55,  70  and  Col.  IV, 
11.  21,  28  of  the  same  text. 


No.  2. 

Transliteration. 


Obv. 

i.  .  .  da- 


2 ina  ilanipl 

3 bilti-ya  as-sa-fyar 

4 -ki         i-Si-  bi-lut-ki 

5 -man-ni-ma     ki-bi-i     damiktim(tim) 

6 -ka  J}ul-li-ki  limuttim(tivi) 

7 ya  -  a  -  ti  pa-  lib-  ki 

8.  [lib-bi-ki]     lu-$a-pi     dd-li-li-ki     Ind-lul 

9.  [IN1M]JNIM.MA  SU  IL.LA  iluTa$-mi-tum.KAN  DU.DU  BI 

SA-NA  burasi 

10.  [ana]  pan  ilu Ta$-mi-tum  taSakan(an)  KAS.SAG  tanaki(ki)-ma 

mmutu(tu)  an-ni-tu  munu(nu) 

1 1 .  Siptu         ap-lu    gaS-ru  bu-kur     iluBil 

12.  $ur-bu-ul    git-ma- lu     i-lit-ti    LSAR.RA 

13.  $d    pu-lub-tit  [lit]-bu-$u2     ma-lu-u*     bar-ba-[$u] 

14.  iluUT.GAL.LU  [$a  la  imj-mab-fra-ru     ka-bal-su 

15.  su-bu-u  man-[za-za]  ina  Hani*1  rabuti*1 

1 6.  ina  I.KUR  bit  ta-[$i]-la-a-ti  sa-ka-a*  ri-Sa-a-ka 

17.  id-din-ka-ma  UuBil  abn-ka 

1 8.  ti-rit     kul-lat    ilanifl     ka-tuk-ka  tarn-bat 

19.  ta-dan  di-in  ti-ni-Si-i-ti* 

20.  tu$-ti-$ir     la  $ii-$u-rii     i-ka-a  i-ku-ti^ 


1  A  lur-bu-u.       2  A  lit-bu-lu.       3  A  nta-lu-u;  B  ftnaj-lu-u.       *  B 
-Id-a       5  />'  di-in  li-ni-Si-i-ti.        6  ft  i-ku-tuni. 


PRAYER  TO  NINIB  ETC.  17 

21.  ta-sab-bat       kat  [in-si]  la  li--a  tu-sa-as-ka'1 

22.  sa  a-na  a-ra-al-[li]-i  su-ru-du  pa-gar-su2  tutira(ra) 

23.  sa  dr-nu  i-su-ii  ta-pat-tdr*         dr-nu"1 

Rev. 

24.  sa  ilu-su  itti-su^  zi-nu-u^  tu-sal-lami  dr-Jjis 

25.  iluNIN.IB    a-sa-rid     Hani*1  ku-ra-du  at-ta 

26.  ana-ku    pulanu    apil  pulani  sa    ilu-su  pulanu   lluistar-su  pu- 

lantlum(tum)* 

27.  ar-kus-ka       rik-sa  KU.A.TIR     as-rnk-ka 

28.  as-mk-ka       tar-[rz'n]-nu9       i-ri-Sul°         tabu™ 

29.  akki-ka         du-iis-[$u]-bu     si-kar     ds-na-an12 

30.  itti-ka  li-iz-[zi]-zu^  Hani*1  su-ut  il"Bil 

31.  itti-ka  li-iz-[zi]-zu^  Hani*1  su-nt  LKUR 

32.  ki-nis  nap-lis-an-ni-[ma**  si-mi15]  ka-ba-ai 

33.  un-ni-ni-ya  [li-ki-nia^  mu-j$ur]         tas-lit 

34.  zik-ri  [li-tib]  ili-ka 
35-  si-lim       itti      ya-a-tu-u             pa-lify-ka 

36.  [pa]-ni-ka       a-ta-mar       lu-si-ra  ana-ku 

37.  [mu]-up-pal-sa-ta^     ki-ni$  nap-lis-an-ni^ 

38.  [an]-ni    pu-tur  str-ti*<)  pu-sur 

39.  [itf-ti-ik         kil-la-ti-ma  fyi-ti-ti  ru-um-[mi?] 

40.  [ili]-ya  u  iluistari-yh  li-sa-ki-ru-in-ni-ma  lik-bu-u  damiktim(tim) 

41.  [lib]-bi-ka  lu-sa-pi     dd-li-li-ka  lud-lul 

42.  [INIMJNIM].MA          SU  IL.LA  iluNIN.IB.KAN 

43 kib-ra-a-ti     i-lat     bi-li-i-ti 

44 iluDa-gan  ra-bit  ilul-gi-gi 

45 b-ti  Hani*1  ka-nu-tu  ai  ak-ki 

46 tukulti(ti)        I.ZID.DA 

47 mu-kin  um-mat  Hani*1  a-pil  il"Marduk 

48 -su nab-ni-ti 

49 -fya-zi 

50 -ra 


1  B  tu-lak-lfa-ri.        2  B  ampagar-$u.       3  B  tu-pat-tdr ;   D  ta-pa- 

4  />'  dr-na.  5  D  <tui$tar-$u.  6  D  zi-nu-u.  7  B  [tu] '-sal-lam.  8  D  ana-kn 
arad-ka  miluAllur-ldn-apll  mar  tli-hi  \  jfa  ilu-Su  Allur  '*ui$(ar-Su  HuAS-lu-ri-tnm. 
9  CD  tar-rin-na.  10  CD  i-ri-la.  n  D  ta-a-ba.  la  D  ai-na-an.  ls  D  li-ziz-zu. 
u  D  naplisa-ni-ma.  15  E  ti-ma-a.  16  D  liki-ma.  17  D  [mti-up]-pal-sa-at. 
18  D  naplis-an-ni.  19  DE  sir-tim. 

D 


1 8  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

The  first  eight  lines  of  No.  2  (K  2487  +  K  2502  -f-  K  2591) 
contain  the  end  of  a  prayer  to  TaSmttu,  in  which  the  suppliant, 
after  beseeching  the  goddess  to  confer  favour  and  to  destroy 
iniquity,  concludes  with  the  desire  that  he  may  extol  her  heart 
and  bow  in  humility  before  her.  LI.  9  and  10  form  a  colophon 
containing  directions  for  ceremonies,  for  a  full  discussion  of 
which  cf.  p.  1 9  ff.  These  are  followed  by  a  complete  prayer 
of  thirty-one  lines  addressed  to  Ninib  (11.  n — 41)  commencing 
with  fourteen  lines  in  description  and  praise  of  the  god ;  the 
suppliant  then  states  the  offerings  that  he  has  duly  made,  rely- 
ing on  which  he  concludes  with  the  request  to  be  cleansed 
from  sin,  comforted  in  sorrow,  and  restored  to  the  favour  of 
god  and  goddess.  LI.  20 — 23  are  remarkable  as  they  attribute 
a  gentle  character  to  Ninib,  describing  him  as  the  guide  of 
the  wandering  and  the  sustainer  of  the  weak,  the  restorer  of 
the  dead  and  the  cleanser  of  sins.  It  is  probable  that  in  this 
description  the  god  is  regarded  in  his  solar  character  as  the 
friend  of  mankind,  a  function  that  is  not  however  inconsistent 
with  his  character  as  the  god  of  battle.1  The  eight  fragment- 
ary lines,  with  which  the  tablet  concludes,  contain  the  beginning 
of  a  prayer  to  a  goddess,  which  in  its  damaged  condition  does 
not  admit  of  a  connected  translation. 

Translation. 

11.  O  mighty  son,  first-born  of  Bil\ 

12.  Powerful,  perfect,  offspring  of  hara, 

13.  Who  art  clothed  with  terror,  who  art  full  of  fury! 

14.  O  Utgallu(f)t  whose  onslaught  is  unopposed! 

15.  Mighty  is  (thy)  place  among  the  great  gods! 

1 6.  In  Ikur,  the  house  of  decisions,  exalted  are  thy  heads, 

17.  And  Bil  thy  father  has  granted  thee 

1 8.  That  the  law  of  all  the  gods  thy  hand  should  hold! 

19.  Thou  judgest  the  judgement  of  mankind! 

20.  Thou  leadest  him  that  is  without  a  leader,  the  man  that  is 

in  need! 

21.  Thou  holdest  the  hand  of  the  weak,  thou  exaltest  him  that 

is  not  strong! 

1  Cf.  JENSEN,  Kosmologie,  p.  475. 


PRAYER  TO  NINIB  ETC.  19 

22.  The  body   of  the  man  that  to  the  Lower  World  has  been 

brought  down  thou  dost  restore! 

23.  From  him  who  sin  possesses,  the  sin  thou  dost  remove! 

24.  Thou  art  quick   to  favour  the  man   with   whom  his  god  is 

angry ! 

25.  O  Ninib,  prince  of  the  gods,  a  hero  art  thou! 

26.  I  so  and  so,    son   of  so   and  so,    whose  god  is  so  and  so, 

whose  goddess  is  so  and  so, 

27.  Have  bound  for  thee  a  cord, have  I  offered 

thee; 

28.  I  have  offered  thee  tarrinnu,  a  pleasant  odour; 

29.  I  have  poured  out  for  thee  mead,  a  drink  from  corn. 

30.  With  thee  may  there  stand  the  gods  of  BU\ 

31.  With  thee  may  there  stand  the  gods  of  tkur\ 

32.  Truly  pity  me  and  hearken  to  my  cries! 

33.  My  sighing  remove  and  accept  my  supplication! 

34.  Let  my  cry  find  acceptance  before  thee! 

35.  Deal  favourably  with  me  who  fear  thee! 

36.  Thy  face  have  I  beheld,  let  me  have  prosperity! 

37.  Thou  art  pitiful!     Truly  pity  me! 

38.  Take  away  my  sin,  my  iniquity  remove! 

39.  Tear  away  my  disgrace  and  my  offence  do  thou  loosen! 

40.  May  my  god  and  my  goddess  command  me  and  may  they 

ordain  good  fortune! 

4 1 .  May  I  praise  thy  heart,  may  I  bow  in  humility  before  thee ! 

The  first  clause  of  the  colophon  contained  in  1.  9  f.  has 
been  already  discussed ,  cf.  p.  1 3  f. ,  and  in  future  I  shall  not 
again  refer  to  this  phrase  which  occurs  on  each  of  the  texts 

^  ^  ^     ^ 

published  under  Sections  I — V.  The  expression  HF-  HF-  >—<  's 
to  be  found  at  the  commencement  of  most  directions  for  cere- 
monies interchanging  with  *"£5f  *~ffi  >— <  and  with  \£^  ]  \  *"n~ 
H  J^  and  evidently  forming  a  sort  of  set  introduction  to  the 
ceremonies  that  follow.  Each  of  these  three  groups  of 
signs  is  probably  equivalent  to  ipuS  annam ,  "do  the  follow- 
ing", as  BEZOLD  has  pointed  out  in  ZA,  V,  p.m.  The  three 
directions  however  that  follow  this  introductory  phrase  in  the 
present  text  require  some  explanation.  The  first  is  to  the 
following  effect:  -  -  "a  SA.NA  of  incense  before  TaSmitu  shalt 

Da 


20  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

thou  set",  and  the  question  at  once  arises,  what  is  a  SA.NAt 
The  phrase  SA.NA  buraSi  is  of  very  common  occurrence  both 
in  these  texts  and  in  regulations  for  ceremonies  generally, 
and  wherever  it  occurs  there  are  only  two  alternatives 
possible  as  to  its  meaning.  It  must  either  be  some  measure 
of  weight  or  capacity  stating  the  exact  amount  of  incense 
to  be  used,  or  else  it  must  refer  to  the  vessel  in  which  the 
incense  is  contained.  Which  of  these  two  meanings  should 
be  adopted  is  made  clear  from  the  use  of  SA.NA  in  K  3245, 
Col.  II,  1.  I4/V  which  reads,  VII  SA.NA  taSakan(an) ,  and  in  a 
colophon-line  that  is  characteristic  of  the  present  class  of  texts, 
lu  ina  SAR  lu  ina  SA.NA  ipu$(ns),  cf.  Nos.  16,  n;  18,  19;  21, 
92  etc.  As  in  both  these  expressions  SA.NA  is  used  absolutely, 
it  cannot  be  the  name  of  any  measure  or  weight.  We  are  re- 
duced therefore  to  the  second  of  the  two  alternatives  and  must 
conclude  that  the  SA.NA  was  a  kind  of  vessel  capable  of  con- 
taining incense  and  of  being  set  before  a  god;  it  may  have 
taken  the  form  of  a  small  brazier  or  tripod.2 

The    second    injunction,    K  AS. SAG  tanaki(ki)-ma ,    is    also 
frequently   to   be  met  with  in  the  ritual  texts.     The  two  signs 

^  ^1  l^p  are  not  to  be  read  phonetically  as  an  adv.  bi-riS, 
but  are  rather  to  be  regarded  as  the  name  of  some  libation, 
for  otherwise  the  verb  tanaki  would  be  left  without  an  object. 
The  K  AS.  SAG  may  have  been  the  name  of  some  drink  or 
liquid,  but  it  appears  to  me  to  be  more  probable  that  it  was 
the  name  of  the  drink-offering  itself.  For  in  IV  R  60  [67], 
200  there  occurs  the  injunction  KAS.SAG  karani  tanaki[(ki)] , 
definitely  stating  that  the  KAS.SAG  is  to  be  of  wine.  This 


1  The  first  eighteen  lines  of  this  column  are  published  by  BEZOLD,   Cata- 
logue, p.  516. 

2  In  texts  containing  directions  for  ceremonies  and  rites  we  meet  with  the 
phrase  SA.NA  Gf.BIL.LA  (=  dipdru)  cf.  No.  12,  1.  86,  K  6052,  1.  5,  IV  R  55  [62], 
No.  2,  Obv.  1.  23,  etc.     If  we  here  assign  to  diparu  its  usual  meaning  of  "torch" 
(cf.  p.  6)    it   is   not    easy    to    see  what   meaning  attaches    to  &A.NA.     In  fact  the 
phrase    appears    inexplicable    to    me,   unless    we    assume    that  diparu  has  also  the 
more  indefinite  meaning  "flame"  or  "fire".    It  was  apparently  on  such  an  assump- 
tion that  STRONG  (Journal  asiatique,   1893,  P-  382)  suggests  for  the  expression  the 
meaning  "un  encensoir".    In  that  case  &A.NA  burdSi  and  SA.NA  dipdri  would  be 
practically  synonymous. 


CEREMONIAL  FORMULAE.  21 

view  is  further  supported  by  the  fact  that  in  Sm.  810,  Obv.  1.  8 
(BEZOLD)  there  occurs  the  expression  *—«  ^M^j  HH  |Y  £ll 
E^y  *~*f~.  KAS.SAG  tuinalli-ma  tukan(an)  "the  KAS.SAG  thou 
shalt  fill  up  and  offer".  To  "fill  up  a  liquid"  would  be  ex- 
tremely colloquial  English  and  in  Assyrian  the  phrase  would 
be  meaningless;  there  would  be  nothing  strange  however  in 
speaking  of  filling  up  such  and  such  a  drink-offering.  The 

expression  KAS.SAG  ^jHj  (=  tot"),  "the  KAS.SAG  of  drink- 
ing", t.  e.  that  is  drunk,  which  occurs  in  the  same  tablet,  Obv. 
1.  17  and  in  Sin.  937,  1.  4  (BEZOLD)  would  also  seem  to  support 
this  explanation.  In  No.  8,  1.  21  mi-ib-ba  tanaki(ki)-ma  occurs 
in  the  place  of  the  more  usual  KAS.SAG  tanaki(ki)-ma.  It  is 
not  possible  however  to  argue  from  this  passage  alone  that 
mi-ify-fra  =  KAS.SAG,  for  we  have  already  seen  (cf.  p.  14) 
that  the  latter  half  of  the  same  line  contains  a  variation  from 
the  usual  formula. 

The  colophon  concludes  with  the  direction  ^JU-/w  an-ni-tu 
^lll'ww,  my  transliteration  of  which  as  minutu(tu)  an-ni-tu  mu- 
mi(nu)  requires  justification.  If  the  phrase  always  occurred 
precisely  in  the  form  in  which  we  find  it  in  the  present  text, 
it  might  with  plausibility  be  urged  that  the  signs  should  be 
read  phonetically :  sit-tu  an-ni-tu  $it-nu,  Sitnu  being  regarded  as 
Imperative  I  2  from  sanii  "to  repeat",  and  Sittu  a  substantive  of  the 

••I " 
form  xX»j  derived  from  the  same  verb.    This  rendering  however  is 

upset  by  the  fact  that  the  verb  does  not  always  occur  as  ^III-««. 
For  instance  in  IV  R  55  [62],  no.  2,  Obv.  1.  19  f.  we  find  the 
direction  Siptu  an-ni-tu  III  Sanitu  ina  pan  ilul$tar  ^JH-^na ,  and 
>1II  without  -nu  is  also  to  be  found  in  Nos.  6,  96;  11,  45; 
12,  16  and  103;  30,  27;  K  3292,  1.  7  etc.  Moreover  in  1.  29  of 
K  6679  -\-  K  8083,  two  fragments  of  a  large  tablet  containing 
ceremonies  and  prayers  to  the  goddess  I$tar  which  I  have 
recently  joined,  we  find  the  form  *jHT-w-  These  facts  together 
prove  conclusively  that  ^JTT  is  an  ideogram,  -nu  and  -u  being 
merely  phonetic  complements.  The  phonetic  complement  -;/// 
indicates  that  ^JTT  =  manii  in  the  present  phrase,  and  this  is 


22  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

put  beyond  a  doubt  by  the  fact  that  SA.MLNl^S.  occurring 
in  V  R  50,  Col.  II,  1.  63  in  the  sense  of  repeating  an  incan- 
tation is  rendered  in  the  Semitic  translation  by  mu-nu  (cf. 
BRI)NNOW,  List,  no.  5972).  But  if  ^n.-nu  =  munu(nu)  the  sub- 
stantive EJTT-/&  must  be  regarded  as  mimitu(tu)  ,  the  whole 
phrase  being  equivalent  to  "This  repetition  (i.  e.  subject  of 
repetition  =  incantation)  repeat".  The  direction  refers  to  the 
prayer  or  incantation  that  precedes,  not  to  that  which  follows 
the  colophon  in  which  it  occurs. 

14.  For  a  discussion  of  iluUT.GAL.LU  as  a  synonym  of 
iluNIN.IB  cf.  JENSEN,  Kosnwlogie,  p.  461  f. 

1  6.  ta-Si-la-a-ti  prob.  =  plur.  of  tasiltu,  "decree,  decision  (?)", 


a  subs,  of  the  form  x*j     (or  possibly  xxii'    from       iW-    Com- 


pare tanittu  from 

20.  The  indiscriminate  use  of  i  and  /  in  the  phrase  i-ka-a 
i-ku-ti  is  striking.  For  the  meaning  of  the  words  cf.  DELITZSCH, 
WB,  p.  370. 

LI.  27—29  recount  the  ceremonies  and  offerings  which  the 
suppliant  states  he  has  made  to  the  god  Ninib.  After  the 
formal  statement  of  his  name  in  1.  26,  he  continues:  "I  have 
bound  for  thee  a  cord".  It  is  probable  that  this  rite  of  binding 
a  cord  before  the  god  belongs  to  the  great  body  of  sym- 
pathetic magic  that  plays  so  important  a  part  in  Babylonian 
sorcery.  The  spell  was  in  all  probability  regarded  as  binding 
only  so  long  as  the  cord  remained  knotted  ,  its  significance 
being  somewhat  similar  to  that  of  twisting  the  black  and  white 
threads  mentioned  as  a  spell  in  the  sixth  surpu  tablet,  Col.  Ill, 
11.  28—31,  cf.  JENSEN,  ZK  II,  p.  42  ff.  The  offering  mentioned 
in  the  second  half  of  the  line  is  somewhat  obscure;  KU.A.TIR 
is  indeed  translated  by  SAYCE  (Hibbert  Lectures,  p.  529)  as 
"cones  (?)"  and  in  a  footnote  he  gives  the  following  three 
reasons  for  his  translation:  in  K  4345,  Col.  Ill,  1.  18  the  signs 
A.TIR  occur  in  the  name  of  the  plant  *<u*A~TIR-ti-a-m,  Tiyaru 
is  "the  cedar"  (II  R  23,  23),  and  the  determinative  KU  denotes 
the  husk  of  a  seed.  Now  A.TIR  preceded  by  the  derminative 

JH[  has  in  all  probability  an  entirely  different  signification  from 
A.TIR  in    combination   with    ti-a-ru   and  preceded  by  the  de- 


PRAYER  TO  DAMKINA  ETC.  .      23 

terminative  £|  1 1^>  and  in  the  second  place  the  determinative 
J^J  (=  kimu)  denotes  not  "the  husk  of  a  seed",  but  "field 
produce,  grain",  cf.  JENSEN,  ZK  II,  p.  31  and  ZA  III,  p.  235. 
The  KU.A.TIR  is  therefore  probably  an  edible  herb  or  serial. 
It  is  mentioned  in  the  present  passage  as  being  offered  to 
Ninib  along  with  the  sweet- smelling  tarrinnu ,  and  a  drink- 
offering  of  mead ,  and  forms  a  very  common  offering  both 
in  the  ceremonies  that  accompany  some  of  the  present  class 
of  texts  and  in  regulations  for  offerings  generally,  cf.  Nos.  12, 
3;  15,  20;  30,  21 ;  58,  26;  IV  R  23,  no.  i,  Rev.  Col.  Ill,  1.  27; 
K  3245,  Col.  II,  1.12  (cf.  BEZOLD,  Catalogue,  p.  576),  K  6060, 
1.  6,  K  6068,  Col.  II,  1.  3  (cf.  op.  cit.,  p.  760),  K  6207  -f  K  6225, 
1.  7,  K  6679  +  K  8083,  1.  4,  K  8932,  1.  5,  etc. 


No.  3. 

Transliteration. 

i bi-lit 

2 liki-i          

3 ilu-su  u  tlui$tar-$u 

4 a-ta-mar  

5 £  Samu-u  faidiitu-ki  apsu 

6.  [ilanipl    sa    kiS-Sa-ti    lik-ru-bu]-ki  £  ilanipl  rabutipl   libbu-ki 

7 [ilu]t-a  li-Sar-bti-u      bilu-ut-[ki] 

8 [tlu]Dam-ki-na  bi-lit  Sami-i  u  irsitim[(tiin?)] 

).  [INIM.INIM.MA]         SU  IL.LA  iluDam-ki-na.[KAN] 

10.  [siptu  ap-lu  gaS-ru]  bu-kur  iluBil  £  Sur-pu-u '  git-ma-lu  i-lit-ti 

I.SAR.RA 
[.  [sd  pu-lub]-tu         lit-bu-Su2         ma-lu-u*     fyar-ba-Su 

12.  [iluUT.GAL.LU]  Sa  la     im-mab-ba-ru  ka-bal-su 

13.  [su-pu-u]  man-za-za         ina  ilanipl     rabutipl 

14.  [ina  I.KUR  bit  ta]-$i-la-a-ti         Sa-ka-a     ri-sa-a-ka 


1  A  lur-pu-u.          a  A  [Ht]-bu-lu.         3  A  ma-lu-u. 


24  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

15.  [id-din-ka-ma   'l"Bil  abu-ka]   ti-rit   kul-lat  ilanipl  ka-tnk-ka 

tain-[Jjat] 

1 6.  [ta-dan  di-in  ti-ni-si-i-ti]  £  tus-ti-$ir  la  sii-su-ra1  i-ka-a  [i-ku-ti] 

No.  3  (K  8122)  is  a  portion  of  what  was  probably  a  large 
tablet  similar  to  No.  6.  The  sixteen  lines  that  have  been  pre- 
served consist  of  the  conclusion  of  a  prayer  to  the  goddess 
Damkina  (11.  i— 8)  and  the  commencement  of  one  to  the  god 
Ninib  (11.  10—  16).  The  first  four  lines  are  fragmentary  and  give 
no  connected  text,  but  from  the  fifth  line  onwards  the  prayer 

reads:  —  "May  Heaven  be  thy  joy,  may  the  Abyss 

6.  May  the  gods  of  the  world  be  favourable  to  thee:   may  the 

great  gods  bless  thy  heart!     7.  (May )  la  increase 

thy  dominion!     8 O  Damkina,  lady  of  heaven 

and  earth!"  This  conclusion,  which  has  been  restored  from 
that  of  the  prayer  to  the  goddess  Istar  in  No.  8  ,  is  not  an 
uncommon  one;  for  somewhat  similar  endings  cf.  No.  6,  11.  127 
—  129,  No.  9,  11.  19 — 21,  etc.  In  the  latter  of  these  two  tablets 
the  gods  Ami  and  la  are  substituted  for  "the  Heaven"  and 
"the  Abyss"  invoked  in  1.  5  of  the  present  text.  The  prayer 
to  Ninib  is  duplicate  of  No.  2,  11.  u — 20,  for  the  translation  of 
which  see  p.  18. 


No.  4. 
Transliteration. 

i 

2 -$U          

3 u       Stpu(?)- 

4.  li-pis  a-mi-ri- 

5.  ina  pi  nisi*1  liS-Sa-kin 

6 -ni      tas-mi-i  u  sa-li-mu -$ut- 

7.  [ilu]t-a  ina     lib-bi-ka         damikti(ti)     Si- 

8.  INIM.INIM.MA  SU  IL.LA  ilula.KAN 

9.  Siptu  iluDam-ki-na  sar-rat  kal  ilani^1  la-tii 

1  A  iu-iu-ru. 


PRAYERS  TO  tA,  DAMKINA  AND  BA'U.  •      25 

10.  al-ti  ilut-a  ka-rid-tu  at-ti 

1 1 .  il"IR.NI.NA  sar-rat  kal  Hani*1  Id-til  £  al-ti  ilut-a  ka-rid-tu  at-ti 

12.  sur-ba-ti    ina     Hani*1         Id-it         par-$u-[ki?] 

13 -mi-at  lluAnunnaki         mu-da-at         ilulgigi 

14.  [bi]-lit  I.TUR.RA  ka-nu-ut  LA 

15 -ti -pi- ilul-a  a-$i-bat  apsu 

bi-lit  samt  u  [irsiti] 

1 6.  [ana-ku  pulanu]  apil  pulani  an-fru  su-ut-lu- 

17.  [ina   lumun    tluatali]   lluSin   sa    ina   arfai  pulani  umi   [pulani 

isakna(na)] 

1 8.  [lumun  idati*1]         ITI.MIS         limmti[*1     la  tabatit1] 

19.  [$a  ina  ikalli-ya  u  mati]-ya   ibaSa-a   mur$u  dan-nu 

20 liSani- 

21 im- 

22 

Rev. 

23.  [1NIM.IN1M.MA]         SU  IL.LA 


24.  [siptu  iluBau]  biltu  Sur-bu-tu  a-$i-bat  $ami-i 

25 rim-ni-tum       ka-i-$at  

26.  [nap?]-lu-us-sa     taS-mu-u     ki-bit-sa  $ul-[mu?] 

27.  [al]-si-ki    biltu  i-ziz-zi-ma     si-mi-i    ka-ba-[ai] 

28 di-ni  da-ni  purus  parasi(si)  dug-gun  di- 

29.  [asfyur]-ki    a-$i--ki    ulinnu-ki    as-bat    ktma    nlinnu    ili-yh    u 

ilu[i$tari-ya] 

30.  [di]-ni  di-ni  purussa-ai  purusi(si)  a-lak-ti  si- 

31.  [d$-$um]  i-ti-ra        ga-ma-la  Su-zu-ba  ti-di-[i] 

32.  [d$-sum]  bul-lu-tu  $ul-lu-mu  ba-Sii-u  it-ti-[kr] 

33.  [biltu] bikitu(?)  ad-dan-ki      sumu-ki  as- 

34.  [ip-Sa]-ki  uznadu-ai  it-ri-m-in-ni-ma  ilu-ut-ki  lut- 

35.  [nis]     kati-ya          mu^-ri-ma  likt-i  un-ni-ni-[ya] 

36.  [lu-us]-pur-ki  ana  ili-ya  zi-ni-i       iluistari-ya  zi-ni-[ti] 
37-  [ana  ilu]  ali-ya     sa     sab-su    gain-lu     libbu-su  it-ti-[ya] 

38.  [ina]     sutti  u     bi-ri  sa     sa- 

39.  [ina]   lumun   iluatali   iluSin    Sa    ina   arfyi  pulani   umi  pulani 

isakna[(na)] 

40.  [lumun]  idatit1         ITI.MIS         limniti*1  la  fabati[fl] 

41.  [sa  ina]  ikalli-ya  u     mati-ya         ibasa-[a] 

42.  pal-fya-ku         ad-ra-ku  u  sii-ta-du-ra-[ku] 


I 


26  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

43.  ina  a-mat  ki-bi-ti-ki  sir-ti  Sa  ina  I.KUR 

44.  u  an-ni-ki  ki-nim  sa     ul         inu-[u] 

45.  Hi      sab-su        litura(ra)     iluistari-ya  zi-ni-tu 

46.  ilu     ali-ya     iluMarduk  sa  i-gu-ga         

47 -zi-zu lluBau   biltu  sur-bu-tu  ummu 


48 lluMarduk mart  ris-ti-i     sa 

49 ki-bi-i 

50 

The  Obverse  of  No.  4  (K  8105)  commences  with  a  few 
broken  lines  from  a  prayer  to  the  god  la,  which  is  followed 
by  the  beginning  of  an  address  to  the  goddess  Damkina,  the 
wife  of  la  and  queen  of  the  Abyss.  The  first  line  of  the  Re- 
verse consists  of  a  colophon-line  referring  to  a  preceding  in- 
cantation, of  which  however  no  trace  remains,  and  the  name 
of  the  god  or  goddess  to  whom  the  incantation  was  addressed, 
which  originally  stood  in  the  second  half  of  the  line,  has  also 
perished.  The  rest  of  the  Reverse  contains  a  prayer  to  the 
goddess  Ban,  from  which  in  all  probability  not  very  much  is 
missing.  Like  the  prayers  to  Sin  and  TaSmUu  in  No.  i  these 
two  addresses  to  Damkina  and  Ban  are  intended  for  recitation 
on  the  occasion  of  an  eclipse  of  the  Moon  (cf.  11.  17—19 
and  39—41).  To  judge  from  its  shape  it  would  appear  prob- 
able that  the  tablet  when  complete  contained  five  or  six  in- 
cantations, of  which  the  remains  of  these  three  only  have  been 
preserved.  Of  the  prayer  to  la  too  little  remains  for  trans- 
lation, and  that  to  Damkina,  though  better  preserved,  is  some- 
what fragmentary.  After  invoking  the  goddess  in  the  first  seven 
lines,  her  suppliant  is  apparently  going  on  to  entreat  the  re- 
moval of  a  great  disease  that  has  resulted  from  the  eclipse, 
when  the  tablet  ends  abruptly. 

Translation. 

9.  O  Damkina,  mighty  queen  of  all  the  gods, 

10.  O  wife  of  la,  valiant  art  thou! 

11.  O  IR.NI.NA,   mighty   queen  of  all  the  gods;    O  wife  of  la 

valiant  art  thou! 

12.  Thou  art  great  among  the  gods,   mighty  is  thy  command! 


PRAYERS  TO  fA,  DAMKINA   AND  BA'U.  .       27 

13.  O  thou  that the  Anunnaki,    that  knowest  the  Igigi, 

14.  O  lady  of  the  Abyss,  strong  one  of , 

15.  Thou    that la,    thou   that    dwellest   in   the 

Abyss,  O  lady  of  heaven  and  earth! 

16.  I  so  and  so,    son   of  so  and  so,   am  weak , 

17.  In  the  evil   of  an  eclipse   of  the  Moon,   which  in  such  and 

such  a  month  on  such  and  such  a  day  has  taken  place, 

1 8.  In  the  evil  of  the  powers,  of  the  portents,  evil  and  not  good, 

19.  Which    are    in    my    palace    and    my    land,    a    terrible 

disease 

In  his  petition  to  the  goddess  Ban  the  suppliant  implores 
help  in  his  extremity:  he  has  had  a  vision  at  the  time  of  an 
eclipse  of  the  Moon,  in  consequence  of  which  he  feels  that  his 
god  and  goddess  and  Marduk  the  god  of  his  city  are  angry 
and  have  deserted  him;  let  Ban  therefore  in  mercy  use  her 
influence  to  ensure  their  return  and  a  renewal  of  their  favour. 
The  following  is  a  translation  of  the  prayer:  - 

24.  O  Ban,  mighty  lady  that  dwellest  in  the  bright  heavens, 

25.  O  merciful  goddess,  the  bestower  of , 

26.  Whose  regard  is  prosperity,  whose  word  is  peace! 

27.  I  beseech  thee,  O  lady,  stand  and  hearken  to  my  cries! 
28 give  judgement,   make   a  decision ! 

29.  I  have  turned  to  thee,  I  have  sought  thee,  thy  idinnu  have 

I  grasped  like  the  ulinnu  of  my  god  and  my  goddess! 

30.  Give  my  judgement,   make  my  decisions, my  path, 

31.  Since  thou  knowest  to  protect,  to  benefit,  to  save, 

32.  Since  to  raise  to  life,  to  give  prosperity  rests  with  thee! 

33.  O  lady tears   have    I    given  thee,    thy  name  have 

I 

34 my  ears,   do   thou  protect   me  and   let  me  .  . 

.  .   .  thy  divinity! 

35.  The  raising  of  my  hand  accept  and  take  away  my  sighing! 

36.  Let  me  send    thee    unto  my  angry  god ,    unto  my  goddess 

who  is  angry, 

37.  Unto  Marduk,  the  god  of  my  city  who  is  incensed,  whose 

heart  is  enraged  (?)  with  me! 

38.  In  the  dream  and  the  vision  which , 

39.  In   the  evil   of  an  eclipse   of  the  Moon   which  in  such  and 
such  a  month   on  such  and  such   a  day  has  taken  place, 

£2 


28  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

40.  In  the  evil  of  the  powers,  of  the  portents,  evil  and  not  good, 

41.  Which  are  in  my  palace  and  my  land, 

42.  I  am  afraid,  I  tremble  and  I  am  cast  down  in  fear! 

43.  At  the  word  of  thy  exalted  command  which  .....  in  Ikur, 

44.  And  thy  sure  mercy  which  changeth  not, 

45.  Let  my  wrathful  god  return,  let  my  angry  goddess  .....  , 

46.  Let  Marduk  the  god  of  my  city  who  is  enraged  ...... 

47  ..............  O  Bau,  mighty  lady,  .....  mother! 

9.   |    -tu,  which  occurs  in  11.  Q«and  u,  and   |    -u  in  1.  12  I 
have   transliterated    lA-tu   and    lA-u  respectively.      The    adj.    is 


probably  a  J**  formation  of  the  VnN^«  "to  ^e  strong",  though 
the  more  usual  form  of  the  word  is  liu. 

25.  The  beginning  of  this  line  is  probably  to  be  restored 
[il-tum]  rim-ni-tum,  cf.  No.  7,  1.  35,  etc. 

26.  For   tasmu,    "prosperity"    cf.    82  —  9  —  18,    3737,    1.   34 
(BUDGE,   PSBA,    Vol.  X,  p.  86  ff.)  u-ru-ub  su-ul-mu  u  tas-mi-i, 
JENSEN,  Kosmologie,  pp.  280,  332,  etc. 

28.  One  sign  only  appears  to  be  missing  from  the  begin- 
ning of  this  line,  which  may  possibly  be  restored:    [ana]  di-m 
da-ni  purus  parasi(si)  etc.     In   this   case  the   sentence  forms  an 
introduction  to   the   one  that  follows   it,    giving  the  suppliant's 
motive   in  seeking  out  the  goddess.     The  end  of  the  line  con- 
tains  a   phrase  similar  to   di-ni  da-ni  and  purus  parasi(si)  ,    the 
subs,    dug-  gun    standing   in    parallelism    with    di-ni  and   punts, 
while  di-  forms  the  first  syllable  of  the  corresponding  verb. 

29.  Besides    the    corresponding   passages    in    the   parallel 
text  No.  6,  11.  7  i  ff.  and  its  duplicates,  phrases  similar  to  those 
in  11.  29  -32  are  to  be  found  in  K  2587,  Obv.  11.  34  -38  (IV  R 
60  [67]).    The  ulinnu  mentioned  in  1.  29  was  probably  a  woven 
scarf  or  garment   in   which  the  figure   of  the  god  was  draped, 
for,   from  IV  R  21,    no.  i   (B),    Obv.  1.  3  f  .    it   is   clear   that   the 
ulinnu  was  capable  of  being  dyed  and  could  be  swathed  around 
the    hands  ,    while   the   present   passage    shows    that   a   god    or 
goddess  might  possess  one,  which  a  suppliant  could  hold  when 
making   his   appeal.      Cf.    also   K  6034,  1.  5  f.    iluSamas  imid-ka 
ll"Sama$  ulinnu-ka  as-bat  [ulinnu-ka  kima  ulinnu]  ili-ya  iluislari- 
ya  a$-bat,  No.  6,  1.  73,  No.  7,  1.  n,  etc. 


PRAYER  TO  THE  GOD  DI.KUD  ETC.  29 

30.  For  the  restoration    of  the  beginning   of  this  line    cf. 
K  2612,  1.  5,  etc. 

37.  ^T^-lu    also    occurs    in    the    somewhat   parallel    text 
No.  7,    1.  19,    while    in    No.  6,    1.  82    we    find    the  word    written 

££±>/«.  "*  There  is  no  doubt  therefore  that  the  word  should  be 
transliterated  gam-lu  or  kam-lu  from  V^c(?T);i-  The  verb  is 
used  in  parallelism  with  sabaru  and  is  followed  by  the  prep. 
itti  (see  especially  No.  6,  1.  82  sa  sab-su-ma  gdm-lu  itti-yd),  so 
that  in  meaning  it  must  be  very  similar  to,  if  not  synonymous 
with,  Sabasu. 


No.  5. 

Transliteration. 

i.  .............  ina  Hani*1     ri-Sa-a     ri-i-  ..... 

2  ...........  ulinnu-ka  ti-ki-  ..... 

3  ......  -bi  Su-mi      su-ri-ka         iimipl-ya 

4  ......  -bu-ri  ru-up-pis  li-im-id  lil-li-ki 

5  ......   -ur     mursi-ya         ki-bi    ba-lA-ti 

6  ......   -ni     lip-pa-tir       lit-ta-bil     a-di-  ..... 

7  ......  -ma-Si     kil-la-ti    su-pu-ub     ta-ni-[fai?] 

8.  [lu]-$a-pi    lib-bi-ka       lut-ta-id    zi-kir-ka 

9  ......  DA  GAN  la  pa-da-a  ku-ru-ud-ka  lud-hil 

10.  IN1MJN1M.MA  SU  IL.LA  il»DI.KUD.[KAN] 


ii.  [siptu]  kd-rid-tuml  lluh-tar  ka-nu-ut  i-ld-a-[ti] 

12  ......  -tu2  iamt-i  u  irsitim(tim)^>  $a-ru-ur  kib-ra-a-ti'' 

13  ......  -in-nin-ni*  bu-uk-rat  iluSin  i-lit-ti  iluNIN.GAL 

14  ......  -am-ti6  dar-ri  Su-mi-i  ku-ra-du1  il"Sama$ 

J5-  [ilu]h-tar     a-na-ti-ma*  Sami-i  ta-bi-il-li^ 

1  6  ......  tluBil     ma-li-ki    ta-di-im-mi    da- 

17  ...........  -mn        ba-an-th?  .....  u 

1  8  ...........  -turn     ilul-a  ma  apsi 

19  ..................   -pur?-ru-u 


1   A  ka-rid-tu.       2    A  DI.BAR.       3   A  irsiti(ti).       *  A  la-ru-ru  kibrdti[P1]. 

6  A -in-nin-na.        6  A -mat.       7  A  £u-ra-di.       8  A  a-nu-[ti-ma] . 

9  A  ti-bi-il-[li]. 


30  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

The  upper  portion  of  No.  5  (K  6019)  contains  the  con- 
clusion of  a  prayer  to  the  god  DLKUD.  Though  most  of  the 
lines  are  imperfect  the  general  sense  of  the  various  petitions 
is  clear.  After  asking  for  the  increase  of  his  name  and  for 
length  of  days,  the  suppliant  prays  for  life  and  the  removal  of 
his  sickness:  let  his  sin  and  his  sighing  be  taken  away  that  he 
may  praise  the  heart  of  the  god  and  glorify  his  name.  LI.  1 1 
—  19  give  the  beginning  of  a  prayer  to  Istar,  which  is  duplicate 
of  No.  i,  11.  29  fF.,  for  a  translation  of  which  cf.  p.  5. 


No.  6. 

Transliteration. 

i.   Siptu   bttu  $ur-bu-[u] 2.    tl"A-nim  $nr-bii-[u] 

3.    ilu  sami-i 4.    iluA-nim  ilu 

$ami-[i] 5.  pa-Sir  u-mi 6.  tluA- 

nim  pa-[sir  u-mi] 7.   pa-Sir  sunatip1?] 

8.  si-it-ti 9.  a$-ti-i 10.  sal-mu 

ii.    libbu  Hi- 12.   ag-gu  .  .  . 

13.  lip-pa-as- 14.  lu-taJ$-l}i 

15.  da-lil 1 6.  nir-bi  ilu- 

17.  IN1M.INIM.MA  [SU  IL.LA]       


18.    siptu  iluNuzku   $ur-[bu-u  il-lit-ti  Dur-iluKI]         19.    na-ram 

tluBil  [ma-li-ki  mu-Sim  .  .  .  . .]     20.   suk-kal-lu'1  si-[i-ru 

mu-ut-ta- -ir] 21.    ina   Samt-i  illuti[pl  ki-bit-ka] 

22.  ina  I.SAR.RA  [$ur-ru-bal] 

23.  a-na  a-[si-ka2  ii-pak-ku]- 24.    ina  ba-li-ka 

[iluA-nim  a-bi]- 25.   u  iluBil  ma-[li-ku  IS]  .  .  . 

26.  ina  ba-li-ka*  ul  [us-ti]- 27.  ana- 

ku  pulanu  apil  pulani  $a  [ilu-su  pulanu  ilui$tar-su  pulanttnm(tum)] 

28.  as-fyur-ka  i$-i-[ka] 29.  [ri]-$a-a*>  ri-i- 

ak-[kil?] 30 -far  iluBU 

-kid- 31 -ya 

-fir 32.    ilu u   ilu$tdu 

33.  pu-it  u  li-$a-[nu?] 34.  ana  pani-ka  al- 


1  A  sukkallu.     2  A  ana  asjl-ka.     3  A  ma  bali-ka.     4  A  la- 


PRAYERS  TO   ANU,  NUZKU  AND  SIN.  '     31 


35.  IN1M.INIM.MA  [SU  IL.LA] 


36.  siptu  tluSin  na- 37.  ga-Sir  ina 

38.    sar  kib-ra-[a-ti] 39.    a-Sa-rid 

40.    Sa  nap-bar  gi- 41.    ina 

ba-li-ka 42.  ba-ra-a- 43.  a- Sir 

at-ta 44.  ma-ak-tum  Sa 45.  di- 

in  kit-ti .      46.    Sa-ap-la 47.    la 

a-lit-tum   ina 48.    s&  iS-ti-ni- 

49.  sa  ka-a-sa 50 51 

-li-1- -ti     52.  Sa  is-safy-ru -i-ma 

53.  Sa  sa-ap-f}i -nun-Su     54.   Sa  Ar-na  tuk- .  .  .   . 

-nam     55.  Sa  ilu-su  iz- itti- 

-sal-lam      56.    i-nu-ma -mu -ya 

57.  iluiStar -sa pi-ya      58.    ul-tu 

-at  ni-ir-tu ili-ya     59.  $i-i-ti  fyu- 

-u  bu-tuk-[ku?] -Sa-nu-nim-ma 

60.  i-ta-Su-uS- -bi napistim(tim)      61.    al- 

si-ka  bi-lum *l     62.    ki-nis  nap-Its- an-ni-ma  .  .  . 

63.   ta-ai-ra-ta  lluSin 64.   i-ti-ra-ta 

ll"Sin 65.   gam-ma- 1 a-ta  ll"Sin  ina  Hani*1  .  .  . 

66.   sa  la  ma-si-i  tluSin  la 67.  /"//' 

w  is-ta-ri  zi-nu-ti 68.  i-lut-ka  rabita(ta)  ki-i-.  .  . 

-ma-am-ma     69.  lib-bi-ka  lu-sa-pi  [da-li-li]-ka  lit d- lid 

70.  1NIM.IN1M.MA  SU  IL.LA  iluSin.KAN 

71.  Siptu   UuBau2   btltu  Sur-bu-tum  ummu  ri-mi-[ni-tum*  a]- Si-bat 

Saim-i  illutipl 

72.  al-si-ki  bilti-ya  i-ziz-zi-[im-ma     Si-mi] -i^    ya-a-ti 

73.  is-i-ki  as-fyur-ki$  kima   vlinnu  [ili-ya  u  iluistaii]-ya  ulinnu-ki 

as.- bat 

74.  aS-sum  di-tn6  da-a-[ni]  punis  parasi(si)1 

75.  ds-Sum  bul-lu-tu  u  Sul-[lu-mu]  ba-$u-u*  itti-ki 

76.  &s-$um  i-ti-ra  ga-ma-[la  u]  su-zu-ba  ti-di-fi 


1    Possibly  im.        2    BE  iluBi-lit  Hi.        3   CE  ri-mi-ni-tum.       4   CE  ti-tni-i. 
•'  />'  as^ur-ki.      6  g  di-ni.       7  D  [pa]-ra-su.      8   CE  baSu-u.      9  For  1.  76  />'  reads 

aS-ium  itira  gamala ,    C [gamdlaj  ti- 

!'-• [gamala]  ii-di-i. 


32  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

77.  il"Bau*         biltu         Sur-[bii-tum]2  ummu  ri-mi-ni-tum* 

Rev. 

78.  [ina  ma--du]-ti  kakkabanit1*  $a-[ma-mi]$ 

79.  6 as-fyur-ki1         ip-Sa-ki  [uznadu-ai] 

80.  upuntu  muj}]-ri-in-ni-ma     li-ki-i*     un-[ni-ni-ya] 

8 1.  [lu-uS-pur-ki]  ana  ili-ya  zi-ni-i  ilu[istari-ya  zi-ni-ti] 

82.  [ana  ilu  ali-ya  Sa]  Sab-su-ma  g&m-lu*  [itti-ya]10 

83.  ".  ., da-ta- 

84 a-ta- 

85.  iluBau™  biltu  Sur-bu-tum^  ina  a-mat  ki-bi-ti-ki  [sir-ti  Sa  ina 

LKUR J 

86.  ft,  an-ni-ki  ki-nim^         sa         [ul     inu-u] 

87.  ili-ya  sab-su  li-tu-ra  lluistari-ya  zi-ni-tum 

88.  ilu  ali-yd       Sa       $ab-su-ma      gAm-lu  [libbu-$u  itti-ya] 

89.  Sa  i-zi-za     li-nu-^a       Sa     i-gu-ga 

go.  iluBau12  btttu  Sur-bu-tum  sa-bi-ta-at  a- 

91.  ana15  iluMarduk  Sar  Hani*1  bilu  ri-mi-ni-ya  pu- 

92.  su-lul-ki  rap'-Su^  ta-ai-ra-tu-ki  kab-[ta?] 

93.  gi-mil     dum-ki  u^  ba-ld-fi         Hi- 

94.  lib-bi-ki  lu-Sa-pi  da-li-[li-ki  lud-lul] 

95.  INIM.INIM.MA  SU IL.LA  iluBau.KAN  DU.DU [BI] 

96.  KAS.SAG     tanaki(ki)     Siptti  III  Santtu  munu-ma 


97.  Siptu  Sur-bu-u    git-ma-[lu  a-bl-rum  iluMarduk]li 

98 id-diS-Su-u      pi-tu- 

99 muS-ti-Sir        am[mitu  u  ambaltu]  .  .  .  . 

100 nu-iir    Sami-i  [u  ir$itim(tim  ?)]  . 

101 -tu-ki  

102.  .      iluMarduk  [bilu] 

103 -ka  


1  B  il"bi-lit  Hi.  2  B  $a-ku-[tum],  D  [Sa]-ku-tum,  E  Sa-[ku-tum].  3  D 
um-mu  ri-mi-ni-tum.  *  B  kakkab.  B  BDE  la-ma-mi.  6  For  the  commencement 
of  this  line  B  reads :  biltu  ka- ?  E -&d?-ki.  8  E  liki-i.  9  B  gam- 
flu],  E  gam-lu.  10  E  itti-ya.  u  L.  83  f.  are  omitted  by  DE  and  probably  by 

B;    in    their   place   D   reads    [ina?   bi]-ri   u    iutti  it-ta-na-al- ,    E 

Iutti  it-ta-na-al-ka-nam-ma;  before  1.  85  B  inserts  the  eclipse- 
formula  ina  lumun  iluatali  etc.  in  three  lines,  which  E  introduces  with  the  line 
[ana-ku  puldnu  apil  puldni  Sa]  ilu-lu  pulanu  iluiltar-Su  puldnitum(tum) .  12  B  ilubi- 
lit  Hi.  13  D  tur-bu-tu.  U  D  ki-ni.  «  B  a-na.  16  B  rap-lu.  17  B  u. 
18  The  bracketed  portions  of  11.  97 — 102  have  been  restored  from  No.  10,  11.  7  — 10. 


PRAYERS  TO  BA'U  AND  THE  SUN-GOD. 


33 


104 

105 

1 06 [balatu     -H] 

107 [samt-i  tu-pat-ti] 

108 -na-di-[.  ....     ta-Sak-kan  nu-u-ru] 

109 -ar-ma         [..'..  .-ta-a  ta-Sa-as-si] 

no -lip  immiru  ta-[Sa-tar  Siru] 

111.  daian     Hani*1  btl    [  ilulgigi] 

112.  lluSamas     bil     Si-mat     mati*   [.....  is.u  u$urati*1  at-ta-ma] 

113.  2$im-ti  si-im       a-lak-[ti  du-um-mi-ik] 

114.  li-Si-ra  i-da-[tu-u-a] 

115.  lid-mi- k a  sunat*l-[u-a] 

1 1 6.  suttu  at-tu-la  ana  damikti(ti)  [suk-na] 

117.  i-$a-ri$     lul-lik  tap-pi-i  [. Su-tii] 

1 1 8.  Sa     u-mi-ya  lu-u     [damikti(ti)^>] 

iig.  $u-ut-li-ma-am-ma  ka- 

1 20.  ina  sil-lu     u     ma-gir  

121.  *[ilu  ul-si]     u   n-Sa-a-ti  lu- 

122.  [ilu  $a  la  salimu  li-iz]-ziz  ina  imni-ya  lluatalu 

123.  lit-tal- ili-ya  sal-li- 

124.  ai     ip-[par-ki]  rabisu  sul-[mu]     

125.  li-ta-mi-ka     iluBU  

126.  UuAi  fyi-ir-tu  na-[ram]- 

127.  tluSama$  a-sa-rid  Hani*1 

128.  $amu-u  fyidutu-ka      [irsitim(tim)  It-] 

129.  il&ni*1  $a  kis-Sa-ti  [lik-ru-bu-ka] 

130.  ilanipl  rabuti*1       lib-[ba-ka  li-tib-bu] 

131.  INIMJN1M.MA  SU  IL.[LA] 

132.  siptu         ilu     Su-pii'U .  .  . 

133.  ikal  mil"A$sur-ban-apli  etc. 

It  will  be  seen   from    the  registration  number  (K  2106  + 
K2384  +  K36o5  +   K3393  +  K  6340  +  K  8983  +  K  9576 


1  F  Ul  limdtiP1.  2  After  1.  112  F  inserts  ana-ku  puldnu  apil  pulani  la 
ilu-iit  puldnu  ilui$tar-Su  pulanltum(tum),  which  is  followed  by  the  eclipse-formula 
ina  lumun  iluatali  etc.  in  three  lines.  3  The  word  damikti  has  been  restored 
from  No.  10,  1.  19.  *  The  bracketed  portions  of  11.  I2lf,  124.,  126,  128  have 
been  restored  from  No.  10,  11.  20  —  24. 


34  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

-\-  K  9688  +  K  11589  -|-  K  12911  +  K  13792  +  K  13800) 
that  No.  6  is  built  up  of  twelve  comparatively  small  fragments 
of  the  K.  Collection.  Guided  by  the  style  of  the  composition 
and  the  character  of  the  writing  I  have  gradually  collected  and 
joined  together  these  fragments  to  form  the  present  text.  Re- 
storations also  have  been  made  from  duplicates,  so  that  even  in 
its  present  somewhat  imperfect  state,  the  text  furnishes  a  good 
idea  of  the  original  size  of  most  of  the  tablets  that  are  here 
published  (cf.  Introduction).  The  tablet  contains  five  prayers 
addressed  respectively  to  Ami,  Nuzku,  Sin,  Ban  and  probably 
Samas,  though  in  the  first,  second  and  fifth  prayer  the  name  of 
the  god  is  missing  from  the  colophon-line  with  which  each  con- 
cludes. Of  the  prayer  to  Anu  (a)  only  the  beginnings  of  the 
lines  remain,  from  11.  i — 7  of  which  we  gather  that  the  god  was 

invoked  as:    "Mighty  lord ,  O  Anu,  mighty  lord 

God  of  the  sky ,  O  Anu,  god  of  the  sky ,  Loosener 

of  the  day O  Anu,  loosener  of  the  day Interpreter 

of  dreams !"  The  second  prayer  (b)  to  the  god  Nuzku  com- 
mences: "O  Nuzku,  mighty  one,  offspring  of  Diirilu,  The  darling 

of  Bil  the  prince,  the  director  of ,  The  exalted  messenger, 

who   ruleth In    the    bright   heavens    is    thy    command 

,  In  hara  thou  makest  bright !"    The  remainder 

of  this  prayer  and  the  greater  part  of  that  to  Sin,  the  Moon- 
god  (c)  which  follows  it,  are  too  broken  for  translation ;  in  the 
latter  however  11.  61  —  65  read:  "I  have  called  upon  thee ,  O 

lord ,   Truly  pity   me  and ,   Thou  art  pitiful,   O 

Sin ,  Thou  art  a  protector,  O  Sin ,  Thou  art  a 

benefactor,    O   Sin,   among  the  gods !"     The  prayer  to 

Bau  (d),  which  stands  fourth  on  the  tablet  and  is  to  some 
extent  complete,  is  a  parallel  text,  though  not  a  duplicate,  to 
the  prayer  addressed  to  the  same  goddess  on  the  Reverse  of 
No.  4,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  translation. 

Translation. 

71.  O  Ban,   mighty  lady,  merciful  mother,  that  dwellest  in  the 

bright  heavens, 

72.  I  beseech  thee,  O  lady,  stand  and  hearken  unto  me! 

73.  I  have  sought  thee,  I  have  turned  to  thee,  like  the  ulinnu 
of  my  god  and  of  my  goddess  thy  ulinnu  have  I  grasped, 


PRAYER  TO  THE  GODDESS  BA'U.  .       35 

74.  Since  to  give  judgement,  to  make  a  decision, 

75.  To  raise  to  life  and  to  give  prosperity  rests  with  thee, 

76.  Since  thou  knowest  to  protect,  to  benefit  and  save! 

77.  O  ffau,  mighty  lady,  merciful  mother, 

78.  Among  the  multitude  of  the  stars  of  heaven, 

79.  [O  lady,]   I  have  turned  to  thee, 

80.  The  up  tint  it-plant  accept  and  take  away  my  sighing! 

81.  Let   me   send   thee  unto    my  angry  god,    unto  my  goddess 

who  is  angry, 

82.  Unto    the   god    of  my    city    who   is  wroth   and    is  enraged 

with  me ! 
83 } 84 

85.  O  Bau,  mighty  lady  at  the  word  of  thy  exalted  command 

which in  Ikur, 

86.  And  thy  sure  mercy  which  changeth  not, 

87.  Let  my  wrathful  god  return,  let  my  angry  goddess 

88.  Let  the  god   of  my  city  (return)    who  is  wroth  and  whose 

heart  is  enraged  with  me! 

89.  Let  him  that  is  incensed  be  pacified,  let  him  that  is  enraged 

! 

90.  O  Bau,  mighty  lady,  that  dost  hold , 

91.  Unto  Marduk,  king  of  the  gods,  my  merciful  lord 

92.  Broad  is  thy  protection,  mighty  is  thy  compassion ! 

93.  The  gift  of  favour  and  life  upon  [me  bestow], 

94.  That  I  may  praise  thy  greatness,  that  I  may  bow  in  humility 

before  thee! 

After  a  colophon  of  two  lines  in  which  the  K 'AS. SAG 
(cf.  supra,  p.  20  f.)  is  appointed  to  be  offered  and  the  incan- 
tation to  be  recited  three  times,  there  follows  (<?)  the  last  prayer 
on  the  tablet.  This  is  in  all  probability  addressed  to  the  Sun- 
god,  though  the  prayer  appears  to  commence  with,  an  invocation 

to  Marduk  beginning:  "O  mighty,  perfect,  powerful  Marduk ! 

Who  art  unique,   who  openest The  ruler  of  the  dead 

and    of  the  living , the  Light   of  heaven   and 

earth!"     The  next  ten  lines   are   very  broken,    after  which  the 
tablet  continues:  — 

1 1 1 .  O  judge  of  the  gods,  lord  of  the  Igigi, 

112.  O  SamaS,  lord  of  the  land's  destiny,  the of  charms 

art  thou ! 
¥2 


36  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

113.  Decree  my  destiny,  make  pleasant  my  path! 

114.  Let  my  powers  be  propitious! 

115.  Let  my  dreams  be  favourable! 

1 1 6.  The   dream  I  have   beheld   do  thou   establish  favourably! 
In  these  lines  the  occasion  of  the  prayer  is  stated  to  have 

been  a  dream,  the  significance  of  which  was  evidently  ambig- 
uous, for  the  suppliant  prays  that  its  result  may  be  favourable. 
The  conclusion  of  the  prayer,  which  has  been  already  referred 
to  (cf.  supra,  p.  24)  as  one  that  is  not  uncommon,  runs:  "O 

Satnas,  prince  of  the  gods! May  heaven  be  thy  joy,  may 

the  earth !  May  the  gods  of  the  world  bless  thee!  May 

the  mighty  gods  benefit  thy  heart!"  The  catch-line  commences: 
"O  mighty  god!" 

1 8.  For  the  city  Diirilu  cf.  DELITZSCH,  Paradies,  p.  230. 
The  sign -group  DUR.AN.KI  is,  however,  also  explained  by 
JENSEN  (Kosmologie,  p.  485,  n.  i)  as  a  cosmic  locality,  "the  place 
of  the  junction  of  heaven  and  earth". 

23.  The  restoration  a-na  a-[si-ka]  may  be  regarded  as 
almost  certain,  supported  as  it  is  both  by  the  traces  on  the 

tablet  and  by  the  variant  reading  ana  \  >^-ka  of  the  dupli- 
cate A. 

71.  Before  the  incantation  commencing  with  this  line  the 
duplicate  D  appears  to  have  contained  some  directions  for 
ceremonies,  of  which  however  only  traces  of  three  characters 
remain.  Cf.  pi.  12,  n.  i. 

73.  In  line  74  we  should  have  expected  some  expression 
similar  to  baSii  ittiki  or  tidt  for  the  two  infinitives  to  depend  on. 
Taking  the  text  as  it  stands  we  must  assume  that  the  second 
a$$um  does  not  commence  a  fresh  clause,  but  is  merely  a  repe- 
tition of  the  .first,  the  infinitives  in  1.  74  depending,  like  those 
in  the  following  line,  on  baSu  ittika.  These  three  lines,  describ- 
ing the  judicial  but  at  the  same  time  compassionate  character 
of  the  goddess,  give  the  reason  for  the  appeal  made  in  1.  73. 

79.  On  the  probable  restoration  of  the  beginning  of  this 
line  cf.  infra  sub  No.  7,  1.  16.  For  as-fyur-ki  the  duplicate  E 
evidently  reads  some  other  verb,  the  traces  of  which  may  be 

taken  to  represent  either -kid-ki,  or  possibly -dan- 

ki\  the  reading  of  D,  so  far  as  it  goes,  agrees  with  that  of  E. 


PRAYER  TO  THE  SUN-GOD.  37 

80.  Though  the  meaning-  is  clear  the  construction  of 
upuntu  mufy-ri-in-ni-ma  is  unusual.  While  the  suffix  forms  the 
direct  object,  npunlu  must  also  be  regarded  as  governed  by 
the  verb:  "Accept  me  in  respect  of  the  upuntu",  i.  e.  "accept 
my  offering  of  the  «/&;z/#-plant".  For  a  discussion  of  the  mean- 
ing of  npunlu  cf.  JENSEN,  ZK.  II,  p.  3  if.,  where  he  shows  that 
it  is  a  plant  capable  of  being  used  for  food,  that  it  is  not  very 
tall,  that  it  is  often  employed  in  religious  ceremonies  and  that 
its  seeds  are  planted  and  not  merely  sown.  HALEVY'S  com- 
parison of  the  word  with  the  Talmudic  }1£N  "pea"  he  thinks  not 
unlikely. 

97.  The  bracketed  portions  of  II.  97 — 102,  121  f.,  124,  126, 
128  and  of  the  word  [dainikti](ti)  in  1.  118  have  been  restored 
from  No.  10,  11.  7  —  24.  I  have  not  throughout  attempted  a 
restoration  of  each  of  these  incantations  from  the  other,  as 
they  are  too  broken  to  admit  of  such  a  course,  but  in  plates 
13,  14  and  21  I  have  given  each  text  as  it  occurs  on  the  tablet 
and  in  my  transliteration  have  restored  those  passages  only 
about  which  there  appears  to  be  no  doubt. 


No.  7. 
Transliteration. 

i 2.  nar-bi-ka 3.  I.SAG.ILA 

bidiitu- 4.  I.ZID.DA 5-  Hani*1 

Sa    sami-i 6.    ilanipl   rabuti*1 

7.  iluA-nim  iluBU 

8.  INIM.INIM.MA  SU  [IL.LA] 


9.  siptu  iluBi-lit  Hi*   biltu  $ur-[bu-tum  ummu  ri-mi-ni-tinn2  a-$i- 

bat  Sami-i  illiiti*1] 

10.  al-si-ki  bilti-ya  i-ziz-zi-[im-ma        Si-mi-i3        ya-a-ti] 
n.  is-i-ki  asfair-ki*   kima   itlinnu   [ili-ya   u  ilui$tan-ya   itlinnu-ki 

as-bat] 
12.  d$-$um     di-ni$     da-a-ni  [purus        p 


1  A  it"Bdu.     2  A  ri-mi-[ni-tum].     3  A  [h'-m/]-i.     *  A  as-jtur-ki.     5  A  di-in. 
6   D  [faj-ra-su. 


38  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

13.  As-Sum  bul-lu-tu*  Sul-lu-[mu     baSu-u2  itti-ki] 

14.  dS-Sum  itira         gamala  [  ti-di-i] 

15.  iluBi-lit  ili*  biltu  Sa-ku-[tum~>  ummu  ri-nri-ni-tum]*3 

16.  ina    ma--du-ti   kakkab1   Sa-ma-mi*   biltu   ka- 

-kidf-ki^  ip-Sa-ki  uznadu-ai 

17.  upuntu     muj}-ri-in-ni-ma  [liki-il°  un-ni-ni-ya] 

1 8.  lu-uS-pur-ki  ana  ili-ya  zi-ni-[i  tluistari-ya  zi-ni-ti] 

19.  ana  ilu  ali-ya  Sa  Sab-su-ma  gam-[lu11  itti-ya121*  ina?  bi-ri  u 

Sutti  it-ta-na-aS-ka-nam-ma] 

20.  l*ina    lumnn   iluatali  iluSin   Sa   [ina   arfyi  pulani  umi  pulani 

i$akna(na)] 

21.  lumun  idati[*1  ITI.MIS     limniti^1  la     tabati^1] 

22.  Sa  ina  ikalli-[ya  u  mati-ya  ibasa-a] 

23.  iluBi-lit  ili^   biltu  $tir-[bu-tuml(>  ina  a-mat  ki-bi-ti-ki  sir-ti  sa 

ina  l.KUR ./ 

24.  ^     an-ni-ki  [ki-nim*1         Sa       ill       inu-u] 

25.  [ili]-ya  Sab-su         li-[tu-ra  llui$tari-ya  zi-ni-tum] 

26.  ilu  ali-ya  Sa  $ab-su-[ma  g&m-lu  libbu-su  itti-ya] 

27.  Sa     i-zi-za         li-nu-[f}a         Sa     i-gu-ga] 

28.  iluBi-lit  Hi1*   biltu  $ur-[bu-tum  sa-bi-ta-at  a]- 

29.  a-na19   iluMarduk   Sar  ilanipl   bilu   [ri-mi-ni-ya  pu]- 

30.  $u-lul-ki  rap-$u20  ta-[ai-ra-tu-ki  kab-ta?] 

31.  gi-mil     dum-ki         u21  [ba-ld-ti    Hi]- 

32.  nar-bi-ki  lu-sa-[pi  dd-li-li-ki     lud-lul] 

33-  INIMJNIM.MA  [SU  IL.LA] 


Rer. 

34.  Siptu  kakkabhhara    .  .  . 

35.  il-tum         rim-ni-[tum] 

36.  Si-mat     ik-ri-bi    .... 


1   A  here  inserts  the  copula  «.       2  AD  ba-lu-u.       3  For  1.  14  A  reads  dS- 

Sum  i-fi-ra  ga-ma- lu-zu-ba  ti-di-i,   D -ma-la  u  lu-zu-ba  ti-di-i. 

*  A  tl"Bau.  5  A  Sur-[bu-tum].  6  D  um-mu  ri-mi-ni-tum.  7  AE  kakkabaniP1 . 
8  A  id-lma-mij.  »  A  as-^ur-ki.  10  A  li-ki-i;  D  [li]-ki-[i].  "  A  gdm-ltt. 
12  D  [itti]-ya.  13  The  latter  half  of  the  line  from  this  point  is  omitted  by  A, 

and  11.  20 — 22  by  AD;    in  their  place  A  contains    the  two  lines 

da-fa- ,    and a-ta- **    Before 

1.  20  E  inserts  the  line  [ana-ku  puldnu  apil  pulani  la]  ilu-lu  pnlanu  lluiUar-lu 
puldnitum(tum).  16  AD  [ilu]Bau.  16  D  iur-bu-tu.  17  D  ki-ni.  18  A  il"Bdu. 
19  A  ana.  20  A  rap-lu.  21  A  u. 


PRAYER  TO  I§HARA.  39 

37.  ka-i-Sat  napisti[(ti)] 

38.  ina     u-mi    an-ni-i 

39.  iluLSUM        

40.  mu-kil-lu  ad-mi-ki 

41.  i-zi-za-ma  da- 

42.  li-iz-zi-zu     

43.  auistarati*1      

44.  ina  ki-bit-ti- 

45.  si-mu-u     ik-ri-bi     

46.  u     at-tu-nu  ki-niS  naplisu-nin-ni 

47.  ma--du        ar-nu  ya 

48.  ma-fyar-ku-nu     ar-ni     lip-pa-tir     

49.  di-ni         di-na  purussa-ai         [punisi(Si)] 

50.  sd       a-na         ya-Si  kis-pi 

5 1 .  up-Sa-Si-i         limutti(ti)     Sa     amtluti^1      Sa 

52.  &       minima     Sum-Su     sd     a-na     ma-ka-li-i 

53.  sa  mursu  la  tabtu(tu)         D I. PAL. A     KA.LU.BI.[DA 

54.  ZLTAR.RU.DA  kalu   Sa    is-fyu-ra 

55.  $d     minima     sumSu  u-U- 

56.  ina     ki-bit-[ku?-nu]  kit-ti  Sa 

57.  up-sa-su [ai]  itifati-ni  ai  ik-ru-bu-ni 

58.  ana  Hi     i-[pi-$i?]  i-piS-ti  li-.   .« 

59.  lluh-fya-ra     ummu     rim-ni-tum     Sd     nisi*1 

60.  ina    lumun    llu  atali    tlu  Sin    Sa    ina    arfai  pulani   umi  pulani 

[iSakna(na)] 

6 1.  lumun   idad*1  ITI.MIS  limniti*1   la  tabatipl  Sa   ina   ikalli-ya 

u  [mati-ya  ibaSa-a] 

62.  [a]-na  Su-[a]-ti     asfaur-ki         al-si-ki 

63 -Sat1 

Parts  of  three  incantations  have  been  preserved  by  No.  7 
(K  3330  -f-  Sm.  394  -f-  8 1  —2 — 4,  244).  Of  the  first  incantation  only 
the  beginning  of  the  last  few  lines  remain.  The  second  has 
been  restored  from  duplicates,  so  that  it  presents  a  text  from 
which  very  little  is  now  missing.  It  is  addressed  to  a  goddess 
whom  it  hails  under  the  title  of  Bilit  Hi,  and  is  intended  not 
for  general  recitation  but  for  use  only  after  a  lunar  eclipse, 
the  usual  eclipse-formula  being  introduced  before  1.  23.  With 
these  two  exceptions  the  composition  closely  follows  the  hymn 


40  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

to  the  goddess  Bdu,  in  No.  6,  for  a  translation  of  which  cf. 
supra,  p.  35  f.  On  the  Reverse  is  a  prayer  to  the  astral  deity 
Isfrara  (in  1.  34  she  is  addressed  by  her  title  of  kakkabAkrabu, 
cf,  JENSEN,  Kosmologie  p.  71),  which  like  the  second  prayer 
on  the  tablet,  contains  the  eclipse-formula  (cf.  1.  60  f.).  The 

incantation  commences:    "O  Akrabu ,    Merciful  goddess 

Who  heareth  supplication Who  bestoweth  life 

!"  The  god  hum  is  next  invoked,  and  he  also  is  described 

as  "the  hearer  of  supplication".  In  11.  46 — 48  both  deities  are 
addressed  in  a  petition  for  mercy  and  the  removal  of  sin 

("Truly    pity    me !     Great    is    my  sin !     Before 

you  let  my  sin  be  loosened!")  From  1.  49  onwards  the  sup- 
pliant addresses  himself  solely  to  the  goddess.  After  petition- 
ing for  judgement  he  comes  to  the  main  object  of  his  prayer, 
which  is  to  seek  deliverance  from  sorcery  and  the  spells  which 
men  may  weave  against  him. 

14.  In  both  the  duplicates  C  and  E  before   ttdt,   the   last 
word  in  the  line,  there  is  a  blank  space  preceded  by  traces  of 

the  character  ^|  |f.  The  third  sign  in  the  line  is  also  V|  |y, 
which  =  itira  (cf.  the  dupl.  A ,  and  BRUNNOW,  List,  no.  7739). 

Since  it  is  improbable  that  V||Y  would  be  used  by  itself  twice 
in  the  same  line  as  an  ideogram  for  different  words,  the  two 

following  signs  »p{  ^£|  |f  must  be  regarded  as  a  compound 
ideogram;  and,  unless  the  text  of  C  and  E  is  wholly  different 
from  that  of  A  (an  unlikely  supposition  in  view  of  their  close 
resemblance  in  the  preceding  lines),  we  must  conclude  that 

»F|  ^£|  *  Y  =  the  inf.  gamala  of  A ,  while  the  inf.  suzubu  is 
omitted  altogether.  It  is  already  known  that  ^J  ^  (=  SU.GAR) 

=  gamalu   (cf.    BRUNNOW,    List,    no.   7250),    so    that   »F|    ^||Y 

(=  SU.KAR)  would  represent  a  difference  in  writing  the  same  word. 

1 6.  The  second  half  of  this  line,   commencing   btltu  ka-.  . 

,   is   probably  to  be  restored  biltu  ka-[a-si] 

The  verb  that  follows  in  A  is  as-J$ur-ki,  so  that  the  line  in  that 
duplicate  runs:  "O  lady!  to  thee  have  I  turned  etc."  The  text 
however  is  probably  to  be  restored  according  to  E,  which  it 
follows  in  many  places  in  preference  to  the  text  of  A  (cf. 
11.  9,  15  f.,  19 — 22).  For  the  reading  of  E  cf.  supra  p.  36. 


PRAYER  TO  THE  GODDESS  ISTAR.  41 

ig.  [ina?  bi]-ri  n  sutti  it-ta-na-as-ka-nam-ma  may  possibly 
have  been  expanded  to  form  1.  83  f.  of  A. 

26.  gdm-lu  has  been  restored  from  A,  the  only  duplicate 
that  covers  that  portion  of  the  text.  It  is  possible  that  the 
tablet  read  gam-lu  as  in  1.  19. 

53  f.  For  a  discussion  of  the  phrases  occurring  in  these 
two  lines,  cf.  infra  sub  No.  12,  1.  i. 

62.  This  line  has  been  restored  from  K  9909,  a  fragment 
of  a  prayer,  which  is  also  addressed  to  the  goddess  Isbara  and 
from  1.  59  onwards  forms  a  closely  parallel  text  (see  below). 


No.  8. 
Transliteration. 

i ta-a-bu  su-up-pu-u-ki  ki-i  ki-ru-ub  nis  sumi-ki 

2.  [nap]-lu-us-ki         tas-mu-u         ki-bit-ki         nu-u-ra 

3.  rimi-nin-ni-ma  lluls-tar  ki-bi-i         na-fya-si 

4.  ki-nis  nap-li-si-in-ni-ma  li-ki-i  un-ni-ni-ya 

5.  ir-di  UZ-ki  is-di-bu         It- 

6.  sar?-ta-a-ki         a-fyu-zu         lu-bi-il    tu-ub  libbi- 

7.  u-bil  ap-sa-na-ki         pa-sa-ba         suk- 

8.  u-ki-  kakfeadn-ki         li-Si-ra         sa-li-mu 

9.  as-sur  sa-ru-ra-ki     lu-ii  tas-mu-u     ft     ma-ga-ru 

10.  is-ti--h     nam-[ri]-ir-ri-ki     lim-mi-ru     zi-mu-u-a 

1 1 .  as- bur    bi-lut-ki    [lu]-u         balatu         fi         sul-mu 

12.  lu  tas-lim   ilusidu   damiktu   sa  pa-ni-ki  £  sa  dr-ki-ki  a-lt-kat 

ilulamassu  lu  tas-liin 

13.  sa    im-nu-uk-ki    mis-ra-a    lu-us-sip    dum-ka    lu-uk-su-da    sa 

su-mi-lu-[uk-ki] 

14.  ki  -  bi  -  ma  Us  -  si  -mi  zik  -  ri 

15.  a-mat  a-kab-bu-u  ki-ma  a-kab-bu-u  lu-u  ma-ag-rat 

1 6.  ina  tu-ub  siri  u  bu-ud  lib-bi  i-tar-ri-in-ni  u-mi-sam 

17.  uimpl-ya  ur-ri-ki  ba-la-ta  sur-ki  £  lu-ub-lut  lu-us-lim-ma  lu- 

us-tam-mar  ilu-[ut-ki] 

1 8.  i-ma   u-sa-am-ma-ru   lu-uk-su-ud  £  samu-u  bidutii-kt  apsu  li- 

ris-lki] 

G 


42  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

19.  ilanipl  sa   kis-sa-ti  lik-ru-bu-ki  £  Hani*1  rabutipl  lib-ba-ki  li- 

tib[-bu] 

20.  INIMJNIM.MA    SU  IL.LA    ilu!star.KAN  ana  pan    ilulstar 

SA.NA  bur  a  si  [tasakan(an)] 

21.  mi-ib-fya  tanaki(ki)-ma       SU    IL.LA     III  sanitu  ftpuS(tiS)] 

22.  siptu  at-tu-nu  kakkabani      sar-Jju-titm  sa  mu- 

23.  nam-ru-ti  sa         Hani*1         rabiiti^1          

24.  a-na  fyul-lu-ku   lim-nu-ti   ib-nu-ku-nu-si  liuA-nim  £  ina  sa- 

ma-mi 

25 -ki  li-tib        abnHSIR.GAR.RA-ki  su- 

26 -su-ti    sa  bi-li-i     MU-ii 

27 -$#  siru         da-li-fyu 

28 

No.  8  is  formed  from  two  fragments  of  the  K.  Collection 
(K  2396  -f-  K  3893)  which  I  have  joined.  Only  one  side  of 
the  tablet  has  been  preserved ,  and  this  is  evidently  the  Re- 
verse, as  its  beginning  is  too  abrupt  to  form  the  commencement 
of  an  incantation.  The  first  nineteen  lines  are  addressed  to 
the  goddess  Istar,  and  only  the  beginning  of  the  incantation  is 
missing,  in  which  the  goddess  is  addressed  by  name,  and  which 
apparently  concluded  the  Obverse  of  the  tablet.  LI.  6  — n  are 
regularly  divided,  the  first  half  of  each  stating  some  attention 
or  observance  on  the  part  of  the  suppliant  towards  his  goddess, 
which  balances  and  justifies  the  petitions  contained  in  the  second 
half  of  the  line.  The  colossi  whose  favour  is  invoked  in  II.  12 
and  13  evidently  surround  the  goddess  on  all  sides  and  poss- 
ibly flanked  the  entrances  to  her  shrine.  Then  follow  various 
petitions  couched  in  general  terms  for  prosperity,  life  and  length 
of  days,  and  the  prayer  concludes  with  a  formula  of  benediction. 

Translation. 

1 good   is   thy  supplication    when  the  spirit  (?)  of  thy 

name  is  propitious! 

2.  Thy  regard  is  prosperity,  thy  command  is  light! 

3.  Have  mercy  on  me,  O  Islar\  Command  abundance! 

4.  Truly  pity  me  and  take   away   my  sighing!     5 

6.  Thy have  I  held:  let  me  bring  joy  of  heart! 


PRAYER  TO  THE  GODDESS  ISTAR  ETC.  .       43 

7.  I  have  borne  thy  yoke:  do  thou  give  consolation! 

8.  I  have thy  head:  let  me  enjoy  success  and  favour! 

9.  I  have  protected  thy  splendour:   let  there  be  good  fortune 

and  prosperity! 

10.  I  have  sought  thy  light:  let  my  brightness  shine! 

11.  I  have   turned    towards    thy   power:    let  there  be   life  and 

peace ! 

12.  Propitious  be  the  favourable  sidu  who  is  before  thee:  may 

the  lamassu  that  goeth  behind  thee  be  propitious! 

13.  That  which  is  on  thy  right  hand  increase  good  fortune:  that 

which  is  on  thy  left  hand  attain  favour! 

14.  Speak  and  let  the  word  be  heard! 

15.  Let  the  word  I  speak,  when  I  speak,  be  propitious! 

16.  Let  health  of  body  and  joy  of  heart  be  my  daily  portion! 

17.  My  days  prolong,  life  bestow:    let  me  live,  let  me  be  per- 

fect, let  me  behold  thy  divinity! 

1 8.  When  I  plan,  let  me  attain  (my  purpose):   Heaven  be  thy 

joy,  may  the  Abyss  hail  thee! 

19.  May  the  gods  of  the  world  be  favourable  to  thee:  may  the 

great  gods  delight  thy  heart! 

After  the  colophon  in  1.  20  f. ,  prescribing  an  offering  of 
incense  and  a  drink-offering  to  be  set  before  Istar  and  the 
ceremony  of  raising  the  hand  to  be  three  times  performed 
(cf.  supra  p.  i3f.),  there  follows  the  commencement  of  a  hymn 

to  certain  stars,  beginning:  "Ye  brilliant  stars,  who ! 

2.  Ye  bright  ones,  whom  the  great  gods  „....!  3.  To 
destroy  evil  did  Anu  create  you!" 

17  f.  The  ends  of  these  lines  have  been  restored  accord- 
ing to  No.  9,  11.  11,  24,  etc. 

21.  In  this  line  mi-ib-fra  takes  the  place  of  the  common 
ideogram  KAS.SAG  (cf.  supra  p.  21).  The  ntibfru  itself  is  not 
of  uncommon  occurrence  in  directions  for  ceremonies,  cf.  K  6209, 
1.  9  where  an  offering  of  the  mi-ib-ba  is  prescribed,  the  phrase 
[KAS].SAG  tanaki(ki)-ma  occurring  four  lines  above,  K  6230 
Col.  IV,  1.  3  [mi]-ib-ba  ilia,  1.  7  mi-ify-fri  kun-ni,  etc. 


G2 


44  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

No.  9. 

Transliteration. 

Obv. 

1.  [siptu         ga  -  AS  -  ru  su  -  pu  -  u         i-mz  lluAssurJ 

2.  [rubu       ti-iz-kd-ru         bu-kur         il»NV.DIM.MUD  ] 

3.  [iluMarduk  sal  -  ba  -  bu  mu  -  ris  I.  TUR.RA] 

4.  [bil    LSAGJLA     tukulti(ti)     BabiliKI     ra  -  im     LZID.DA] 

5.  [mu- Sal -Urn   napisti(ti)   a-sa-rid  LMAH.TIL.LA   mu-dis-su-u 

balatu] 

6.  su  -  [/u/1      ma  -  a  -  ti       ga  -  mil      ni  -  si       rap  -  sa  -  a  -  ti] 

7.  usumgal    [ka  -  Us  parakkani^1] 

8.  sumu  -  ka         ka  -  [Us  ina  pi         nisi*1  ta  -  a  -  ab] 

9.  2iluMarduk  btlu  rabu-u     

10.  ina     ki  -  bi  -  ti  -  ka     sir  -  ti         [In  -  ub  -  hit     lu  -  us  -  lim  -  ma] 

11.  lu  -  us  -   tarn   -  mar  [        ilu  -  ut  -  ka] 

12.  i  -  ma         u  -  sa  -  am  -  ma  -  ru  [     lu  -  iik  -  Su  -  ud] 

13.  su  -  us  -  kin  kit  -  tu  [ina         pi  -  ya]3 

14.  sup  -  si  -  ka  damiktim(tim)  [ina  libbi  -  ya]°< 

15.  ti  -  i  -  ru*    u    na  -  an  -  za  -  zu     lik  -  bu  -  [u     damiktim(tim)^] 

1 6.  Hi  -  ya  li  -  iz  -  ziz  ina    imni  -  [ya]1 

17.  iluistari  -  ya         li  -  iz  -  ziz  ina  Suimli  -  [ya]& 

1 8.  ///  -  ya  sal  -  li  -  mu    ina  idi  -  yaq  lu  -  u  -  ka  -  [at  -  an] 

1 9.  sur  -  gam  -  ma I0    ka-  ba-  a  si  -  ma  -a       u  ma  -  ga-  [ra] 

20.  a-mat     a-kab-bu-u     ki-ma^      a-kab-bu-u     lu-u     ma-ag-[rat] 

21.  il"Marduk         btlu         rabu-u  napistim(tim)     ki-[bi]™ 

22.  ba  -  I  at  napisti(tim)  -  ya^  ki  -  [bi] 

23.  ma  -  bar  -  ka          nam  -  ris  a  -  dal  -  lu  -  ka1*     lu  -  us  -  [bi] 

24.  iluBil  urru-ka  ilul-a  li-ris~[ka] 

25.  [Hani]*1  sa     kis  -  sa  -  ti  lik  -  ru  -  bu  -  [ka] 

26.  [Mm]*1  rabuti*1  lib  -  ba  -  ka ^      li-  tib  -  [bu] 

27.  [1NIM.IN1M].MA  SU    1L.LA  ilu[Marduk.KAN] 


1  B  zn-lul.  2  £  U"Marduk  bihi  rabu-u  ina  l}ibit-ka  ka-bit-ti  lu-ub-lut. 
3  B  kit-tit  ina  pi-ya.  *  B  damiltti(ti)  ina  libbi-ya.  5  B  ti-ru.  6  B  damikti(ti). 
7  B  ina  im-ni-ya.  8  B  ina  lu-mi-li-ya.  9  B  i-da-ai.  10  B  lur-garn-ma. 
11  B  i-ma.  12  B  rabu  napilti(ti)  [lu]-u.  J3  B  napiUi-ya.  14  B  a-dal-lu-ka. 
15  B  libba-ka. 


PRAYERS  TO  MARDUK  AND  A  GODDESS.  45 

Rev. 

28 sir-turn  SA.TAR  i- .  . 

29 [ilui$tarati]pl       ra-bit  ilani[*1?] 

30 -turn  i-til-lit  ilanipl  ka-nu-ut  I. 

31.  [sar]-rat  ilu  TUR.DUL.KU      sal-ba-bu  a-pil  iluNIN. 

32.  sar-rat    l.SAG.ILA       ikal  ilanipl  $a-du-[ii ] 

33.  bi-lit  BabiliKI  su-lnl  ma-[ta-a-ti] 

34.  ilu Bi-lit         Hi  sA  bul-lu-ta^  i-[ram-mu] 

35.  it-ti-rat  ina  puSki         u  [dannati] 

36 -ma-li-tu  sa-bi-ta  katadu2         na-[a$-ki] 

37-  [i] -pi-rat  in-Si  sa-pi-ktit  [zini] 

38.  na-si-rat  napisti(ti)  nadnat(at)     [aplu     u     ziru] 

39.  [ka]-i-$at         balatu  li-kat    un-ni-ni     ma-[bi-rat    tas-lit] 

40.  [ba?]-na-at         nisipl  gi-mir  [nab-ni-ta] 

41 si-ta-aS         u         Si-la-an  ba-i-[lat*  iluBil] 

42 far-it-ti  UD.DA.GAN  ta-bar-ri-[i  sa-an-dakr] 

43 -pal-ki  kit-mu-sa       [muSi     u     im-ma] 

44 -ki   i$-tii    ma-[. -ut-ki  dal-la] 

45 [-at         a-bu-ti         in-Si] 

46 [ki-bi-i  damikti(ti)] 

47 -[kir  da-ba-bi] 

48 [  lu-uk-Su-ud] 

49 -[bit  pi-ya] 

50 [  damkuti*1] 

51 [pl  ba-ni-ti] 

52 [          ti-ni-Si-ti] 

53 [    damikti(ti)] 

54 [    kil-la-a-ti] 

55 [-ki  $uk-.....] 

56 [-turn- 7 

The  two  fragments  K  2558  -J-  K  9152,  which  I  have  joined 
and  which  form  the  basis  of  the  text  of  No.  9,  contain  portions 
of  two  incantations,  the  first  of  which  has  been  completed  from 
Col.  Ill,  11.  i — 21  of  K  2538  etc.,  part  of  a  composite  and  chiefly 
bilingual  text  (cf.  IV  R2,  pl.  21*).  LI.  1  —  12  have  been  restored 
from  this  tablet,  which  is  cited  as  B,  without  alteration,  but  in 
11.13 — J7  several  restorations  have  been  made  in  accordance 


1    A  la  bul-lu-lu.       2   A  sa-bi-ta-at  hat.       3    B  ba-'-lat. 


46  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

with  other  portions  of  the  text  (cf.  also  No.  22,  11.  14  ff.)  in 
preference  to  the  corresponding  readings  of  B.  The  incantation 
is  addressed  to  Marduk  and  reads  as  follows. 

Translation. 

1.  O  mighty,  powerful,  strong  one  of  As$ur\ 

2.  O  noble,  exalted,  first-born  of  la\ 

3.  O  Marduk,  the  mighty,  who  causeth  Itura  to  rejoice! 

4.  Lord  of  hagila,  Help  of  Babylon,  Lover  of  lzida\ 

5.  Preserver  of  life,  Prince  of  J.MAN.  TIL. LA,  Renewer  of  life ! 

6.  Shadow  of  the  land,  Protector  of  distant  peoples ! 

7.  For  ever  the  Sovereign  of  shrines! 

8.  For  ever  is   thy  name  good  in   the  mouth  of  the  peoples! 

9.  O  Marduk,  mighty  lord, 

10.  At  thy  exalted  command  let  me  live,  let  me  be  perfect  and 

11.  let  me  behold  thy  divinity! 

12.  When  I  plan,  let  me  attain  (my  purpose)! 

13.  Cause  righteousness  to  dwell  in  my  mouth! 
14 mercy  in  my  heart! 

15.  Return  and  be  established!    May  they  command  mercy! 

1 6.  May  my  god  stand  at  my  right  hand! 

17.  May  my  goddess  stand  at  my  left  hand! 

18.  May  my  god,  who  is  favourable,  stand  firmly  at  my  side, 

19.  To  give  utterance,  to  command,  to  hearken  and  show  favour! 

20.  Let  the  word  I  speak,  when  I  speak,  be  propitious! 

21.  O  Marduk,  mighty  lord,  command  life! 

22.  The  life  of  my  life  do  thou  command! 

23.  Before  thee  brightly  have  I  bowed  (?)  myself,  let  me  be  satisfied ! 

24.  May  Bit  be  thy  light,  may  la  shout  with  joy  unto  thee! 

25.  May  the  gods  of  the  world  be  favourable  to  thee! 

26.  May  the  great  gods  delight  thy  heart! 

The  second  incantation  commences  the  Reverse  of  the 
tablet,  and  is  addressed  to  a  goddess  to  whom  the  following 
titles  are  ascribed :  - 

32.  Queen  of  hagila  the  palace  of  the  gods,  the mountain! 

33.  Lady  of  Babylon,  the  Shadow  of  lands! 

34.  Lady  of  the  gods,  who  loveth  to  give  life, 

35.  Who  giveth  succour  in  sorrow  and  distress! 


PRAYERS  TO  MAKDUK  AND  A  GODDESS.        .   47 

36.  The one,  who  holdeth  the  hands  of 

37.  Who  supporteth  the  weak,  who  poureth  out  seed, 

38.  Who  protecteth  life,  who  giveth  offspring-  and  seed, 

39.  Who  bestoweth  life,  who  taketh  away  sighing,  who  accept- 

eth  prayer, 

40.  Who  hath  made  the  peoples,  the  whole  of  creation! 

41.  [Lady?]    of  the  rising   and  the  setting,   the  mistress  of  Bil\ 

i.  This  prayer  is  included  in  the  list  of  incantations  K  2832 
-f-  K  6680,  Col.  I,  1.  1 1  (cf.  supra  p.  15). 

3.  sal-ba-bu  is  explained  by  BRUNNOW,  ZA,  IV,  p.  242  as 
=  "anger",  since  in  V  R,  29,  23  h  the  word  is  followed  by 
ni--u  which  occurs  again  in  V  R,  21,  43^  apparently  as  a 
synonym  of  a-ga-gu  (ibid.  1.  40  d).  This  explanation  does  not  suit 
the  word  in  the  present  passage.  But  a-ga-gu,  besides  mean- 
ing "to  be  angry",  also  =  "to  be  strong",  while  ni--u  in  the 
text  cited  by  BRUNNOW  stands  between  the  words  ti-bu-u  "to 
advance,  press  on"  and  sal-turn  "battle";  sal-ba-bu  would  there- 
fore appear  to  be  an  epithet,  or  possibly  a  substantive,  denot- 
ing the  attribute  of  strength. 

9.  B  omits  the  latter  half  of  the  line,  reading  without  break: 
"O  Marduk,  mighty  lord,  at  thy  weighty  command  let  me  live!" 

15.  In  B,  published  in  IV  R2,  pi.  21*,  for  ua-<in-[^p  ^^J] 
read  na-an-jj  *"»H  |  according  to  the  traces  on  the  tablet. 

23.  In    form   a-tal-lu-ka    might   be    II    2    from   ilu   "to   be 
high"  with  the  same  meaning  as  II  i ;  but  the  prep,  ma-bar-ka 
would  then   be   out  of  place.     I  have  therefore  taken  adalluka 
for  adallaluka,  the  prep,  merely  repeating  the  suffix  of  the  verb. 

24.  li-ris-ka,  cf.  K  7592  etc.  Obv.  1.  21   (BRUNNOW,  ZA,  V, 
p.  77)  li-ris-ka  BabiluKl. 

26.  In  B  (IV  R2,  pi.  21*)  for  ^JJJ  ^TITO  read  ^TTT 
»~£^L[.  The  *~H£lJ  is  carelessly  written  on  the  tablet. 

41.  This  passage  proves  that  .y/'-z'-^r  [  is  to  be  read  s.itas, 
not  si-i-TAS  (=  fan)  =  sttan,  as  is  suggested  by  JENSEN,  Kosmo- 
logie,  p.  14,  probably  on  the  authority  of  DELITZSCH.  AL-\  p.  35, 
no.  311.  The  forms  sitai  and  sttan  evidently  existed  side  by 
side.  JENSEN  (loc.  cit.)  explains  the  word  as  meaning  "the  cul- 
mination-point of  the  Sun". 


48  PRAYERS  TO  GROUPS  OF  DEITIES. 

No.  10. 

Transliteration. 

Obv. 

i 2 &     

3 -ri-Su-nu   lim-nu-tu   li-pat-tir  rubu  Hani*1 

iluMarduk 4.  miS-ri-tu-u-a  ili-ya  li-ti-ba  Samu-u 

fadiitu-ka 5.    Hani*1  rabuti*1 

-li-sa(n  li-tib-ka 

6.  INIM.INIM.MA  SU  IL.LA  il»Marduk.[KAN?~] 

7.  Siptu  $ur-bu-u    git-ma- lu     a-bl-rum  ilwMarduk 

8 mus-ti-Sir  ammitu   u  ambaltu 9.    ... 

sami-i  u  irsitim[(tim  ?)] 10 

UuMarduk    btlu n 

rapsati*1  ni- 12 -ri$  a-tu-.  .  .  . 

13 -tu  sik-nat 

14 15.    [daian]1   Hani*1  bil  [il"Igigi  iluSama$ 

btl  Si-mat  mati '"' usurati*1  at-ta-ma]    16.    [$im]-ti  Si-i-mt 

[a-lak-ti  du-um-mi-ik]      17.   [lid]-mi-ka  [$unatpl-u-a  li-$i-ra  i-da- 

tu-u-a]       1 8 MI. MI  at-tu-la    [ana    damikti(ti)  Suk-na 

i-Sa-riS  lul-lik  tap-pi-i $u-tu]      19.    $a   u-mi-ya 

/u-u  damikti[(ti)  Su-ut-li-ma-am-ma  ka- .]     20.   ilu 

ul-si  ft  ri-$a-a-[ti  lu- .]     21.   ilu  $a   la  salimu   li- 

iz-ziz  ina  [imni-yd  tl"atalfi lit-tal- Hi- yd 

sal-li .]    22.  ai  ip-par-ki  rabisu  sulmu(mu)  [.  .  .  . 

li-ta-mi-ka  iluBU .]     23.  ilu Malik  far-til 

na-ram  [. lluSamas  a-$a-rid  ilanipl .] 

24.  samu-u  bidiitu-ka  irsitim(tim)  U- 

25.  iluA-nim  iluBil  u  ilul-a  li- 

26.  INIM.INIM.MA  SU      IL.LA  iluSama$.[KAN?] 

27.  [siptu?]  ilu  nam-ri(?)       $i-mu  u       ka- la-ma 

Rev. 

28 -ka 29 si- 

bit-ti-ka 30.   iluSamas  $A(?)  ib-ba-nu    u    nap-ti- 

31.   pulanu    apil   pulani -tu 


The   bracketed   portions   of  11.  15 — 23   have   been   restored   from   No.  6, 
11.  111—127. 


PRAYERS  TO  MARDUK  AND  §AMA§.  49 

32  ...........  -la  i-di-a  $d  ilu-Su 

33.  ana  panu-ka  RA  ZIB.BA  Ml  .......... 


34.  INIM.INIM.MA     .....  A 


35.  ki-i    pi     **u[li--um  sa .] 

No.  10  (K  5980  +  K  8746)  is,  according  to  1.  35,  a  copy 
of  an  older  tablet.  Unlike  the  other  texts  in  this  volume  it  is 
written  in  the  Babylonian  character,  and,  though  in  11.  6  and 
26  it  contains  the  distinctive  colophon-line,  in  1.  34  it  presents 
a  different  one  to  that  usually  found  in  this  class  of  texts.  It 
contains  parts  of  three  incantations,  the  first  being  addressed 
to  Marduk,  the  second  to  SamaS,  and  the  third  to  a  god  whose 
name  has  not  been  preserved.  The  second  of  these  three  in- 
cantations is  a  duplicate  of  No.  6,  11.  97  ff.  and  has  been  partly 
restored  from  that  text;  in  m#ny  places  however  the  tablets  are 
too  broken  to  admit  of  restoration  from  one  another  (cf.  p.  37). 

7.  It  is  possible  that  the  horizontal  wedge  which  follows 
£-^4H  (cf.  plate  21)  is  merely  a  slip  made  in  writing  the  sign 
*~*7~ ;  in  this  case  read  a-pil  llu Marduk. 

17.  The  phrases   in  this  line   appear  to  have  stood  in  the 
reverse   order   to   that  in  which   they  occur  in  No.  6,    for  it  is 
improbable   that  li-si-ra  i-da-tu-u-a  was  included  in  1.  16,  leav- 
ing lid-mi-ka  $unat*l-u-a  as  a  line  by  itself. 

1 8.  The  traces  of  the  character  before  \££  suggest  the  Bab. 
form  of  *~|^5  in  which  case  the  line  would  read:  Sunati*1  at- 
tu-la  etc. 

20.  This  line  possibly  contained  1.  i2of.  of  No.  6  in  the 
reverse  order. 

27.  Only  one  sign  is  missing  from  the  beginning  of  1.  27. 
In  the  transliteration  I  have  restored  this  as  X^n.  regarding  the 
line  as  the  beginning  of  the  incantation  which  is  continued  on 
the  Reverse.  If  however  the  line  contained  directions  for  cere- 
monies, ^z"\|  should  be  restored,  giving  as  the  commencement 
of  the  line  the  common  ceremonial  formula  ipu$  an-nam.  The 
signs  \  £^IH  should  possibly  be  read  as  one  character  \£^|£|- 

3 1 .  Possibly  for  ty-  *~\\  read  flH"TO«  ar-ri 


Section  II. 
Prayers  addressed  to  Gods. 

This  Section,  as  its  title  indicates,  is  composed  of  tablets 
containing  prayers  addressed  only  to  one  god.  They  may  indeed 
take  the  form  of  large  tablets,  each  including  several  incantations 
interspersed  with  ceremonies,  and  resembling  in  arrangement 
those  published  under  Section  I;  they  differ  from  these,  however, 
in  that,  instead  of  being  addressed  to  various  gods  and  god- 
desses, the  prayers  and  ceremonies  on  each  tablet  are  all  ad- 
dressed to  the  same  god.  Nos.  12,  21  and  22  are  good  examples 
of  this  class  of  text.  A  second  subdivision  might  be  made  of 
smaller  tablets  such  as  Nos.  n,  18  and  19,  which  contain  but 
one  prayer  in  some  cases  accompanied  by  a  few  directions  for 
ceremonies.  In  addition  to  their  difference  in  size  they  are 
further  distinguished  from  the  former  class  by  being  inscribed 
on  a  somewhat  coarser  clay.  They  are  moreover  written  in  a 
slightly  larger  character  and  a  few  have  the  appearance  of 
being  extracts  from  the  larger  tablets  made  possibly  for  some 
temporary  purpose. 

Some  of  the  Nos.  included  in  this  Section  are  merely 
fragments,  of  whicl}  so  little  has  been  preserved  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  say  with  certainty  to  what  form  of  text  they  origin- 
ally belonged.  It  is  indeed  probable  that  No.  13  was  origin- 
ally a  large  tablet  similar  to  No.  12,  and  that  No.  29  is  a 
fragment  of  one  of  the  smaller  extracts,  but  in  many  cases 
there  is  insufficient  data  for  a  final  classification.  As  however 
each  contains  a  prayer  to  one  god,  and  there  is  no  definite 
indication  that  they  included  prayers  to  other  deities,  they  have 


PRAYERS  TO  MARDUK.  51 

been  classified  under  the  present  Section.  The  tablets  contain- 
ing prayers  to  the  same  deity  have  been  placed  together;  the 
order  in  which  the  groups  occur,  however,  has  not  been  dictated 
by  the  relative  importance  of  the  deities  addressed,  but  is  that 
which  was  found  most  convenient  for  the  arrangement  of  the 
plates. 


No.  11. 

Transliteration. 

1.  [Siptu]        karradu*        iluMarduk        $a        i-zis-su2        a-bu-bu 

2.  [nap]-$ur-su  a-bu          ri-mi-nu-u* 

3.  [ka]-bu-u  u       la       si-mu-u       it-lal-pan-ni*- 

4.  [$d]-su-u  u       la       a-pa-lu^       id-da-sa-an-ni 

5.  [am]-ma-ti-yab  ina  lib-bi-ya1  u$-ti-si-[ma] 

6.  [kima]  $i-bi*  uk-ta-ad-di-da-an-ni^ 

7.  [btlu]10  rabu-u  iluMarduk  ilu  ri-mi-nu-u" 

8.  [a-mi-lu]-tum™           ma-la  Su-ma  na-bat^ 

9.  [a-na  ra]-ma-ni-$a^  -  man-mi  i- lam-mad 
io-  [man-nu             la            i-Si-it           y&]~u            ^a  u-kdl-lil 
n.  [a-lak-ti                         ilu         [man-nu?]                       i-lam-mad 

12.  [lu-ut-ta-id-ma]  [za?]-lip-tu  la  a-ra-a$-$il$ 

13.  [As-rat       ba-la]-ti  lu-u$-ti--mal(> 

14.  [.  .  .  .   .  ar-ra]- pu-Su         ina     Hani*"1     ka-bat 

15 ilu   ana   amilu    ba-ba-lu 

1 6.  J7 -ka        ana-ku        $it-tu-tu         lu        i-pu-u$l* 

17 -a         $a         ilu  lu  i-ti-ik 

1 8 miS-Sdr-riS   mudu  u   la   mudu  u  mi-lim-mal() 

ig -ka    ai  ik-tar  an-ni  pu-fur-ma20  $%r-ti  pu-$ur 

20.   " [i]-Sa-ti-ya  nu-um-mi-ir22 


1  A  Siptu  bit  nu-ru  kar-ra-du.  ^  A  i-zi-su.  3  A  ri-mi-nu-u-um.  *  A  it- 
tal-pu-nin-ni.  5  A  a-pa-lum.  6  A  am-ma-ti-ya.  7  A  ina  libbi-ya.  8  A  ki-ma 
$i-bi-im.  9  A  uk-(a-ad-di-da-ni.  10  A  bi-lum.  ll  A  ri-mi-nu-u.  12  A  a-mi-lu-tu. 

13    A  na-bi-at.        14    A  [a]-na  ra-ma-ni-la-ma.        15    A  [a]-ra-$i.        16    A 

-i(?)-ma.       17   The  fragment  K  6537,  which  exhibits  a  very  similar  text  to 

11.  1 6  ff.,  in  the  Transliteration  is  cited  as  C.  18  C  [Sit]-tu-tu-um  £^||.  19  C 
[mudu]-u  u  Id  mudu-u  mi-lim-[ma].  20  C  pu-tur.  21  Ll.  20  and  21  form  one 
line  in  C.  M  C  nu-um-mir. 

Hz 


52  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

21.  [dal]-ba-ti-ya  zu-itk-ki 

22.  I -ni    abi-ya    abu     abi-ya     ummi-ya    ummu    ummi-yh 

23 -ti-ya  ni-su-ti-ya*  u  sa-la-ti-yh 

24.  [a]-na       ra-ma-ni-ya  ai         itiba-a       a-fyi-tu-ma       lil-lik 

25.  ik-ta-ba-an-ni-ma       Hi  kima      s&™KAN.KAL       ubbib-an-ni 

26.  a-na     hati*1     damkati*1  sa       ili-ya      sal-mii      ti-pi-ik-da-ni 

27.  ina       ik-ri-bi       tas-li-ti  u       ti-mi-ki       da-ris       lu-ziz-ku 

28.  ni-su       di-sa-a-tum(?)  -matt       sa       ina       As-ri      sak-na-At 

29.  li-na-du-ka  an-ni    pu-tur  an-ni    pu-sur 

30.  Jtarradu     iluMarduk  an-ni    pu-tur  an-ni    pu-sur 

Rev. 

31.  biltu  rabitum(tum)     ilulrua  an-ni    pu-ut-ri 

32.  Su-mu     ta-a-bu     UuNabu  an-ni    pu  -  tur 

33.  biltu  rabttum(tum)     iluTas-mi-tum  an-ni    pu-ut-ri 

34.  karradu     iluNirgal  an-ni    pu  -  tur 

35.  Hani*1  a-$i-bu  iluA-nim  an-ni   pu-ut-ra 

36.  iluNA.GAL.A             sa         ul-tu  si-bi-ri-ya  i-pu-su 

37.  su-up-pi-ifr-ma                  adi  VII.-SU  pu  -  tur 

38.  lib  -  ba  -  ka                ki  -  ma  a  -  bi  a  -  lid  -  ya 

39.  u          ummi          a-lit-ti-ya           a-na  as-ri-su  li-tu-ra 

40.  [kar]-ra-du               iluMarduk  da-li-li-ka  lud-lul 

41.  INIM.INIM.MA  SU    IL.LA  iluMarduk.KAN 

42.  [AG].AG  BI    ana  pan  UuMarduk   SA.NA  burasi  tasakan(an) 

43 (an)  SA  samni  nikii  mu  dispu  foimitu  tasakan(an) 

44 ztr  sammastakal   ana  libbi  samni  tanadi(di) 

45 tasakan(an)    minutu    munu-ma     samnu 

tapasas(as) 

46 $i  -  i  -  ru        git  -  ma  -  lu         si-tar-bu 

47.  [ikal  miluAssur-ban-apli]  sarru  etc. 

The  incantation  contained  by  No.  1 1  (K  235  -\-  K  3334) 
is  addressed  to  the  god  Marduk  and  is  mainly  concerned  with 
petitions  for  the  removal  of  sin.  Though  some  of  the  lines 
are  broken  and  portions  of  the  incantation  are  obscure,  the 
line  of  thought  running  through  the  composition  is  clear.  The 


1    L.  22    is  expanded   into  three  lines  in  C ,    which  read : 

abi-ya ,     ummi-ya 

abi-ya ^  c  ,-ti-va 


PRAYERS  TO  MARDUK.  53 

suppliant  commences  with  an  invocation  of  the  god  as  "the 
hero  Marduk,  whose  anger  is  the  storm-flood",  and  whose  word 
the  disobedient  and  rebellious  cannot  disregard.  In  1.  5  f.  he 
complains  that,  though  Marduk  has  granted  him  eloquence,  he 
has  also  afflicted  him  ("My  words  in  my  heart  he  bringeth 
forth!  Like  an  old  man  hath  he  bowed  me  down!").  Therefore, 
after  praising  the  righteous  among  mankind  and  stating  his 
own  aspirations  ("whoever  hath  learnt  the  way  of  god  let  me 
praise,  wickedness  I  have  not  possessed;  the  sanctuaries  of  life 
let  me  seek!"),  he  asks  in  11.  igff.  to  be  purified  from  his  sin 
and  delivered  into  the  favourable  hands  of  his  god.  Then  fol- 
lows a  sort  of  litany  for  the  removal  of  his  sin,  in  which  he 
successively  addresses  Irfta,  Nabii,  TaSmitu,  Nirgal,  Ann  etc. 
In  the  last  three  lines  he  returns  to  the  god  Marduk,  for  the 
renewal  of  whose  favour  he  prays  in  the  following  terms :  "Let 
thy  heart  like  my  father  my  begetter  and  the  mother  who  bore 
me  return  into  its  place!  O  hero  Marduk ,  let  me  bow  in 
humility  before  thee!" 

After  the  incantation  there  follow  four  lines  of  directions 
for  ceremonies  intended  to  accompany  its  recitation.  "Do  the 
following.  Before  Marduk  a  SA.NA  of  incense  shalt  thou  set, 

a  SA  of  oil,  a  drink-offering,  water,  honey  (and)  butter 

shalt   thou    offer, the   seed   of  the   M*4£6>£a/~plaiit  in 

the  middle   of  the  oil  cast, ,    recite  the  incantation  and 

anoint  with  oil."  The  catch-line  commences  a  prayer  to  a  god 
whom  it  hails  as  "the  exalted,  the  perfect,  the  powerful!" 

i.  The  duplicate  A  commences  the  text  with  the  words 
Siptu  bit  nu-ru  "incantation  of  the  house  of  light",  a  title  that 
is  omitted  in  the  text  itself.  For  other  incantations  with  this 
heading  cf.  No.  22,  1.  35,  K  2587,  Obv.  1.  30  (IV  R  60  [67]), 
K  54  (BEZOLD,  Catalogue  p.  14  and  Vol.11  p.  XXIII),  K.  157, 
1.  9  (ibid.  p.  41),  K  2425,  1.  i  (ibid.  p.  442),  K  7866,  1.  i  (ibid. 
p.  880),  K  9004,  1.  10,  Rm.  581,  1.  5,  etc. 

i-zis-su  (var.  i-zi-sii)  for  izzit-su,  izzitu  being  prob.  a  syn- 
onym of  uzzu  and  uzzatu  "anger". 

20  f.  These  lines  have  been  restored  from  K  3927,  Rev.  1.3  f. 

27.  It  is  possible  that  -ku  in  lu-ziz-ku  =  2  s.  m.  suffix, 
cf.  DELITZSCH,  Grammar,  §56,  Addenda. 


54  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

44.  The  plant  **IN.NU.U$  is  rendered  in  IV  R2  26  1.  36  £ 

by  4"  ;£!!!  ^TT?  i-  e-  mas-ta-kal  (not  ^f=  ^JU  £jf{  as  IV  R1 
and  BRUNNOW,  List,  no.  6049). 

46.  si-tar-fyu  by  metathesis  for  sitrafyu. 


No.  12. 

Transliteration. 

/«;*««  mursi  DI.PAL.A  ZI.TAR.RU.DA  KA.LU.BI.DA 

dubbubu  ana  amilu  ul  itifyi 

2.  DU.DU.BI  ina   initsi  gusuru  arku   mu   illu   lasalafy  ana   pan 

iluMarduk   GI.GAB  tukan(an) 

3.  suluppu  KU.A.  77 R  tasapak(ak)  SA  samni  niku  mil  dispu  fyi- 

mitu  tasakan(an) 

4.  kar*atua-da-gur  tukan(an)  si-am  na-ab-la  tasapak  SA.NA  burasi 

tasakan(an) 

5.  K AS. SAG    tanaki(ki)    ana    pan    KISDA    art*1   »>«^T    a"pl 

isuMA  art*1  wSID  ma-kan-na 

6.  tanadi(di)  wbdtufassu  ina  Hi  SIR. AD  arka  KISDA  *™GIS.SAR 

tanadi(di) 

7.  immirtiniki  tanaki  tiruZAG  x™MI.HI  u  *r*KA.lZl  tasakan(an) 

8.  samnu    ina    iwnapsastu   wurkarinnu    talaki(ki)-ma   ana   libbi 

samnn  su-a-tu 

9.  gassu  burasu  iwbinu  *ammastakal  isamJL          burasu 
10.  'tuNIM  iwasagu  *<™KUD.SIR  *™SI.S1  ^m SI. MAN  ARA(rad) 
n.  ana    libbi   samnu*    tanadi(di)    ina    DA.SAR    tasakan(an)    sa 

AN.HUL.MIS  I  sa  abnuparutu 

12.  I  sa2   burasu   I  sa   abnuuknu   I  sa   ^kunukku   ttpus(us)  ab""pa- 

riitu  abnul}urasu 

13.  abnuukmi  abnukunukku  ina   bi-rit  AN.HUL.MIS  ina   GU.GAD 

tasakak(?)(ak) 

14.  ina    DA.SAR    ina    kar*aiu  bur  -  zi  -  gal    tasakan(an)    KU    sa 

AN.HUL.MIS  sa-su-nu 

1  A  Samnu  Su-a-ffuj.       2  A  la. 


PRAYERS  TO  MARDUK.  '        55 

15.  ina  samni  iwSurmtnu   tubbal  ina  *wnapSaStu  [wurkarinnu  ina 

DA].SAR  tasakan(an) 

1 6.  kat  amUumarsi  subut-ma  Siptu   iluMarduk Ill 

sanitu  munu-Su 

17.  Siptu   tluMarduk   btl  matati  sal-[ba-bu] -ru-bu 

1 8.  Sar-fyu  id-diS-Su-ul  git-ma-[lu]  . -u-um 

19.  tiz-ka-ru  siru  $d   ul2  uttakkaru(ru) -Sar-iu 

20.  li--u  sarru  to3     uz-nu     sil- -turn 

21.  tluMarduki'  kab-tu  Su-tu-ru       $&       $a- -su 

22.  ga$-ru  b(p)u-iin-gu-ln  a-[li]- kabtu 

23.  a-bu-ub  wkakku  ka-bal  la -iz-zu 

24.  iluDU.KIRRUD.KU  git-mal- " 

25 iluLUGAL.KIRRUD rabuti*1 

26 a*Marduk      bilu -ik 

27.  lluMarduk    bit    mu-di-i(?) -nin         nufyiu 

28.  btl      Saint*"1       sd-di-i          u     tainaU*1       fya-i-du     bur-sa-a-ni 

29.  btl     u  g(k)up-pi     u     bi-ra-a-ti  ninS-ti-iS-ru  nari*1 

30.  foa-ai-Ad  llua$-na-an   it   tlula-J}ar(^)   ba-nu-n   Si-ant   u   ki-i  mu- 

diS-iu-u  *<""  iirkitu 

31.  ta-ba-an-na   Sa   ilu   u   ilui$-tar  ba-nu-u  ki-rib 

-mi(?)-$u-nu     at-ta 

32.  uSumgal  iluA-nun-na-ki  a-ii-rn  ^"Igigi*1 

33.  ir-Su  bu-kur  llula  ba-nu-u     ti-[m]-$it    gim-ri 

34.  bilu  at-ta-ina  kima  a-bi  u  urn-mi  ina *l  ta-ba-d$-$i 

35.  at-ta-ma         kima        iluSama$      ik-lit-si-[nal?]       tit$-nam-mar 

36.  ku-la        u        riS-sa -Sir-si-na 

{luUD.DA  CAN 

37.  tuS-ti-sir  i'ku-tu -turn       -ri-bu 

38.  bi-rit  uznadu-Si-na 

39.  matati  u  nisi*1  rap$ati[tl] 

40.  ri-mi-na-ta  

41 -rum  an-/ja    $ii-nu 

42 nam-ta-ru        • 

43 -bat  kat-su     Sa 

44 u     bit     si- 


1  A  id-di-lu-u.     2  A  [ti]-iz-ba-ru  fi-ru  Sa  la.     3  A  [li]-'-u  rap-*u.     4  A  here 
inserts  bilu. 


56  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

45.  [ana-ku  arad]-ka  pulanu  apil  [pulani  Sa  ilu-Su  pulanu  jluistar- 

Su  pulamtum(tum)] 

46.  AKA  ..........    katadu-Su   ib-  ............... 

47.  u-ma-  .....  ................... 

48.  ana  niS  kati-[ya]   .......................... 

49.  maruStu     ............................... 

50.  u-ban-ni  kima   ..............  •  .  ,  ........... 

51.  alu      di-fru      u      ta-ni-fyu     la--bu     ta-  .............. 

52.  mursu      la     tabu     ni-Su          ma-mit        u-saj}-  .......... 

53.  suk-lul  balat  pag-ri-ya  la--bu-ma  lit-bu  Sa  ku-  .......... 

54.  il-ku-ul  salman^l-u-a  Sit-  .......... 

55.  ipir  Sipidu-ya       Sab-su      man-da-ti-ya  li  -  ka-  ..... 

56.  ba-ds-ti  tab-la-tu  ina  ip-Si  limmti*1  Sa   amiluti*12  lu-ub-ba-ku 

u  lu-ub-bu-ta-ku-[ma] 

57.  mi-lat  Hi  u  amtluti(ti)^  ibasa-a  ili-ya  BAR.DA  $uttu-u-a  lim- 

na  fya-da-a 

58.  idat^-ii-a      ti™tirtu-u-a     ri-^a-ma      ul      i-Sa-a     purus     kit-ti 

59.  bi-li   ina   ft  -mi  an-ni-i  iziz-ma   $i-mi*  ka-ba-ai  di-ni  di-in 

purussa-ai  pnrus(us)  5 

60.  6murus  SAG  NA  nu-uk-kir-ma     nu-us-si     di-J}u  sa  zumri-yh 
6  1.  T  ili-ya  tl"i$tari-[ya?]      amilutu     dinu-ma  afyuzu(?)-ni 
62.  ina  ki-bit  pi-i-ka   ai  itiba-a  mimma    lim-nu  u-pis  kas-$a-pi  n 


63.  ai   itibu-ni   imti   imti   imfi   arSaSi**9    limniiti*'1    Sa 

64.  ai    iti^a-a    litanun    Sun&ti*1    idati^1    ITI.MJS    Sa    Sami-i   u 

irsitim(tim) 

65.  lumun  ITI  ali          u          matt  ai    ikSuda-ni      ya-si 

66.  ina  pi  limni  liSani  limmti  Sa  amiluti*1  pani-ka  ln-nS-lim-ma'il 

67.  Saminu   AN.HUL  Sa   ina  kiSadi-ya  Saknu(nu)   mimma    limnu 

ai  u-Sis-ni-ka 

68.  arrat  limuttim(tim)  pit  Sa  la  damku         ana  a-fyi-ti      li-is-kip 

69.  kima       abnuparittu       nu-ri       lim-mir  i-dir-tu     ai    ar-Si12 

1  A  gloss  reads  i$-[ku-u].      2  B  Sa  a-  ..........       3  B  Hi  ilui$tari  u 

amilutum(tum).      *  B  it-mi.      5  B  pu-ru-us.     6  L.  60  is  expanded  in  B  and  forms 
two  lines  which  read  ..........  -ya  nu-us-si,  and  ..........  -us-su  di-hu 

$a  zumri-yd  •    C,   which  reads  ..........  -si,    and  ..........  -ya,   appar- 

ently had  the  same  reading  as  B.       7    In  place  of  1.  61   B  reads  .......... 

-ma  li-ir-lu-ni  lis-ku-nu-ni  ri-i-ma,    C  ..........  -i-ma.        8    B  kas-$ap-tum,   C 

..........  -turn.      9  B  ..........  -u  dr-sa-su-u.      10  BC  amtlutumftuml. 

11  C  .....  -ui-lim.       12  C  probably  read  dr-li. 


PRAYERS  TO  MARDUK.  57 

Rev. 

70.  ktma    abnuuknu    na-pis-ti  ina  pani-ka   li-kir   li-Sak-na   ri-i-mu 

71.  ktma  burasu  ili-ya  u  llui$tari-ya  sulmu(mu)  itti-ya 

72.  ina  pi  nisi*1  ana  damikti(ti)  lu-ub-si 

73.  ktma  iwkunukku  lu-ni-is-su-u*  limniti*l-ya 

74.  arrat   limutti(ti)     la    tabtitm(tnm)2    ai  itifoa-a    at    uSisnika(ka) 

75.  ina  pani-ka  su-mi  ft  pi-ir-i*  It-Sir 

76.  Sammi*1*    u    nap-Sal-tum    Sa    ina    pani-ka    kun-nu    lip-su-su 


77.  ai  u-kar-ri-bu-ni6  uz-zu  ul  ug-gat          Hi 

78.  Titti  sit-tii       kil-la-tu       fai-ti-tu       lip-su-ru       ni-Su         ma-mit 

79.  ni-iS     kati*  zi-kir  Hani*1     rabutipl 

80.  9ma  pi-ka  dan-na  lu-ba-  ki-bi        balatu 
8  1.  l°ktma       Sami'i       lu-lil         ina         ru-fyi-i       sa        ib-Su-u-ni 

82.  ktma       irsitim(tim)™       lu-bi-ib      ina      ru-si-i      la     tabati^112 

83.  kima1^  ki-rib  sami-i  lu-ut-ta-mir  lip-ta-at-ti-ru  ki-sir  limniti*)l-ya 

84.  wbi-nu**   ullil-an-ni  *a™DIL.BAD  lip-$ur-an-ni^  i*uufcuru(r) 

ar-ni-ya^  lip-  fur 

85.  kartaiua-gub-ba       sa^     iluMarduk       li-sat-lim-ma^       damiktu 

86.  li-ib-bi-bu-nin-ni^    SA.NA    dipari  sa  iluGIS.BAR  <luAZAG™ 

87.  ina    ki-bit   ilul-a2i       sar    apsi       a-bi    Hani*1    ilu[NIN.SI.KU] 

88.  22a-na    ni$   kati-ya   li-nu-uj}   libba(ba)-ka  *luMarduk  ma$-maS 

Hani*1  rabiiti^1  abkal  ilulgigi] 
8g.  a-mat   ilul-a2*   lu-ut-ta--id  &   Sar-ra-tum2*   il"Dam-ki-[na   lu- 

tt$-ti-$ir] 

go.  ana-ku   arad-ka  pulanu   apil  pulani  lu-itb-luf  lu-u$-[lim-ma] 
91.  lu-uS-tam-mar          ilu-ut-ka         lud-lu-la          da-[li]-li-[ka]2'3 


1    C  ki-ma  abntt  is.ukunukku  li-is-su-u.       2    C  arrat  limuttum(tum)    la  (a-al- 

tum.     a   C  lumu  u pi-ir-  .     4   C  ^T]r  for  !»»>•>• .     5   C  dr-ni-ya.     6  C  ai  u-&ar- 

ri-bu-u-ni  minima  lim-nu.       7    C   omits  itti   and    reads    Stt-ta  ^il-lat  u  fti-ti-tu  etc. 

C  Wdd".     9  For  1.  80  C  reads  ^[gj    ^]]}    >^    ^   ^    %^TI    ^TIT 

f-dil-li.ii  li-ba-    ki-bi  baldfu.        10    For  1.  8 1    C  reads    ki-ma  Sami-i  lu-lil  ina  ru-fr-i 

il-la-pi  u  kal-lap-ti  limnutiP1  Sa  ib-lu-ni.        J1   C  ki-ma  ir-$i-tum.       12  C  la  fa-bn- 

4m.  13  C  ki-ma.  "  C  ",ubinu  (^ij  ^^I^^Cffi)'  1B  C  HP*ur-an'ni- 
C  dr-ni-ya.  "  C  here  inserts  «'/M/-a  u.  18  C  li-la-at-li-ma.  19  C  lib-bi-btt- 
20  C  Sa  U»GI$.BAR  u  H»AZAG.IZU.  21  C  ilula  (>-*^-  - 

C  niS  kdti^-ya  li-kun  \   li-nu-u^  etc.     23   C  ilufa  C*^T"    **)'     2*   C  u  iar'raf- 
C  dd-li-li-ka  lud-lul. 


58  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

92.  ili-ya  lu-uS-tam-mar  kur-di-[ka] 

93.  ilnistari-ya  nar-bi-ka  lik-[bi] 

94.  ft         ana-ku         ma$-ma$     arad-ka         da-li-li-ka        lud-lul 

95.  INIM.INIM.MA  SU      IL.LA  iluMarduk.KAN 

96 KISDA  it-tu-fyu- -pat-su  BI-u^  kakkad 

immiri  KI  SA  NU  la2  uttakkar(?)(dij 

97 -bu-ti-su  ianasafy(?)-ma  lu  ana  Hi  sammu-ka  lu^  ana 

Hi  sd*  is-sub-ba-a 

98.  .    , u    tanadi(di)  gim-ru-u   ma-am-ma  ina  pan 

ll"Marduk  iS-pur-an-ni 

99.  [llu]t-a  u-ma--ir-an-ni    III  Sanitu    kibi-ma    riksu    tapatar(ar) 

100.  amUumarsu     ana     biti-$u     lisir-ma     ana     arki-su     ul     liniur 

1 01 .  D UR.D UR sammu  AN.HUL.MISSa  i$tu-$u-nu  *™ NI.KUL.LA 

iamUGU.KUL.LA 

102.  ARA    ina   Samni    i$u$urmtnu  tubbal  ina    TI.SAR  tasakan(an) 

puSuS  zumru 

103.  ipu$   an-nam    III  sanitu    munu   u   $a  AN.HUL.MIS   nisi-ma 

104.  abni*1  sii-nu-ti  itti  sammu  AN.HUL.MIS  mufaur(?)   ana   Hi 

HUR  kiam  kibi 

105.  Siptu  at-ta  AN.HUL  ma-$ar  Sulmi(mi)  sa  ilul-a  u  iluMarduk 

1 06.  i-tam-mur    kis-pi  ru-fa-i  zi-ru-ti 

107.  mi-lat    ilu     u     ilui$tar  a-ml-lu-ti* 

108.  6 HUR    ZLTAR.RU.DA    DI.PAL.A    KA.LU.BI.DA 

109 u-piS   kiS-pi   lim- -[i]-iu  sa- 

as-ni-ka  yd-Si1 
no.  llu$idu     damku     llu lamassu     damiktu[(tu)  ]     sukna(na)* 

111.  ilu         zi-na-a          ilu[i$tar         zi-ni-ti(?)]         u         a-mi-lu-ta 

112.  sul-li-ma-am-ma       [ki-nis       li-taj-mti-u^       itti-ya 

113.  ina  ma-sar  $ul-mi u  kal luf-tul10 

114.  ina     ki-bit    iluMarduk     abkal    [Hani*1    rabiiti^1]    ilttMardnk 

115.  ipu$  an-nam  ana  Hi  Sammu  AN.HUL.MIS         tak-ta-bu-u" 


1  D -M.      2  D  Id.      3  D  lu-u.      *  D  ia.      5  E  u  amilutu.     6  L.  108 

forms    two  lines    in  E  which  read : paris(is)  napiStim(tim)  \ ,  and 

KA.LU.BI.DA  \.      IE -f-tu  ta-as-ni-ka  a-na  ya- 

a-$i.     8  E  luk-na.     9  E  li-tam-mu-u.     10  For   113  E  reads: 
damikta(ta)  lu-mur  £  luf-ful.     ll  E  .  .   .-u. 


PRAYERS  TO  MARDUK.  .        59 

1 1 6.  ina  kisadi-su  tasakan(an)  ana  libbi  samni  $a  ina  wnapsastu 

wurkarinnu  saknu(nu) 

117.  siptu     iz-zi-tn     III  sanitu     munu(nu)-ma     ka-ai-an     dumum 

1 1 8.  ina  u-mi-su-ma  kar^a{"  a-gub-ba  SA.NA1  dipari  tus-ba--su-ma 

119.  samu-u    sal-la-tu    minima    in-su    mimma    lim-nu    id  itifyi-Su 

120.  sum-su  ana       damikti(ti)  tazakar(dr) 

121.  tnuina   amilu  kakkadu    zumru   akil-Su    karsi-su  ii-zak-kat-sn 

122.  ikal  m  jl"Assur-ban-apli  etc. 

The  text  of  No.  12  (K  163  -f-  K  218)  has  been  published 
in  IV  R1,  pi.  64  and  revised  in  IV  R2,  pi.  57,  the  Reverse  of 
K  2379,  which  is  duplicate  of  11.  76 — 96,  being  given  on  p.  1 1 
of  the  Additions  to  the  latter  volume.  It  is  here  republished 
with  restorations  and  variant  readings  from  five  duplicates.2 
The  text  as  given  in  IV  R1  has  been  transliterated  into  Hebrew 
characters  by  HALEVY,  Documents  religieux,  p.  179  ff.  and  a  trans- 
lation of  11.  76  —  82  is  given  by  LENORMANT,  La  divination,  p.  212  f. 
and  of  11.1  —  24,  30  —  35,  61—95,  101  — 107  by  SAYCE,  Hibbert 
Lectures,  p.  536  fF.  (cf.  BEZOLD,  Catalogue,  p.  42).  The  tablet  is 
concerned  entirely  with  the  worship  of  the  god  Marduk,  the 
object  of  its  petitions  and  ceremonies  being  the  cure  of  the 
suppliant  who  is  suffering  from  sickness.  The  greater  part  of 
the  tablet  is  occupied  by  the  prayer  or  incantation  addressed 
to  the  god  ,  which  is ,  however,  preceded  and  followed  by  di- 
rections for  ceremonies.  The  incantation  is  to  be  recited  by 
the  masmasu  or  priest  who  also  carries  out  the  ceremonies  that 
accompany  it,  for  1.  16  contains  a  definite  injunction  to  this 
effect,  while  in  the  last  line  of  the  prayer  (1.  94)  the  masmasn 
speaks  in  his  own  name.  The  prayer  is ,  however ,  composed 
from  the  point  of  view  of  the  sick  man,  on  whose  behalf  the 
priest  recites  it. 


1  &A.NA  is  apparently  omitted  by  E. 

2  After  the  plates  had  been  lithographed    the  duplicate  cited  as  C  was  in- 
creased by  the  addition    of  a  fresh  fragment,    K  3289,    Prof.  ZIMMERN  having  last 
summer  (1894)    recognised    it    as    a   duplicate    of  K.  163,    11.  73 — 90.     The  variant 
readings    of  C   therefore,    which    are  given  on  pll.  29  f.,    though  correct  as  for  as 
they  go  ,    are  not  exhaustive.     In  the  footnotes  to  the  transliteration  of  the  tablet 
however    the  fresh  variants   of  C  have  been  incorporated,    and  in  all  cases  where 
the  transliteration  would  leave  the  exact  reading  doubtful  the  cuneiform  has  been 
added  in  brackets. 

12 


60  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

The  first  line  of  the  tablet  forms  a  sort  of  heading  or 
introduction,  and,  while  stating  the  occasion  of  the  prayer, 
contains  a  general  direction  to  the  effect  that  when  the  sickness 
has  fallen  on  the  man  nothing  evil  or  inauspicious  is  to  be 
allowed  to  approach  him.  Then  follows  the  first  section  on 
the  tablet,  containing  14  11.  of  directions  for  ceremonies,  which 
commence  as  follows:  —  "Perform  the  following.  In  the  night 
sprinkle  a  green  bough  with  pure  water.  Before  Marduk  the 

drink-offering  shalt  thou  set.    Dates  (and) shalt 

thou  heap  up.  A  SA  of  oil,  a  drink-offering,  water,  honey 
(and)  butter  shalt  thou  offer;  thou  shalt  set  there  an  incense- 
burner,  corn shalt  thou  heap  up;  a  SA.NA  of  incense 

shalt   thou    offer.      The -drink    shalt    thou    pour   out." 

The  rites  in  the  next  line  and  a  half  are  obscure ;  at  1.  7  offer- 
ings of  flesh  are  prescribed,  three  preparations  of  flesh  being 
specified.  In  1.  8  the  command  is  given  to  take  the  oil  of 
certain  woods,  and  the  next  two  lines  contain  a  list  of  sub- 
stances that  are  to  be  cast  into  the  oil,  including  gold,  frag- 
ments of  various  kinds  of  wood  and  plants,  and  incense.  In 
11.  i  iff.  certain  offerings  are  specified  in  honour  ofi.heAN.Hf7L.MIS, 
the  offerings  consisting  of  one  piece  of  alabaster,  one  piece  of 
gold,  one  piece  of  lapis-lazuli  and  one  seal.  In  the  principal 
prayer  of  the  tablet  reference  is  made  to  each  of  these  four 
offerings  (cf.  11.  69 — 73),  and,  as  the  prayer  is  addressed  through- 
out to  Marduk,  it  is  obvious  that  AN.HUL.MIS  is  merely  a 
title  of  the  god  Marduk.'"  The  ceremonies  conclude  with  an 
injunction  to  the  officiating  priest  to  hold  the  hand  of  the  sick 
man  and  recite  the  incantation.  This  incantation,  which  occupies 
11.17  —  94.  reads  as  follows. 

Translation. 

17.  O  Marduk,  lord  of  lands,  the  mighty 

1 8.  Powerful,  unique,  perfect  .  .   ... 

19.  The  exalted  hero,  who  suffers  no  change 

20.  The  strong  one,  the  king  who 

21.  O  Marduk  the  illustrious,  the  great  one  who 


1  The  group  is  prob.  a  compound  ideogram  and  is  not  to  be  transliterated 
t'lu  hidutiP1;  the  rendering  "the  god  of  joys"  is  therefore  tentative. 


PRAYERS  TO  MARDUK.  •        6 1 

22.  The  mighty the  illustrations! 

23.  The  storm  of  the  weapon,  the  battle 

24.  O !    the    perfect !     25 the 

great !    26 Marduk,  the  lord  ....    27.  0  Mar- 
duk, the  lord 

28.  Lord  of  the  heavens,  of  mountains  and  of  oceans,  who  .  . 

...  the  hills! 

29.  Lord  of and  fortresses,  whe  guideth  the  rivers! 

30.  Who  bestoweth  corn  and  grain  (?),  who  createth  wheat  and 

barley,  who  reneweth  the  green  herb! 

31.  Who  createth    the  handiwork    of  god  and  goddess;    in  the 

midst  of  their art  thou! 

32.  The  ruler  of  the  Anunnaki,  the  director  of  the  Igigi\ 

33.  The  wise,  the  first-born  of  la,    the  creator  of  the  whole  of 

mankind! 

34.  Thou  art  lord,    and  like  my  father    and  my  mother  among 

the art  thou! 

35.  Thou   art  like    the  Sun-god  also:    their  darkness  thou  dost 

lighten ! 

36.  A   cry   and  a  shout  of  joy 37.    Thou  guidest  him 

that    is    in    need 38.    Their    wisdom 

39.  Lands  and  distant  peoples 

40.  Thou  art  compassionate 41 I  am  weak 

42 43.  Thou  holdest  his  hand 44 

At  1.  45  the  suppliant  makes  a  formal  statement  of  his 
own  name  along  with  that  of  his  father,  after  which  the  tablet 
continues  broken  for  several  lines ,  only  disconnected  words 
having  been  preserved.  When  the  lines  once  more  become 
connected  we  find  the  suppliant  imploring  that  the  life  of  his 
body  may  be  restored,  the  disease  from  which  he  is  suffering 
being  put  down  to  the  influence  of  magic.  He  concludes  a 
description  of  his  symptoms  with  the  words:  "My  powers  and 
my  soul  are  bewitched  and  there  is  no  righteous  decision!"  He 
therefore  makes  a  direct  appeal  to  the  god  in  the  following 

rords: — 

59.  O  lord ,    at   this  time   stand  beside  me   and  hearken  to  my 
cries,  give  my  judgment,  make  my  decision! 

>o.  The  sickness do  thou  destroy,  and  take  thou  away 

the  disease  of  my  body! 


62  PRAYERS   ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

61.  O  my  g-od  (and)  goddess,  judge  ye  mankind,  and  possess  me! 

62.  By  the  command  of  thy  mouth  may  there  never  approach 
anything  evil,  the  magic  of  the  sorcerer  and  of  the  sorceress! 

63.  May  there  never    approach    me    the  poisons    of  the  evil  .  . 

...  of  men! 

64.  May  there  never  approach   the  evil   of  dreams,    of  powers 

(and)  portents  of  heaven  and  of  earth! 

65.  Never  may   the  evil    of  the  portent   of  city   and  land  over- 

take me! 

66.  In  spite   of  the  evil  mouth ,    the  evil  tongue   of  men  in  thy 

sight  let  me  be  perfect! 

67.  Let  nothing    evil  ever  restrain    the  plant  of  the  god  of  joy 

that  is  placed  upon  my  neck! 

68.  The  evil  curse,   the  mouth   that   is  unfavourable   let  it  cast 

aside! 

69.  Like  alabaster  let  my  light  shine,  let  me  never  have  affliction! 

Rev. 

70.  Like  lapis-lazuli  may   my  life  be  precious  in  the  sight,    let 

it  establish  mercy! 

71.  Like  gold,  O  my  god  and  my  goddess,  may  prosperity  be 

with  me! 

72.  In  the  mouth  of  the  peoples  may  I  be  blessed! 

73.  Like  a  seal  may  my  sins  be  torn  away! 

74.  May  the  evil  curse,  that  is  unfavourable,  never  draw  nigh, 

may  it  never  be  oppressive! 

75.  Before  thee  may  my  name  and  posterity  prosper! 

76.  May  the  plants  and that  are  set  before  thee  loosen 

my  sin! 

77.  Never  may  there  approach  me  the  wrath  or  anger  of  the  god, 

78.  With  misery,  disgrace  (and)  sin;  from  the  curse 

79.  May  the  raising    of  my  hand ,    the  invocation    of  the  great 

gods,  give  release! 

80.  At  thy  mighty  command  let  me  approach!  Command  thou  life! 

81.  Like    heaven    may   I   shine    among   the    enchantments    that 

possess  me ! 

82.  Like  the  earth  may  I  be  bright  in  the  midst  of  spells  that 

are  not  good! 

83.  Like  the  heart  of  heaven  may  I  be  bright;  may  the  power 

of  my  sins  be  destroyed! 


PRAYERS  TO  MARDUK. 

84.  May  the  dinu-wood  purify  me,  may  the -plant  deliver 

me,  may  the  ^l&uru-'wood  remove  my  sin! 

85.  May  Marduk's  vessel  of  purification  bestow  favour! 

86.  May    the   flaming    censer  (?)    of  the  god make   me 

bright! 

87.  At  the  command    of  la ,    king  of  the  Abyss,   father  of  the 

gods,  the  Lord  of  wisdom, 

88.  At    the  raising    of   my  hand    may    thy  heart  have  rest,    O 
Marduk,  the  priest  of  the  great  gods,  the  arbiter  of  the  Igigi\ 

89.  The  word  of  fa  let  me  glorify,  and,  O  queen  Damkina,  let 

me  have  dominion! 

90.  May  I  thy  servant  so  and  so,   the  son   of  so  and  so,   live, 

let  me  be  perfect, 

91.  Let  me  revere    thy  divinity,    and   let   me   bow   in  humility 

before  thee! 

92.  O  my  god,  let  me  revere  thy  power! 

93.  O  my  goddess,  let  me  tell  of  thy  greatness! 

94.  And    may   I  the  priest,    thy   servant,    bow  in  humility  be- 

fore thee! 

On  the  conclusion  of  the  prayer  there  follow  three  short 
sections  of  ceremonies,  an  incantation  of  ten  lines,  and  a  final 
section  of  ceremonial  directions.  After  the  first  of  these  sections 
the  sick  man  himself  ceases  to  take  part  in  the  ritual,  for  the 
section  concludes  with  the  injunction  that  he  shall  go  straight 
to  his  house  without  looking  behind  him.  The  remainder  of 
the  tablet  deals  with  the  due  disposal  of  some  of  the  offerings 
and  objects,  that  have  been  used  in  the  ceremonies  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  Obverse  and  in  the  course  of  the  incantation. 

LI.  101  —  104  form  two  sections  of  two  lines  each  which 
contain  directions  concerning  the  stones  and  the  plant  of  "the 
god  of  joy"  mentioned  in  11.  i  i  if.,  66  ff.  Then  follows  a  short 
incantation  addressed  to  "the  god  of  joy"  himself,  in  which  he 
is  besought  to  make  the  sidu  and  lamassu  propitious  and  restore 
by  his  command  the  favour  of  the  angry  god  and  goddess. 
The  last  section  on  the  tablet  contains  directions  concerning 
the  plant  of  "the  god  of  joy",  the  recital  of  the  incantation  and 
the  offering  of  a  vessel  of  purification  and  a  censer.  L.  121 
gives  the  catch-line  for  the  next  tablet  which  probably  contained 


64  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

similar  prayers  and  ceremonies  to  be  recited  and  performed 
for  the  relief  of  some  other  form  of  sickness. 

i.  In  K  2513,  a  tablet  containing  directions  for  ceremonies, 
the  first  section  of  Col.  IV  commences:  tnuma  atnilu  lumun 
mursi  ZI.7AR.RU.DA  DI.PAL.A  KA.LU.BLDA  u-pi-su  lim- 
mti*1  (cf.  BEZOLD  ,  Catalogue,  p.  449) ,  while  the  second  section 
contains  ceremonies  for  a  similar  occasion;  it  is  therefore  pro- 
bable that  the  ceremonies  attached  to  the  incantation  in  No.  12 
form  an  extract  from  some  larger  work  devoted  entirely  to 
ceremonial  observances.  The  disease  itself,  with  which  the 
tablet  deals ,  would  appear  to  be  of  the  nature  of  possession 
or  bewitchment,  cf.  K  2572,'  1.8  muma  a-na  amtluZI.  TAR.RU.DA 
sa  UuNIN.KlLITI i-pu-us-su,  and  1.13  f.  amilu  sa  Zl.TAR.RU.DA 
ip-su-su  ana  pan  kakkabMAR.BU.DA  likmisu(su),  and  the  some- 
what similar  texts  K  3278,  11.  i  ff.,  8  ff.,  and  K  6172,  11.  i  ff.,  n 
(cf.  op.  cit.  pp.  519  and  768);  see  also  K  9612  -\-  K  10760, 
11.  i  off.,  etc. 

3.  For  a  discussion  of  the  KU.A.TIR  cf.  supra  p.  22  f. 

4  f .  For  SA.NA  burasi  and  K  AS. SAG  tanaki(ki)  cf.  supra 
p.  20  f. 

5.  That  £p  =  aru  (BRUNNOW,  List,  no.  5570)  =  the  flower 
(of  a  palm)   cf.  JENSEN,   ZK  II,  p.  26.     The  tablet  clearly  reads 

^=T»  not  ItlJ  as  in  IV  R1,  nor  HJ  as  in  IV  R2.  The  £j  ^J 
is  possibly  to  be  identified  with  the  plant  *am  tlj  ^|,  which 
occurs  in  Sm.  8,  Col.  I,  1.  141,  where  it  is  rendered  by  &a-as- 
fyu-ra-ku,  and  fya-as-fyu-ur  (cf.  BRUNNOW,  List,  no.  4193). 

6.  According   to    BRUNNOW,    List,   no.  8613    russu  is  also  a 
possible  rendering  of  the  group  KU.HUS.A. 

7.  The  three  forms  of  flesh  here  enumerated  may  represent 
the  flesh  of  three  different  beasts,  or  flesh  in  general  prepared 
in  three   different   ways.     The  ^riKA.IZI  was  poss.   so  named 
from   its   appearance,    KA.IZI  being    =  bamatu ,    sa   isati   (cf. 
BRUNNOW,  List,  no.  651). 


1  For  the  text  of  this  tablet  cf.  BOISSIER,  Documents  assyriens,  Paris,  1894, 
p.  42.  For  £:|  *  j£:  at  the  beginning  of  1.  6  read,  according  to  the  tablet,  >-  \t^ 
i.  e.  ina  muli  Su-a-tum  etc. 


PRAYERS  TO  MARDUK.  .      65 

8.  £pf-H    is   to    be  here  taken  as  =  Samnu  (cf.  LATRILLE, 
ZK  II,  p.  356  f.).     In   ritual   texts  samnu    "oil"    is   rendered    by 

£pF-M  >  MT^I  and  £ff-  almost  indiscriminately.  No  clear 
distinction  in  their  use  can  be  observed,  though  perhaps  £yy~ 

is  more  often  used  for  "oil"  in  general,  £fl^|  or  ^yy^J  when 
the  oil  of  some  particular  tree  is  specified. 

That  £|  HJ  should  be  read,  not  £f  H3J  as  IV  R2,  cf.  1.  1 16. 

9.  That  4i*TT         is    a  material   used    in  building  is  clear 
from  the  East  India  House  inscription,  Col.  II,  1.  45  (cf.  SCHRADER'S 
Keilins.  Bidl.,  Bd.  Ill,  Hft.  II,  p.  14   and   DELITZSCH,    Worterbuch, 
p.  1 10,  note  i).    The  ideogram  is  transliterated  in  the  text  as  gas$u, 
in  accordance  with  a  communication  from  Dr.  BEZOLD,  who  has 

come  across  the  group  in  K  4864,  1.  16  f.  rendered  by  £X^L<  yT 

and  who  compares  the  Arabic  (j&s?-  Cf.  also  BRUNNOW,  List, 
no.  8470. 

10.  ^|    \>—  I   cannot  here  =  sitas,   but  is  prob.  the  name 
of  a  plant   or  tree,   ^|    being  the  determinative;    cf.  the  plant 

H  1 1^  \^|'  which  occurs  in  Sm.  8,  Col.  II,  1.  5  and  possibly 
in  K  4354,  Col.  II,  1.  12  (II  R,  pi.  43,  no.  2),  etc. 

\  i  if.  The  sign  y  in  the  phrases  j  y  abnufarutu ,  ]  y 
fyurasiii  etc.  is  to  be  taken  as  the  relative ,  not  as  a  numeral, 

the  duplicate  A  giving  the  variant  reading  |  ^~\\  \fl>  In 
11.  12  and  73  kunukku  is  written  with  the  determinative  £|?  in 

1.  13  with  £ff-<T'  while  in  1.  73  the  duplicate  C  writes  the  word 
with  both  determinatives. 

1 6.  The  end  of  this  line  should  probably  be  restored  siptu 
iluMarduk  [bil  matati]  III  sanitu  munu-su  from  1.  17,  the  incan- 
tation being  cited  by  the  words  with  which  it  commences.  In 
this  common  rubric  the  suffix  is  not  generally  appended  to  the 

verb  munu,  so  that  it  is  possible  the  second  J  is  merely  an 
error,  through  ditography  on  the  part  of  the  scribe,  for  ^~ 
the  phonetic  complement  that  is  commonly  found  with  the 

ideogram  ^HL 

20.  For  fcji£$ff  V  sarru  sa  of  the  text  A  gives  the  variant 


66  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 


reading  fcE^f^-        rap-su,    which    has   probably  arisen   from  the 

fc;K>->- 
misreading  of  a  badly  written  fc-^tJffy- 

27.  The  characters  in  this  line  are  rubbed;  if  t^  V^F 
££E>  the  reading  of  IV  R1  and  2  be  adopted,  the  phrase  should 

be  translitarated   mudabbidi(di)   nufysu   (i.  e.   £fc±:  ^[TIN)'   "who 
giveth  great  abundance". 

30.  +-£^\-nu-u  should  be  read  with  IV  R1,  not  *~*7  —  nu-u 
as  in  IV  R2. 

32.  The  title  usumgallu  in  this  passage  is  clearly  not  used 
in  the  sense  cf  "dragon".  The  parallelism  of  a-si-ru  in  the 
second  half  of  the  line  suggests  some  general  term  implying 
authority. 

50.  The  first  sign    in   this  line    should   probably    be   read 

£jy|£   as   in    IV  R2,    although    £JTI    is    all  that    is    at  present 
visible. 


52.  The  signs  ff-  »p|?  which  occur  frequently  in  a  form- 
ula on  the  6th  tablet  of  the  .?//;-/#-series  (cf.  IV  R,  pi.  7,  Col.  II, 
11.  2,  12,  22,  32,  42,  52;  pi.  8,  Col.  Ill,  11.  3,  1  6),  are  explained 
by  JENSEN  (ZK  II,  p.  20)  as  a  verb  (i.  e.  nisu  III  i)  with  the 
3  m.  s.  suffix,  and  as  instances  of  the  occurrence  of  the  phrase 

he  quotes  the  present  passage   and  £^  £^|[  >F|  in  1.79   (see 

below).  It  is  more  probable  that  the  signs  £yy  »F|  should  be 
transliterated  phonetically  ni-su,  a  word  that  is  not,  however, 
to  be  identified  with  the  nisu  "spirit  (?)",  which  occurs  in  the 

phrase  ma-mit  nis  (=  *~\  J^v  sami-i  .  •  .  nis  irsitim(tim)  (ibid. 
Col.  I,  1.  50;  see  also  BRUNNOW,  List  no.  2326).  In  the  passages 
cited  above,  as  in  the  present  line,  ni-su  is  followed,  not  pre- 
ceded, by  ma-mit,  and  is  to  be  regarded  as  I  i,  Inf.  from  nasu, 
the  two  words  being  probably  taken  together  in  the  sense  of  an 
"oath"  or  "curse"  (lit.  "the  raising  of  an  oath  or  curse"),  ni-su, 
however,  sometimes  occurs  by  itself  (cf.  No.  I,  1.  48:  li-in-ni-is-si 
ma-mit  li-td-kil  ni-[su(?)],  etc.]  so  that  in  the  phrase  ni-su  ma- 
mit  the  two  words  are  perhaps  to  be  taken  as  separate  syno- 
nymous phrases  in  apposition. 

67  .    Y  +%-  i.  e.  sakinu(nu)  is  to  be  read  for  y  A^-  of  IV  R. 


PRAYERS  TO  MARDUK.  .       67 

7 1  f.  It  is  possible  that  these  two  lines  should  be  taken 
together  without  a  break. 

73.  The  application  of  the  metaphor  in  this  line  is  not  at 
first  sight  apparent.  The  kunukku  may,  however,  refer  to  the 
seal-impression ,  and  as  seal-impressions  have  been  found  on 
small  clay  cones,  which  were  originally  attached  to  the  docu- 
ments they  attested  by  means  of  a  strip  of  reed  (cf.  BUDGE, 
ZA  III,  p.  214),  it  is  probable  that  the  tearing  off  or  removal  of 
such  a  seal-impression  is  the  basis  of  the  metaphor  in  the  text. 

77  ff.  The  division  of  11.  77 — 79,  as  given  in  the  translation 
is  based  on  the  duplicate  C,  which  reads  as  follows:  — 

Rev.   5.  Never  may  there  approach  me  any  thing  evil,  neither  the 

wrath  nor  anger  of  the  god,  misery,   disgrace  and  sin! 
6.  From  the  curse  may  the  raising  of  my  two  hands,  the 
invocation  of  the  great  gods,  give  release! 

Here  the  general  phrase  mimma  limnu  is  introduced  and 
defined  by  the  substantives  that  follow.  £ff-  ^11  *^l  nas  been 
explained  by  JENSEN  (ZK  II,  p.  20)  as  =  HPF-  ^|  =  lusisisu 
or  lisisisu  (cf.  supra  sub  1.  52).  The  reading  of  C,  however, 
proves  that  the  phrase  is  to  be  transliterated  ni-is  kati,  in  ap- 
position to  zi-kir  ilanipl  rabuti*1. 

98.  *~~  is  written  over  an  erasure;  the  scribe  had  probably 
begun  to  write  \|*~  omitting  *~>  but  corrected  his  mistake. 

99.  On  the  rendering   of  fcjE^lJ  5^  ^"iF   by   riksu  tapa- 
far(dr)  cf.  supra  p.  22  and  infra  sub  No.  16,  1.  n. 


No.  13. 

Transliteration. 

i 2.    ///- 3.  sa-l?a-a  i- 

4.   a-lik  tap-pu-ti  la  It-- 5-   ana-ku  pu- 

lanu   apil  pulani   sa   ilu-su  pulanu    [iluistar-su   pulamtum(tum)] 

6.    azzaz(az)  ina  pan  ilu-ti-ka   rabiti(ti) 7-    tna 

biktt  nisi*1  sa  la  ma- 8.    mimma  sumsu  ka-ba-a 

u  ma-ga-[ra] 9.  lul-lik  ruk-^a(f)  a-mi-ri  .... 

K.2 


68  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

10.    lu   taS-lim    ina   sil-li-ka   ni-mi-ki 

1 1 .  ina  pi-ka  Sa  la  na-kar  li- 

12.  INIM.IN1M.MA  SU  IL.[LA         ilu  Marduk.  KAN] 

13.  DU.DU  BI         ana    pan     iluMarduk  

14.  [SA].NA      burasi       taSakan(an)       ntS  kati 


15.  [Siptu]        bi-lum         iluMarduk        mu-di-i 

1 6 -la-at  nisi*1  a-pa-[a-ti]    .    . 

17 -ba  $it-ka- 


Rev. 

1 8 -Sap   balatu    iS-Sak-na 

19 sd  i$-$ak-nam-[ma] 20.  [id?] 

a-na   ya-$i   kima    sami-i    ana-ku    a-na    Sa-a-Su 

21.    [tlu]$tdu  damku  u-Si-is-sa  . 22.    ii-sab-bit  sap- 

ti-ya   lib-bi  u- 23.    u-ka-as-si  a-j}i-ya 

....    24.   bir-ki-ya  u-mal-li  tabti- 25.  gdm-ma- 

al  mati-ya  26.   su-mi  ii-sat-bi    ina     umi 

[an-ni-i(?)] 27.     bi-li   ak-ri-dak-ka    Si-mi  .  .  . 

28.    Sur-Si  di-ni        purus 29.    bi- 

il-la-an-ni 30.    ki-i  la  in- 

31.    iluMarduk 32.    ina  pi-i- 

33.    mab- 

No.  13  (K  3229)  forms  the  bottom  left  corner  of  a  large 
tablet  similar  to  No.  12.  The  Obverse  contains  the  conclusion 
of  a  prayer  to  Marduk,  in  which,  after  giving  his  own  names 
and  those  of  his  god  and  goddess  in  the  usual  formula ,  the 
suppliant  states  that  he  stands  before  the  god  whom  he  ad- 
jures by  the  tears  of  the  people ;  he  prays  that  he  may  enjoy 
the  god's  favour,  remaining  in  his  deep  shadow  (/.  e-  protection) 
through  his  mighty  command  that  does  not  change.  This 
prayer  is  followed  by  two  lines  of  directions  for  ceremonies, 
and  at  1.  15  a  fresh  prayer  commences,  which  is  continued  on 
the  Reverse  of  the  tablet.  The  second  prayer  begins  with  an 
invocation  of  Marduk,  who  at  1.  20  is  described  as  "like  the 
heavens"  in  his  relation  to  the  suppliant.  In  1.  21  the  Stdu  or 
divine  colossus  is  addressed,  probably  as  the  minister  who 
carries  out  the  will  of  the  greater  god;  at  1.  27  the  suppliant 
turns  once  more  to  Marduk,  petitioning  him  for  judgment.  As 


PRAYERS  TO  MARDUK.  69 

both  hymns  are  addressed  to  Marduk,  it  may  be  inferred  that 
the  tablet  was  somewhat  similar  in  its  arrangement  to  No.  12, 
and  that  it  contained  prayers  and  ceremonies  in  honour  of 
this  god  only. 


No.  14. 

Transliteration. 

i ili-ya    2 -lim-man-ni  3.  ... 

tas-li-ti    4 gi-mil  napisti(ti)    5.  ... 

-  turn    ina   kati-ya   li-kin     6 foi-ti-ti 

7 si-lim  itti-ya    8 I.SAG.ILA 

9 bilu-ut-ka   10 pa-nu-uk-ka  li-sa-lik(?) 

n.  [IN1M.INIM.MA  $U  IL.LA  ilu]Marduk.KAN 


12.     .     . 

[ilu]Marduk            taSakan(an) 

I  3 

-    lit   -    su            vncigrat(ai) 

14. 

,-hu    i  ^. 

.  kar-du    1  6  

ra  -  Sub  -bu     1  7  . 

.  ul  ib-$i     1  8. 

No.  14  (K  2793)  is  a  fragment  of  a  large  tablet  and  pre- 
serves the  ends  of  a  few  lines  only.  It  contains  the  conclusion 
of  a  prayer  to  Marduk  (11.  i  — 10),  followed  by  two  lines  of 
directions  for  ceremonies  and  the  commencement  of  a  second 
prayer  or  incantation. 

10.  The  last  3  characters  in  the  line  (li-sa-lik  =  liitulik?) 
may  poss.  be  read  li-ir-ur. 


No.  15. 

Transliteration. 

i -  ya       2 -  turn  3 

-ku     4 &r-Si     5 

6 -tuk     7 ki-i-nu  8 

arki-ya  9 limuttu  at  a-mur  10 


70  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 


yd-  Si    ii simati*1     12 

-$ut-ka     13 -mu  $i-mat-ka     14 

-bu-ka    15 ina  Su-bat  ta-ni-ij}-ti-y&    16 

damikti(ti)-ya  lik-bi-ka 

17.  [INIM.INIM.MA  SU  IL.LA]  iluMarduk.KAN 

1 8 mu  a-giib-ba  tukan(an)    19 

GI.GAB  tukan(an)    20 [KU.A].TIR  tatapak(ak) 

21 -bu-ku    22 tukan(an)   23.  .. 

siptu  III  Sanitti  munu(nu) 

24 [buraSi]  tasakan(an)    25 -az 

26 -ku-nu     27 tanaki(ki) 

28 

Like  the  preceding  fragment,  No.  15  (K  2586  -f-  K  7185) 
preserves  a  portion  of  the  right  side  of  what  was  originally  a 
large  tablet.  The  conclusion  of  a  prayer  to  Mardnk,  a  section 
of  six  lines  giving  directions  for  ceremonies,  and  the  beginning  of 
a  second  ceremonial  section  represent  its  present  contents. 


No.  16. 

Transliteration. 

Obv. 

i 2 Sipat- 3 

Si-pir- 4 -nam-ru     5 

-tu     6 

Rev. 

7 [lu]-u-$a-pi 8 

-  ka  I.SAG.ILA     9 si- lint       lik-bi-ka 

10.  [INIM.INIM.MA  SU  ILj.LA  il»Marduk.KAN 

11.  [DU.DU  BI    lu   ina  KISDA  lu  ina  SAJ.NA  ipu$(us) 

12 Sami     u     irsiti 

13.  [ikal  miluAs$ur-ban-apli]  etc. 

Of  the  Obverse  of  No.  16  (K  11681)  a  few  characters  only 
have  been  preserved,   while  the  Reverse  contains  the  conclud- 


PRAYERS  TO  MARDUK.  •       71 

ing  phrases  of  a  prayer  to  Marduk,  the  last  one  on  the  tablet. 
The  colophon-line  that  gives  the  title  of  the  prayer  (1.  10)  is 
here  accompanied  by  a  rubric  or  direction  contained  in  a  single 
line  (1.  u),  which  occurs  frequently  in  the  present  class  of  texts. 
For  other  instances  of  its  occurrence,  cf.  No.  18,  1.  19;  No.  21, 
1.  92;  No.  22,  1.  69;  No.  28,  1.  6;  No.  34,  1.6;  No.  38,  1.4; 
No.  39,  1.  5;  No.  41,  1.  2;  No.  46,  1.  10;  No.  47,  1.  7.  It  will  be 
seen  that  the  line  is  never  found  by  itself,  but,  when  it 
occurs,  always  follows  the  colophon-line  IN1M.INIM.MA  SU 
IL.LA  etc.  It  commences  with  the  phrase  DU.DU  BI  i.  e.  ipus 
annam,  "do  the  following",  which  generally  precedes  any  di- 
rections for  ceremonies  or  ritual  (cf.  supra  p.  19).  The  direction 
itself  consists  of  the  words  lu  ina  KISDA  lit  ina  SA.NA  ipus, 
a  set  formula  that  rarely  varies.1  No  substantive  is  mentioned 
for  the  imperative  ipus  to  govern;  hence  it  may  be  inferred 
that  the  object  of  the  verb  is  to  be  supplied  from  the  previous 
line,  i,  e.  that  the  rubric  refers  to  the  manner  in  which  the  pre- 
ceding prayer  or  incantation  is  to  be  recited.  Two  methods 
of  recitation  are  in  fact  given  as  alternatives,  the  line  reading: 
"Perform  (the  incantation)  either  ina  KISDA  or  ina  SA.NA. 

In  the  course  of  a  prayer  to  Ninib  contained  by  No.  2, 
1.  27  reads:  ar-kus-ka  rik-sa  KU.A.TIR  ds-ruk-ka,  "I  have  bound 
for  thee  a  cord,  the  KU.A.TIR  have  I  offered  thee!"  (cf.  supra 
p.  17).  The  KU.A.TIR  is  of  common  occurrence  among  the 
offerings  that  are  prescribed  in  the  ceremonial  directions  that 
accompany  the  present  class  of  incantations  (cf.  supra  p.  22  f.). 
It  would  not  therefore  be  surprising  if  the  riksu  mentioned  in 
the  first  half  of  the  line  should  also  be  found  in  the  directions 
for  ceremonies.  It  was  suggested  above  (p.  58)  that  in  I.  99 
of  No.  12  the  phrase  fc^tJ  ££  ^Vr  should  be  transliterated 
riksu  tapalar(ar),  "the  knot  thou  shalt  loosen",  and  it  is  not 
improbable  that  in  the  phrase  ina  fc^tJ  in  the  rubric  under 
discussion  we  may  see  a  further  reference  to  the  rite  ot  the 
knotted  cord  (riksu).  The  second  ideogram  SA.NA  has  been 
already  discussed  on  p.  igf.,  where  the  suggestion  was  made 
that  the  word  denoted  a  vessel  for  containing  incense.  The 


1  See  below,  sub  No.  42,  1.  25,  and  No.  52,  1.  4. 


PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

rubric  therefore  is  to  the  effect  that  the  incantation  must  be 
accompanied  either  with  the  rite  of  the  knotted  cord,  or  with 
the  offering  of  incense. 


No.  17. 

Transliteration. 

i 2 balatu 

3 ri-sa-a-ti  u  GUR.UD 4. 

ka-a-sa  pa-li-fyi-ka  lu- 


5.  [1NIMJN1M.MA  SU]  IL.LA  ilu[Marduk(?).KAN] 

6 -mi  a$ar(?)   sipadu   TAR(at) 

7 -za  tanadi(di)  ina  Hi 8.  ... 

ina  Hi  sa 9 

The  fragment  No.  17  (K  5668)  contains  a  few  words  of 
a  prayer  followed  by  some  directions  for  ceremonies.  The 
name  of  the  god  to  whom  the  prayer  is  addressed ,  though 
broken ,  is  in  all  probability  Marduk ;  hence  the  fragment  is 
included  under  the  prayers  addressed  to  that  god. 


[No.  18. 
Transliteration. 


2-                    i  -  na  -  ta  -  lu  pa  -  nu  -  uk  -  [ka]1 

3.  a-na    gi-bis      ta-ma-a-ti      pa-nu-ka       ma-a- 

4.  sa  -  k&  -  ta  ina                sa  -  ma  -  mi 
5-                     kul  -  lat         ni$ipl  ta  -    bar  -    ri 
6.  sur    -     ba     -     ta     -     ma  ina  irsitim(tim) 
7-                     tirutirti*1  -  su  -  nu  [ta  -  bar  -  ri2 

8.  sa     fyi  -  tu     iff.  -  tu  -  u  ta  -  ga  -  mil  -  su     at  -  ta 

9.  s.ab  -  ta  -  ku  -  ma  ki  -  i       ti  -  i  -  ri 
I0-                        z#tf3  ka       -       an               ni       -       ka 


1    Ll.  I   and  2    probably  formed  one  line  in  A,    which  gives  traces  of  two 

preceding  lines,  of  which  the  second  reads: -ku-[ti?].     >Jt  For  1.  7 

A  reads:  liriPl-lu-nu  ta-na-ftal].     3  A  i-na. 


PRAYERS  TO  MARDUK.  .      73 

11.  ki  -  i  izakara(ra)  -  ni  iluMarduk 

12.  a     -     la     -     su     -     urn  ur  -  ki  -  [ka] 

Rev. 

13.  na  -  sa  -  ku         nindabu  a  -  sa  -  rak  .......... 

14.  pu  -  fur                    maruSti*  li  -  ki      un  -  ni  -  [ni  -  yd]2 

15.  Saru  -  ka         tabu  li  -    zi  -    ka    -    am   -    [ma]3 
1  6.                napiStim(tim)*  li                       ri                      ik 
17.  la-ta-am             nar-bi-ka  ana5            ni$t*1 


i8.INIMJNIM.MA  SU  IL.LA  ""Mardtik.GI6 

19.  TDU.DU  BI         lu       ina     KISDA     lu  ina  SA.NA     ipuS(uS) 

20.  Siptu  ga-aS-ru  Su-pu-u  i-dil         ilulgigi 

No.  1  8  (K  8009)  is  the  lower  portion  of  a  comparatively 
small  tablet,  of  which  about  one  third  has  been  preserved.  It 
probably  contained  only  one  prayer,  the  end  of  which  is  re- 
presented by  11.  1  —  17.  L.  20  gives  the  catch-line  to  the  next 
tablet  ,  while  1.  2  1  evidently  marks  the  commencement  of  a 
colophon.  The  prayer  is  carefully  written  and  several  of  the 
longer  lines  have  been  split  up  into  two  halves,  each  of  which 
occupies  one  line  of  the  tablet  (cf.  11.  i  f.,  4  f.,  6  f.,  9  f.,  1  1  f., 
15  f.),  11.  3  —  8,  for  instance,  reading:  — 

Unto  the  ocean-flood  thy  face  is  .....  ! 
Thou  art  exalted  in  heaven  : 

All  nations  thou  dost  behold! 
Thou  art  mighty  upon  earth: 

Their  spirits  thou  dost  behold! 
The  man  that  hath  sinned  thou  requitest! 

This  metrical  arrangement  of  the  lines  is  not  to  be  found, 
however,  in  the  duplicates  A  and  B.  On  the  Reverse  of  the 
tablet  the  suppliant  states  that  he  has  offered  a  present  and 
poured  out  a  libation,  and  he  therefore  prays  for  the  removal 
of  his  sorrow  and  sighing  and  for  length  of  days,  concluding 


1  B  maruUi-ya.     z  A  [un-ni]-ni-ya.      3  A  flij-zi-fam-ma.     *  B  [napiiti](ti). 
5  A  [a]-na.      6  U"Marduk.KAN.      7  After  1.  1 8  A  ceases  to  be  a  duplicate  giving 

three  lines  of  directions   for  ceremonies,    which  read: [ana  pan 

iltt]Marduk  $A.NA  bur&i  \ talakan(an)      HI  to- 

nltu  munu(nu)  \. 


74  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

with  the  desire   that  he  may  declare  the  greatness  of  the  god 
unto  distant  peoples. 

i  off.     Between   11.  8  and  9    of  A  an  insertion   or  a  gloss 

is  written  in  smaller  characters  of  which  only  ^  has  been  pre- 
served, the  tablet  reading:  - 


» 

TT  £TTT  IH 


•19.  The  duplicate  A  in  place  of  1.  19  gives  a  ceremonial 
section  of  three  lines  prescribing  the  offering  of  incense  and 
the  repetition  of  the  incantation  three  times. 

20.  This  catch-line  which  gives  the  first  line  of  the  next 
tablet  is  to  be  found  in  the  list  of  incantations,  K  2832  -f-  KL  6680, 
col.  I,  1.  7  (see  above  p.  15). 


No.  19. 

Transliteration. 

i 

2 -sit 

3.  ilu       ma- 

4.  bilu     bilu     bilu     

5.  a  -  bu  rabutit1 

7.  mu  -  ma  -  '  -  ir  sami  -  i  u  irsiti(ti)  bil  matati 
%'  isa]  ~  m*r  di  -  ni  sa  ul  inu  -  u  ki  -  bit  -  su 
9.  [mu]  -  sim  simati  kala(?)ma 

10.  [ina]  lumun  iluatali  iluSin  sa  ina  ar^i         iimi         isakna(na) 

11.  [lumun]         idatit1         ITLMIS         limniti^1         la         tabati^1 

12.  [sa]      ina      ikalli  -  ya      u      mati  -  ya  ibasa  -  a 

13.  [ina    ki]  -  bi  -  ka  -  ma    u  -  tal  -  la  -  da    ti  -  ni  -  si  -  i  -  ti 

14.  [a-na?]         sarru         sagganakku         sii-mi-sii-nu         ta-za-kar 

15.  as-sum  ba-ni-i  ilu  u         sarru 
I6-                                                     ba     -     su     -     u  itti     -     ka 


PRAYER  TO  BlL. 


75 


17.  ft         blhi         iam'£U       Sam  RIG        *a™GA  dan     -     ni 

1 8.  ina     ma  -  '  -  du  -  ti  kakkab  sa  -  ma  -  mi 
19-                                                        bi  -  li                      ad  -  dan  -  ka 
20 -rat-ti-ka                          ip-sa-ku  uznadu-ai 


Rev. 

2  i .  Sim  -  ti  ba  -  la  -  ti  -  ya  si  -  im 

22.  ba  -  ni  -  i  su  -  mi  -  ya  ki  -  bi 

23.  mi  -  ni  -  ta  FAL  -  ma  dumku  sur  -  ka 

24.  su  -  kun  -  ma         Hi  -  ya         ba  -  as  -  ta  -  ka  rabitti(tn) 

25.  [tin]         u         sarru  li  -  sa  -  ki  -  rn  -  in  -  ni 

26 u     rubu  kar  -  bu  -  ni  -  ya      li  -  pn  -  su 

27 -  ri  li  -  ba  -  sa  -  an  -  ni 

28.  ina        pufyri              lu     si  -  mat  ki  -  bi  balatu 

29.  llustdu                  likbi  magara  u  magara 

30.  u  -  mi  -  sam           lit  -  tal  -  lak  itti  -  ya 

31.  [ina]         ki  -  bit  -  ka  fir  -  ti  sa     ul    uttakkam(ru) 

32.  &               an  -  ni  -  ka  ki  -  nim  Sa       ul  inu  -  u 


1N1M.INIM.MA 


SU   IL.LA 


**BU.KAN 


33- 

34.  siptu       ru  -  ba  -  tu        rabttu(tu)       i  -  lat      si  -  ma  -  a  -ti 

As  is  the  case  in  the  preceding  tablet,  some  of  the  longer 
lines  in  No.  19  (K  34)  are  divided  into  halves,  which  together 
occupy  two  lines  on  the  tablet  (<:/.  11.  4  f.,  isf.,  i8f.,  29  f.). 
No.  19  contains  only  one  prayer  and  this  is  addressed  to  the 
god  Btl  and  was  intended  for  use  after  an  eclipse  of  the  moon 
(£/".  11.  i  off.).  The  beginning  of  the  prayer,  with  which  the  Ob- 
verse commenced,  has  been  broken  off;  it  probably  contained, 
however,  an  invocation  of  the  god,  of  which  the  conclusion, 
describing  his  power  as  ruler  and  creator,  has  been  preserved. 

4.  O  Lord!    O  Lord!    O  Lord! 

5.  Father  of  the  great  [gods?]! 

6.  The  lord  of  destinies,  the  [god?]  of  charms! 

7.  The  ruler  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  lord  of  lands! 

8.  Perfect  in  judgment,  whose  word  is  not  altered! 

9.  Director  of  destinies 

10.  In    the    evil    of    the    eclipse    of  the    moon    which    in    the 

month  (**ace)  on  the  day  (**ace)  has  taken  place, 

1 1.  In  the  evil  of  the  powers,  of  the  portents,  evil  and  not  good, 

L2 


76  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

12.  Which  are  in  my  palace  and  my  land! 

13.  At  thy  command  created  was  mankind! 

14.  Unto  king  and  noble  their  names  thou  didst  name! 

15.  Since  to  create  god  and  king 

1 6.  Rests  with  thee! 

In  11.  17  ff.  the  suppliant  states  he  has  made  an  offering 
to  the  god  consisting  apparently  of  three  plants,  and  he  there- 
fore seeks  the  god's  protection  for  himself  and  for  his  posterity 
("The  destiny  of  my  life  decree!  The  making  of  my  name  do 
thou  command!").  The  prayer  concludes  with  the  desire  that 
the  god  will  confer  blessings  through  his  attendant  minister, 
the  Si'du. 

29.  May  the  sidu  command  favour  upon  favour, 

30.  Daily  may  he  go  with  me, 

31.  Through  thy  exalted  command  which  is  not  altered, 

32.  And  thy  sure  mercy  which  changeth  not! 


No.  20. 

Transliteration. 

Obv. 

i -  ka     2. 

3 4 -  tint 

5 -ri$-ka -da  Si 

6.  ,  .  MIN.NA  DA  GAL  MA  SUR 


7.  [IN1M].INIM.MA  SU  IL.LA 


8.  [Siptu]    $ur  -  bu  -  u  git  -  ma  -  lu 

9.  [u]-mu           la         a-ni-bu  mut-tab-bil 

Rev. 

10.  lluRammanu             Sur-bu-u  git-ma- lu 

11.  u-mu       la         a-nz-fru  mut-tab-bil 

12.  $a  -  kin         u  -  ml  -  i 

13.  [mu]  -  Sab  -  rik          birku  AN.ZA  .  .  . 

14.  [kaS]  -  ka  -  $u                  git  -  ma  -  lu 

15.  [la?]        pa-du-u  a-$a-[rid?] 

1 6.  [tlu]Rammanu         kas-ka-Su  git-ma-[lu] 

17.  [tar]            pa-du-u  a-[$a-rid?] 


PRAYERS  TO  RAMMAN.  77 


1 8 -  kip  ik  -  du 

i  Q -  ni  -  bu     la  --.... 

Sar  -  . 


The  Obverse  of  No.  20  (K  10406)  contains  the  end  of  one 
prayer  and  the  beginning  of  another.  The  name  of  the  god 
to  whom  the  first  is  addressed  has  not  been  preserved,  but  the 
second,  which  is  continued  on  the  Reverse  of  the  tablet,  is 
addressed  to  Ramman  and  is  somewhat  similar  to  the  commence- 
ment of  the  prayer  to  the  same  god  in  No.  21,  11.  34  ff.  In 

11.  12  ff.  the  god  is  described  as  "the  establisher  of  days , 

who    causeth   the    lightning   to    shine ,    the  strong  one, 

the  perfect ,  the  unconquerable,  the  prince !" 


No.  21. 

Transliteration. 

Obv. 

[i.]   * [2.] i-tar-ra- 

i.    bi- -ru-su  u-nam-ma- 2.   ga- 

$a  ul  inu-u 3.  tik- -tim 

mu-$a-as- 4.  pa- mu-diS-Su-[u]  .  .  . 

5.    $a abt*l-$u  Sur- .' 

6.  na- -ft  Sa  ina  Sami-i j.  Sa  .  .  . 

-ti-ya    nir-bi  ana  nap- 8 

.  .  .  $a  i-mu-ku 9.  mil- -nu  it-rnu 

la  [a-ni-bu?] 10.  al- ina  ki-rib  Sami-t 

ii.    ana-ku [ana    maj-fyar-ka 

az-ziz  a-Si--ka  Sa- 12.  ilu Si-mat 

nisi*1  i- 13 il*$almu  da-.  .  .  . 

14 tu-ur-dam-ma  ina  ali-ya  fa-.  .  .  . 

15 -ka Sami-i  tn-nr- 

[dam-ma]     16 GAR -/« 


1  Since  the  plates  have  been  lithographed  I  have  joined  to  No.  21  two 
small  fragments  K  6612  and  K  6588.  The  former,  while  giving  additions  to 
11.  I  — 12,  adds  two  lines  to  the  text  which  in  the  Transliteration  are  numbered 
[i]  and  [2];  the  latter  completes  portions  of  11.  37—  47-  F°r  tne  present  text  of 
11.  [i]— 12  and  37—47  cf.  Additions  to  the  plates. 


78  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

sa-mid  duru  ru-  ..........    17  ...........  di-bi-.  .   .  . 

......  -an  u  abni^1  birku  ..........      18.    ilu  ali-ya  .  .  . 

.......  -am  -ma    u-kal-lu    ..........      19.    tlu  Rammanu 

bilu  ..........  ~ka  a-ta-ta-ma  ..........     20.   [a-na?] 

ya-a-$i  ..........  a-ta-ta-ma  ..........     21  ...... 

.....  an-ni-i  ma-bar-  ..........  li-ki  un-ni-ni-ya  mu-gu-ur 

su-[pi-ya]  22  ...........  pi-ka  lu  la  itifya-a  .......... 

i-pis  ri-ba   lu  la   iksud-an-ni  ya-[a-$i?]     23.    [nar]-bi-ka   lu-$a-pt 
[dalili-ka]  ana  nisifl  rapsati^1  lnd-[lul] 


24.  [INIM].1N1M.MA  SU  [IL.LA]         iluRammanu.[KAN] 

25  ...........  llu  Rammanu  pii-su  ittanandii  .......... 

alu  lu  bit  ilu  ali  u$-tal-pi?  ..........    26  ........... 

libit  bit  Hi  lu  ..........  lu  sa-mi-id  duru  ru-  .......... 

27  ...........  -  2$  ..........  -  in-na  -  .......... 


28.  [DU].DU  BI  ina  mu$i  guSiiru  [arku  mu  illu  tasalafy  GI].GAL 
ana  pan  llu Rammanu  tukan(an)  29.  suluppu  KU.[A.TIR  ta$a- 
pak(ak)  SA  Samni  nikii  mil  dispu  fyimitu  tasakan(an)  30.  immtrunikit 

tanaki[(ki)] -tafy-fya-ma    31.  SIT 

-i-ri- 32.  ki- llu Rammanu 33.  .  . 

-ni 

34.  [siptu]  Sur-bu-u 35.  [u]-mu  la  a-nt-ftu  .... 

36.  [ilu]Rammanu  $ur-bu-ii 37.   u-mu 

la  a-ni-fyu 38.  Sa-kin  ic-ml-i -bu- 

39.  kas-ka$-su  git-ma-[luj -a-la- 

40.   sam-ru  la  H-- tam-fya-.  . 

41.  tlu 'Rammanu  kas-ka$-$u  git-ma-[lu  $am]-ru  la  li-f]- 

42.    la-id  muk-tap-lu -ri  a$-tu- 

43.  sd-gi$(?)  ga-aS-ru -i-di   muS-tar- 

44.  mu-ur-si   in-ni- -pal-lu-u    Sal- 

45-  $1- du- -iz  ta-$ib- 

46.  ni- i-dan-ni  kar-da  mi- 47.   llu 

-$i(?) 48.    ina 

49-  to- 50 

Rev. 

51 />/   bir-tum   ab- 52 

[kul]-lat   Hani*1   $a 53 

-tak-ku-u 54 ya-u   aS-rat  ta- 

55-  ilu  u  Saplii  ib-ni- 56 


PRAYERS  TO  RAMMAN.  .      79 

a-bi  Hani*1 57 apsu 

m-mi-ki 58.  lluBilit  banat(at)  Hani*1  Sa-lum-ma- 

ta 59.   tluMarduk  tu-tir  u$-mal-la  kat-ta-ka  na- 

mnr-ra-ta 60.    ina  I.KUR    bit  $imatipl  $a-ka-a 

[ri-Sa-a-ka?]     61.    bilu    ri-mi-nu-u  ina   Hani*1 

62.  ip-sa-kn    uznadu-ai  ma-jjar-ka    ut-nin   Sa  bal- 

63.  ri-man-ni-ma  bilu  si-mi  tas-[li-ti?]  64.  [j}ul]-lik  ai-bi-ya  fu-ru-ud 

lim- 65.   [at]  itibu-ni  imti  imti  imti  ar$a$t*1  .  .  . 

66 naplisa-ni-ma  ki-bi  dum-ki- 

67.  [ili-ya]  u  llltistari-ya  sulma(ma)  itti-ya     68 

[lib]-ba-ka   li-nu-j}a   lippasra(ra)   ka-bit-ta-ka    'sulma(ma)  $uk-[na] 

69 li-ri-man-ni -ya  lisa-a  rimu 

70 nikt  an-ni-ma lu-ta-id  ilu-iit-ka 

7  i .  [nar  -  bi]  -  ka        lu  -  [$a]  -  pi        dalili  -  ka  lud  -  lul 

72.  [IN1MJ.INIM.MA  SU  IL.LA  iluRammanu.KAN 

73.  [DUDU]   BI  i-nu-ma    llu Rammanu   ina    ki-rib   sami-i  pii-Su 

it-ta-na-an-du-u 

74 -ta    sa illu    tasalajj.  SA.NA 

buraii  ina  i$ati  waSagi  ta-Sdr-rak 

75.  [SU?]  IL.LA -raS-Si-ma  $i-ma-a-at 

76.  [siptu]  iluRammanu -ta-az-nu  iu-pu-u  ilu  gaS-ru 

77 -fit- -ul-j}u    da-pi-nu    ku-ra-du 

78 -pi-i-ti  mu-$al-lil  u-nti 

79 -tit- As-li-i-ti     nu-uk-ka    gam-ra-a-ti 

80.  [ba?]-$u-u  bir-ki  bil  a-bu-bi 

81.  [mil]  -  ut  -  tab  -  bil       sami  -  i       Sadi*1       ta  -  ma  -  a  -  ti 

82 -  mu  -  ka Si  -  mu  -  u     zi  -  kir  -  ka 

83 -  Sim  -mi -  du  -  u       jjur-sa-a-ni 

84 -bi-i da-a-ri-Su  u-ga-ru 

85 -fri      it-bu- i-dal-la-la       kur-di-ka 

86 -sa-am       iz- -ti-ma       mu$i      u      it-mi 

87 U.A  ur-ki-tu(?)  tu-sal-lam  $ab-sa 

88.  [ana]       ya-a-Si       arad-ka        ana       tu-ub-ba-ti      si-di-ir-ma 

89.  [minima]      SumSu  ri-i-ma  da-li-li-ka          lud-Iul 
90 -ka       tabu       lul-tam  ma-ra       ana       nisi*1      rapSati*1 

QI.  IN1M.INIM.MA  SU  IL.LA  iluRammami.KAN 

92.  [DU].DU  BI      lu     ina     [$AR]      lu    ina    $A.NA 


80  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

93.  ilu     btlu         su-pu-u          git-ma-lum  Hani*1          ra-sub-bu 

94.  ikal  m  UuAssur-ban-apli  etc. 

Like  No.  6  (cf.  supra  p.  33  f.)  No.  21  has  been  built  up  of 
several  fragments  of  the  K.  Collection  (K  2741  -f-  K  3180  -f" 
K3208  +  K5043  -f  K  6588  +  K  6612  -j-  K  6672  +  K  6908 
-J-  K  7047  +  K  8498  -J-  K  9157  -\-  K  10219  -f-  K  10497  + 
K  13431  +  K  I3793)-  The  tablet  at  present  contains  traces  of 
ninety-five  lines ;  about  six  or  seven  lines  however  are  missing 
from  the  beginning,  and  eight  or  nine  from  the  end  of  the  Ob- 
verse. It  will  be  seen  therefore  that  the  tablet  is  somewhat 
similar  in  size  to  Nos.  6  and  12.  The  text  commences  with  a 
prayer  or  incantation  which  is  followed  by  two  ceremonial 
sections,  the  first  of  three  lines,  the  second  being  six  lines  in 
length.  Then  follows  a  second  long  prayer,  which  is  in  all 
probability  continued  without  a  break  on  the  Reverse  of  the 
tablet.  This  is  in  turn  followed  by  a  section  of  three  lines  of 
ceremonies  and  a  third  incantation  of  fifteen  lines.  All  the 
prayers  and  ceremonies  are  to  be  recited  and  performed  in 
honour  of  the  god  Ramman. 

The  first  prayer  is  much  broken;  it  concludes  with  the 
desire  that  Ramman  will  accept  his  suppliant's  sighing  and  re- 
ceive his  supplication :  let  no  evil  approach  or  possess  him  and 
he  will  proclaim  the  greatness  of  the  -god  unto  distant  nations. 
The  rubric  in  11.  25  —  27  contains  the  statement  that  the  prayer 
is  to  be  repeated  during  a  certain  state  of  the  wind ,  while 
11.  28 — 33  recount  the  ceremonies  that  are  to  accompany  its 
recitation.  The  commencement  of  this  latter  section  is  identical 
with  that  of  the  first  ceremonial  section  in  No.  12,  for  a  trans- 
lation of  which  cf.  supra  p.  60. 

The  beginning  of  the  second  prayer  is  very  similar  to 
No.  20,  11.  8  ff.  (see  above  p.  76).  At  1.  58  the  goddess  Btlit  is 
addressed,  and  in  the  following  line  the  god  Marduk.  After 
allusions  to  his  power  and  mercy  the  suppliant  states  that  he 
is  petitioning  before  him,  and  the  prayer  concludes  (11.  61  ff.): 
"Have  mercy  on  me,  and,  O  Lord,  hear  my  prayer!  Destroy 
my  foes  and  drive  away  the  wicked!  Never  let  there  approach 

me   the    poisons,    the    enchantments    ...:.!     pity  me 

and  command  favour!  O  my  god  and  my  goddess,  may  peace 


PRAYERS  TO  R  AMMAN. 


8l 


be  my  portion!     may  thy  heart  have  rest,    may  thine 

anger  be  loosened,  and  do  thou  establish  prosperity!  Thy  great- 
ness let  me  praise,  let  me  bow  in  humility  before  thee!"  The 
directions  for  ceremonies  that  follow  this  prayer  enjoin  that 
"when  the  Storm-god  has  set  his  mouth  (i.  e.  has  spoken)  in  the 
midst  of  heaven",  among  other  offerings  "a  vessel  of  incense 
with  fire  of  the  aSagu-wood"  shall  be  presented. 

The  last  prayer  on  the  tablet  commences  with  the  follow- 
ing invocation  of  the  Storm-god:  "O  Ramman power- 
ful one,  O  mighty  god! strong  one,  O  hero! 

who    darkenest    the    day!     Possessor    of  the  lightning, 

Lord  of  the  storm-flood!  Who  destroyest  the  heavens,  the 
mountains,  and  the  seas!"  The  prayer  concludes  with  general 
petitions  for  mercy  and  blessings.  The  colophon-line  in  1.  91 
is  followed  by  the  rubric  which  has  been  already  discussed 
on  p.  71  f. 

25.  That  yll  is  probably  to  be  transliterated  ittanandu, 
cf.  1.  73- 

67.  As  -ma  is  evidently  the  phonetic  complement,  v^f"- 
cannot  =  lislimu  (cf.  No.  i,  1.  23  f.  etc.);  it  should  rather  be 
transliterated  by  the  subs.  sulmu  as  in  1.  68. 

89.  lul-tam-ma-ra  for  lustammar,  cf.  lu-us-tam-mar  ilu-nt- 
ka(or  -ki),  No.  8,  1.  17,  No.  9,  1.  n,  etc. 


No.  22. 

Transliteration. 


Obv. 

1.  siptu         rubu         asaridu 

2.  massu-u*         i-ti-ip-su 

3.  iluNabu       na-as       duppu 
4-  bil     I.Z1D.DA 

5.  na  -  ram  iluta 

6.  a  $  arid  Babili 


bu-kur 
i-lit-ti 

si-mat     ilanipl 
su-lnl 


il"Marduk 

itu  Zarpanitu 

a- sir    I.SAG.ILA 

dfn-n  BorsippaKI 


na  - 


ka  -  i  -  su         balatu 

-  ru         na  -  pis  -  ti 


1  A  [massu]-ii. 


82  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

7.  ilu         du-ul         da-ad-mi           kar         nisi*1         btl  is-ri-ti 

8.  zi  -  kir  -  ka       ina       pi         nisi*1        SU.DUB.BA  iltlsidu 
g.  mar       mbi(?)       rabi(?)       llllMarduk       ina    pi  -  ka  kit  -  ti 

10.  ina       si-ik-ri-ka^       kabti      ina       ki-bit      ilu-ti-ka  rabiti(ti) 

1  1  .  ana-ku    pulanu      apil    pulani     mar-su     sum-ru-su  arad-ka 
12.  sa   kat  utukki-ma   imat  BUR.RU.DA   nam-kil-lu-ni-ma  nak- 


13.  lu-iib-hit  lu-ns-lim-ma  ......  ....  GUB.BU.DU  luksud(?)(ud) 

14.  sit  -  us  -  kin  kit  -  [ti          ]  ina    pi  -  ya2 

15.  sup  -  Si  -  ka  [damikli(ti)]  ina     libbi  -  ya 
1  6.  ti  -  i  -  ru     n3      man  -  za  -  [za      lik  -  bu  -  u]      damikti(ti) 
17.  li-iz-ziz                                  [ili-ya                    ]         ina      imni-ya 
1  8.  li-iz-ziz                                  [lluistari-ya          ]       ina     sumili-ya 

19.  llusidu  damiktu  il"[lamassu  damiktu]  ..........  -kisitti-ya 

20.  su-ut-li-ma-am-[ma]  ..........    u       ma  -  ga  -  [ra] 

21.  si  -  kir*  a  -  ta  -  ..........  -  //         Us  -  ..... 

22.  mar      rubi(?)       rabi-i^     [llu]  ..........  la     ki-  ..... 

23.  panu  -  ka         ki  -  nis         ..........         hi  -  us  -  bi(?) 

24.  iluMarduk  KAN    ..........     KAN.SIR  -  [kar] 

25.  ilu  .......................      lik  -  ru  -  bu  -  ka 

26.  '*•  .................................  -ka 

27.  Hani*1  ................................ 

28.  iluNabu  ...............................  .- 

29.  ina  L  ................................. 

30.  INIMJNIM.[MA  SU  JL.LA  iluNabu].KAN 

31.  DU.DU  BI  II  KA  ktmi  ...................... 

32.  isu  tanitti  itti  ktmii  ARA    ..................... 

33.  K  AS.  SAG  tanaki(ki)  tubbal-ma  siptu    .............. 

34.  kurmat-su  tasakan-ma  mafy-rat  .................  -i 

35.  siptu  bit  nu-ru  ab-kal  .....................  -u 

36.  ilu       siru  [a]  -  pit  iluMarduk 

37.  lluNabu  abkallu  asaridu  ir  -  sit  mudu  -  u 

38.  ilu         $iru  a  -  pil  UuMardnk 
39  ...........  -mar-ras         samt-i                   u         irsitim(tim) 

40.  ..  ................  -tu-u  sa         LSAGJLA 


1  B  ina  zik-ri-ka.     -  B  ina  pl-ya.     3  Omitted  by  B.     *  B  zi-kir.     •'  /j  war 
rubif?)  raU(?). 


PRAYERS  TO  NABC.  '      83 

41 iluMarduk     sar    Hani*1 

42 bur-sa-nu  illiitii>l  tamatipl  rapsatipl 

43 u-tak-ku 

44 

Rev. 

45 

46 ki-di- 

47 --a-tu   Sak- 

48 -  na         ik  -  sa  - ana       DI.DI(iS) 

49.  UGU-ma  ki-i         ta-sa-kan         ilusalmu 

50.  SA         in  -  si         kit  -  lim  - ta  -  da  -  an 

51.  ana  -  ku        pulanu         apil      fulani     -  ka 

52.  marustu  im     -     mur    -     .  .  .'.  .'T. .,.,  .     -     sa     -     ku 

53.  ina     ku  -  u  -  ru         u          -  a  -  ni 

54.  ina       lu  -  mun -  ti 

55.  pu       u      lisanu     ka  -.....'.' -  ya 

56.  ina      ii-mi     an-ni-i .  . -Sid 

57.  az-ziz    ma-J}ar-ka -ka 

58.  [su]-lul-ka    tabu    ta-ai(?)~ -a  ili-ya 

59.  [ur]-fyi  lid-mi-ik  li-sir 

60.  [kib]  -  sa  i  -  Sa  -  ra  Su  -  kun     ina     stpidtl  -  ya 

61.  bttu         Hi  -  yd,  si  -  lim  it  -  ti  -  ya 

62.  iluNabu      bilu       Hi  -  ya  si  -  lim  it  -  ti  -  ya 

63.  i  -  na         sat         mu  -  Si         lid  -  mi  -  ka      Sunat*"1  -  u  -  a 

64.  ri  -  i  -  ma  un  -  ni  -  na  bal  -  ta  llttsidu 

65.  ka  -  ba  -  a  Si  -  ma  -  a  Suk  -  na          ya  -  Si 

66.  ina        ki-bit       ilu-ti-ka        rabiti[(ti)]        lu-ub-lut       lu-di-ma 

67.  dalili*1  -  ka  ana  nisi[pl     rapsati*1]  lud  -  lul 

68.  INIMJNIM.MA  [SU  IL.LA]  il»Nabu.KAN 

69.  DU.DU  BI        [lu     ina     SAR     lu     ina     $A].NA       ipuS(uS) 

70.  siptu         ilu[Na-bi-um         a-sa-ri-du         bu-kur]         iluMarduk 

7 1 .  ikal  [m  iluAssur-ban-apli  etc. 

No.  22  (K  140  -f-  K  3352  -f-  K  8751  +  K  10285)  forms 
the  upper  portion  of  a  large  tablet,  from  which  about  a  quarter 
is  at  present  missing.  The  tablet  contains  portions  of  three 
prayers  and  of  one  ceremonial  section ,  all  of  which  are  com- 
posed in  honour  of  the  god  Nadu.  The  first  prayer  on  the 

Ka 


84  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

tablet  contains  petitions  for  life  and  prosperity,  and  was  in- 
tended for  the  relief  of  a  man  suffering  from  sickness  and  de- 
moniacal possession.  The  end  of  the  prayer  is  broken;  the 
first  20  11.,  however,  read  as  follows. 

Translation. 

1.  O  hero,  prince,  first-born  of  Marduk\ 

2.  O  prudent  ruler,  offspring  of  Zarpanitu\ 

3.  O  Nabu,    Bearer   of  the  tablet    of  the  destiny  of  the  gods, 

Director  of  tsagila\ 

4.  Lord  of  tzida,  Shadow  of  Borsippa! 

5.  Darling  of  la,  Giver  of  life! 

6.  Prince  of  Babylon,  Protector  of  the  living! 

7.  God  of  the  hill  of  dwelling,  the  fortress  of  the  nations,  the 

Lord  of  temples! 

8.  Thy  name  is in  the  mouth  of  the  peoples,  O  sidul 

9.  O  son  of  the  mighty  prince  Marduk,  in  thy  mouth  is  justice! 

10.  In   thy   illustrious    name,    at    the  command    of  thy   mighty 

godhead, 

11.  I  so  and  so,    the  son  of  so  and  so,    who  am  smitten  with 

disease,  thy  servant, 

12.  Whom  the  hand  of  the  demon  and  the  breath  of  the 

13.  May  I  live,  may  I  be  perfect 

14.  Set  justice  in  my  mouth! 

15 mercy  in  my  heart! 

1 6.  Return  and  be  established!  May  they  command  mercy! 

17.  May  my  god  stand  at  my  right  hand! 

1 8.  May  my  goddess  stand  at  my  left  hand! 

19.  May   the   favourable   sidu,   the  favourable  lamassu 

with  me! 

On  the  conclusion  of  the  prayer  there  follows  a  section 
of  four  lines  containing  directions  for  the  making  of  certain^ 
offerings ,  and  the  commencement  of  an  incantation ,  both  of 
which  are  much  broken.  On  the  Reverse  of  the  tablet  is  in- 
scribed the  conclusion  of  a  prayer,  which  may  possibly  be  the 
continuation  of  that  which  commences  at  the  end  of  the  Ob- 
verse. The  sick  man,  after  making  a  formal  statement  in  1.  51 
of  his  own  name  and  of  that  of  his  father,  concludes  the  prayer 
with  the  following  petitions. 


PRAYERS  TO  NABl).  .      85 

56.  At  this  time 57-1  stand  before  thee ! 

58.  Good  is  thy  shadow ! 

59.  May  my  way  be  propitious ! 

60.  Set  a  pleasant  path  for  my  feet! 

6 1.  O  lord,  my  god,  deal  graciously  with  me! 

62.  O  lord  Nabu,  my  god,  deal  graciously  with  me! 

63.  In  the  night  season  may  my  dreams  be  propitious! 

64.  Mercy,  compassion,  (and)  life,  O  $idu, 

65.  Command,  grant  my  petition  and  establish  me! 

66.  At  the  command  of  thy  mighty  godhead  let  me  live,  let  me 

have  knowledge! 

67.  In  the  sight  of(?)  wide-spread  peoples  may  I  bow  in  hum- 

ility before  thee! 

The  catch-line  for  the  next  tablet  reads:  "O  Nabii,  the 
prince,  the  first-born  of  Mardukl" 

2.    i-ti-ip-su   probably  for  itpteu  an  adj.  of  the  form 

from  V¥ZX. 

9.  That  the  beginning  of  this  line  is  not  to  be  read  mar 
abgalli  iluMardnk  appears  from  1.  22  ,  in  which  -i  is  added  to 

the  sign  ^|^>    mar  rubi  rabt  tl"Marduk  seems  therefore  to  be 
the  only  reading  admissible. 

12.  Y  »P|  here  poss.  =  bu$u,  i.  e.  "prey  of  the  demon", 
but  the  transliteration  $a  hat  appears  to  me  better,  as  it  ba- 
lances imat  in  the  following  phrase. 

14.  For  this  and  the  following  petitions  cf.  No.  9,  11.  i3ff. 
The  present  prayer  is  composed  throughout  on  somewhat  si- 
milar lines  to  the  first  prayer  of  No.  9. 


No.  23. 

Transliteration. 

i 2 li-Si-rib 

3 li-ki  un-ni-[ni-yh]    4 -da-ar-ti 

5 [nar]-bi-ka    lu-[$a-pi] 

6.  [INIM.1NIM.MA                   SU  IL.LA                      il»]Sin.KAN 
7-  •  •  nit  8 


86  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

[ilu]Sin 9. **  So, 

IO II 

No.  23  (K  13277)  contains  a  few  phrases  from  the  end  of 
a  prayer  to  Sin  and  from  the  beginning  of  a  section  of  cere- 
monies to  be  performed  in  honour  of  the  same  god. 


No.  24. 

Transliteration. 

i -id 2 -bit 

'ik- 3 sar-ra-ti  ra- 

4.  [INIM].IN1M.MA  SU  IL.[LA  iluSin.KAN] 

5.  [AG].AG     BI    i-nu-ma     iluSin     6 

tanaki(ki)    ana  pan   tlltSin 7 

munu(nu) 

The  name  of  the  god  to  whom  the  prayer  on  No.  24 
(K  13922)  is  addressed  has  not  been  preserved  in  the  colophon- 
line.  As,  however,  the  ceremonies  that  follow  it  are  to  be  ob- 
served in  honour  of  Sin  during  a  certain  phase  or  position  of 
the  moon  (cf.  1.  5),  it  is  clear  that  the  preceding  prayer  is  also 
addressed  the  Moon-god. 


No.  25. 

Transliteration. 

i 2 dir  - 

3 a-ti-ra- 4 

ma-fyar-ka  lu- 

5.  [IN1M.INIM.MA  SU  IL.LA]  iluSin.[KAN] 

6 -ki-im  aburris  nari^l(?)     7 -ti 

III  Santtu  munu[(nu)]    8 SA  Samni  hurasu  VII 

9 

Like  the  two  preceding  fragments  No.  25  (K  13296)  con- 
tains the  conclusion  of  a  prayer  to  Sin  and  the  commencement 
of  a  ceremonial  section. 


PRAYERS  TO  THE  MOON-GOD.  .      87 


No.  26. 
Transliteration. 


Obv 
I 

2  

-  bil 

3- 

[IN1M.1NIM.MA                      SU]  IL.LA 

iluSin.KAN 

A 

ana              *'"  Sin 

C. 

_  si     ina     iimi     magari 

vusiiru     ta  -  sa  -  bit 

Rev 

6 

-sal-tit     7  

.  kimu       tubbal-ma 

8 

-  an  -  ma        o     .    .    . 

.        .                      fabi' 

TO 

-four 

T  T 

.•.   .  ,-tim     12. 

No.  26  (K  10550)  preserves  portions  of  a  prayer  to  Sin 
and  a  ceremonial  section  of  seven  lines,  which  runs  over  onto 
the  Reverse  of  the  tablet,  and  was  probably  followed  by  a 
second  prayer  or  incantation. 


No.  27. 
Transliteration. 

1.  siptu    bi-lum    ga$-ru    ti-iz-ka-[ru    bu-kur    iluNU.NAM.NIR] 

2.  a-sa-rid         iluA-nun-na~[ki  btl  tam-fta-ri] 

3.  H-lit-ti         iluKU.TU.SAR  [sar-ra-tum2        rabitum(tnm)] 

4.  iluNirgal      kas-ka$       Hani*1         [mi-ram       iluN!N.MIN.NA] 

5.  su-pa(?)-ta       ina     sami-i      illuti[pl       sd-ku*       man-za-az-ka] 

6.  ra-ba-ta  ina          aralli-[ma  asira(ra)  LA.TI-Su] 

7.  it-ti     il"I-a         ina      pubur*       [Hani*1       mi-lik-ka$       Su-fur] 

8.  //-//         a*Sm  ina         Samt-i         [     ta-Si-6  gim-n] 

9.  id-din-ka-mai  iluBil  abu-[ka  sal-mat kakkadu pu-bur  napisti(ti)] 
10.  bu-ul         iluNirgal          nam-ma$-[si-i         ka-tuk-ka         ip-fcd] 


1    Sm.  398,  cited  as  C,   is  duplicate  of  11.  3  —  16.       2    C  [iarj-ra-ti. 
[Sdj-ku-u.      *  A  [ina  pu]-lnir.      '"'  mi-lik-ka  has  been  restored  from  C.     f>  C  tt-li- . 
7  A  iddin-ka-ma. 


88  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

11.  lana-ku    pulanu     apil    pulani    [  arad-ka] 

12.  mi-lat     Hi     u     ll"istari  [is  -  sak  -   nu  -   nim  -  ma] 

13.  nasafyu         u        bu-lu-uk-ku-[u*         basii-u*         ina        biti-ya] 

14.  ka-bu-u*         la       si-imi-[u  it  -  tal  -  pit  -  nin  -  ni] 

15.  ds-sum         gam-ma- la-ta         bi-li*         [as-sa-&ar        ilu-ut-ka] 

1 6.  ds-sum         ta-ai-ra-ta6  [         is  -  ti  -  '  -  u  -  ka(?)] 

17.  ds-sum     mu-up-pal-sa-ta          [a  -  ta  -  mar .] 

1 8.  ds-sum        ri-mi-ni-ta7  [at  -  ta  -  ziz        pant  -  ka(?)] 

19.  ki-nis     naplis-an-ni-ma  [  si  -  mi    ka  -  ba  -  ai] 

20.  ag-gu     lib-ba-ka*  [  li    -     nu     -     /ja] 

21.  [pu]-tur         an-ni  fai-[ti-ti<)         .] 

22 -sir  lib-bi  ilu-ti-ka 

23.  ilu       u       lluistaru       zi-nu-ti         sab- 

24.  nir-bi-ka  lu-uk-bi        [dd-li-li-ka       lud-lul] 

25.  [INIM.INIM.MA]  SU  [IL.LA  *il"Nirgal.KAN] 


26. 


No.  27  (K237I  -j-  K  13791)  contains  the  first  prayer  of 
what  was  originally  a  large  tablet.  It  has  been  restored  chiefly 
from  the  duplicate  which  is  cited  as  A.  This  tablet  is  a  com- 
paratively small  one  and  contains  nothing  more  than  the  prayer 
in  11.  i — 25  of  the  text,  followed  by  a  catch-line,  its  Obv.  giv- 
ing 11.  i  — 15  in  22  lines,  its  Rev.  11.  16 — 25  in  10  or  11  lines, 
while  the  end  of  the  Reverse  is  left  blank.  It  is  inscribed  in 
rather  coarse  characters,  and  was  copied  from  one  of  the  larger 
texts  for  Ashurbanipal,  who  substituted  his  own  name  in  place 
of  the  general  formula  in  1.  n.  Moreover  the  insertion  of  the 
eclipse-formula  in  A  changes  the  general  character  of  its  peti- 
tions and  proves  that  the  copy  was  required  for  use  during 
or  after  an  eclipse  of  the  moon.  Thus  restored,  not  much  is 
missing  from  the  prayer.  LI.  i  — 10  contain  the  invocation  of 
the  god,  at  1.  1 1  the  suppliant  states  his  name  and  goes  on  to 


1  For  1.  li  A  reads  ana-ku  m  Attur-bdn-apli  arad-ka ,    which  is  followed  by 
the  formula  ina  lumun  iluatali  etc.  in  three  lines;   11.  II   and   12  form   one  line  in 

J3  and   C.      2  A  hul-lfu-u,      3   C  balu-u.     *  A  fcd-bu-u  u,  B  kd-bu- 

5  A  [V^Nirgal.  6  A  [ta]-ai-rat.  1  A  [ri-mij-na-ta.  8  A  libba-ka.  9  A  lii-ti-ti. 
10  Of  the  catch  line,  with  which  the  text  of  B  concludes,  only  the  end  has  been 
preserved: IN.DUL-ki.. 


PRAYER  TO  NIRGAL.  89 

describe    his    cause    of   complaint,    and   the   conclusion   of  the 
prayer  contains  his  various  petitions. 

Translation. 

1.  O  mighty  lord,  hero,  first-born  of  NU.NAM.NIR\ 

2.  Prince  of  the  Anunnaki,  lord  of  the  battle! 

3.  Offspring  of  KU.TU.SAR  the  mighty  queen! 

4.  O  Nirgal,  strong  one  of  the  gods,  the  darling  viNIN.MIN.NA  \ 

5.  Thou  treadest  in  the  bright  heavens,  lofty  is  thy  place! 

6.  Thou   art   exalted   in   the  Under-world   and  art   the   bene- 

factor of  its 

7.  With  la    among   the    multitude    of  the   gods    inscribe    thy 

counsel! 

8.  With  Sin  in  the  heavens  thou  seekest  all  things! 

9.  And  Bit  thy  father  has  granted  thee  that  the  black-headed 

race,  all  living  creatures, 

10.  The  cattle  of  Nirgal,  created  things,  thy  hand  should  rule! 

11.  I  so  and  so,  the  son  of  so  and  so  am  thy  servant! 

12.  The of  god  and  goddess  are  laid  upon  me! 

13.  Uprooting  and  destruction  are  in  my  house!    14 

15.  Since  thou  art  beneficent,  I  have  turned  to  thy  divinity! 

1 6.  Since  thou  art  compassionate,  I  have  sought  for  thee! 

17.  Since  thou  art  pitiful,  I  have  beheld ! 

1 8.  Since  thou  art  merciful,  I  have  taken  my  stand  before  thee! 

19.  Truly  pity  me  and  hearken  to  my  cries! 

20.  May  thine  angry  heart  have  rest! 

21.  Loosen  my  sin,  my  offence 22 

23.  O  god  and  angry  goddess 

24.  Let  me  talk  of  thy  greatness,    let  me  bow  in  humility  be- 

fore thee! 

4.  The  title  iluNIN.MIN.NA,  i.  e.  "Lady  of  the  crown",  is 
evidently  an  abbreviated  form  of  iluN!N.MIN.AN.NA,  i.  e.  "Lady 
of  the  crown  of  heaven",  since  the  former  occurs  as  a  variant 
of  the  latter  in  1.  48  of  the  Cylinder -inscription  of  Sargon, 
cf.  LYON,  Sargon,  p.  8,  n.  2  and  p.  71. 

6.  For  the  rendering  of  4^  ^^TT  bv  tne  Part-  °f  ***ru 
cf.  BRUNNOW,  List,  no.  8211  and  No.  12,  1.  32,  a-Si-ru  ilulgigipl. 

*"^|    *~*7~<   is   apparently    a   compound  ideogram.     *"  ^|   *~*T~ < 


90  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODS. 

i.  e.   ina  ma-ti-$u   cannot  be   read,    as   the  duplicate  A  clearly 

reads  >~^\- 

7.  $u-tur  might  poss.  be  read  for  sii-tur  i.  e.  "mighty  is  thy 
counsel". 

19  f.  L.  19  has  been  restored  from  No.  2,  1.  32,  etc.,  though 
poss.  some  other  synonym  for  "prayer"  or  "cry"  may  have  been 
employed.  L.  20  is  restored  from  No.  21,  1.  68,  No.  46,  1.  5,  etc. 


No.  28. 
Transliteration. 

i 2 -fyar-ra    3 

lislimu(mu)     itti-ya       4 [dd-li-li-ka]     lud-lul 

5.  [INIM.INIM.MA  SU  IL.LA]  iluNirgal.KAN 

6.  [DU.DU  BI        lu     ina     SAR      lu     ina]     SA.NA         ipu$(us) 

7 -u  ilu  ri-nii-nu-u  8 mu-bal-lit 

amUumitu     9 -gu-u  il}-tu-u     10 

-lib  a-du-ur-ma     11 -ub-la     12 

-ka  li-nu-]$a     13 

No.  28  (K  3355)  is  a  small  fragment  from  the  right  side 
of  a  large  tablet.  It  preserves  a  few  phrases  from  the  end  of 
a  prayer  to  Nirgal  and  from  the  beginning  of  a  prayer  to  a 

god  who  is  addressed  as  "a  merciful  god ,  the  quickener 

of  the  dead! 


Section  III. 
Prayers  addressed  to  Goddesses. 

Like  the  preceding  division ,  Section  III  is  made  up  of 
tablets  containing  prayers  addressed  only  to  one  deity.  While 
the  prayers  in  Section  II,  however,  are  composed  in  honour  of 
gods,  those  in  the  present  Section  are  addressed  to  goddesses. 
Nos.  30  and  33,  and  possibly  Nos.  29  and  35,  contain  but  one 
prayer,  which  is  accompanied,  in  the  case  of  the  two  former, 
by  directions  for  ceremonies.  The  tablets  are  comparatively 
small  and  are  inscribed  in  a  somewhat  large  and  coarse  cha- 
racter, and,  like  others  in  Section  II,  may  perhaps  be  regarded 
as  forming  extracts  from  the  larger  compositions.  The  ques- 
tion whether  any  large  tablet  existed ,  containing  a  series 
of  prayers  and  ceremonies  addressed  only  to  one  goddess, 
and  in  its  arrangement  corresponding  to  Nos.  12,  21,  and  22, 
is  one  that  cannot  be  answered  with  certainty.  It  is  true  that 
Nos.  31,  32,  and  34  are  fragmentary  portions  of  large  tablets, 
and,  as  their  present  contents  refer  only  to  one  goddess,  they 
have  been  classified  under  the  present  Section.  It  is  not  im- 
possible, however,  that  the  tablets  of  which  they  are  fragments 
originally  contained  prayers  addressed  to  other  deities.  Their 
inclusion  ,  therefore ,  under  this  Section  must  be  regarded  as 
provisional. 


92  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODDESSES. 

No.  29. 

Transliteration. 


[du ?]-nm-mu-ku    ku-nm-ma 


2.  [INIM.INIM.MA]                    SU  IL.LA               iluSa-la.[KAN] 
3 ti-iz  -  ka  -  ru     bu  -  knr     ilu 

No.  29  (K  13907)  has  preserved  three  lines  from  the  Re- 
verse of  a  small  tablet,  which  represent  the  last  line  of  a  prayer 
followed  by  its  colophon-line,  and  apparently  the  catch-line  for 
the  next  tablet.  The  latter  should  possibly  be  restored  from 
No. 27,1.  i :  [siptubi-lumgas-ni]ti~iz-ka-rubti-kurilu[NU.NAM.NIR]. 

If  this  is  so,  the  sign  +^~  must  have  been  written  over  an  erasure. 


No.  30. 

Transliteration. 


2.  ***«*GU.ZI  karani  ib  -  bi(?)      

3.  as-ruk-ki  si-rik 

4-  in-na- 

5.  a-ku- -a-ba          Si- 

6.  linub(ufy)         libbu  -  ki         ka  -  bit  -  ta  - 

7.  ana-ku    pulanu     apil    pulani    sa     marustu 

8.  da  -  ya  -  na  -  ti  di  -  ni  di  - 

9.  mus  -  ti  -  si  -  ra  -  a  -  ti      a  -  lak  -  ti      ki- 

10.  H  -  sal}  -  ra          Hi  sa  iz  -  nu  -  u  itti  -  [ya?] 

1 1.  in  -  nin  -  ti      %ab  -  ri       ka  -  si  -  ti      li  - 

12.  linasih(ib)    mursu    sa    zumri-ya    linasi(si)    MUN.GU  sa    da- 


13.  lip  -  ta  -  ti  -  ru         a  -  di  -  ra  -  tu         sa         lib  -  bi  -  ya 

14.  sur-dim-ma  sumu  u  ziru   lu  rimu  si-li-ti  ^  lu-sa-pa  zi-kir-ki 

15.  lublut(uf)      lu  -  us  -  lim  -  ma       nir  -  bi  -  ki      lu  -  sa  -  pi 

1 6.  da     -     li     -     li    -     ki  hid    -     lul 

1 7.  a  -  mi  -  ru  -  u  -  a  nir  -  bi  -  ki            li  -  sa  -  pu  -  u 
l8-  a  -  na                    nisi*1 


PRAYER  TO  SALA  ETC.  .      93 

ig/  [INIMJ.INIM.MA  $U  IL.LA  il"[I$tar.KAN] 

20.  AG.AG  BI  ina  iimi  magari  URU  77  ana  pan  il"I$tar  ummu 


21.  urn   illu    tasalafy  GLGAB  tukan(an)   suluppu  KUA.T1R  [ta- 

Sapak(ak)] 

22.  SA     samni     nikii     mil  dispu     bimitu         ta$akan[(anj] 

23.  **'***» a  -  da  -  gur         tukan(an)         K AS. SAG         tanaki(ki) 

24.  SID(di)         SIR. AD        KU.DUB.DUB.BU      SUB.[SUB(di)] 

25.  KU.KU      iwirinu       wSW      *am IL.LA  ARA 

26.  ina   Samni  wSunmni  MU.SAL   wurkarinnu   talaki  Ml  ina 

TLSAR  [tasakan(an)] 

27.  siptu  .    an-ni-tu       III     Samtu        munu-ma       

28.  riksu         tapatar  -  ma         Samnu      $natu(r)     

29.  an-nu-u     ki- tu- 

30.  Siptu  ll-ti          llulgigi         bu  -  uk  -  rat     

31.  duppu  CXXXIV^^   siptu 

32.  ikal  m  iluA$$ur-ban-apli  etc. 

A  little  over  one  third  of  the  original  tablet  has  been 
preserved  by  No.  30  (K  3448).  The  text  contains  a  single 
prayer  addressed  to  the  goddess  Istar,  followed  by  a  ceremonial 
section,  and,  according  to  the  colophon,  forms  the  i34th  tablet 
of  a  certain  series.  Of  the  prayer  to  Istar  only  the  latter  part 
has  been  preserved.  The  suppliant  cries  that  he  has  poured 
out  a  libation  to  the  goddess  and  prays  that  her  heart  may 
therefore  have  rest  and  that  her  anger  may  abate.  After  stat- 
ing his  name  in  1.  7  and  the  fact  that  he  is  suffering  from 
sickness,  he  continues:  — 

8.  Thou  art  the  judge  of  my  cause 

9.  Thou  art  the  director  of  my  path 

10.  May  my  god  who  is  angry  with  me  turn! 

11.  Sorrow,  the  grave,  and  bonds  may  he ! 

12.  May  he  remove  the  sickness  of  my  body,  may  he  tear  away 

the of 

13.  May  he  loosen  the  grief  of  my  heart! 

14.  Cause  name    and  posterity  to  advance;    let  there  be  mercy 

and  compassion;  let  me  praise  thy  name! 

15.  Let  me  live,  let  me  be  perfect,  let  me  praise  thy  greatness! 


94  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODDESSES. 

1 6.  Let  me  bow  in  humility  before  thee! 

17.  May  my praise  thy  greatness 

1 8.  Unto  the  distant  peoples! 

The  Reverse  of  the  tablet  begins  with  the  colophon-line 
referring  to  the  prayer  contained  by  the  Obverse.  Then  follows 
a  section  of  ten  lines  of  directions  for  ceremonies ,  which  are 
to  be  performed  before  Istar  "on  a  favourable  day".  "Pure 

water  shalt  thou  sprinkle.    The drink-offering  shalt  thou 

present.     Dates   (and) shalt    thou    heap  up.     A  SA  ot 

oil  a  drink-offering,  water,  honey  (and)  butter  shalt  thou  offer. 

An  incense-burner  shalt  thou  set  there.    The -drink  shalt 

thou  pour  out."  LI.  24  —  26  prescribe  certain  rites  to  be  per- 
formed with  various  woods  and  oil ,  and  are  followed  by  the 
injunction  to  recite  the  incantation  three  times  and  to  unloose 
"the  knotted  cord".1  The  end  of  the  first  line  of  the  colophon 
(1.  31),  which  contained  the  title  of  the  series  to  which  the  tablet 
belonged,  is  broken  away. 

24.  This  line  has  been  restored  from  No.  40,  1.  12  (q.  v.\ 
That   the   signs  KU.DUB.DUB.BU  are   to   be    taken    together, 
cf.  No.  62,  1.  29. 

25.  The    character    |^    is    somewhat    spread    out    on    the 
tablet,  so  that  it  might  almost  be  taken  for  two  signs  and  read 
iStiniS(nis).    As  however  other  characters  on  the  tablet  are  care- 
lessly written ,    it  is  preferable  to  regard  it  as  one  sign ,    as  in 
No.  12,  1.  10,  etc. 


No.  81. 

Transliteration, 
i 

2.  sA     

3.  **    •: 

4.  ana-ku  pulanu  [apil  pulani  $a]  ilu-Su  [pulanu.  ilui$tar-$u  pula- 

mtum](tum) 

5.  a-na      ka-a-Si         -dan 

6.  ina  puSki  u  dannati  su-zi-bi [dd-li-li]-ki  lud-lul 

1  See  above,  p.  22. 


PRAYERS  TO  ISTAR.  95 


7.  INIM.INIM.MA         SU  IL.LA        ilu  ..........  samt-i 


8.  ina  miiSi    ana    pan     llul$tar  guSuru    arku    mu    illu    tasalafy 

9.  GLGAB        tukan(an)        ^J\\TA.A.AN        kurmati*1         tar-bi(?) 

10  ...........    buraSi  ta-Sdr-rak   i-ti-ra    u   gi-mil-tu  kun-ni 

11  ...........     G1.G1     bu-nk-rat     ilu  Sin     ti-li-tu 

No.  31  (K  7207  -}-  K  9675  +  K.  13274)  represents  the  end 
of  the  Obverse  of  a  tablet  containing  prayers  and  ceremonies 
addressed  to  the  goddess  Istar.  LI.  i  —  6  give  the  concluding 
phrases  of  a  prayer,  in  the  last  three  lines  of  which  the  sup- 
pliant states  his  own  name  ,  and  ,  after  probably  referring  to 
the  offerings  he  has  made  to  the  goddess  ,  concludes  with  a 
petition  for  deliverance  "in  misery  and  distress".  The  prayer 
is  succeeded  by  three  lines  of  ceremonies  to  the  following 
effect:  "In  the  night  before  Istar  thou  shalt  sprinkle  a  green 
bough  with  pure  water.  The  .....  drink-offering  shalt  thou 
present.  Seven  times  the  food  shalt  thou  .....  A  ..... 
of  incense  shalt  thou  offer.  Place  thou  there  a  garment  and 
a  gift."  L.  1  1  commences  an  incantation  that  was  continued 
on  the  Reverse  of  the  tablet. 


No.  32. 

Transliteration. 

.-bit 


2.  [INIM.INIM.MA  SU]  IL.LA  il»I$tar.KAN 

3.  [D  U.D  UBI  ana  pan  ilulstar  SAJ.NA  burati  taSakan  KA  S.  SA  G 

tanaki(ki) 

4 Ill  Samtu  munu(nu)  i-il-ta-Su 

5 [Uu]istar-[$u?]  itti-Su  salimu(mu?) 

-na  iluhtar  ka-rid-ti         i-ld-a-[ti] 

1 man-za-az-ki      ina      ki-rib     Sami-i    illuti[*1] 

8 -ti-ma  ki-ma  iluSama$ 

9 Sami*1  $adi*1         u        tamati[*1] 

10 -pis-ti  na-mas-tifcak-ka-ri  ta-bar-ri-i 


96  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODDESSES. 


11  ...........  nisi*1  sa-pi-ify-ti     tus-ti-$i-ri 

12  ...........  -ni-ki-ma  kul-lat-si-na         ba- 

13  ......  -ru-ki  na-mas-su-u 

14.  [at]-ti-ma  ilu  I  star  li--at 

15  ...........  -ki-ma     biltn  ina  ki-rib  [Samt-i 

Like  the  preceding  fragment,  No.  32  (K  3358  -f-  K  9047) 
represents  the  lower  portion  of  the  Obverse  of  a  tablet.  Only 
one  sign  remains  of  the  incantation  to  which  the  colophon-line 
(1.  2)  refers.  Then  follow  three  lines  of  directions  prescribing 
the  offering  of  incense,  the  pouring  out  of  a  libation,  and  the 
due  recital  of  the  incantation  three  times.  At  1.  6  there  com- 
mences a  fresh  prayer  to  the  goddess  Istar,  containing  the  in- 
vocation of  the  goddess  and  a  description  of  her  power.  The 
beginning  and  end  of  most  of  the  lines  are  broken. 

6  .....  :  O  Istar,  heroine  among  goddesses! 

7.  Thy  seat  is  .....  in  the  midst  of  the  bright  heavens! 

8.  Thou  art  .....  ,  and  like  the  Sun-god  .....  ! 

9.  [Lady?]  of  the  sky,  the  mountains  and  the  seas! 

10.  Thou  .....   the   handiwork    of  creatures   of  the   ground, 

thou  beholdest  .....  ! 

1  1  .  Thou  scatterest  the  nations  .....  ,  thou  directest  .....  ! 
12  ......   all  of  them  .....     13  ......  creation  .....  ! 

14.  Thou,  O  Istar,  art  powerful  .....  , 

15.  And  thy  ......  O  Lady,  is  in  the  midst  of  the  bright  heavens! 


No.  33. 

Transliteration. 

i -  zu  -  zu         i-  lat        tnu  -na- 

2.  [mu$(?)]-ti(?)-i$-ma-at    a-mat-sa     Sa-ki-na-at 

3.  [muS]  -  ti  -  ni  -  if}         uz  -  zi  Hi         u     

4.  Si  -  mat  tas  -  li  -  ti  u  su  -  pi  -  i 

5.  li  -  kat  ik  -  ri  -  bi  u  un     -     ni     -     ni 

6.  im  -Sir  -  pa  -  a  -  ti  a  -  pit  ilu  Marduk 

7 .  dan  (?)  - 1L       du-ru- sadu-u 

kib-ra-a-ti 


PRAYER  TO  TASMlTU.  97 

8.  sir    I. Z ID. DA         bit    si-kin     na-pis-ti    sa     ilanipl     rabuti*1 

9.  [sar]  -  rat         BorsippaKI  ba  -  '  -  I  at  da  -  dd  -  mi 
10.  [llu]Tas-mi-tum         bi-il-tum           sa          ki-bi-sa        gas- [rat?] 

ii iluistaratipl     [rabati*1  (?)]      

12 ina       Hani*1  a  -  bi      kib  -  ra  -  a  -  ti 

13 -i-kis-ki  ka  -  a  -  Si 

14 -ri -si-na     azkur(ur)    pani-ki 

15 tas-ma-a         u        sa  -  li  -  ma 

1 6 -at  ma-gi-ri  [ta-sa?]-ka-m 'tas-ma-a  u  sa-li-ma 

17 -ris-ma -nu    tu-sa-as-mi-i   ki-bit-su-un 

1 8 lib-ba-su-nu    tu- si-is- si-ri   is- 

19 *l      ru-ku-tu       tn-sak-na      panu-ki      

20.  tlu  Tas-mi-tum    i-latl    su-pi    u    da-di   bi-[lit .] 

21.  [ana] -kit  pulanu   apil  pulani  sa  ilu-su  pulanu  iluistar-su  [pu- 

lanitujn(tum)] 

22.  2as  -  &ur  -  ki         bzlti  -  ya        si  -  mi  -  i        su  -  [pi  -  ya] 

23.  [a]-na     iluNabu      ba-i-ri-ki*      bilu      asaridu      mart     ris-[ti-i] 

24.  [sa     IJ.SAG.ILA  a-bu-[ti  sab-ti-ma] 

25.  [lis-mi  zik]-ri-ya*  [      ina  ki-bit  pi-ki] 

26.  [HI  -  ki         un]  -  ni  -  ni  -  ya      [HI  -  ma  -da      su  -  pi  -  ya] 

27.  [ina    zik-ri-su    kabti](ti)]     ilu     [u    iluistar  lislimu(mu)  itti-ya] 

Rev. 

28.  [li-in-ni-is]-si  [mursu  Sa  zumri-ya] 

29.  [lit-ta-kil^]  ta-[ni-bu  sa  $iripl-ya] 

30.  [lit-ta-bil]  asakku          [  sa  bit  anipl-ya] 

31.  6 rn-Iju-u    ru-[su-u?] 

32.  [li-in]-ni-is-si        ma-mi-tu1        lit-[ta-kil5        ni  -  .    .    .    .    .] 
33 gallu*  li  -  sal  -  [irat  -  su] 

34.  [a-na(?J]  nisi*1  a-pa-a-ti^          lis-sa-kin          ba-ni-[ti] 

35.  [ilu]         &™         sarru         lik  -  bu  -  u  damikti[(ti)] 

36.  [ina  ki-bit]-ki  sir-ti  sa  ill  uttakkaru(ru)'11  u  an-ni-ki  ki-[nim]12 
37-  [iluTaS  -  mi]  -  turn  bi    -     il     -     turn** 

38.  [1NIM.INIM.MA  SU]  IL  LA  il»Tas-mi-tum.KAN 


1  A  ilat(at).  -  After  1.  21  A  inserts  the  formula  ina  lurnun  iluatall  etc.  in 
two  lines,  and  for  1.  22  reads:  asfyur-fii  imid-ki  li-mi-i  a-ra-ti.  3  A  fta- '-i-ri-ki. 
*  A  zik-ri.  5  A  li-td-ftil.  G  For  1.  31  A  reads:  lip-pa-aS-ru  imtit1  imtiP1  imtiP1 
Jta  ibalu-u  ili-yd.  7  A  ma-mit.  8  A  lit-lu-ud  U«  NAM.  TAR.  9  A  ina  pi-ki. 
10  A  u.  ll  A  uttakkarum(rum).  12  A  inserts  Sa  ul  inu-u.  13  A  LUtu. 

O 


98  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODDESSES. 

39 mu     illu      tasalafy     SA.NA     burasi    ftarri 

40 GA     ina     kimi    taSapak(ak) 

41 munu(nu)-ma  sukki?(ki)-wa 

42 

43 

44 ina  rik-si  TA  G-ma 

45.  .  .  . i-nu-ma  ttpus(u$)  Sumu  lil(?)- 

46 [KAM]  SAH(?)  ul  takalu(lu)   u- 


47 Sar-rat         kib-ra-a-ti         i-lit         bi-li-i-ti 

48.  ikal  m  Uu  ASSur-ban-apli  etc. 

No.  33  (K  3432  -\-  K  8147)  is  a  small  tablet  inscribed  with 
rather  coarse  characters,  which  are  in  places  much  broken.  It 
contains  a  prayer  to  the  goddess  Tasmttu ,  the  latter  half  of 
which  is  preserved  in  duplicate  on  the  Reverse  of  No.  i  (see 
pp.  4,  6  f.).  The  prayer  is  followed  by  two  short  ceremonial 
sections,  which  with  the  catch-line  and  a  short  colophon  com- 
plete the  text  of  the  tablet.  The  prayer  commences  as  follows. 

Translation. 

i O  goddess 

2.  Who  causeth  her  word  to  be  obeyed,  who  establisheth ! 

3.  Who  appeaseth  the  anger  of  god  and ! 

4.  Who  heareth  prayer  and  supplication! 

5.  Who  accepteth  petition  and  sighing! 

8.  O  seed   of  tzida ,   the  house   of  the   living    creature    of  the 

great  gods! 

9.  Queen  of  Borsippa,  Lady  of  the  Dwelling! 
10.  O  lady  TaSmztu,  whose  command  is  mighty! 

The  next  few  lines  are  broken.  After  stating  (1.  14)  that 
he  is  crying  before  the  goddess,  the  suppliant  describes  her 
merciful  character,  as  the  giver  of  peace  and  prosperity.  At 
1.  20  he  once  more  addresses  her  by  name  and  proceeds  to 
make  his  request. 

20.  O  TaSmttu,  goddess  of  supplication  and  love,  lady  of ! 

21.  I  so  and  so,    the  son  of  so  and  so,   whose  god  is  so  and 

so,  whose  goddess  is  so  and  so, 
2  2 .  Have  turned  towards  thee,  O  lady !  Hearken  to  my  supplication ! 


PRAYER  TO  TASMlTU. 


99 


23.  Before  Nabu  thy  spouse,  the  lord,  the  prince,  the  first-born  son 

24.  Of  Isagila,  intercede  for  me! 

25.  May  he  hearken  to  my  cry  at  the  word  of  thy  mouth! 

26.  May  he  remove  my  sighing,  may  he  learn  my  supplication! 

27.  At  his  mighty  word  may  god  and  goddess  deal  graciously 

with  me! 

28.  May  the  sickness  of  my  body  be  torn  away! 

29.  May  the  groaning  of  my  flesh  be  consumed! 

30.  May  the  consumption  of  my  muscles  be  removed! 

31.  I sorcery,  poison, 

32.  May  the  ban  be  torn  away  may  the be  consumed 

33-  May 

34.  May  mercy  be  established  among  men  (and  their)  habitations! 

35.  May  god  and  king  ordain  favour 

36.  At  thy  mighty  command  that  is  not  altered,   and  thy  true 

mercy, 

37.  O  lady  Tasmttu\ 

Of  the  two  ceremonial  sections  a  few  phrases  only  have 
been  preserved.  The  first  prescribes  that  the  sprinkling  of  pure 
water  and  the  offering  of  incense  of  ftarru-wood  shall  accom- 
pany the  recital  of  the  incantation,  while  the  second  apparently 
deals,  among  other  matters,  with  the  rite  of  the  knotted  cord 
(cf.  supra  p.  71,  etc.}. 

24.  On  the  restoration  of  the  end  of  this  line,  see  above 
p.  14). 

29.  The  verb  lit-ta-kil  is  here  restored  from  1.  32  and 
No.  i,  11.  46,  and  48  (cf.  supra  p.  14). 

32.  The  last  sign  in  this  line  is  probably  to  be  restored  as 
\  (cf.  PI.  3,  No.  i,  Rev.  (cont.},  1.  48).  For  the  explanation  of 
nisii  (=  I  i ,  Inf.  from  nasu)  as  a  synonym  of  mamttu,  cf.  supra, 
p.  66. 

4 1 .  The  sign  Ef^T  is  written  over  an  erasure ;  it  is  clearly 
however  to  be  read  as  >jpf-|)  not  >+$]• 

46.  The  reading  ^±^flff  suggested  in  the  transliteration 
is  not  certain. 


1  For  1.  31   A  reads:  "May  the  poisons  that  are  upon  me  be  loosened!" 


100  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  GODDESSES. 

No.  34. 

Transliteration. 


i  ...........   2  ...........  a-ta-mar 

3  ...........   par(?)-da-a      ya-si      4 

dd-li-li-ki    lud-lul 


5.  [1NIM.INIM.MA  u      IL].LA  **MLM1 

6.  [DU.DU  BI  lu     ina     SAR]     lu     ina     SA.NA     ipus(us) 

7  ...................................... 

The  fragment  No.  34  (K  1187  6)  contains  a  few  phrases 
from  a  prayer  to  the  goddess  tlu  MLMI  (cf.  BRUNNOW  ,  List, 
no.  10449),  the  two  colophon-lines  being  followed  by  a  second 
prayer  or  perhaps  the  catch-line  for  the  next  tablet.  Of  this 
line,  however,  only  traces  of  signs  remain. 

3.  If  the  rendering  of  *T-  by  par  is  correct  p&r-da-a  must 


=  3  f  .  pi.  Prms.  1  1,  from  Hfc.  For  another  instance  of  the  use 
of  the  verb  in  I  i,  cf.  LOTZ,  Tiglathpileser,  Col.  II,  1.  67  (p.  22) 

li-par-du  (^£^=11  ^\  M^|)  »  and  for  its  use  in  IV  i  with  the 
meaning,  according  to  ZIMMERN,  Busspsalmen  p.  no,  of  "to  shine 
to  the  bright",  cf.  IV  R  60*  [67],  C.  Rev.  1.  20  ka-bit-ta-su  ip- 

par-du  (^~l|  I  £>^|)>  whence  the  epithet  nipirdu  ,  "shining" 
(see  DELITZSCH  in  LOTZ'S  Tigl.  p.  106  and  ZIMMERN,  op.  cit.  p.  1  10). 

Perhaps  also  from  this  root  are  to  be  derived  the  subs.  *f~ 
(=  p&rT)-da-a-ti  in  the  phrase  Sunati*1  p&r-da-a-ti  la  tabati 

(IV  R  17,  16  b\  and  *f-  ^JJ  in  No.  12,  1.  57. 


No.  35. 

Transliteration. 

i Sa  bi(?)-lu- 2 , 

ina 3 balatu     si- 4.    .  .  .  , 

ina  pa-ni- 5 nap-li- 

6 libbu     fridiiti- 7 

DIM.  .  8. 


PRAYER  TO  BlLIT.  .    1OI 

Rev. 

9 II 10 

GIS.7UK ii SAG.GA 

12 ik-ri- 13 

-mi-ik-ti        id- 

14 ni  -  is          ka  -  a  -  ti         $&         iluBilit 

15 safy(r)      ki-bit     ana     arkat(?)     L     DA.RA 

16 

No.  35  (K  2757)  contains  portions  of  a  prayer  to  the  god- 
dess BHit,  at  the  end  of  which  there  follows  the  catch-line  for 
the  next  tablet  and  traces  of  the  first  line  of  the  colophon 
(1.  1 6).  The  interest  of  the  fragment  centres  in  1.  14,  where  we 
find  the  colophon-line,  which  is  characteristic  of  the  present 
class  of  texts,  written  phonetically  (see  above  p.  13). 


102 


Section  IV. 

Prayers  to  deities  whose  names 
are  not  preserved. 

Section  IV  is  composed  of  fragments  of  tablets ,  which 
contain  the  colophon-line  that  is  characteristic  of  the  present 
collection  of  texts,  but  from  which  the  names  of  the  deities 
addressed  are  missing.  It  is  generally  possible  to  distinguish 
whether  a  god  or  goddess  is  addressed.  In  some  cases,  how- 
ever, in  addition  to  the  colophon-line,  only  a  few  signs  have 
been  preserved. 


No.  36. 

Transliteration. 

i -ki 2 -zi- 


'-il-ti 


6.  [IN1MJNIM.MA]  SU  IL.LA  ilu . 


7 buraSi  ina 

8 SU        IL.LA 

g • -  ma  tislitu 


10 [tlu]lgigi        butuktu        fra-si- 

1 1 .  [ikal  m  iluA$$ur]-ban-apli  etc. 

The    fragment    No.   36    (K  9125)    contains   the   end   of  a 
prayer,    followed  by  three  lines    of  directions  for  ceremonies, 


PRAYER  TO  A  GODDESS  ETC.  .    103 

which   prescribe   that  the  burning   of  incense   and  the  rite    of 

raising-  the  hand  are   to  accompany  its  recitation.  L.  10  gives 
the  catch-line  for  the  next  tablet. 


No.  37. 

Transliteration. 

i a* 2 napis- 

tim(tim) 3 *l  libbi- 

4 bi-ir-tu 5 

[$i?] -kin  na-pis-ti 

6.  [INIM.INIM.MA  SU]  IL.LA 


7.  [Siptu] *    [biltu]    $ur-bu-tinn    ummu    ri-mi-ni- 

tum2  a-[$i-bat  savii-i  illuti*1] 

8.  [al-si-ki        bilti-ya         i-]ziz-zi-im-ma        $i-mi-i*        [ya-a-ti] 

9.  [is-i-ki  aSfair-ki*  kima]  ulinnu   ili-ya  u  tlui$tari-ya  ulinnu-[ki 

a$-bat] 

10.  [ds  -  sum        di  -  ni^        da]  -  a  -  ni      purus       [fiarastfsi)6] 

11.  [As-Sum          bul-lu-tu]i          Sul-lu-mu          ba$u-u*          [itti-ki] 

12.  [?a$-snm     ittra    gamala]  ti  -  [di  -  i] 

13. J    [biltu    $a-ku]-tum™    ummu   ri-[mi-ni-tuni11] 

No.  37  (K  9087)  contains  a  few  words  from  the  end  of 
one  prayer  and  the  first  seven  lines  from  the  commencement 
of  another.  The  second  prayer  is  addressed  to  a  goddess  and 
is  partly  duplicate  of  the  prayer  to  Bau  in  No.  6,  11.  71  ff.,  and 
of  that  to  the  goddess,  who  bears  the  title  Bilit  Hi,  in  No.  7, 
11.  9  ff.  For  a  translation  see  above,  p.  34  f. 


1  Possibly  to  be  restored  from  B  U*Bi-lit  Hi;  A  iluSau.  z  A  ri-mi-[ni- 
turn].  3  A  [Si-mi]-i.  4  A  as-^ur-Jti.  5  A  di-in.  6  D  [pa]-ra-su.  7  A  here 
inserts  the  copula  u.  8  AD  ba-lu-u.  9  For  1.  12  A  reads  dS-lum  i-fi-ra  ga-ma- 

lu-zu-ba  ti-di-i,  D -ma-la  u  lu-zu-ba  ti-di-i.     10  A 

Sur-[bu-tum] '.     u  D  um-mu  ri-mi-ni-tum. 


104  PRAYERS  TO  DEITIES 

No.  38. 

Transliteration. 

i.    ana  di- 2.    da  -  li  -  [li  -  ] 


3.  INIMJNIM.[MA  SU  IL.LA] 


4.  DU.DV  [BI        lu     ina     SAR       lu     ina     SA.NA       ipus(us)] 

5.  iiptu  Sur- 

6.  & 

7 

No.  38  (Bu.  91—5 — 9,  16)  is  a  fragment  from  the  left  side 
of  a  tablet  and  preserves  the  beginnings  of  two  lines  from  the 
end  of  a  prayer,  which  is  followed  by  the  two  common  colo- 
phon-lines, the  catch-line,  and  the  beginning  of  the  colophon. 


No.  39. 

Transliteration. 


2 [a]-na   ka-. 

iluhtar 


4.  [INIM.INIM].MA  SU  IL.LA  

5.  [DU.DU  BI]        lu     ina     SAR         lu     ina  SA.NA  [ipus(u$)] 

6 kakkabani^1     i-lat    sar- 

7 -  i  -  ti  i-lat    i- 

8 Hani*1         DI.BAR    Sami-i 

9 [damiktu](tu)  *lttlgigi  nu-ur  ma- 

10 mus-na-mi-rat  

ii -bu-u  di  -  pa  -  ru- 

12 it  -  ta  -  na  -  an  -  bi  -  tu 

13 -ki  bi-il-ti  ina  ki- 

14 -  ya  ku  -  $i  -  ma  

15 -  ni  -  ma  ma  - 

1 6.  [ana-ku  pulanu  apil]  pulani  Sa  sum-ru- 

17 -mafy-ra  dan- 

18. 


WHOSE  NAMES  ARE  NOT  PRESERVED.  .   105 

Of  the  first  prayer  to  which  the  two  colophon-lines  (1.  4  f.) 
on  No.  39  (K  8930)  refer,  a  few  characters  only  remain.  The 
prayer  that  commences  at  1.  6  is  addressed  to  a  goddess.  The 
first  eight  lines  contain  the  invocation,  and  ascribe  to  her  the 
power  of  giving  light  (to  the  world);  the  beginning  and  end 
of  every  line,  however,  is  broken  off. 


No.  40. 

Transliteration. 


i.  ...  DI 


2.  [INfM.INIM.MA]      SU  IL.LA 


3 *l-$u      sa     IM.IL  ilu 

4 -  at       iwirinu       a  -  [na?] 

5 KUR.NA  TU.UD.TA  diparu 

6 -nis-su-un-nu  SIR  ina  lubuUupisati  lubuUu 

7 -rit-ta-su       VII    babati^1      tu- 

8 wpassuru  tasakan(an)  XXXVI  SA  AS.A.AN 

SIR  ( ; 

9 -na    sa    ZU,DU  tukan(an)   immiruniki  tunam- 

mar(f')  kap-ra  tunikis  (?) (is) 

10 *truKA.2ZI  SI.IL(ka)  nii    mi 

ii [itujzrinu  ft.         upuntu         tu-nam-inar 

12.  [mi  -  ih  -  bat]    tanaki(ki)    KU.DUB.DUB.BU  SUB.SUB(di) 

13 -su    nis   ini-ma   III  sairitu   minutu(tu)   an-ni-tii 

14 -su  DIM. SID  tamAN.IRIM  u  riksu  tapafar(ar) 

15 -  bu-ma   ina    sumi  suati  tudammik(ik) 

1 6 ,  .    ana     damikti(ti)     tazakar(ar) 


The  principal  contents  of  No.  40  (K  2567)  consist  of  four- 
teen lines  of  directions  for  ceremonies.  These  were  preceded 
by  a  prayer,  of  which  only  a  few  traces  of  signs  remain.  BEZOLD 
(Catalogue,  p.  454)  suggests  that  this  fragment  belongs  to  K  2487 
(=  No.  2,  see  above,  p.  18).  The  character  of  the  writing  on 
both  tablets  is  very  similar. 


106  PRAYERS  TO  DEITIES 

8.  For  the  explanation  of  the  sign-group  gE  f  ^*T"  as 
=  irrit  zunni,  see  JENSEN,  ZA\,  p.  308  (cf.  BRUNNOW,  List,  no.  6767). 
What  meaning  attaches  to  the  group  in  the  present  passage  is 
not  clear. 

12.  The  suggested  restoration  of  the  beginning  of  this  line 
is  based  on  No.  8,  1.  21  (cf.  supra,  p.  42  f.). 


No.  41. 

Transliteration. 


2.  [DU.DU  BI]    lu     ina     KISDA     lu     ina    SA.NA     [ipu$(us)] 

3 sarru      ni  -  mi  -  ki    ba  -  nu  -  u     ta  -  sim  -  li 

4 m  iluAssur-ban-apli  etc. 

In  No.  41  (K  7916)  the  first  line  is  probably  to  be  restored 
as  the  colophon-line  INIM.INIM.MA  SU  IL.LA  etc.  L.  3  gives 
the  catch-line  for  the  next  tablet. 


No.  42. 
Transliteration. 

Obv. 

i 2.    na- 3.    kul-lat 

4-   u-tag-ga(?)- 5 -ri-   ki- 

6.    ta-ta-na-ru- 7.    a-na  ri-i- 

8.  sak-na-ta 9.  sa  ZIG.GlR-ka 

10.  a-lik  bar-ra-ni n.  la  DIM.KU  la 

ir- .     12.  sa  pak-du  pi- 13.  dannu 

ina    dan-na- 14.    /-/«/  mun-nap- 

15.  ina  kari  dan-na 16.  mu-sap-sik  UD 

17.    ina  pi-ka  ki- 18.    sa  la 

19.    a-zu- 

Rev. 

20 21.  ul- 22.  bidutu-ka 

23.  ilttNIN.A.KU.KUD.[DU] 


WHOSE  NAMES  ARE  NOT  PRESERVED.  1 07 


24.  1NIM.INIM.MA     SU  [1L.LA] 


25.  inu(?)-ma     ina     KISDA     inu(f) 


26.  Siptu     il"Marduk     bilu     rabu 

27.  ikal  '"  il"A$sur-ban-[apli]  etc. 

No.  42  (K  3221)  preserves  part  of  the  left  side  of  a  large 
tablet,  about  four  lines  being  missing  from  the  beginning  of  the 
Obverse.  L.  25  gives  an  unusual  form  of  one  of  the  common 
colophon-lines  (see  above,  p.  71). 


No.  43. 

Transliteration. 

i -bu- 2.  a"Marduk 

3.  [Hani]*1 4.  Hani*1 5.  Hani*1 

a-Sib 6.  UuA-nim  iluBil 7.  ana- 

ku    arad-ki 

8.  [INIMj.INIM.MA  SU  [IL.LA] 


The  end  of  a  prayer  to  a  goddess  has  been  preserved  by 
No.  43  (K  I3355)- 


No.  44. 

Transliteration. 

iluNIN  . 


2.  [INIMJN1M].MA      SU  IL.[LA] 


3 -tit  an-na 4 

KV*1 5 .  .-nu 

6 

No.  44  (K  14210)    contains    traces   of  a  prayer   and   three 
lines  of  directions  for  ceremonies. 


108  PRAYERS  TO  DEITIES 

No.  45. 

Transliteration. 

Obv. 

i -ft 2 -////  lu- 

3 -nm  tak-bu-n  tl"Sama$ 

4.  [INIM.INIMj.MA         SU  IL.LA     il" ~ 


Rev. 

6 -ra-ka 7 -ma 

a-na 8 -na  Si-it- 

g ba-la-tu 10 

-bit 

The  fragment  No.  45  (82 — 3 — 23,  119)  contains  traces  of 
prayers;  so  little  however  has  been  preserved  that  it  is  impos- 
sible to  decide  with  certainty  which  side  is  the  Obverse  of  the 
tablet. 


log 


Section  V. 
Prayers  to  Astral  Deities. 

Section  V  contains  prayers  to  certain  stars,  which  are  not 
regarded  as  inanimate,  but  are  personified  as  deities.  This  per- 
sonification of  the  stars  and  planets  is  not  surprising,  for  there 
are  not  lacking  proofs  that  the  greater  gods,  even  when  ad- 
dressed by  name  in  prayer,  were  regarded  as  astral  powers. 
To  mention  three  instances  in  the  present  collection  of  texts, 
in  No.  19,  1.  iyf.  the  god  BU  is  selected  from  "the  multitude 
of  the  stars  of  heaven"  to  receive  a  gift,  while  in  No.  6,  1.  77  f. 
the  goddess  Bau,  and  in  No.  7,  1.  15  f.  the  goddess  Bilit  Hi,  are 
sought  by  the  suppliant  among  the  stars.  Moreover  the  astral 
deities  here  addressed '  are  invoked  in  terms  as  exalted  as  those 
employed  in  prayers  to  the  greater  gods,  and  in  No.  50,  if  my 
restoration  of  the  passage  is  correct,  the  fixed  star  Sibziana  is 
even  credited  with  the  creation  of  mankind. 

The  majority  of  the  tablets  in  this  section  are  of  the  larger 
class ,  and  contained  ,  when  complete  ,  several  prayers  ,  inter- 
spersed in  some  cases  with  directions  for  ceremonies. 


No.  46. 
Transliteration. 

i -  gu  -  u  if}  -  fit  -  u 

2 -lib            a  -  du  -  ttr  -  ma 

3 -  [ka]             rabiti(ti)  ub  -  la 

4 Urn  -  bu  -  ru  -  ka  -  ma 

5-  ["£  -  gu                               Ub  -  ba  -  ka]  li  -  nu  -  fra 


110  PRAYERS  TO  ASTRAL  DEITIES. 

6 -[ka       ra-bu]-ul    ta-ai-ra-tu-ka    kab-ta-a-tuin 

7 -si  lib-sa-nim-ma 

8.  [da  -  HI  ilu  -  ti  -  ka]         rabtti(ti)  hid  -  Inl 

g.  IN1M.INIM.[MA  SU  IL].LA  kakkabu Mustabarru-mit- 

tanu(a-nu).  KA  N 

10.  DU.DU  BI    [lu    ina     KISDA]      In     ina     SA.NA     ipus(us) 

11.  siptu  iluNirgal    bit kakkabuPisu  ti-ib  sami-i  u 

irsitim(tim) 

12.  sa-ni-ku  -  ti      bu-kur      iluKU,TU.SAR 

13.  ma-am- lu  git-ma-lum  pa-ki-du  gi-mir  KIRRUD.AZAG.GA 

14.  i  -  lit  -  ti          lluA  -  nim  maru  ris  -  tit  -  u 

15.  fya  -  lip        sa  -  him  -  ma  -  ti        sa        lit  -  bu  -  sit        nam  -  ri  -  ri 

1 6.  dan  -  dan  -  nu  kit  -  ru  -  du          bU         a  -  ba  -  ri 

17.  Sa  -  kin      tab  -  ti  -  [i]     mu  -  Sa  -  as  -  ki  -  nu     li  -  i  -  ti 

1 8.  sarru     tarn  -  fra  -  [ri    ir?]  -  sit      ik  -  du     la     pa  -  du  -  u 

19 [mu-hal-lik?]  za-ai-ri 

20 [sal?]-ba-bu    muk-tab-lnni 

21 -tu      karradu 

22 -ti 

23 

The  upper  portion  of  No.  46  (K  11153  -j-  Rm  582)  con- 
tains the  end  of  a  prayer  to  the  kakkabu Mustabarm  -  mfitanu,2 
addressed  as  a  male  deity,  which,  after  the  double  colophon 
(1.  gf.),  is  followed  by  a  prayer  to  Nirgal,  who  is  invoked  as 
follows:  — 

11.  O  Nirgal,  lord  of Pisu,  near  to  heaven  and  earth! 

12.  Who  harasses   the ,   the  first-born  of  KU.TU.SARl 

13.  The  strong,    the  perfect,    who  careth  for  the  whole  of  the 

Kirrud-azaga  \ 

14.  The  offspring  of  Ami,  the  first-born  son! 

15.  Who  is  clad  with  brightness,  who  is  clothed  with  light! 

1 6.  The  mighty,  the  valiant,  the  lord  of  power! 

17.  Who  giveth  the  victory,  who  establisheth  strength! 


1  A  ra-bu-u. 

2  One  of  the  seven  names   of  the  planet  Mercury,   see  JENSEN,  Kosmologie 
p.  I2of. 


PRAYER  TO  THE  MUSTABARRtf-MOTANU.  -Ill 

18.  King  of  the  battle,  the  wise,  the  courageous,  the  invincible! 

19 who  destroyeth  the  foe! 

20 the  impetuous,  the  warrior! 

21 the  hero ! 

9.  That  the  kakkaluNI-BAT-a-nu  is  phonetically  written 
kakkab"Mustabarru-mutanu,  cf.  BRUNNOW,  List,  no.  5347,  and  JENSEN, 
Kosmologie,  p.  119. 

12.  For  the  identification  of  \§£^-azaga  with  \^^-azaga, 
and  the  explanation  of  the  latter  as  "the  lordly  chamber"  of 
the  Lower  World,  see  JENSEN,  op.  cit.,  p.  234^ 

15.  The  word  salummatu  expresses  the  idea  of  light  viewed 
as  an  object  of  terror  (JENSEN,  op.  cit.,  p.  155). 

19.  This  line  is  restored  from  I  R.  17,  1.  8  where  Ninib  is 
described  as  mu-lial-lik  za-ya-a-ri.  Several  of  the  epithets  in 
this  prayer  are  to  be  found  in  Asmrnasir pal's  dedication. 


No.  47. 
Transliteration. 

i -/         ru~ 2 

Urn  -  nu  - 3 KA.LU.BI.DA 

4 -na-ku-nu  balatu  ba-a-ni    5 

dA-li-li-ku-nu  lud-lul 

6.  [1NIM.INIM.MA  SU    IL].LA  Mul-mul.KW 

7.  [DU.DU  BI       lu     ina     KISDA     lu]    ina     SA.NA     ipus(us) 

8 gaS  -  ru  -  u  -  ti 

9 SU  1L.LA  KAN 

10.  [ikal  m  illi  Assur-ban]-apli  etc. 

The  end  of  a  prayer  has  been  preserved  by  No.  47  (K  8808). 
In  1.  6  the  signs  ££f^>*f-  ££|«-»f-  I  have  taken  as  the  Mut- 
w/7//-star  (cf.  JENSEN,  Kosmologie,  p.  152)  and  not  as  the  plural 
of  kakkabu  (see  No.  8,  1.  22),  though  the  suffix  in  d&-li-ll~ku-nu 
suggests  that  the  prayer  is  addressed  to  more  than  one  deity. 


112  PRAYERS  TO  ASTRAL  DEITIES. 

The  tablet  apparently  formed  one  of  a  series,  part  of  the  title 
of  which  is  contained  by  1.  9. 


No.  48. 
Transliteration. 

Obv. 

i -ni-ti      2 -a-ti     3 

in- si    4 -sa     5 -a-ti 

6 -li-ku     7 MIN    8 

-ri     9 -  su      10 -  ya 

ii ziz      12 -si      13 

-ziz     14 

Rev. 

15-  ki- 

1 6.  INIM.INIM.MA  SU  IL.LA  Mul-mul.KAN 

17.  siptu       bilu       sur-bu-u       sa     ina     sami-i    $u-luj}-f}u-su     illu 

1 8.  Vlll-u  par-su    Bit   sa-la-mi-i     ikal     m  lluAssur-ban-apli    etc. 

According  to  the  first  line  of  the  colophon  (1.  18),  No.  48 
(K  8 1 1 6)  forms  the  eighth  part  of  a  composition  entitled  the 
Bit  sa-la-mi-i  (cf.  BEZOLD,  ZA  V,  p.  1 1 2  and  Catalogue,  p.  896). 
The  Obverse  of  No.  48  preserves  a  few  ends  of  lines  from  the 
beginning  of  the  tablet,  the  Reverse  the  end  of  a  prayer  to  the 
Mu/mu/-star.  According  to  the  catch-line  the  next  part  of  the 
composition  commenced  with  the  words:  "O  mighty  lord,  whose 
is  brilliant  in  heaven!" 

1 8.  With  the  composition  entitled  the  Bit  salami  may  be 
compared  the  incantations  that  commence  siptu  bit  nu-ru  (see 
above,  p.  53),  and  the  Series  Bit  rimki  (supra,  pp.  i4ff.).  The 
bit  rim-ki  and  the  bit  sa-la-mi-i  are  mentioned  together  in  the 
letter  K  168,  1.  13  (cf.  LEHMANN,  Samassumukin,  Pt.  II,  p.  76  and 
pi.  XLV). 


PRAYERS  TO  THE  STARS  MULMUL  AND  KAK.SI.DI.  I  I  3 

No.  49. 
Transliteration. 

Obv. 

i  ...........     2  ...........  -u-ti     3  ........... 

-mar    4  ...........  -a-ti    5  ...........  Hani*"1  ilulgigi 

6  ...........  ta-ab-tit    7  ...........  -ai-ti    8  ...... 

.....  -li-ti   9  ...........  -hi  at-mu-u-a    10  .......... 

-pu(?)  ya-a-si    \\  ...........  -ni  u-mi-iam    12  ........... 

-ru-sa-a-ti  13  ...........  -it  lim-nn-ti  14  ...........  -it 

ina    zumri-ya        15  ...........     [sar]-ra-tum    rabiliim(tnm) 

16  ...........    ka  -  ru  -  bu     17  ...........  -  ma  -  '  -  w 

18  ...........  -si  -la  -ku     19  ...........   ri-ii-ka 

20.  [INIM.IN1M.MA  SU  IL.LA     knkkabuKAK].SI.DI.KAN 


21 


Rev. 

22  ...........     23  ...........  i-mu-ki     24  ...... 

.....  -ru-ti    25  ...........  ra-Sub-bji    26  ........... 

-Sa-an-nu     27  ...........  ^    7^    z'^/w     28  .........  .  . 

abmpl  29  ...........  sami-i  30  ...........  [mit-$a?]- 

az-nin    nufrsu       31  ...........  fya-ra-Ar-ra       32  ...... 

.....      il  -  lu      stru       33  ...........      fya  -  ra  -  Ar  -  [ra] 

The  Obverse  of  No.  49  (D.T.  65)  preserves  part  of  a  prayer 
to  the  star  KAK.SI.DI  (cf.  JENSEN,  Kosmologie,  p.  49  ff.,  etc.), 
addressed  as  a  male  deity.  This  prayer  is  followed  by  a  second, 
which  is  continued  on  the  Reverse  of  the  tablet. 


No.  50. 

Transliteration. 


f  ;/>*>/*  kakkab"SlB.ZI.AN.NA] 

?.  [mu  -  na  -  kir]  '  • 

}.  [ina  Samt-i  ] 

\.  [kan  -  su  mail  -  ra  -  ka?] 

[t'/am**  rabitti*1  i  -  sal  -  lu  -  ka  -  ma?] 
j.  [ina  ba  -  li  -  ka  iluA  -  nim] 

il«BH        ma  -  [li  -  kit?] 


114  PRAYERS  TO  ASTRAL  DEITIES. 

8.  tluRammanu    asarid   samt-i  u   irsitim(tim)  ul  .......... 

9.  ina       ki  -  bit  -  ka1        izzakara(ra)       ti  -  [ni  -  Si  -  i  -  ti?]2 

10.  si  -  si  -  ma        itti  -  ka^       Hani*1       rabuti*1       li  -  zi  -  [zu] 

11.  *di  -  ni         di  -  in  purussa  -  ai        purus(us) 

12.  a  -  na  -  ku     arad  -  ka     m  Assur  -  ban  -  apli    mar    Hi  -  su 

13.  sd      ilu  -  su      Assur      iluis  -  tar-  su     ilHAs  -  sit  -  ri  -  i  -  tu 

14.  ina     lumun     lluatali    tluSin     sa     ina     arfyi  umi 

isakna(na) 

15.  ina     lumun       idati*1         ITI.MIS        limniti*1       la      tabati*1 
1  6.  sa     ina     ikalli  -  ya  u         matt  -  ya         ibasa  -  a 
17.  As  -  sum       u  -  pis       limutti(ti)       mursu      la      tabu     ar  -  ni 

1  8.  kil-la-ti  fyi-ti-ti  sa  ina  zumri-ya  .......... 

19.  ikimmu    lim-nu    sa    ilti-ya    rak-su-ma    u-Safy-  .......... 

20.  am  -  fair  -  ka  u     -     sa     -     pi    -     [ka] 

2  1  .  nis    kati  -  ya  mu  -  four  si  -  mi     las  -  [li  -  U] 

22.  pu  -  sur       kis  -  pi  -  ya      pu  -  si  -  si       fyi  -  ta  -  ti  -  [ya] 

23.  *  linnasij}(ib)  minima  lim-nu  sa  ana  na-kas  napisti-ya  illika[(ka)] 

24.  jl"sidu     damku  lu  ka  -  ai  -  an      ina      rtsi  -  ya 

25.  ilu       il"istar      amiluti  sa  -  li  -  mu       li  -  ir  -  su  -  ni 

Rev. 

26.  ina        kibtt  -  ka  lu     -     ub     -     Im 

27.  ludlul  -  ka  nar  -  bi  -  ka  lu     -     sa     -    pi6 

28.  INIM.INIM.MA          SU  IL.LA     kakkabuSIB.ZI.AN.NA.KAN 


29.  siptu  at-ta  kakkab"KAK.SLDI  iluNINIB  a-sa-rid  Hani*1  r 

No.  50  (K  2801  -f-  K  9490)  is  a  comparatively  small  tablet 
inscribed  for  Assurbanipal  with  a  prayer  to  be  recited  on  the 
occasion  of  an  eclipse  of  the  Moon.  The  prayer  is  evidently 
extracted  from  one  of  the  larger  compositions,  which  contain 
several  prayers  and  ceremonial  sections.  Such  a  text,  similar 
in  size  to  Nos.  12,  21,  and  22,  must  have  been  the  tablet  of 
which  the  duplicates  A  and  B  are  parts.  These  two  fragments 
do  not  join  but  from  the  style  of  the  writing  and  character  of 
the  clay  it  may  be  assumed  that  they  are  parts  of  the  same 


1  A  ina  kibit-ka.      2  Restored  from  the  similar  expression  in  No.  19,  1.  13. 

3  A  it-[ti-ka].      4  For  1.  II   A  reads: -zi •'  For 

1.  23  B  reads :    ii-5ur- c    After  I.  27    B  ceases  to  be  a  duplicate 

and  reads:    |  Siptu  kakkabu |   ilu£){jjif(j t   |  ki-ma 

,     I   .          .  .-//-.  .  .     I   . 


PRAYER  TO  SIBZIANA.  115 

tablet.  The  prayer  in  the  present  text,  however,  was  not  ex- 
tracted from  the  original  of  A  and  B,  for  the  incantation  that 
follows  in  B  commences  l*~*j-  ££f  |>  and  does  not  agree  with 
the  catch-line  of  No.  50.  The  prayer  is  inscribed  to  the  star 
Sibziana^  addressed  as  a  male  deity,  and  invoked  in  11.  i — 9  in 
somewhat  extravagant  terms.  The  object  of  the  prayer  is  to 
induce  Sibziana  to  remove  the  evil  spells,  bewitchments,  pos- 
session by  spectres  etc.,  that  have  followed  in  the  train  of  the 
lunar  eclipse.  The  prayer  reads  as  follows. 

Translation. 

i.  O  Sibziana 2.  Thou  that  changest  the 

3.  In  the  heavens 4.  They  bow  down  before  thee 

5.  The  great  gods  beseech  thee  and 

6.  Without  thee  Ami 7.  BU  the  arbiter 

8.  Ramman  the  prince  of  heaven  and  earth 

9.  At  thy  command  mankind  was  named!2 

10.  Give  thou  the  word  and  with  thee  let  the  great  gods  stand ! 

11.  Give  thou  my  judgement,  make  my  decision! 

12.  I,  thy  servant,  ASSurbanipal,  the  son  of  his  god, 

13.  Whose  god  is  AsSur,  whose  goddess  is  ASSuritu, 

14.  In  the  evil    of  the  eclipse  of  the  moon  which  in  the  month 

(sfiace^    on    tne    (Jay     (sfac^    J^g    taken    place, 

15.  In  the  evil  of  the  powers,  of  the  portents,  evil  and  not  good, 

1 6.  Which  are  in  my  palace  and  my  land, 

17.  Because    of  the   evil    magic,    the   disease   that  is  not  good, 

the  iniquity, 

1 8.  The  transgression,  the  sin  that  is  in  my  body , 

19.  [Because  of]  the  evil  spectre  that  is  bound  to  me  and , 

20.  Have  petitioned  thee,  I  have  glorified  thee! 

21.  The  raising  of  my  hand  accept!  Hearken  to  my  prayer! 

22.  Free  me  from  my  bewitchment!  Loosen  my  sin! 


1  For  the  identification    of  Sibziana   with  Regulus,    and  the  explanation  of 
the  name  as  "the  true  shepherd  of  heaven"  (JRfu  kinu  Ja  iami),  see  JENSEN,  ZA  I, 
p.  266,  and  Kosmologie,  pp.  36  f.,  48  f.  etc. 

2  I.  e.  created.     It  is  possible  that  >^  ^^TT  should  be  rendered  by  the 
Qal,  not  the  Nifal,  of  zakdru,  Sumu  being  understood ;  in  either  case  the  meaning 
of  the  line  remains  the  same. 

Q' 


Il6  PRAYERS  TO  ASTRAL  DEITIES. 

23.  Let  there  be  torn  away  whatsoever  evil  may  come  to  cut 

off  my  life! 

24.  May  the  favourable  $idu  be  ever  at  my  head! 

25.  May  the  god,    the  goddess   of  mankind   grant  me  favour! 

26.  At  thy  command  let  me  live! 

27.  Let  me  bow  down  and  extol  thy  greatness j 

The  catch-line  for  the  next  tablet  reads:  "Thou.O  KAK.SI.D1 
art  Ninib,  the  prince  of  the  great  gods!"  This  line  is  discussed 
by  JENSEN  (Kosmologie,  pp.  53  f.,  150),  BEZOLD  having  published 
the  fragment  K  9490  (cf,  ZA  III,  p.  250),  which  contains  the 
conclusion  of  the  text. 


No.  51. 

Transliteration. 

i  ...........     2.    [i]-ti-ir  ..........     3  ......  -pal 

dr  -  sa  -  ..........      4  ......  amilutu  .......... 

5  ......  -ma  ..........    6.  [as]-bat  subata(?)-ka  u-  ..... 

.....    7.  gi-mil  balati  Hi-  ..........    8.  dalili-ka  ..... 

9.  II  INIM.IN1M.MA     SU  IL.LA    kakkabu[SlB.ZLAN.NA.KAN] 

10.  AG.AG  BI  ana  pan  kakkabuSIB.ZLAN.NA  II  .......... 

11.  [SA.NA]   buraSi  taSakan(an)   K  AS,  SAG   tanaki(ki)  Siptu  an- 


12  ...........  -za-za     abarrikanutf)    itti(?)    wbtnu 

13  ...........     Samni     ^surminu      pu$u$ 

14  ...........  SlsamIGI.MAN.GIRI 

15  ...........  [ta$akan?](an)       ina 

1  6  ................     lint  -  nu  ul 


In  No.  51  (K  8190)  the  colophon-line  (1.  9)  seems  to  refer 
to  two  prayers,  of  which  the  end  of  the  second  has  been  pre- 
served. At  1.  10  a  ceremonial  section  of  seven  lines  commences, 
prescribing  the  offering  of  incense  and  the  pouring  out  of  a 
libation  before  Sibziana.  LI.  12  if.  contain  certain  rites  to  be 
performed  with  various  plants  and  woods,  including  anointing 
with  the  oil  of 


PRAYERS  TO  SIBZIANA.  .    I  17 

No.  52. 

Transliteration. 

i 2.    ina    an-ni-ka    ki-nim 

3.  AG.AG  BI  ana  pan    kakkabu  SIB.[ZI.AN.NA] 

4.  lu         ina         KISDA         lu  ina  SA.NA  III  Samtu  munu[(nu)] 

5.  Siptu    Sarru     Hani*1    gaS-ru-u-ti    Sa    nap-fyar    ma-a-ti    Su-pu-u 

iluIMINA.Bl  at-tu-nu-ma 

6.  ikal  m  ilu  As$ur-[ban]-apli  etc. 

Part  of  the  last  line  of  a  prayer  has  been  preserved  by 
No.  52  (K  6395  -f-  K  10138),  followed  by  a  rubric  of  two  lines 
which  presents  a  variant  form  of  a  common  ceremonial  direc- 
tion. Elsewhere  the  injunction  DU.DU  BI  lu  ina  KISDA  lu 
ina  SA.NA  ipu$  follows  the  colophon-line  INIM.INIM.MA  Sli 
IL.LA  etc.  In  the  present  tablet,  however,  it  is  directly  pre- 
ceded by  the  incantation,  and  is  expanded  so  as  to  form  two 
lines.  It  is  possible  that  nothing  followed  the  name  of  the  star 
in  1.  3.  In  that  case  1.  4  would  not  commence  a  new  sentence, 
but  would  run  on  without  a  break:  "Do  the  following.  Before 
Sibziana  either  ina  KISDA  or  ina  SA.NA  three  times  recite 
(the  incantation)".1 

The  catch-line  (1.  5)  reads:  "O  king  of  the  mighty  gods 
of  all  the  land!  Powerful,  O  Seven-fold  one,  are  ye!"  While 

citing  the  passages  in  which  the  *"*T~  T  £-«  }S  found,  E.  T. 
HARPER  (Beitrdge  zur  Assyr.,  Bd.  II,  Hft.  2  (1892)  p.  436),  has 
attempted  to  distinguish  its  use  as  applied  to  a  single  divinity 
from  those  instances  in  which  the  context  shows  a  plurality  ot 
deities  are  referred  to.  In  1.  5  of  No.  52,  however,  we  have  a 
remarkable  instance  of  the  combination  of  sing,  and  plur.  with 
reference  to  the  iluIMINA.BI,  the  plur.  of  the  pers.  pron.  occurring 
by  the  side  of  Sarru  and  Supji.  There  is  no  doubt,  therefore, 
that  the  name  »^f~  ty  Jl<  was  applied  to  a  group  of  gods 
who  were  so  closely  connected,  that,  though  addressed  in  the 
plural,  they  could  in  the  same  sentence  be  regarded  as  form- 
ing a  single  personality. 

1  See  above  p.  71  f. 


n8 


Section  VI. 

Prayers  against  the  evils  attending 
an  eclipse  of  the  Moon. 

The  sixth  and  final  Section  might  be  more  strictly  termed 
an  appendix,  for  the  texts  it  contains  are  only  indirectly  con- 
nected with  the  series  of  tablets  classified  under  Sections  I — V. 
Throughout  these  five  sections  it  will  be  observed  that  several 
of  the  prayers  contain  the  formula,  discussed  on  pp.  7  ff. ,  in 
which  it  is  stated  that  the  prayer  is  offered  in  consequence  of 
certain  evils  that  have  followed  in  the  train  of  a  lunar  eclipse. 
The  formula  is  to  be  found  in  No.  i,  11.  i — 28,  a  prayer  to  Sin, 
and  11.  36 — 52,  a  prayer  to  TaSmitu,  in  No.  4,  11.  9 — 22,  a  prayer 
to  Damkina,  and  11.  24 — 50,  a  prayer  to  Bdu,  in  the  concluding 
prayer  of  No.  6,  according  to  the  duplicate  F,  in  No.  7,  11.  9 — 33, 
a  prayer  to  the  goddess  Bilit  Hi,  and  11.  34 — 63 ,  a  prayer  to 
Isbara ,  in  No.  19,  11.  i — 33,  a  prayer  to  Bil ,  in  the  prayer  to 
Nirgal  in  No.  27,  according  to  the  duplicate  A,  and  in  No.  50, 
11.  i — 28,  a  prayer  to  Sibziana.  It  is  not,  however,  confined  to 
the  group  of  texts  collected  in  Sections  I— V,  but  is  of  some- 
what common  occurrence  in  various  series  and  classes  of  prayers. 
In  Section  VI,  therefore,  I  have  collected  those  tablets  and 
fragments  in  which  I  have  come  across  the  formula.  The  list, 
however,  makes  no  pretence  of  being  exhaustive,  for  it  is  pro- 
bable that  the  eclipse -formula  is  contained  by  other  tablets 
throughout  the  collections  from  Kouyunjik. 


PRAYER  TO  fA,  SAMAS,  AND  MARDUK.  '  119 

No.  53. 

Transliteration. 


Obv. 


2 gas(?)-ru -fa 

3.  abkal      kis-sa-ti      iluMarduk         sal-ba-[bu  bile]     I.TUR.RA 

4.  llut-a       ll"Samas       M       ilu  Marduk       ya-a-Si      ru-sa-nim-ma 

5.  ina     an  -  ni  -  ku  -  nu  i  -  Sa  -  ru  -  tu     lul  -  Hk 

v 

6.  ll"Samas     ikimmu     mu-pal-li-fyi     s&     is-tu     ii-mi    ma--du-ti 

7.  arki  -  ya  rak  -  su  -  ma  la     muppatiru(ru) 

8.  ina    kal  ii-mi  iksu$(?)-an-ni  ina    kal  musi  up-ta-na-lafy-an-ni 

9.  ri-du-su        u$tzizu(zu)        lubuStit (?)       ili-ya       uz-za-na-ka-pti 

10.  pani  -  ya  i  -  fyi  -  su  -  u          ini*1  -  ya         uz-za-na-kup 

11.  ur  -  ka  -  ya         ub  -  ba  -  lu         $iri*1  -  ya         i-sam-ma-mu 

12.  kal    pag  -  ri  -  ya  ub  -  ba  -  lu 

13.  lu     i  -  kim  -  mu     kirn  -  ti  -  ya  u         sa  -  la  -  ti  -  ya 

14.  lu     i  -  kim  -  mu  $a     ina     di  -  ik  -  ti  di  -  ku 

15.  lu  ikimmu   GUR  TAP. PI  DU  an-nu-u  Su-u  an-nu-u -Su 

Rev. 

1 6.  tluSamas    ina   pani-ka    i$-ti--su-ma    lubuSti*1   ana    lit-bu-$i-$u 

miSiru  ana  kabti(?) 

17.  misiru     ana     kabli-$u       SU.A.RU.LA          mi*1     ana     5ati-5u 

1 8.  ki"""£^\     i-sib-Su  SA.KASKAL    addin-Su 

19.  a  -  na  i  -  rib  iluSam$i($i)  HI  -  Hk 

20.  a-na     iltlNt.DU.NI          DV.GAL         sa  irsitim(tim)  lu-pa-kid 

21.  iluNt.DU.NI    DU.GAL   sa  irsitim(tim)  masartu-su  li-dan-nin 

22.  H  -  iz  -  ziz     'si'sigaru  nam  -  sa  -  ki  -  su  -  nu(?) 

23.  ''"Savias     ina     ki-bi-ti-ka     sir-li  sa     [ul]     uttakkaru(ru) 

24.  ina  lumun  il" atali  il"Sin  sa  ina  arl}ipulani  umi pitlani  isakna(na) 

25.  luwun       idati^1       ITI.MIS  limntti*1       la       tabati*1 

26.  sa     ina         ikalli  -  ya  u  mati  -  ya         ibasa  -  a 

27.  [ina]    ki-bit   abkalli    Hani*1    il"Marduk   ina  zumri-ya 

-kis-su 

28 -ya     ipparasu(su)  ina  zumri-ya 

-pal-su 

29 lu-ta-mi    napsat  ilul-a lu-ta-mi 

30 Pl lu-ta-mi 


120  PRAYERS   AGAINST  THE  EVILS 

No.  53  (K  3859  -f-  Sm.  383)  preserves  the  bottom  portion 
of  a  tablet  and  contains  a  prayer  to  la,  Samas,  and  Marduk, 
of  which  both  the  beginning  and  end  are  missing.  The  sup- 
pliant states  that  he  is  praying  after  an  eclipse  of  the  Moon, 
and  he  implores  these  three  deities  to  rescue  him  from  the 
clutches  of  a  spectre,  by  whom  he  is  continually  haunted.  What 
remains  of  the  Obverse  commences  as  follows:  — 

3.  O  arbiter  of  the  world,  Marduk,  the  mighty,  the  lord  of  ltura\ 

f  V 

4.  O  fa,  SamaS,  and  Marduk  deliver  me, 

5.  And  through  your  mercy  let  me  come  to  prosperity! 

6.  O  Samai,  the  spectre  that  striketh  fear,  that  for  many  days 

7.  Has  been  bound  on  my  back,  and  is  not  loosed, 

8.  Through  the  whole  day  hath me,  through  the  whole 

night  hath  stricken  me  with  terror! 

The  suppliant  then  describes  the  ways  in  which  he  is 
tormented  by  the  spectre,  who  defiles  him  and  attacks  his  face, 
his  eyes,  his  back,  his  flesh  and  his  whole  body.  On  the  Re- 
verse of  the  tablet  he  recounts  to  SamaS  how  he  has  tried  to 
appease  and  to  restrain  his  tormentor.  Apparently  his  efforts 
have  met  with  no  success  for  he  now  turns  to  the  Sun-god  for 
relief,  which  he  prays  he  may  receive  through  his  mighty  com- 
mand that  is  not  altered,  and  through  the  command  of  Marduk, 
"the  arbiter  of  the  gods". 

10.  After  the  form  uz-za-na-ka-pii  in  1.  9  one  might  per- 
haps assign  to  £P|  in  uz-za-ua-t^\  the  new  value  kafi. 

18.  The  character  ^£*~^y^  is  not  quite  accurately  rendered 
on  pi.  68,  for  the  small  perpendicular  wedge  should  project 
slightly  above  the  long  horizontal  one.  Elsewhere  the  forms 
of  this  character  are  somewhat  various.  While  the  beginning 

of  the    sign   0<£*~)   remains    constant,    together  with  the  small 

perpendicular  wedge  (|),  the  number  and  position  of  the  small 
diagonal  wedges  above  the  long  horizontal  line  vary  conside- 
rably. In  K  2971,  Col.  Ill,  1.  22  three  wedges  (^)  occur 
above  the  horizontal  line  (not  two  as  in  IV  R2  56,  1.  55^),  in  V 
R  18,  1.  35  f.  (as  corrected  in  ZK  I,  p.  349)  two  wedges  only 

occur,  and  in  V  R  1 1,  1.  lof.  four  wedges  (^)  are  to  be  found 


ATTENDING  AN  ECLIPSE  OF  THE  MOON.  121 

which  in  the  duplicate  K  4410  are  written  ^-  In  all  these 
passages,  however,  only  one  diagonal  wedge  is  written  below 
the  long  horizontal  wedge. 

23.  In  the  transliteration  before  the  sign  AT  I  have  restored 
V~,  which  has  been  apparently  omitted  by  the  scribe  in  error. 


No.  54. 

Transliteration. 

1.  [ana-ku]    pulanu    apil  pulani    Sd    ilu-su   pulanu    ilu[istar-$u 

pulan  tlu  m  (tu  m)] 

2.  [ina]    lumun    lluatalt    lluSin      $d  ina  arj}i  pulani  iimi  pulani 

[iiakna(na)] 

3.  [ina]    lumun    idati^1    ITI.MIS  limniti*1      [la    fabati*1] 

4.  [sa]       ina       ikalli  -  ya  u         mati  -  ya         [ibaSa  -  a] 

5.  [ina]     kibit  -  ka  kit  -  ti  lu  -  [iib  -  lut] 

6.  [lu  -  us]  -  Urn  -  ma     lu  -  u$  -  tarn  -  mar     [ilu  -  ut  -  ka] 

7.  [i  -  ma]      u  -  sa  -  am  -  ma  -  ru  lu  -  [uk  -  $u  -  ud] 

8 kit    -     turn  

9 [damiktim](tim)  

10 

No.  54  (Sm.  512)  is  a  fragment  from  the  centre  of  a  prayer, 
and,  in  addition  to  the  eclipse-formula,  contains  some  of  the 
common  petitions  for  life,  success,  etc.  LI.  8  and  9  are  possibly 
to  be  restored  according  to  No.  9,  1.  13  f. 


No.  55. 

Transliteration. 

i 2.   ana-[ku   m]A$$ur-ban-apli  iluBAR 

3.  ina  lumun  iluatali  iluSin  Sa  ina  arj}i  [  umi 

KANiSakna(na)]  4.  ina  lumun  idati^1  ITI.MIS  [limniti*1  la  tabati*1] 
5.  $a  ina    ikalli  -  ya    u    mati  -  ya    ibaSa  -  [a] 


122  PRAYERS  AGAINST  THE  EVILS 

Part  of  a  prayer  of  Ashurbanipal  has  been  preserved  by 
No.  55  (K  6792).  The  fragment  is  from  the  left  side  of  one 
of  the  class  of  smaller  tablets. 


No.  56. 

Transliteration. 

1.  sa     

2.  iluSamas  ilu 

3.  maru 

4.  ik  -  ka  -  ru      ki  - 

5.  mu  -  sa  -  ri     in  - 

6.  z  -  ti  -  ir 

7.  a-na-ku   mAssur-[ban-apli] 

8.  sa        ilu  -  $11        [Assur      ilui$  -  tar  -  su     iluAs  -  su  -  ri  -  i  -  tu] 
g.  ina  lumun  ilu  [atalt  iluSin  Sa  ina  arfyi       umi     KANisakna(na)] 

10.  [ina]      lumun      idati[^1       1TLMIS      limniti*1      la     tabati*1] 

1 1 .  [sa     ina]     ikalli[-ya  u          mati-ya         iba$a-a] 

Like  the  preceding  fragment  No.  56  (K  2810)  contains  part 
of  a  prayer  written  for  Ashurbanipal.  The  tablet  is  one  of  the 
smaller  kind  and  is  written  in  somewhat  coarse  characters;  what 
has  been  preserved  of  the  Reverse  is  uninscribed. 


No.  57. 

Transliteration. 


Obv. 

i.  . 

ilu 


2.  lluh-J}a-ra     ummu     ri-[mi-ni-tum     $d     nisi*1     

3.  ana-ku  pulanu   apil  pulani  sa   ilu-su   [pulanu  tluistar-su  pula- 

nitum(tinn)] 

4.  ina  lumun  lluatalt  UuSin  Sa  [ina   arfyi  pulani  umi  pulani  isak- 

na(na)] 

5.  lumun         idatit1         ITI.[M1S  limniti*1         la         tabati^1] 

6.  sa     ina     ikalli  -  ya       u     [mati  -  ya  ibasa  -  a] 


ATTENDING  AN  ECLIPSE  OF  THE  MOON.  123 


7 .  a  -  na    su  -  a  -  ti     asfrur  -  ki     al  -  [si  -  ki] 

8.  d$  -  Sum    gi  -  mil      dum  -  ki     

9.  as  -  riik  -  ki        si  -  rik 

10.  za  -  ka  -  a      da -as -pa      ku  -  ru  -  [un  -  na] 

11.  u  -  ma  -  far  -  ki  mu  - 

12.  napisti(ti)     ub  -  lak  -  ki     

13.  iluls  -  fya  -  ra      ina     sap  - 

14.  bi  -  lit     matati      ina      sap  - 

15.  dup  -  pi  -  ri     mimma 

1 6.  mimma     lim  -  nu 

ij.su- 18 

Rev. 

19 -  mi  - 20 

21 22 

The  commencement  of  No.  57  (K  9909)  is  very  similar  to 
the  end  of  the  Reverse  of  No.  7.  Each  tablet  is  addressed  to 
Isfyara,  No.  57,  11.  2  and  4 — 7  corresponding  to  No.  7,  11.  59 — 62. 
L.  63  of  No.  7,  however,  does  not  agree  with  1.  8  of  No.  57, 
so  that  the  texts,  through  closely  parallel,  are  apparently  not 
duplicates 


No.  58. 

Transliteration. 

Obv. 

i *l  mu-sim  simatipl       2 -su-u 

nubsu    3 *l  ta- pa-kid  4 lim-na-ti 

su-nl-ma   5 [ana-ku  pnlanu  apil]  pulani  sa  ilu- 

su  pulanu  iluistar-su  pulamtum(tum)  6.  [ina  liimun  illiatali  il"Sin 
sa  ina  arfri  pulani]  itmi  pulani  iSakna(na)  7.  [lumun  idatipl 
IT1.M1S  limniti*1  la  tabati*1  sa  ina]  ikalli-ya  u  mati-a  ibasa-a 

8 .•  •  •   pa-sa-su       9 -an- 

10 -ka ii na 

12 fyu 

13 

Rev. 

14 15 -  Si  -  ru     sii  -  luf}  -  h* 

1 6 -mi  ilanipl  mu-tal-lum      17 

mu-na-mir     nk-li     18 -  ki   mu  -  ris   LTUR.RA 

Ra 


124  PRAYERS   AGAINST  THE  EVILS 

To  judge  from  the  thickness  of  the  tablet,  No.  58  (K  6644) 
may  possibly  have  contained  two  columns  on  either  side.  In 
that  case,  the  beginning  of  Col.  II  and  the  end  of  Col.  Ill  have 
been  preserved,  inscribed  with  portions  of  two  separate  incan- 
tations. 


No.  59. 

Transliteration. 


i *l         ina     kal 

2 -ni      Sa  iprit1  DUB 

3 Sudani*1  (ni)  barrani*1  NUN 


4 Ml    Uati*1    Saplatit1   BUR 

5 -u  tas-lit  

6 bU     nduti(ti)  

7 dr-ni     u     ma-mit     Hani*1 

8 tluSamaS   kaspu    bura$u    nu- 

9 [kam]-sa-ku  a-na-kar  ir- 

10 lit-ba-lu  

ii -  ti-ka  rabiti(ti)  sa  ul  uttakkaru(rii) 

12.  [ina  lumun]   lluatalt   lluSin    Sa    ina   arf}i  pulani  [umi  pulani 

isakna(na)] 

13.  [lumun     idati]*1     ITI.MIS  [limmti*1     la     tabati^1] 

14.  [Sa  ina  ikalli]-ya  u  mati-ya         [ibaSa-a) 

15 -ya  Us- 

1 6 -li-na-an-ni  ma-fyi(?)- 

17 mar    ili-Sti     in  -  an  -  na  -  .  .  .  .  •. 

1 8 iluSamaS  iluRammanu    u   UuMarduk 

19 -tab-ba-la-ka  ta  - 

20 rik  -  ku  -  ti  

21 amUumitu  la     itur 

22 iribu  

The  upper  portion  of  a  tablet  has  been  preserved  by 
No.  59  (K  7978),  consisting  of  a  heading  or  introduction  of 
three  lines,  and  the  beginning  of  an  incantation  to  a  male  deity. 


ATTENDING  AN  ECLIPSE  OF  THE  MOON.  125 

No.  60. 

Transliteration. 


Obv. 

i. 


2.  [LUGAL?]   BI  KA.TAR.ZU  GA.AN.S1L   £   sar-[ru?  su]-u 

da-[li-li-ka 


3.  u        anaku         am'tluMU.MU        aradka         dalilika         ludlul 

4.  IN1MJNIM.MA     KI  iluSama$.KAN          mas-mas  limnu(nit) 

V 

5.  siptu  tluSamas  daian  Sami-i   u    irsitim(tim)    la-it   ir$iti(ti)  ra- 

pastim(tim) 

6.  bilu        pi-tu-u         uz-ni  na-ram  tluBil 

7.  daianu       stru  sa       ki-bit-su  la     ut-tak-ka-ru 

8.  an-na-Su         ilu         ma-am-man  la         i-nu-u 
g.  bilu         at-ta-ma             Sur-bat  a-niat-ka 

10.  ki-bit-ka     ul    im-maS-Si  ut-nin-ka     ul    iS-Sa-na-an 

1  1  .  kima     iluA-nim     abu-ka  ki-bit-ka  $i-rat 

Rev. 

12  ...........  *l-ka  Si'i-tu-rat  a-mat-ka 

13  ...........          $a       i  -  mu  -  ka  ra  -  aS  -  bu 

14  ...........     [i]  -  mu  -  ki          strati*1          at-ta-  ..... 

15  ...........  -di-ri-ka  sa      $it-mu-ru     la     sa-  ..... 

1  6  ...........   amatipl    SI.  MIS    lim-bu-ru-  .......... 

17  ...........  -mat  lik-ru-bu-  .......... 

18  ...........  -ri    NI.RUS  lizziza(za)  .......... 

19.  [ina  lumun  il"]atali  Sin  sa  ina  arfyi  pnlaniumipulaniisakna[(na)] 

20.  [lumun        idati*11]       IT1.MIS        limniti*1         la         fabati[fl] 

21.  [sa  ina  ikalli]-ya  mati-ya  ibasa-[a] 
22  ...............  -us  su-ut-li-ma-am-ma  [damiktim](tim) 


No.  60  (K  3463)  consists  of  the  lower  portion  of  a  tablet. 
After  three  colophon-lines  there  follows  a  prayer  to  Santas, 
which  is  continued  on  the  Reverse  of  the  tablet.  The  prayer 
opens  with  the  following  invocation:  — 

5.  O  Santas,  judge  of  heaven  and  earth,  that  burnest  the  broad 

earth! 

6.  O  Lord,  that  openest  the  ear,  the  darling  of  Bill 

7.  Exalted  judge,  whose  command  is  not  altered, 


126 


PRAYERS  AGAINST  THE  EVILS 


8.  Whose  mercy  no  god  has  ever  annulled! 

9.  A  lord  art  thou,  and  mighty  is  thy  word! 

10.  Thy  command  is  not  forgotten,  thy  intercession  is  unequalled! 

11.  Like  Anu,  thy  father,  thy  word  is  exalted! 

On  the  Reverse  of  the  tablet,  which  is  somewhat  broken, 
the  suppliant  continues  his  invocation  of  the  god,  and  in  11.  19  ff. 
states  the  occasion  of  the  prayer. 

2.  The  second  half  of  this  line  is  probably  a  Semitic  trans- 
lation of  the  Sumero-Akkadian  phrases  with  which  it  commences. 
For  my  conjectural  restoration,  cf.  BRUNNOW,  List,  no.  561,  and 
ZIMMERN,  Busspsalmen,  p.  73. 


No.  61. 

Transliteration. 


2  .................  -  Sat  -  ki    ..... 

3.  /".....  INJTI      sik-nat  matati  mi  - 

4.  [Ill]     samtu     kibi  -  ma  limuttu 


5.  [Siptu]     marat     'l"A-nim     sa     sami-i  

6.  [bi]  -  nu  -  ut    tamti  ta  -  ma  -  ti         rapsati(ti) 

7.  [llu]A  -  nim     a  -  bu  -  ni  ib  -  na  -  na  -  Si  -  [ma?] 

8.  [samu]-u         u         irsitim(tim)^  ib-ba-nu-u  it-ti-[ni] 

9.  [ft]      ma  -  mi  -  tu  ib  -  ba  -  ni      it  -  ti  -  ni  -  [ma?] 

10.  [atj'ti       ma-mit      SA.LA2     kar^atuGU.ZI          u         wpassuru 

11.  [ina    umi]    UKAN   umi   \I±KAN   jtmi   XV^/W  urn  mi-bat(?)-ti 

um  AB.AB  nmi 

12.  [umi  X.X.]^AN  bubbulum  iim  rim-ki  inn  limutti*  ii 

13.  [a-na]        nap-sat        Hi        u       Sarri       ka-ti       at-ta-ra-[am?] 

14.  [ni]  -  is         Hani*1         rabutipl  az  -  za  -  [kar?] 

15.  [a-na]     mudii  -  u     la     mudii  -  u     at  -  ta  - 

1 6.  [*ina   lumun]   iluatalt   il"Sin   sa  ina  arfyi  pulani   umi  pulani 

isakna[(na)] 


1  A  ir$itum(tum).  2  After  ^^f  A  reads  in  smaller  characters:  £  it-ti. 
3  A  bigalli.  *  A  apparently  omits  1.  16,  reading  in  its  place:  lumun  iddtiP1 
ITI.MI&  limnitiP1  [id  fdbdtiPl]  \  />a  ina  ikalli]-ya  u  mati-ya  [ibald-a] . 


ATTENDING  AN  ECLIPSE  OF  THE  MOON.  -127 


17 mub-ra-an-ni  GU.ZUR-ki  u-kul-li- 

18 -pi-ka  pu-sur  ina  la  Hl-ka  sii-$a-a- 

19 [ka?]-bu-ut-ta-ka-ma  tas-ma-a  an-.  , 

20 -  tu  -  un       sipat     llut  -a     ... 

21.  .  .      UuBau  sipat  iluNIN.A  .  .  . 


22 MA  GU 


23 

No.  6 1  (K  8293)  contains  traces  of  four  lines  of  directions 
for  ceremonies,  which  are  followed  by  a  short  incantation  of 
seventeen  lines,  addressed  to  a  goddess,  "the  daughter  of  Ami". 
Only  the  first  line  of  the  eclipse-formula  is  included  in  the  text, 
while  in  the  duplicate  A  this  is  replaced  by  the  second  and 
third  lines  of  the  formula. 

ii.  For  the  iim  nu-bat(?)-ti,  cf.  DELITZSCH,  Beitrage znr  Assyr., 
Bd.  I,  p.  231,  and  JENSEN,  Kosmologie,  p.  106  f.  A  similar  sequence 
of  days  occurs  in  K  2866,  1.  25  f.  (S.  A.  SMITH,  Miscellaneous 
Assyrian  Texts,  p.  17);  cf.  also  III  R  56,  No.  4. 


No.  62. 

Transliteration. 

Obv. 

i  ................     kissat  Hani*1  rabuti*"1 


2  ................  simati*1          mu-us.-si.-ru 

3  ................  sami-i     u     irsitim(tim)    at-tu-nu-ma 

4.  ..........  *l  us  -  su  -  ru         busii  -  ku  -  nu  -  ma 

5  ...........  [ta]-sim-ma  wusurati*1  balatu  at-tu-nu-ma  tu- 

u$-sa-ra 

6  ...........     ta-par-ra-sa  sipat-ku-nu  balatu 

7  ...........  -la-mu  i-pis    pi-ku-nu     ba-la-tu-um-ma 

8  ...........        ka  -  bi  -  su  irsiti(ti)  rapasti(ti) 

.......  '.  .  .-bu  ka-bi-su  ki-rib  sami-i  rukiitipl  at-tu-nn-ma 

10  ...........    lum-ni  sa-ki-nu    dum-ki   mu-pa-si-su   idati*1 

ITI.MIS  limniti*1 
i  ...........  -da-a-ti  limmti*1  la  tabati  mn-sal-li-tu  ki-i  lum-ni 

12  ...........  -si-ru   NAM.BUL.BI.I  i-ma  idati*1  ITI.MIS 

ma-la  ba-sa-a 


128 

13-  [ana-ku  pulanu]   apil  pulani  sa   ilu-su  pulanu  lluistar-su  pu- 

lamtum(tum) 
14 *l  ITLMIS         limniti*1  it-ta-nab-sa-nim-ma 

15.  [pal]-j}a-ku-ma  ad-ra-ku  u  su-ta-du-ra-ku 

1 6.  ina  lumun  ll"atali  lluSin  ina  lumun  lluatalt  iluSamas 

17.  ina  lumun  kakkabani*1  Sa  su-utilut-a  su-ut ilu A-nim  su-ut  iluBtl 

1 8.  ina   lumun *l      Sa  ana  kakkabanipl  ^arrant*1 

is-sal- 

19.  ina  lumun *l    sa  ana  a-fya-miS  it-ti-ify- 

20 ina  lumun  ali 

Rev. 

21 ilul-a 

22 rabtti(ti)  ana 


23 kalu 


24 -ak-ki     SAR     mi*1    illiiti*1 

25 [ilu]Marduk  tukan(an)  III  KArA-A-AN 

26.  [suluppu   KU.A].TIR   taSapak(ak)   SA   samni  niku  mil  [dispu 

frimitu  taSakan(an)] 

v 

27 tukan(an)  SA.NA  burasi  tasakan(an) 

28.  [immiruniki]  tanaki(ki)  XruZAG  ^uj\fLHf  [u  XruKA.IZI  ta- 

sakan(an) 

29 [ta?]-sal-lab  III  KU.DUB.DUB.BU SUB.[SUB(di)] 

30 minutu(tu)  an-ni-tu  III  Samtu   munu-ma   u$- 

ki-in-ma 

3 1 .  [Siptu  bil]       bill       sar       Sarrani 

32.  [ikal]    miluAs$ur-ban-aph  Sarri    kisSati  sarri  mdtu  a"[AsSurKI] 

33.  [sA     a]  -  na         iluAs$ur         u         iluBilit  tak  -  him 

34.  [sd]  lluNabu  u  tlu  Ta$-mi-tum  uznadu  rapaStum(tum)  i$-ru-ku-u$ 
35-  [i-fyu]-zu  inadu  na-mir-tum         ni-sik        dup-Sar-ru-ti 

36.  [$a  ina]     Warrant*1  (ni)  a  -  lik  ma&  -  ri  -  ya 

37.  [mimma     sip  -  ru]         su  -  a  -  tu  la  i  -  fyu  -  zu 

38.  [ni-mi-ik      jl"Nabu]      ti-kip      sa-an-tak-ki      ma-la     ba-as-mu 

39.  [ina      dup-pa-a-ni       as]  -  tur         as  -  nik     ab  -  ri  -  i  -  ma 

40.  [a-na       ta-mar-ti       si-ta]-as-si-ya      ki-rib      ikalli-ya      u-kin 

41.  [itillu         mndu  nu  -  ur]         sarri         Hani*1         iluAs~sur 

42.  [man-nu  sd  itabbalu  u  lu-u]  suma-sti  it-ti  sumi-ya  i-sat-ta-ru 

43.  [iluAssur       u       iluBilit       ag]-gis         iz-zi-is        lis-ki-pu-su-ma 

44.  [suma  -  su         zira  -  su]          ina        mati      li  -  fyal  -  li  -  fcu 


ATTENDING  AN  ECLIPSE  OF  THE  MOON.  .     129 

No.  62  (K  7593)  is  the  upper  portion  of  a  large  tablet. 
Its  Obverse  contains  a  prayer,  which  is  addressed  to  more  than 
one  deity,  and  is  offered  with  the  object  of  obtaining  help  on 
several  occasions  of  distress.  The  line  that  is  ruled  between 
11.  15  and  1 6  does  not  mark  the  commencement  of  a  second 
incantation,  but  rather  a  fresh  section  of  the  first  prayer.  For 
at  that  point  the  suppliant  ceases  his  invocation  and  the  state- 
ment of  his  own  condition  of  alarm,  and  prays  for  deliverance 
from  various  evil  powers  and  influences.  As  the  first  of  these 
evils  is  that  caused  by  a  lunar  eclipse  the  tablet  is  included 
in  the  present  Section.  The  other  evils,  that  are  enumerated 
in  11.  17 — 20,  appear  to  be  of  an  astral  nature.  The  Reverse 
of  the  tablet  concludes  with  a  ceremonial  section  of  seven  lines. 

12.  The  compound  ideogram  NAM.BUL.B1  appears  to  be 
a  somewhat  general  term  for  evil  or  unpropitious  influences,  cf. 
IV  R  17,  Rev.,  1.  15  f.,  K  2277,  Obv.,  11.  3  ff.,  Rev.,  11.  i,  4,  etc. 

For  the  Series  of  incantations  entitled  the  *nl^  ^^l  1 1^  +~< 
]****">  see  BEZOLD,  Catalogue,  p.  456,  sub  K  2587. 

29.  For  the  restoration  of  the  end  of  this  line,  cf.  No.  40, 
1.  12;  see  also  No.  30,  1.  24. 

32.  The  most  recent  translation  of  this  colophon  has  been 
given  by  TALLQVIST,  Die  Assyrische  Beschwonmgsserie  Maqlu, 
Leipzig  1895,  pp.  41,  53  f.,  etc. 


VOCABULARY 


K2  =  n;  K9  =  n.  ^-;  ^  =  yi,  ^;  KB  =  y*  £ 

iltu  "spell,  charm":  '-//-//  36,5;  i-il-ta-Su  32,4. 
jfc^  abu  "father":  a-bu  n,  2;  ig,  5;  a-fo6,  24;  n,  38;  12,  34,  87; 

21,56;    33.12;    <z£«  11,22;    abu-ka  2,17;    3,15;    27,9; 

60,  n;  abi-ya  n,  22  (7;  abi-ya  n,  22bis;  a-bu-ni  61,  7. 
2N  I  i   "to  shine,  be  bright":  lu-bi-ib  12,  82;  -  -  II  i  "to  make 

bright,  to  purify":  li-ib-bi-bu-nin-ni  12,  86;  lib-bi-bu 

12,  86  C;  ubbib-an-ni  (ideogr.  LAH.LAH)   11,25. 

ibbu  "pure":  ib-bi  30,  2. 
abubu  "deluge,  inundation":  a-bu-bu  u,  i;  a-bu-ub  12,  23; 

a-bu-bi  2 1 ,  80. 

AB.AB  a  festival?:  f«»«;  AB.AB  61,  n. 
abnu  "stone":  abnt*1  12,  104;  4g,  28. 

a  ban  birki  "thunderbolt":  abni*1  birku  21,  17. 
abkallu  "arbiter":    ab-kal  22,35;  abkallu  22,37;  abkalli 

53,27;  a^fl/  12,88,114;  53,3. 
abaru  "to  be  strong":  ?  a-bi-rnin  6,97;   10.7. 

abaru  "strength":  a-ba-ri  46,  16. 

aburriS  "in  security":  aburriS  (ideogr.   U.SAL)  25,6. 
abbuttu  "chain,  fetter"  (see  sabatu):  a-bu-ti  1,42;  g,  45; 

33,24. 
agubbu  "pure  water;  vessel  of  purification":  kari>atua-gub-ba 

12,85,  IX8;  a-gub-ba   15,  18. 


132  VOCABULARY  [agagu 

agagu  "to  be  enraged":  i-gu-ga  4,46;  6,89:  7,27. 

aggu  "angry":  ag-gu  6,  12;  27,20;  46,5. 

uggatu  "anger":  tig-gat  12,  77. 
igu  "sin":  [i]-gu-u  46,  i;  [i]-gu-u  28,9. 
UGU.KUL.LA  (*«>«):   12,101. 
IGI.MAN.GIRI(*»»):  51,  14- 
ugaru  "plain,  country":  u-ga-ru  21,84. 
adaguru  "incense-burner,  censer":    kari>atua-da-gur  12,4; 

kar*atua-da-gur  30,  23. 
adi  "up  to":  adi  11,37. 
idlu  "hero":  i-dil  9,  i;   18,20. 
admu  "child":  ?  ad-mi-ki  7,40. 
adaru  "to  fear":    Ii   a-du-ur-ma  28,  10;    46,2;    ad-ra-kn 

4,  42;  62,  15;  -  -  III  2  su-ta-du-ra-ku  4,  42:  62,  15. 

adiru  "trouble,  distress":  a-di- 5,6. 

idirtu  "affliction":  i-dir-tu  12,69. 
adirtu  "grief":  ? a-di-ra-tu  30,  13. 

mudisSu   "renewer,  renovator":  mu-dis-Su-u  9,5;  mu-dis- 
$u-u   12,  30;  21,4. 

iddissu,    iddiSu    "newly   shining":    id-diS-Su-u    12,  18; 

id-di$-$u-u  1,2;  6,98;  id-di-su-u  12,  iS  A. 
umu  "storm":  u-mu  20,9,11;  21,9,35,37. 
urru  "light":  urru-ka  i.  5,  10. 
4  izibu  III  i   "to  save,  to  deliver":  su-zi-bi  31,6;  $ii-zu-ba  4, 

3U  6,76. 
4  izizu  "to  be  angry":  i-zi-za  6,89;  7,27;  i-zi-za-wa  7,41. 

izzu  "mighty,  terrible":  iz-zi-tii  12,  117. 

uzzu  "anger":  uz-zu   12,77;  w#-£*'  33,3. 

izzitu?  "anger":  i-zis-su  n,  i;  i-zi-su  n,  i  ^4. 

^   uznu    "ear":    «2--wz/    12,20;    «^-«z    60,6;    uznadu-ai  4,  34; 
6,  79;  7,  16;  19,  20;  21,  62;  uznadu-$i-na  (cf.  birtu)  12,  38. 
abu  "brother":  afa-ya  11,2  2  £7;  a&t**-Stt  21,5. 

abami§  "together":  a-fya-mi$  62,  19. 
abu  "side":  a-fa-ya  13,  23. 

"side":  a-f}i-ti  12,68. 


VOCABULARY  .133 

ab^  "hostile":  ?  a-fyi-tu-ma   11,24. 
ahazu  "to  hold,  to  grasp":  a-j}u-zu  8,6. 

abarrikanu    a    disease   of  the  eye:    abarrikanu  (ideogr. 

IGLIGI)  51,  12. 
itiru  "to  protect":    i-ti-ir  56,6;   [i]-ti-ir  51,2;  if-ri-nl-in- 

ni-matf)  4,34;    it-ti-rat  9,35;    i-ti-ra-ta  6,64;    i-ti-ra  4, 

31;  6,76;  ittra  (ideogr.  KAR)  7,  14;  37,  12. 

itiru  a  garment:  i-ti(?}-ra  31,  10. 

ai  "not,  never":    <w  2,  45;    6,  124;    7,  57bis;    10,  22;  n,  19, 

24;   12,  62,  63,  64,  65,  67,  69,  74bis,  77;   15,  9;  21,  65. 
ya'u  "where?":  ya-u  u,  10;  21,  54. 
aibu  "foe":  ai-bi-ya  21,  64. 

inu  "eye":  ini  40,  10;  ini-ina  40,  13;  inipl-ya  53,  10. 
aru  I  2  "to  lead,  rule":  mu-ut-ta--ir  (or  I  2  fr.  -|N«D?)  6,  20. 

tirtu  "command,  law":  ti-rit  2,  18;  3,  15. 
ikdu  "mighty,  courageous":  ik-du  20,  18;  46,  18. 
^"  "needy":  i-ka-a  2,  20;  3,  16. 

ikutu    "need,   want":    i-ku-tii  12,37;    i-ku-tum  2,208; 

i-ku-ti  2,  20;  3,  1 6. 
akalu  "to  eat,  to  consume":  Ii  ikkal-Su  (ideogr.  KU.KU) 

12,  121 ;    takalu(lu)    ideogr.  KU   33,46;  -•   IV  2    li-td- 

kil(r)   i,  45,  48;  lit-[ta(?)-kil(?)]  33,  29,  32. 

makalu  "eating":  ma-ka-li-i  7,  52. 
iklitu  "darkness":  ik-lit-si-[na]  12,  35. 

uklu  "darkness":  #/£-/*  58,  17. 

ukallu?:  u-kal(gal?)-lu  21,  18. 
ikallu  "palace":    z'/('^/  9,  32;   ikalli-yd  i,  13,  40;  4,  19,  41; 

6,  113  F;    7,  22,  61 ;   19,  i  2;   27,  1 1  A\  50,  16;  53,  26:  54, 

41   55.  5;   56,  n;   57,  6;   58,  7;   59.  14;  60,  21;  61,  16  A. 
ikimmu  "spectre":   i-kim-mu  53,  13,  14;   ikimmu  (ideogr. 

GIDIM)  50,  19;  53,  6,  15;   GIDIM(UTUG?).MA  22,  12. 
uknu  "lapis-lazuli":  ttbnuuknu  12,12,13,70. 
ikkaru  "husbandman":  ? ik-ka-ru  56,4. 

city":    alu  21,  25;    «/?  12,  65;  21,  25;  62,  20;   ali-ya 

21,  14,  18;  0/z-^  4,  37,  46;  6,  82,  88;  7,  19,  26. 


134 


VOCABULARY 


[ilu 


ilu  "god":  ilu  i,  25,  44,  50;  4,  37,  46;  6,  3,  4,  82,  88,  121, 
122,132;  7,19,26;  10,20,21,27;  11,7,11,15,17;  12, 
31,107,111;  19,3,15,25;  21,18,25,76,93;  22,7,36, 
38;  27,  23;  28,  7;  33,  27,  35;  50,  25;  60,  8;  Hi  12,  57, 
77;  21,26;  27,12;  33,3;  61,13;  Hi  (NI.NI)  4,45;  6, 
67;  11,25;  30,10;  Hu-Su  1,38;  2,24,26;  3,3;  6,27, 
55,83^;  10,32;  12,45;  J3,  5;  3i,4;  33.2i;  50,13; 
54,  i;  56,  8;  57,  3;  58,  5;  62,  13;  Hi-Su  2,  26  D\  50,  12; 
59,  17;  ili-ya  i,  23;  2,  40;  4,  29,  36;  6,  73,  81,  87,  123; 
7,11,18,25;  9,16,18;  10,  21;  11,26;  12,61,71,92; 

21,  67;    22,  17,  6 1,  62;    37,  9;    Hi- 6,  1 1 ;    ilanipl 

i,  n,  14,  16,  17;  2,  2,  15,  18,  25,  30,  31,  45,  47;  3,  6bis,  13, 
15;  4,  9,  n,  12;  5,  i;  6,  39,  65,  91,  in,  127,  129,  130;  7, 
5,  6,  29;  8,  i9bis,  23;  9,  25,  26,  29,  30,  32;  10,  3,  5,  15,  23; 
11,  14,  35;  12,  79,  87,  88,  114;  21,  52,  56,  58,  61,  93;  22, 
3,27,41;  27,4,7;  33,8,12;  39,8;  43,3,4,51  49,55 
50,  5,  10,  29;  52,  5;  53,  27;  58,  16;  59,  7;  61,  14;  62,  i. 
iltu  "goddess":  il-tum  7,  35;  ll-ti  30,  30;  i-lat  2,  43; 
!9>  341  33,  i,  20;  39,  6,  7;  ilat(af)  i,  37;  i-la-a-ti  i,  29; 
5i  n;  32,  6. 

ilutu  "godhead,  divinity":  ilu-ti-ka  i,  18;  13,6;  22,  10, 
66;  27,  22 ;  46,  8;  ilu-ut-ka  9,  1 1 ;  12,  91 ;  21,  70;  27,  15; 

54,  6;  ilu- 6,  16;  i-lut-ka  6,  68;  ilu-ut-ki 

4>  34?  8,  17. 

ul  "not":  ul  6,  26;  12,  58;  14,  17;  50,  8;  60,  iobis;  ul  i, 
50,  51;  4,  44;  6,  86;  7,  24;  12,  i,  19,  77,  100,  119;  19,  8, 
31,  32;  21,  2;  33,  36,  46;  51,  16;  53,  23;  59,  u. 

^   ultu  "from":  ul-tu  6,  58;   n,  36. 
alu  a  demon:  alii  12,  51. 

lu  "lofty,  situated  above";  that  which  is  in  heaven  (opp. 

to  Saplu,  q.  v.}:    -la-a  2,  i6Z?:  ilu  21,  55;  i/ati?1 

59,  4- 

ili  "on,  upon":  Hi  7,  58;   12,  6,  gj}'h,  104,  115;   17,  7,  8; 

Hi-ka  2,  34;  ili-ya  6,  58;   10,  4;  ili-ya  i,  22,  47;   12,  57; 

14,  i;   19,  24;  22,  58;  53,  9;  Hi-.        .  6,  93;  7,  31;  51,  7. 

.-  nii-lat  (?):    12,  57,  107;  27,  12. 

? ti-li-tii\  31,  ii. 


amilutu]  VOCABULARY  -135 

alaku  "to  go":  Ii  illika(kd]  ideogr.  DU  50,  23;  lil-li-ki 
5,  4;  lil-lik  n,  24;  53,  19;  lul-lik  6,  117;  10,  18;  13,  9; 
53.  5:  a-lik  13,  4;  42,  i  o;  a-li-kdt  8,  12;  —  I  2  lit-tal-lak 
19,30;  /*'/-/#/-  .....  6,123;  10,  21  ;-  III  2  H-sa-lik 
(=  *H$talik?)  14,  10. 

alaktu  "path,  way":  a-lak-ti  4,  30;  6,  113;   10,  16;   u, 
ii  ;  30,  9. 

IL.(LA)  a  plant:  J«»»IL  12,  9;  *<«»IL.LA  30,  25. 
alalu  "to  bind,  to  gird,  to  hang  up":  i-lul  42,  14. 

I  i    "to  shine,  be  bright":   /#-/*'/  12,  81;  —  II  i   "to  make 

bright,  purify":  ullil-an-ni  (ideogr.  AZAG)  12,  84. 

illu  "bright,  pure":   il-lu  49,  32;  illu  12,  2;  21,  28,  74; 

30,21;    31,8;    33,39;    48,17;    Uluti*1   4,24;    6,21,71; 

7,  9;  22,  42;  27,  5;  32,  7,  15;  37,  7;  62,  24. 
ulinnu   "robe,  vestment":    ulinnu  4,  29;  6,  73;  7,  1  1  ;  37, 

9;    ulinnu-ka  5,  2  ;    ulinnu  -ki  4,  29;   6,  73  ;  7,  1  1  ;  37,  9. 
4    ulsu  "joy,  pomp":  ul-si  6,  121;  10,  20;  ulsi  (ideogr.  UL) 


N   ima  "when;  in,  among":    i-ma  8,  18;    9,  12,  20  B\    54,  7; 

62,  12. 
4  imidu  "to  stand;    to  establish":    imid-ki  (ideogr.  KI.KI) 

i,  41  ;  li-im-id  5,  4. 
"to  speak":  III  2  uS-ta-mu-b  i,  15. 

amatu  "word,  speech":  a-mat  4,  43  ;  6,  85  ;  7,  23  ;  8,  15  ; 

9,  20;   12,  89;    a-wat-sa  33,  2;    a-mat-ka  60,  9,  12;   <?»*- 

ma-ti-ya  11,5^;  am-ma-ti-ya  11,5;  ^^//^(KA.A.MlS) 

60,  16. 

atmu  "speech,  word":  at-mu-u-a  49,  9. 

mamitu  "ban,  curse":   ma-mi-tu  33,32;  61,9;  ma-tmt 

i,  48;   12,  52,  78;  59,  7;  61,  10  ;  ma-  .....  39.  I5- 
amilu  "man":    amilu   11,15;    12,1;    amttu  (NA)  12,121; 

a-ml-lu-tu    n,  8  /I;     a-inl-lu-tum    n,  8;    tf-  .......... 

12,56^;    amilutiP1  7,51;   12,56,63,66;   amilutum(tum) 

12,  57  Z?,  63  5dT;  annluti(ti)  12,  57. 

amilutu  "mankind":  amilutu   12,  107^;  51,4; 

12,  61:  50,  25;  a-ml-lu-ti  12,  107;  a-mi-hi-ta   12,  in. 


136  VOCABULARY  [ummu 

ummu  "mother":  um-mu  6,  77  D\  ummu  4,  47;  6,  71,  77; 
7.  9'  15.  59?  IJ,  22;  30,  20;  37,  7,  13;  57,  2;  urn-mi  12, 
34;  ummi  n,  39;  ummi-ya  n,  226";  ummi-ya  n,  22bis. 

ummatu  "host":  um-mat  2,  47. 

&$4  imuku  "might,  strength":  i-mu-kit  21,  8;  i-mu-ka  60,  13; 
i-mu-ki  49,  23;  60,  14;  i-muk  i,  19. 
nimiku  "wisdom":   ni-mi-ki  13,10;  21,57;  41,  13. 
timiku  "supplication":   ti-mi-ki  n,  27. 

amaru  "to  see":  I  i  a-mur  vis,  9;  /z;«wr  (§I.BAR)  12, 
100;  lu-mur  12,  1 13/5";  a-ma-ri-ka  i,  8;-  I  2  i-tam- 
mur(?)  12,  106;  a-ta-mar  2,  36;  3,  4;  27,  17;  34,  2. 

amiru  "deafness (?)":  a-mi-ru-u-a  30,  17;  a-mi-ri- 

4,  4;  a-mi-ri  13,  9. 

immiru  "lamb,  sheep":  immiru  6,  110;  immiri  12,96. 

ana  "to,  for,  towards,  according  to";  also  compounded 
with  afyamiS,  Hi,  arki,  libbi,  mafyar,  pani  (gq.  v.)\  a-na 
i,  3,  42;  2,  22;  6,  23;  7,  29,  50,  52,  62;  8,  24;  n,  9,  24, 
26,39;  12,  88,  109  £;  13,  20bis;  18,3,17^;  19,14;  21, 
20;  30,  18;  31,  5;  33,  23,  34;  39,  2;  40,  4;  42,  7;  45,  7; 
53.  J9>  2°;  57.  75  6l>  !3>  15;  «««  J»  4.  8,  27;  2,  10;  4,  36, 
37  ;  6,  23  A,  34.  81.  82,  91,  1 16;  7,  18,  19,  58;  8,  20;  10, 
18,33;  11,15.42,44;  12,  i,  2,  5,  8,  n,  48,  68,  72,  97bis, 
ioobis,  104,  115,  116,  120;  13,13;  18,17,19^4;  21,7,11, 
23,  28,  88bis,  90:  22,  48,  67;  24,  6;  26,  4;  30,  20;  31,  8; 
32,35  35,  *5;  38,i;  40,16;  50,23;  51,10;  52,3;  53, 
i6bis,  i7bis;  62,  18,  19,  22. 

aS§um  (=  ana  Sum}  "since,  because  of":  d$-$um  4,  31, 
32;  6,  74,  75,  76;  7,  12,  13,  14;  19,  15;  27,  15,  16,  17,  18; 
37,  10,  ii,  12;  50,  17;  57,  8. 

ina  "in,  through,  among,  during";  also  compounded  witl 
Hi,   balu,   btrit,  kirib,  pani,  Sapli  (qq.  z/.):    i-na   18, 
22,  63;    ina    i,  5,  n,  i2bis,  13,  15,  24,  26,  39*%  40,  43, 
49,  50;      2,  2,  15,  16;     3,  13,  14;     4,  5,  7,  12,  i7bis,  19,  3* 
39bis,  41,  43bis;     5,  i,  18;    6,21,22,24,26,37,41,47,6; 
78,837?,  84£,  85bis,  n3Fter,  120,  122;  7,  1 6,  19,  20bis,  22, 
23bis,  38,  44,  56,  6obis,  61;     8,16,24;    9,8,10,13,14,16, 
17,18,35;    10,  21;    11,5,14,27,28;    12,  2,  6,  8,  n,  i3bis, 


annu]  VOCABULARY  137 

i4bis,  '5ter,  34,  56,  59.  62,  66,  67,  70,  72,  75,  76,  80,  81,  82, 
87,  98,  i02bis,  113,  114,  n6bis,  118;  13,  6,  7,  10,  n,  26,  32; 
M.5;  I5.I5;  16,  nbis;  17,7,8;  18,  4,  6,  10,  igbis;  ig, 
iobis,  12,  13,  18,  28,  31;  21,  6,  10,  14,  28,  48,  60,  61,  73, 
74,  92bis;  22,  8,  9,  iobis,  14,  15,  17,  18,  29,  53,  54,  56,  60, 
66,  69bis;  26,  5;  27,  5,  6,  7,  8,  1 1  Ater,  13;  28,  6bis;  30,20, 
26bis;  31,6,8;  32,7*15;  33,12,25,27,36,40,44;  34, 

6bis;  35,2,4;  36,7;  38,  4bis;  39,  5bis,  13;  40,  6, 15;  41, 
2bis;  42,  13,  15,  17,  25;  46,  iobis;  47,  7bis;  48,  17;  49,  14; 
50,  3,  6,  9,  i4bis,  15,  16,  18,  24,  26;  51,  15;  52,  2,  4bi»;  53, 

5,  8bis,  14,  16,  23,  24bis,  26,  27bi»,  28;    54,  2bis,  3,  4,  5;    55, 
3bis,  4,  5;     56,  9bis,  10,  n;     57,4^,6,13,14;     58,  6bis,  7; 
59,  i,  I2bis,  14;     60,  i9bis,  21;     61,  n,  i6bis,  16^,  18;    62, 
i6bis,  17,  18,  19,  20. 

jtf4  inuma  "when":  i-nu-ma  6,  56;  21,  73;  24,  5;  33,  45;  inu- 
ma  12,  i,  121 ;  tnu(?)-ma  42,  25;  inu(?) 42,  25. 

inu  "to  annul;  to  be  annulled,  to  be  altered,  to  become 
invalid":  i-nu-u  60,8;  inii-u  1,51;  19,32;  inu-u  4,44; 

6,  86;  7,  24;   19,  8;  21,  2. 

tanihu  "sighing,  groaning":  ta-ni-bu  i,  45;  12,51;  33, 
29;  ta-ni-[bi?]  5,  7. 

tanihtu  "sighing":  ta-ni-ib-ti-yd  15,  15. 
PUN   "to  faint,    to  be  weary":    a-ni-bu  20,  9,  n;    21,  9,  35,  37. 

anaku  "I":  a-na-ku  50,12;  56,7;  ana-ku  1,38;  2,26, 
36;  4,  16;  6,  27,  83  £";  u,  16;  12,45,90,94;  13,5,20; 
21,11,51;  27,11;  30,7;  31,4;  33,2i;  39.i6;  43,7; 
54,  i;  55,  2;  57,  3;  58>  55  62,  13;  anaku  60,  3. 

INIM.INIM.MA  "prayer":  i,  28,  52;  2,  9,  42;  3,  9;  4,  8, 
23;  5,  10;  6,17,35,70,95,131;  7,8,33;  8,20;  9,27; 
10,6,26,34;  11,41;  12,95;  13,  '2;  14,11;  15,  17;  16, 
10;  17,5;  18,  18;  19,33;  20,7;  21,24,72,91;  22,30, 
68;  23,  6;  24,  4;  25,  5;  26,  3;  27,  25;  28,  5;  29,  2;  30, 
19;  3i,  75  32,  2;  33,  38;  34,  5:  36,  6;  37,  6;  38,  3;  39, 
4;  40,  2;  42,  24;  43,  8;  44,  2;  45,  4;  46,  9;  47,  6;  48, 
16;  49,  20;  50,  28;  51,  9;  60,  4. 

annu  "sin":  an-ni  2,  38;  u,  19,  29b!s,  3obis,  31,  32,  33,  34, 
355  27,  21. 


138  VOCABULARY  [annu 

Uto  be  merciful";  II  2  uto  weep,  to  pray":  ut-nin  21,  62; 
ut-nin-ka  60,  10. 

annu  "mercy":  an-na-$ii  60,  8;  an-ni-ka  19,  32;  52,  2; 
an-ni-ki  i,  51;  4,  44;  6,  86;  7,  24;  33,  36;  an-ni-ku-nu 
53,  5- 

unninu  "mercy,  compassion;  sighing,  prayer":  un-ni- 
na  22,64;  un-ni-ni  g,  39;  33,5;  un-ni-ni-ya  i,  435  2,33; 
6,  80;    7,  17;   8,  4;  18,  14^;  21,  21;  33,  26;    un-ni-ni-ya 
4,  35;  !8,  14;  23,  3. 
Pinnintu  "sorrow(?)":  in-nin-ti  30,  11. 

annu  "this":  an-nu-u  53,  15;  an-nu-u  30,  29;  53,  15;  an- 
ni-i  7,  38;  an-ni-i  12,  59;  13,  26;  21;  21;  22,  56;  an-ni- 
ma  21,  70;  an-nam  12,  103,  115;  BI  (=  annani)  2,  9; 
6,95;  11,42;  12,2;  13,13;  16,  n;  18,19;  21,28,73, 
92;  22,  31,  69;  24,  5;  28,  6;  30,  20;  32,  3;  34,  6;  38,  4; 
39,5;  41,2;  46,10;  47,7;  51,10;  52,3;  an-na(f).. 
44,  3;  an-ni-tu  2,  10;  30,  27;  40,  13;  62,  30;  an-ni-[ti] 
51,  ii ;  a-nu-ti-ma  i,  33;  a-na-ti-ma  5,  15. 

IM^^:  40,  14. 

"weak":  in-Sti  12,  119;  /«-jf/  2,  21;  22,  50;  48,  3;  in- 
&  9,  37,  45- 
altu  "wife":  «/-/z  4,  10,  11. 

tinisitu  "men,  mankind":  ti-ni-si-i-ti  2,  19;  3,  16;  19,  13; 
50,9;  ti-ni-$i-i-ti  2,  19 /?;  ti-ni-Si-ti  9,52;  ti-ni-$it  12,33. 

atta;  atti  "thou":  «/-/«  2,  25;  6,  43;  12,  31,  105;  18,  8; 
50,29;  at-ta-ma  6,112;  10,15;  12,34,35;  60,9;  at-ti 
4,  10,  ii ;  61,  10;  [at]-ti-ma  32,  14. 

attunu  "ye":  at-tu-nu  7,  46;  8,  22;  at-tu-nu-ma  52,  5; 
62,  3,  5,  9. 

isinnu  "festival":  i-sin-na-ka  i,  18. 

misiru  "band,  fetter":  misiru  (ideogr.  SU.I.BU)  53,  16; 
mtsiru  (ideogr.  SU.I.TUM)  53,  17. 

aptu  "dwelling,  habitation":  a-pa-a-ti  13, 16;  33,  34;  *-pa- 
a-ti(?)  33,  6. 

D^4  upu  "clouds":  u-pi-i  20,  12;  21,  38. 


VOCABULARY  -I3g 

apalu:  Ii   a-pa-lu  11,4;  a-pa-lum   11,4  A 

aplu  "son":  ap-lu  2,  1 1 ;  3,  10;  a-pil  2,  47;  9,  31;  22,  36, 

38;  33,  6;    aplu  (ideogr.  TUR.U&)  9,  38;    apil  (ideogr. 

A)  1,38;    2,26;    4,  16;    6,  27,83  £;    10,31;    12,45,90; 

13,5;    22,11,51;    27,11;    30,7;    31,4;    33,21;    39,16; 

54,  i;  57,  31  58,  5;  62,  13. 
up  until  a  plant:  upuntu  6,  80;  7,  17;  40,  n. 

apsu   "the  deep,  the  abyss":    apsu  3,  5;  4,  15;  8,  18;  21, 
57;  apst  5,  18;   12,  87. 

ipiru  "to  support,  sustain":  [i?]-pi-rat  9,  37, 
ipru  "dust":  ipir  12,  55;  ipri*1  (iS.ZUN)  59,  2. 
apsanu  "yoke":  ap-$a-na-ki  8,  7. 

"to  do,  to  make,  to  perform":  i-pu-Su  n,  36;  ti- 
PU$(U$)  ideogr.  DU  12,  12;  33,  45;  i-pu-uS  n,  16;  //-/#- 
jfw  19,  26;  ipu$(u$)  ideogr.  DU  8,  21;  16,  n;  18,  19; 

21,  92;    22,  69;    28,  6;  34,  6;  38,  4;  39,  5;  41,  2;  46,  10; 
47,  7;  ipuS  (ideogr.  DIM)  12,  103,  115;  DU.DU  (=  ipu$) 
2,9;    6,95;   J2,  2;   13,13;   16,  n;   18,19;  21,28,73,92; 

22,  31,  69;    28,  6;    32,  3;    34,  6;    38,  3;   39,  5;  41,  2;  46, 
10;   47,  7;    AG.AG  (=  ipu$)  u,  42;   24,  5;  30,  20;  51, 
10 ;  52,  3;  i-pis  62,  7. 

ipistu  "handiwork":  [i]-piS-ti  32,  10. 

"to  practise  magic";    part,   "sorcerer,    sorceress": 
i- pi-Si  7,  58;  i-pis- ti  7,  58. 
ipsu  "magic,  sorcery":  ip-Si  12,  56. 
upisu  "magic,  sorcery":  ii-piS  12,  62,  109;  50,  17. 
itpisu  "prudent":  [tt]-pi-[Si]  4,  15;  i-ti-ip-Su  22,  2. 

"to   surround,    confine,    bewitch":    II  i    tu-u$-$a-ra    62,  5; 
mn-iis-si-ru  62,2;  uf-su-ru  62,4. 
usurtu   "charm,  spell":    t**M$urati*1   6,112;  10,15;  19, 

6;   62,  2,  5. 

ukuru  a  plant  or  tree:  iwufcitru  (?  iwlibbigisimmari)  12,  84. 

aru  "blossom":  an*1  12,  5ter. 

irtu  "breast":  irat-su  1,49;  33,33- 


140  VOCABULARY  [iribu 

iribu  "flight  of  locusts":  iribu  59.  22. 

iribu  I1  "to  enter":  i-rib  (Inf.  with  Samsi  =  "sunset") 
53,  19;  -  -  III  i  uto  bring  in":  li-si-rib  23,  2. 

ardu    "servant,    slave":    arad-ka    2,  26  D;    12,45,90,94; 

21,  88;  22,  n;  27,  1 1 ;  50,  12;  aradka  (URU.ZU)  60,  3; 

arad-ki  43,  7. 

urhu  "way":  ur-fri  i,  24;  22,  59. 
arbis  "quickly":  dr-hiS  2,  24. 
araku    Ii    "to    be    long":    li-ri-ik    18,  16;  II  i    "to 

lengthen":    ur-ri- ki  8,  1 7 ;   -       III  i    "to  lengthen":    $u- 

ri-ka  5,  3. 
urkarinnu  a  precious  wood:  iwurkarinnu  12,  8,  15,  116; 

30,  26. 

arallu  "the  Lower  World,  the  realm  of  the  dead":  a-ra- 
al-li-i  2,  22;  aralli[-ma]  27,  6. 

arnu  "sin":    dr-nu  2,  23bis;   dr-na  2,  23^;  6,  54;  ar-ni  7, 

48;  50,  17;    Ar-ni  59,  7; -ni  5,  6;   ar-nu(-yaP)  7, 

47;    ar-ni-ya   12,84;    dr-ni-ya  12,  76  C\    dr-ni-ya  1,26; 
12,  84  C. 

irinu  "cedar":  iwirinu  30,  25;  40,  4,  n. 

irsitu  "earth":  ir-si-tum  12,  82  C\  irsitum(titm)  61,  8  A; 
irsita(ta)  1,7:  irsiti(ti)  1,30;  19,7;  60,5;  62,8;  irsi- 
tim(tim)  3,  8;  5,  12;  6,  100,  128;  10,  9,  24;  12,  64,  82; 
18,  6;  22,  39;  46,  ii ;  50,  8;  53,  20,  21 ;  60,  5:  61,8;  62, 
3;  irsiti  4,  15;  16,  12. 

arratu  "curse,  incantation":  a-ra-ti  i,  41;  arrat  12,  68,  74. 

irsu  "wise":  z>-^«  12,  33;  22,  37;  46,  18. 

irisu  "scent,  odour":  i-ri-iu  2,  28;  i-ri-Sa  12,  28  CD. 

ar§asu  ''device,  machination":  dr-Sa-Su-u  12,  63  Z>';  dr-sa- 

$u[-u?]  7,57;  dr-sa-Si-i  7,51;  4r-j«- 51, 

3;  ariaSt*1  12,  63;  21,  65. 

i§atu  "fire":  /^/«  49,  27;  z'^/z  21,  74;  36,  7. 

isibu  "to  sprout,  to  bear  fruit":  i$-$ub-ba-a  12,  97. 

asagu  a  shrub:  waSagu  12,  10;  'waSagi  21,  74. 


VOCABULARY  141 

isitu  "trouble,  confusion":  [i]-sa-ti-ya  n,  20. 

asakku    "evil    sickness,     consumption":    aSakku    i,   46; 

33,  30. 

ds-li-i-ti  (?  ina  li-i-tt)  21,  79. 

uSumgallu  "sovereign,  ruler":  uSumgal  9,  7;   12,  32. 
a§nan  "corn,  grain":  a$-na-an  2,  29  D\  iluaS-na-an  12,30; 

ds-na-an  2,  29. 

asaru  "to  be  favourable,  to  bless":  I  i   li-$u-[ru-u]  3,  6; 
a-Si-ru   12,  32;  a-Sir  22,  3;  a-Sir  6,  43;  d$ira(ra)  ideogr. 
SAR  (?[ma]-j}i-ra)  27,  6;  —  II  i   u$-$it-ru  i,  4. 
aSirtu  "sanctuary,  shrine":  aS-rat  21,  54;  ds-rat  n,  13. 
i§irtu  "shrine":  iS-ri-ti  22,  7. 

asru  "place":    dS-ri  u,  28;   a$-ri-$u  n,  39;  a^«r  (ideogr. 

KI)   17,6. 
aSaridu  "prince,  chief:  a-Sa-ri-du  22,  705  a-$a-rid  i,  25; 

6,39,127;    9,5;    10,23;    20,15,17;    27,2550,29;    aSa- 

ridu    (ideogr.    SAG.KAL)    22,  1,37;    aiaridu    (ideogr. 

INI.DU)  1,42;  33,  23;    aSarid  (ideogr.  SAG.KAL)  22, 

6;  aSarid  (ideogr.  TIK.GAL)  50,  8. 
istu    "from":    is-tu  1,23;  53,6;    i$-tu(?)   9,44;    iStu-Su-nu 

12,  101. 

istaru  "goddess":  iS-ta-ri  6,67;  iluiS-tar  12,31;  ilui$~tar- 
S"  5°,  13;  S6,  8;  {lui$taru  27,  23;  {lui$tari  12,  57  B\  27, 
12;  a*istar  1,44;  6,57;  12,61,107,111;  33,27;  5°,  25? 
il*iitar-Su  1,38;  2,24/^,26;  3,3;  6,27,83/5';  12,45; 
J3,  5;  3i,  4;  32,  5;  33,  21;  54,  i;  57,  3;  5«,  55  62,  13; 
il"i$tari-yd  2,40;  4,29,36,45;  6,73,81,87;  7,11,18, 
25;  9,17;  12,71,93;  21,67;  22,18537,9;  il"iStat-i  i, 
23;  il* iitarati*1  7,  43;  9,  29;  33,  n. 
ITI  cf.  nntf. 

itti    "with":    //-/?    27,7,8;    *'//*  2,  35;    12,78,104;    22,32; 

51,  12;    «%-.?«  2,  24;  32,  5;    ////- 6,  55;    it-[ti-ka] 

50,  io^;  itti-ka  2,  30,  31;  19,  16;  50,  10;  it-ti-ki  4,  32; 
itti-ki  6,  75;  7,  13;  37,  n;  it-ti-ya  4,  37;  22,61,62;  itti- 
ya  i,  44;  6,  82,  88;  7,  26;  21,  67;  28,  3:  30,  10;  33,  27; 
itti-yh  1,24;  6,  82  E;  7,19;  12,71,112;  14,7;  19,  3°; 
22,  19;  50,  19;  it-ti-ni  61,  8;  it-ti-ni-[ma~s]  61,  9. 


142  VOCABULARY  [ittu 

ittu  "portent":  ittu  (ITI)  12,65;  ittati*1  (ITI.MlS)  1,13, 
40;  4,18,40;  6,  113^;  7,  21,61;  12,64;  19,  n;  27,11  A: 
5°,  15;  53,  25;  54,  3?  55,  4;  5^,  10;  57,  5;  58,  7;  59,  13; 

60,  20;  61,  16  A;  62,  10,  12,  14. 

atalu  "eclipse":  lluatalu  6,  122;  10,  21;  iluatali  i,  12,  39; 
4,17,39;  6,  113/s  7,20,60;  19,10;  27,11^;  50,14; 
53-,  24;  54,  2;  55,  3;  56,  9;  57,  4;  58,  6;  59,  12;  60,  19; 

61,  16;  62,  i6bis. 

itillu  "mighty,  exalted":  i-til-lit  9,  30. 
i  t  i  1 1  i  S  "mightily' ' :  i-til-/i-iS  12,  80  C. 
itiku  "to  remove,  tear  away":  i-ti-ifc  11,17;  [t?]-ti-ik  2,  39. 


3 

ba'alu  "to  be  great,  mighty":  ba-i-lat  9,  41. 
ba'altu  "lady":  ba--lat  9,  41^;  33,  9. 

bilu  "to  rule":    ti-bl-il-li  i,  33;    ta-bi-il-li  5,  15;    bi-il-la- 
an-ni  13,  29. 

bilu  "lord":  bi-lum  6,  61;  n,  7^;  13,  15;  27,  i;  bi-li 
12,59;  J3,  27;  19,19;  27,15;  bilu  1,42,53;  6,1,91, 
102;  7,  29;  9,  9,  21;  10,  10;  n,  7;  12,  21  ^,  26,  34;  19, 
4,17;  21,19,61,63,93;  22,61,62;  33,  23;  42,  26;  48, 
17;  60,6,9;  ^76,in,ii2;  9,4;  10,  i5bis;  12,17,27, 
28;  19,6,7;  21,80;  22,4,7;  27,2;  46,11,16;  53,3; 
59,  4,  6;  62,  31;  bi-li-i  8,  26;  bill  19,  4;  62,  31. 
biltu  "lady":  bi-il-tum  33,  10,  37;  bi-il-ti  39,  13;  bi(?)- 
lit  z,  i;  bi-lit  \,  37;  3,8;  4,14,15;  9,33;  33,  20;  57, 
14;  #//*  i,  51;  4,  24,  27,  33,  47;  6,  71,  77,  85,  90;  7,  9, 
15,  16,  23,  28;  n,  31,  33;  32,  15;  37,  7,  13;  bilti-ya  2,  3; 
6,  72;  7,  10 ;  33,  22;  37,  8;  bi-li-i-ti  2,  43;  33,  47. 
bilutu  "lordship,  dominion":  bi-lut-ki  2,4;  8,  1 1 ;  bi(?)- 
lu- 35,  i ;  bilu-ut-ka  14,9;  bilu-ut-ki  3,  7. 

babu  "gate":  babati^1  40,  7. 

babalu  "to  bring,  supply":  ba-ba-lu  n,  15. 

bubbulum  the  time  of  the  moon's  disappearance:    bub- 
bulum   i,  17 ;  61,  12. 


bungulu]  VOCABULARY  .  143 


ba'u  I  i  "to  come":  lu-ba-  12,  80;  li-ba-  12,  8oC;  — 
III11  i  uto  bring":  tus-ba-  -$u-ma  12,118. 

bulu  "cattle":  bu-ul  27,  10. 

bu'anu  "muscle,  sinew":  biiani^l-ya  i,  46;  33,  30. 

binu  a  tree  or  shrub:  wbi-nu  12,  84;  wbinu  12,  9,  84  C\ 
51,  12. 

°itu  "house":  bit  1,54;  2,16;  3,14;  n,  \  A;  12,44;  21, 
25,  26,  60;  22,  35;  33,  8;  48,  18;  biti-Su  12,  100;  biti-yh 
27,  13- 

bikitu  "tears,  weeping":  bikltu  4,  33;  biktt  13,  7. 

bukru  "first-born":    bu-kur  2,  1  1  ;  3,  10;  9,  2;   12,  33;  21, 
i,  70;  27,  i;  29,  3;  46,  12;  bu-uk-ri-  .....   i,  10. 
bukratu  "first-born  daughter":  bu-uk-rat  1,31;  5,13; 
30,  30;  31,  ii. 

?2  balu,  bali  "without";  compounded  with  *'«#:  ba-li-ka  6, 
24,  26,  41;  50,  6;  bali-ka  (ideogr.  NU.MI.A)  6,  26  A. 

balatu    I  i    "to  live":    lu-ub-lut  8,  17;    9,  10;    12,  90;    22, 
13,  66;   50,  26;  54,  5;    ..........  -luf  45,  2;    lublut(ut) 

ideogr.  TI  30,  15;  —  II  i  "to  cause  to  live,  to  quicken": 

mn-bal-lit   28,8;    bul-lu-fu   4,32;    6,75;   7,13;  9,34^; 

37,  ii  ;  bul-lu-fa  9,  34. 

balatu    "life":    ba-la-ta    8,17;    ba-la-ti   11,13;    ba-ld-fi 

5,  55  6^  935  7,  31;    ^-/rt/  9,  22;    balafu  (ideogr.  TI)   12, 

80;    19,  28;    balatu  (ideogr.  TI.LA)  8,  1  1  ;    9,  5,  39;   12, 

806";   13,18:   17,2;  22,5;  47,4;  62,5,6;   balatu  (ideogr. 

NAM.TI.LA)  35,  3;    balatu  (ideogr.  NAM.TIN)  6,  106; 

balafl  (ideogr.  TI.LA)  51,  7;  balat  (ideogr.  TI)  12,  53; 

ba-la-ti-ya  19,21. 

baltu  "living":  am'llubaltu  (ideogr.  TI)  6,  99;  10,  8. 

"to    pour   out":    bulul  12,  15,  102;    bulul-ma  22,  33;  26,  7 

(ideogr.  SAR.SAR). 
D  balatu  "to  abound":    tab-la-tu  12,  56;  ba-la-tu  45,  9;  ba- 
la-tu-um-ma  62,  7. 

baltu,  bastu  "abundance":    bal-ta  22,64;  ba-ds-ti  12, 
56;  ba-ds-ta-ka  19,  24. 

bungulu:  b(p)u-un-gu-lu   12,  22. 


144  VOCABULARY  [band 

band  "to  build,  create":  Ii  ib-ni(-.  .  .  .  .)  21,55;  ib-nu- 
ku-nu-si  8,  24;  ib-na-na-si-[ma?]  61,  7;  ba-nu-u  12,  30, 
31.  33?  41,3;  ba-a-ni  47,4;  ba-an-tu(?)  1,35;  5,17; 
[ba]-na-at  g,  40;  banat(at)  ideogr.  DU  21,  58;  ba-ni-i 
19,  15,  22;  --  II  i  u-ban-ni  12,  50;  --  IV  i  ib-ba-ni  61, 
9;  ib-ba-nu(-u?)  10,  30;  ib-ba-nu-u  61,  8. 

binutu  "creature,  offspring":  bi-nu-ut  61,  6. 
nabnitu  "creation":  nab-ni-ti  i,  53;  2,  48;  nab-ni-ta  9,  40. 
tabannu  "handiwork":  ta-ba-an-na  12,  31. 
banitu  "brightness,  mercy":    ba-ni-ti  i,  49;  9,  51,  33,  34. 

baru  "to  see,  perceive":  ta-bar-ri  18,5,  7;  ta-bar-ri-i  9, 
42;  32,  10;  ba-ra-a- 6,  42. 

biru  "vision":  bi-ri  4,  38;  6,  83  Z>;  7,  19. 

birtu  "glance";  birit  uzni  "understanding";  com- 
pounded with  ina  "between,  within";  pi.  birati  "springs": 
bir-tum  21,  51;  bi-rit  (uznadu-$i-na)  12,  38;  bi-rit  12,  13; 
bi-ra-a-ti  12,  29. 

burzigallu  a  vessel:  kar*atu bur-zi-gal  12,  14. 

birku  "knee":  bir-ki-ya  13,  24. 

"to  lighten";  III  i   do.:  mu-Sab-rik  20,  13. 

birku  "lightning":  bir-ki  21,  80;  bir]?u  20,  13.  (For 
aban  birki,  see  f«<^  abnu.) 

burasu  "pine-wood;  incense":  bnrasu  12,  9;  burasi  2,  9; 
8,20;  11,42;  12,4:  13,14;  15,24;  18,19^;  21,74; 
31,  10;  32,  3;  33,  39;  36,  7;  51,  n;  62,  27. 

basu  "to  be;  to  have":  I  i  ta-ba-ds-si  12,  34;  ibasu-u  i, 
47;  iba$a-a  1,13,40;  4,19,41;  6,113/^5  7,22,61;  12, 
57;  19,12;  27,11^;  50,16;  53,26;  54,4;  55,5;  56, 
n;  57,  6;  58,  7;  59,  14;  60,  21;  61,  16^;  z'^-j/  14,  17; 
ib-Su-u-ni  12,  8i>  ib-Su-ni  12,  8iC;  ib-sa-ku  19.  20;  21, 
62;  ib-$a-ki  4,  34;  6,  79;  7,  16;  lib-sa-niin-nia  46,  7;  /*'- 
ba-$a-an-ni  19,27;  lu-ub-$i  12,72;  [ba?]-su-u  21,80; 

-^«-«  58,  2;    ba~$u-u  4,  32;    6,  75;   19,  16;    basu-u 

6,  75  £;  7,  13;  27,  13;  37,  1 1;   baSu-u  27, 
62,12;   -  -   IV  3  it-ta-nab-$a-nim-ma  62,14. 


GIS.SAR]  VOCABULARY 


145 


busu  "property,  possession":  bu$u-ku-nu-ma  62,  4. 
butuktu  "flood,  inundation":  bu-tuk-[tum]  6,  59;  butuktu 
(ideogr.  A.HUL)  36,  10. 


GA  a  plant:  *<"«GA  19,  17. 

gibsu  "mass,  volume":  gi-biS  18,  3. 

GLGAB  a  drink  (?)-  offering:   12,  2;   15,  19;  21,28;  30,21; 

3i,  9- 
GU.ZI  a  vessel:  *ar'af*GU.ZI  30,  2;  61,  10. 

gallu  a  demon:  gallu  33,  33. 

gamalu  "to  complete,    benefit,    maintain,   requite":    ta- 

ga-mil-Su  18,  8;    ga-mil  9,  6;   gam-ma-la-ta   6,  65;    27, 

!5;   ga-ma-la  4,31;  6,76;   gdm-ma-al  13,  25;   gamala 

(ideogr.  SlJ.KAR)  6,  76^;  7,  14;  37,  12. 

gimillu  "present,  gift":  gi-mil  6,  93;  7,  31;  14,  4;  51, 

7;  57,  8- 

gimiltu  "gift":  gi-mil-tu  31,  10. 

gitmalu  "perfect":  git-ma-lii  2,  12;  3,  10;  6,  97;  10,  7; 

n,  46;    12,  18;    20,  8,  io,  14.  16;    21,  39,  41;    git-ma-lum 

21,  93;  46,  13;  git-mal-  .....   12,  24. 
gamru  "perfect":  ga-mir  19,  8;  gam-ra-a-ti  21,  79. 

gimru    "the  whole,  totality":   gi-mir  1,53;    9,40;   46, 

!3;  gim-ri  12,  33;  27,  8. 

gim-ru-u(?)  12,  98. 

ga$su  "plaster":  gassu  (ideogr.  IM.PAR)  12,  9. 
I1    "t(>   strengthen;    to  be  strong";    II  2    uto  be  mighty, 

powerful":    I  i    ga-Sir  6,  37;    ga$-[rat?]  33.  io;   -       II  2 

ug-da-ia-ra  i.  8. 

gasru  "strong,  mighty":    ga-a$-ru   18,  20;  21,  43;  £tf- 

if^-r«  9,  i;  ga$-ru  2,  1  1  ;  3,  io;   12,  22;  21,  76;  27,  i;  53. 

2;  ga$-ru-u-ti  47,  8;  52,  5. 

gusiiru    "beam,    branch":   guiuru  12,  2;  21,  28;  26.  5; 


12,  6. 


146  VOCABULARY  [*da§u 


"to  treat  with  injustice,  to  oppress":  id-da-sa-an-ni  11,4. 
dababu  "to  plan,  'to  intrigue":  I  i   da-ba-bi  9,  47;  —  II  i 

dubbubu  (ideogr.  KA.HI.KUR.RA)   12,1. 
dadmu  "dwelling11:  da-dd-mi  22,  7;  da-Ad-mi  33,  9. 
dadu  "love":  <&z-<ft  i,  37;  33,  20. 
daku  "to  slay":  di-ku  53,  14. 

diktu  "slaughter":  di-ik-ti  53,  14. 
daru  "eternal":  dd-ra-ti  i,  27. 

daris  "for  ever":  da-riS  n,  27;  ?  da-a-ri-su  21,  84. 
duru  "wall,  fortress":  ^arw  21,  16,  26. 
dihu  "pestilence,  sickness":  di-fyu   12,  51,  60. 
danu  "to  judge":  i-dan-ni  21,46;  ta-da-an  22,50;  ta-dan 

2,  19;  3,  1 6;  di-in  12,  59;  50,  u;  di-ni  4,  30;  7,49;  da- 
a-ni  6,  74;  7,  12;  37,  10;  da-ni  4,  28. 

dfnu   "judgment":    di-na   7,  49;    <//-;«'  4,  28,  30;    7,  12; 
J2,  59?  J3,  28;  19,  8;  30,  8;  37,  10;  50,  1 1 ;    di-in  2,  19; 

3,  16;  6,  45,  74;  di-in  2,  19  B. 

daianu  "judge":  da-ya-na-ti  30,  8;  daianu  60,  7;  daian 

6,  in;   10,  15;  60,  5. 
dulu  "hill(?)":  du-ul  22,  7. 
DIL.BAD  a  plant:  ^«DIL.BAD   12,  84. 
dalabu  "to  disturb,  to  disorder":  da-li-l}u  8,  27. 

dalbu  "disturbed,  confused":  dal-fya-ma  12,  58. 

dalifotu  "disorder,  confusion":  dal-fya-ti-ya   n,  21. 
dalalu    "to  bow  down,    to  humble  oneself":    i-dal-la-la 

2i,  85;  a-dal-lu-ka  9,  23  .Z?,   a-ddl-lu-ka  9,  23  (or  a-tal- 

lu-ka,  cf.  supra  p.  47);    lud-lu-la  12,  91;    lud-lul  i,  27; 

2,  8,  41;   5,  9;    6.  69,  94;  7,  32;  ii,  40;   12,  91  £",  94;  21, 

23,71,89;    22,67;    27,24;    28,4;    30,16;    31,6;    34,4; 

46,  8;    47,  5;    60,  2;     GA.AN.SIL     (ludlul)    60,  2,  3; 

ludlul-ka  (KA.TAR.ZU-/fo)  50,  27. 

dalilu  "submission,  humility":    da-lil  6,  15;    ^-///  46, 

8;     db-li-li-ka    1,27;    2,41;    6,69;     11,40;    12,91,94; 


diparu]  VOCABULARY  147 

21,  89;  27,  24;  28,  4;  60,  2;  dalUi-ka  (ideogr.  KA.TAR) 
21,  23,  71;  51,  8;  dalili*l-ka  (ideogr.  KA.TAR.MlS)  22, 
67;  KA.TAR.ZU  (dalilika)  60,  2,  3;  da-li-li-ki  30,  16; 

dd-li-li-ki  2,  8;  6,  94;  7,  32;  31,  6;  34,  4;  da-li-[li]- 

38,  2;  dd-li-li'ku-nu  47,  5. 
dallu   "humble,  submissive":  dal-la  9,  44. 
ta-di(ti?)-im-mi  i,  34;  5,  16. 

damamu  "to  weep,  lament":  dumum  (ideogr.  SlS.SlS) 
12,  117. 

damaku  I  i  "to  be  favourable":  lid-mi-ik  i,  24;  22,  59; 
lid-mi-ka  10,  17;  lid-mi-ka  6,  115;  22,  63;  -  •  II  i  "to 
make  favourable":  tudammik(ik)  40,  15;  dn-um-mi-ik  6, 
113;  10,  1 6;  [du]-um-mu-kn  29,  i. 

damku  "favourable";  f.  damiktu  as  subs,  "favour": 
damku  12,  68;  damiktu(tu)  39,  9;  damiktn(tu)  12,  no; 
damikta(ta)  12,  113/1";  damikti(ti)  1,50;  4,7;  6,  116, 
118;  9,  14  £,  15^,  46,  53;  10,  18,  19;  12,72,  120;  22,  15, 
16;  33,  35;  4°,  16;  damiktim(tim)  2,5,40;  9,  14,  15;  54, 
9;  60,  22;  damikti(ti)-ya  15,  16;  damkuti*1  9,  50;  dam- 
kati*1  n,  26. 
dumku  "favour":  dum-ki  1,22;  6,93;  7,31;  57,8;  62, 

10;   dum-ka  8,  13;  dum-ki- 21,  66;  dwnku  12,  85; 

19,  23;  dumki  8,  12;  12,  110;  13,  21;  22,  i9bis;  50,  24. 

dananu  "to  be  strong":  li-dan-nin  53,  21. 

dannu  "strong,  mighty":  dan-nu  4,  19;  dan-na  12,  80; 

42,  15;  dan-ni  19,  17;  dan-na- 42,  13;  dannu  42,  13. 

dannatu    "distress":    dannati  (ideogr.  SAL.KAL.GA) 

9,  35;  3i,  6. 

dandannu  "mighty":  dan-dan-nu  46,  16. 
DI.PAL.A  ideogr.:  7,  53;  12,  i,  108. 
dap  in  u  "strong":  da-pi-nu  21,  77. 
duppu  "tablet":  duppu  i,  54;  22,  3. 
II  i   "to  tear  away,  to  remove":  dup-pi-ri  57,  15;  IV  i  "to 

be  torn  away":  lid-dip-plr  i,  49. 
diparu  "torch":    di-pa-ra-ka  i,  6;   di-pa-ru- 39,  ! '  \ 

di-par  i,  30;  39,  8;  diparu  (ideogr.  GI.BIL.[LA])  40,  5; 

dipari  (ideogr.  GI.BIL.LA)  12,  86,  118. 

Ua 


148  VOCABULARY  [darru 

darru  "strong":  dar-ri  i,  32;  5,  14. 

disu  "abounding,  numerous":  di-sa-a-tuni   n,  28. 

daspu  "mead":  da-aS-pa  57,  10. 

dispu  "honey":  dispu  u,  43;  12,  3;  21,  29:  30,  22;  62,  26. 

duSSupu  "mead":  du-uS-Su-pu  2,  29. 
DA.&AR  ideogr.   12,  n,  14,  15. 


u  "and":  //  i,  13,  22,  23,  24,  30,  37,  40,  44,  50,  51;  2,  40; 
3,  3,  8;  4,  3,  6,  15,  19,  29,  38,  41,  42,  44;  5,  12;  6,  32,  33,- 
67,  73,  75,76,  83/^,93,99,  100,  113  F,  120,  121 ;  7,  n,  19, 
22,61;  8,  16;  9,19,35,38,41,43;  10,8,9,25,30;  n, 
3,  4,  23,  27;  12,  7,  28,  29,  3obis,  31,  34,  36,  39,  44,  51,56, 
57,62,64,  65,  71,  75 C,  76,  78 C,  8iC,  85^,  86 C,  8gC,  98, 
103,105,107,107^,113;  13,8;  16,12;  17,3;  19,7,12, 
25,26,29;  21,  17,  55,  67,  86;  22,  20,  39,  53,55?  27,  1 1  A, 
12,  13,  14^4,  23;  30,  14;  31,  6,  10;  32,  9;  33,  3,  4,  5,  15, 
16,20,27,36;  37,9;  40,14;  46,n;  49,27;  50,8,16; 
53,4,13,26;  54,4;  55,5;  56,11;  57,6;  58,7;  59,7, 
14,18;  60,5;  61,8,10,13,16^;  62,3,15,28;  &  6,  25, 
86;  7,24,31,46,52;  8,  9,  n;  10,2,20;  11,39;  I2,  75, 
89,94,111;  19,15,17,32;  33,35?  38,6;  40,  n;6o,  3; 
61,  9. 

imtu  "breath,  poison":  imti  12,  63ter;  21,  65ter;  imtipl 
i,  47ter- 

abalu  I  i  "to  bring,  to  carry,  to  carry  off,  remove":  nb- 
ba-lu  53,  n,  12;  u-bil%,  7;  ub-la  28,  n;  46,  3;  ub-lak-ki 
57,  12;  lu-bi-il  8,  6;  —  I  2  Part,  "leader,  ruler":  mu-ut- 
tab-bil  21,  81;  mut-tab-bil  20,  9,  1 1 ;  —  IV  2  "to  be  re- 
moved": lit-ta-bil  i,  46;  5,  6;  33,  30. 

aladu  "to  bear,  to  beget":  I  i  a-lid-ya  n,  38;  a-lit-ti-ya 
11,39;  a-lit-tum  (la-a-lit-tum?)  6,47;  —  II 2  u-tal-la- 
da  19,  13. 

ilittu    "child,  offspring":    i-lit-ti  i,  31;    2,  12;  3,  10;  5, 
13;  6,  18;  22,  2;  27,  3;  46,  14;  /-///  33,  47. 


Siptu]  VOCABULARY  149 

NiDl   "to  shine  forth";  III  i   "to  glorify":  lu-$a-pi  2,  8,  41;  5,  8; 
6,  69,  94;  7,  32;  21,  23,71;  23,  5;  30,  15;  50,  27;  [lu]-u- 
Sa-pi  1 6,  7;  lu-sa-pa  30,  14;  li-$a-pu-ii  30,  17. 
supu   "glorious,  mighty":    Sfi-pn-u  2,  15;   3,  13;   18,  20; 
21,  7°i  93",  52,5;  su-pii-u  i,  1 6;  6,  132;  Su-pu-u  9,  i ;  s&- 
pa(r)-ta  27,  5. 
fc$^  asu  "to  go  out":  I  i  a-si-ka  6,  23;  ast-ka  (ideogr.  UD.DU) 

6,  23  A\  -      III  i    sii-sa-a- 61,  18;  -      lit  2    uS-ti- 

si-ma  n,  5. 

situ  "exit;  offspring":  $i-i-ti  6,  59. 
sitaS  "beginning,  rising":  si-ta-aS  9,  41. 

"^pl  akaru  I  i  "to  be  of  value":  li-kir  4,  4;  12,  70;  Hi- 

fca- 12,  55;  -  III  i  "to  consider  valuable,  to 

esteem,  to  honour":  tu-Sak-ka-ri  2,  21  B\  li-Sa-ki-ru- 
in-ni  19,  25;  li-Sa-ki-ru-in-ni-ma  2,  40. 

"HI  I  i  "to  go  down":  tu-itr-dam-ma  21,  14,  15;  —  III  i  "to 
bring  down":  $ii-ru-du  2,  22. 

mi  ar"  I  2  "to  bring,  to  carry,  to  rule":  i-tar-ri-in-ni  8,  16; 
i-tar-ra- 21,  [2]. 

mi   arbu    "month":    arty   1,12,39;    4,17,39;    6,84^,113^"; 

7,  20,  60;  19,  10;   27,  ii  A\  50,  14;   53,  24;  54,  2;  55,  3; 
56,  9;  57,  4;  58,  6;  59,  12;  60,  19;  61,  16. 

"J"^   arki  "behind":  ar-ki-ki  8,  12;  arki  12,  6;  arki-$u  12,  100; 

arki-ya  53,  7;  arki-ya  15,  8. 

urku  "back":  ur-ki-ka  18,  12;  ur-ka-ya  53,  n. 
;)T)  arku  "green":  arku  12,  2;  21,  28;  31,  8. 

urkitu  "green  herb":  ur-ki-tu  21,  87;  *<*»*urkttu  12,30. 
Jty'l   asabu  "to  dwell,  to  inhabit":  a-$i-bat  4,  15,  24;  6,  71;  7, 

9;  37,  7?  a-Si-bu  n,  35;  a-Sib  43,  5. 

subtu  "place,  dwelling-place":  Su-bat  15,  15. 
|t#l   guttu  "dream":    suttu  6,  116;  Sutta  12,  ii3-£";  Sutti  4,  38; 

6,83^^;    7,19;    $uttn-ii-a    12,57;    Sunati*1  i,  25;    6,7; 

10,  1 8;    12,64;    Sunat*l-u-a    22,63;    Sunat^-ii-a    6,115; 

10,  17. 
|t^)   siptu    "incantation":    Siptu  i,  i,  29,  53;   2,  1 1 ;  3,  1O;  4,  9> 

24;  5,  ii ;  6,  i,  18,  36,  71,  96,  97,  132;  7,  9,  34?  8*  22'  9' 


150  VOCABULARY  [suluru 

i;  10,7,27;  ii,  i ;  12,16,17,105,117;  13,15;  15,23; 
18,  20;  19,34;  20,8;  21,34,76;  22,1,33,35,70;  27, 
i;  30,27,30,31;  37,75  38,5;  42,26;  46,11;  48,17; 
50,  i,  28  /?,  29;  51,  n;  52,  5;  60,  5;  61,  5;  62,  31;  sipat 

61,  20,  21  ;  sipat- 16,  2;   sipat-ku-nu  (ideogr.  MU) 

62,  6. 

suturu    "mighty,    prodigious":    si'i-tu-m    12,21;    sit-tu-rai, 
i,  10;  60,  12. 


ZAG  a  species  of  flesh:  ^«ZAG   12,  7;  62,  28. 

"to  break  loose,    to  burst  forth":    li-zi-ka-ain-ma   18,  15; 

li-zi-kam-ma  18,15^. 
zaiaru  "foe":  za-ai-ri  46,  19. 

zirutu  "hate":  zi-ru-ti  12,  106. 
I  i   "to  be  bright,  to  be  pure":  za-ka-a  57,  10;  —  II  i    "to 

brighten,  to  purify":  zu-uk-ki  n,  21. 

zakaru  "to  name,  call,  speak,  command":  I  i  izaka- 
ra(ra)-ni  18,  n;  ta-za-kar  19,14;  tazakar(ar)  12,120; 
40,  16;  az-za-[kar?]  61,  14;  IV  i  izzakara(ra)  50,  9. 
zikru  "name,  word,  cry":  zik-ri  2,  34;  8,  14;  zik-ri  i, 
43;  zi-kir  12,  79;  22,  2  i  B;  si-kir  22,  21;  zik-ri-su  1,44; 
33,  27;  zi-kir-ka  5,  8;  21,  82;  22,  8;  zik-ri-ka  22,  \Q  B\ 
si-ik-ri-ka  22,  10;  zi-kir-ki  30,  14;  zik-ri-ya  33,  25. 

zaliptu  "wickedness":  [za?]-lip-tu  n,  12. 
("IDT?  zimu  "appearance,  countenance":  zi-mu-u-a  8,  10. 

zumru  "body":  zumru  12,102;  zumri-ya  1,45;  30,12; 
33,  28;  zumri-ya  12,  60;  49,  14;  50,  18;  53,  27,  28. 

zinu  "to  be  angry":  iz-nu-u  30,  10;  iz- 6,  55. 

zinu  "angry":  zi-nu-u  2,  24  Z?;  zi-nu-u  2,  24;  zi-na-a 
12,  111;  zi-ni-i  4,  36;  6,  81;  7,  18;  zi-ni-tu  4,  45;  zi-ni- 
tum  6,  87;  7,  25;  zi-ni-ti  4,36;  6,  81;  7,  18;  12,  in;  zi- 
nu-ti  6,  67;  27,  23. 

zananu  "to  rain":    III  i  [mu-$a]-az-nin  49,  30; -nin 

12,  27. 


harranu]  VOCABULARY  .151 

P|pf  zakapu    Ii    "to  erect";    II  i   "to  impale";  -  •    13  uz-za- 
na-ka-pu  53,  9;  uz-za-na-kup  53,  10. 

tizkaru   ulofty,  noble":    ti-iz-ka-ru  12,19^;  27,1;  29,3; 

ti-is-kd-ru  g,  2;  tiz-fca-ru  12,  19. 
"to  sting":  II  i   ii-zak-kat-su  12,  121. 

ziru    "seed1':    ,srzn/    (ideogr.  KUL)    30,14;    £*>«    (ideogr. 
,     5I.KUL)  9,  37,  38;  ztr  (ideogr.  KUL)  n,  44;  33,  8. 
ZI.TAR.RU.DA  ideogr.:  7,54;  12,1,108. 


bigallu  "abundance":  bigalli  61,  12  A. 

mi"!   badu  I  i   "to  rejoice";  II  i  "to  make  joyful":  bu-ud  8,  16. 
badu  "joyful":  j}a-da(ta?)-a   12,  57. 
fcadiS  "joyfully":  f}ad-i$(?)  i,  24. 

bidutu   "joy":    ^idutu-ka  6,  128;  10,  4,  24;  42,  22;    $/'- 

dft/w- 7,  3;   bidutu-ki  3,  5;  8,  1 8;  fodiiti- 35,  6. 

batu  "to  sin":  ify-tu-u  46,  i:  ify-fu-u  18,  8;  28,  9. 

bittii,  bitu  "sin":  fri-if-fi  9,  42;  ^'-/«  18,  8. 

bititu  "sin":  fyi-ti-tu  12,78;  tfi-fi-ti  2,39;  14,6;  27,21; 

50,  1 8;  bi-ti-ti  27,  21  ^4;  36,  3;  bi-ta-ti-[ya]  50,  22. 
baiadu  "giver,  bestower":  &a-ai-dd  12,  30. 
"to  rule,  to  govern":  &a-z-du  12,  28. 

ba'ir u  "spouse,  husband" :  ba--i-ri-ki  1,42;  fya-i-ri-ki 33,  23. 
btrtu  "spouse,  wife":  bi-ir-tu  6,  126;  37,4;  far-til  10,23. 
balapu  l'to  be  clad":  fa-Hp  4^,  15- 
balaku  I  i   "to  perish";  II  i   "to  destroy":  bul~lik  21,64; 

bul-li-ki  2,  6;  [mu-bal-lik]  46,  19;  bul-lu-ku  8,  24. 

hulku  "destruction":  bul-ku-u  27,  13^. 

hulukku  "destruction":  bu-lu-uk-J?u-u  27,  13. 
bimitu  "butter":  famitu  n,  43;  12,  3;  21,  29;  30,  22;  62,  26. 
i-bi-su-u(f)  53,  10. 
barbasu  "storm,  fury":  b^r-ba-^u  2,  13;  3,  n. 
pp|  barranu  "way,  road":    fyar-ra-ni  42,  10;  bafr&mP  59,  3; 

62,  18. 


152  VOCABULARY  [h 

hurasu  "gold":  fairasu   12,  9,  12,  71;  25,  8;  59,  8;  "b" 
rasu  12,  12. 

bararu  "to  dig,  to  plough":  ?  fya-ra-Ar-ra  49,  31,  33. 
barru  a  wood:  $<zm  (ideogr.  SlM.SlS)  33,  39. 

bur§u,    hursu    "mountain,  hill":    fyur-$a-nu  22,  42; 
sa-a-ni  12,  28;  21,  83. 

t^'I^'n  buSsu  a  ceremonial  robe:  subdtu  fruSSii  12,  6. 
(Tin  tabtu  "victory":  tab-ti-i  46,  17. 


"to  approach":  Ii  ?//^/  12,1;  iti/ji-$u  12,119;  ?//- 
^«-«  12,  62,  64,  74;  iiibii-ni  (ifou-nir}  7,  57;  12,  63;  21, 
65;  itiba-a  n,  24;  21,  22;  --  II  i  lu-tab-fyi  6,  14. 

tibi  "near":  #'-/$  46,  n. 

tabu  I  i  "to  be  good,  to  be  acceptable":  li-tib  2,  34;  8, 
25;  li-tl-ba  10,  4;  --  II  i  "to  make  good,  to  gladden": 
li-tib-ka  10,  5;  li-tib-bu  6,  130;  8,  19;  9,  26;  tu-ub  8,  6,  16. 

tabu  "good":  ta-a-bu  8,  i;  n,  32;  ta-a-ba  2,  28  Z>;  ,^- 
«-«^  9,  8;  .....  -a-ba  30,  5;  /a^w  (ideogr.  DUG.GA) 
2,28;  12,52;  18,15;  21,90;  22,58;  50,17;  ta-ab-tii  49, 
6;  ta-ab-tum  12,  74^;  tabtu(tu)  ideogr.  DUG  7,  53;  /rt^- 
ttim(tum)  ideogr.  DUG.GA  12,74;  ta-bu-tum  12,  82  C; 
/^/i/^7  (ideogr.  DUG.GA)  12,  82  ;  ^/^  (ideogr.  DUG) 
i,  13,40;  27,  ii  A;  tabatit1  (ideogr.  DUG.GA)  4,  18,40; 
6,84^,113^;  7,21,61;  19,11;  50,15;  53,25;  54,3; 
55,4;  56,  10;  57,5;  58,  7;  59,  13;  60,20;  61,  i6A;  62,  n. 

tabtu  "blessing":  tabti-  .....   13,  24. 
tubtu  "friendliness,  kindness":  tu-ub-ba-ti  21,  88. 
"HID  tar  ad  u  "to  expel":  tu-ru-ud  21,  64. 


*isiru]  VOCABULARY  153 


•p  idu  "hand,  side":  i-di-a  10,  32;  idi-ya  g.  18;  i-da-ai  9,  is  /;. 
PI.  idati  "forces,  powers":  i-da-tu-u-a  6,114;  10,17; 
idatpl-u-a  12,  58;  idati^1  i,  13.  40;  4,  18,  40;  6,  \\$F\ 
7,  21,  61:  12,  64;  ig,  n;  27,  u^;  50.  15;  53,  25;  54,3; 
55,  4;  56,  10;  57,  5;  58,  7;  59,  13;  60.  20;  61,  16  A;  62, 

IO,    12. 

^  idu  "to  know":  ti-di-i  4,31:  6.76:  7,  14;  37,  12;  ln-di-ma 

(fr.  mi?)  22,  66. 

mudu  "understanding,  wise":  mu-di-i  13,  15;  mu-di-i(?) 

12,  27;  mudu-u   u,  i8bis;  mudii-u  n,  i8d7bis;  22,  37;  61, 

i5bis;  mu-da-at  4,  13. 
umu  "day":    it-mi  21,  86;    #-w*  6,  5,  6;  7,  38;   12,  59;  21, 

?8;    53,  8;    u-mi   22,  56;  53,  6;    it-inn    i.  17,  18,  23;    inn 

61,  nbis,  I2bis;    umu    i,  18;    unit    1.12,39;    4-  '7;  395    6? 

84^,113^;    7,20,60;    13,26;    19.10;    26,5;    27,  \\  A\ 

30,  20;    50.  14;    53,  24;  54,  2;  55,  3;  56,  9;  57,  4;  58,  6; 

59,  12;   60,  19;  61,  nquater,  i2bis,  16:    u-ml-Su-ma  12.  118; 

u-mi-ya  6,  118;  ii-mi-yci  10,  19;  iiinipl-ya  5,  3;  8,  17. 

umiSam  "daily":  u-mi-iam  19,  30;  49, 1 1 ;  u-mi-Sam  8,  16. 
immu  "day.  daylight":  im-ma  9,  43. 
imnu   "right,  right  side":    im-nu-uk-ki  8,  13;    im-ni-ya  9, 

1 6^;  imni-ya  6,  122;   9,  16;   10,  21:   22,  17. 
isipu  "to  add  to,  augment,  increase":  II  i   lu-us-sip  8,  13. 

ya§i,  yati  "me":  ya-a-Si  12,  109  E\  21,20,22,88;  49,10: 
53,4;    j/^-^1  7,50;    13,20;    22,65;    34.3;   yd-ii  12,65, 
109;  15,  10;  ya-a-ti  2,  7;  6,  72;  7,  10;  37,8;  ya-a-tu-n(r) 
2,  35- 
»   isu  "to  have;  to  be":  //j^-a  (ideogr.  TUK)  21,69;  i-Sii-ft 

2,  23;  i-Sa-a  12,  58. 
I  i   "to  go  straight,   to  advance,  to  succeed,  be  prosper- 
ous":   li-Sir  12,  75;  22,59;  ti$ir-ma  (ideogr.  SI  DI)  12. 
100;    li-si-ra  8,8;    lu-si-ra  2,36;  li-Si-ra  6,  114;   10,  17; 
-  II  i   ?mu-$a-ri  56,  5;  -       III  i   uto  guide,  to  bless": 
fii-ti-t'S-Si-rt  33,  18;  Sit-ifi-ru  2,  20;  iu-sit-ra  3,  10;  - 


154  VOCABULARY  [iSaru 

"to  lead,  to  direct,  to  rule":  tuS-ti-Si-ri  32,  n;  tu$-ti-$ir 

2,  20;  3,  16;   12,  37;    lu-u$-ti-$ir  12,  89;    mus-ti-is-ru   12, 

29;  mu$-ti-$ir  i,  53;  6,  99;   10,  8;  mu$-t{-$i-ra-a-ti  30,  9. 

isaru  "straight,  right":    i-Sa-ra  22,  60;   i-$a-ru-tu  53,  5. 

i§ari§  "rightly":  i-$a-ris  6,  117;  10,  18. 

miSaru  "righteousness":  mi-Sa-ri  i,  22;  miiari  (ideogr. 

SA.SI.DI)   i,  24. 

misaris  "rightly":  mi$-$dr-riS  u,  18. 


i-    8,  8. 

!   Uto  Pay  homage,  to  humble  oneself":    uS-ki-in-ina 
62,  30;  us-kin-ma  33,  41. 
KU.A.TIR    a   species   of  grain:    2,  27;   12,  3;   15,  20;  21, 

29;  30,  21 ;  62,  26. 
kaba.su  "to  tread":  ka-bi-su  62,  8,  9. 

kibsu  "path":  kib-sa  22,  60.  . 

kibratu    "quarter  of  heaven,  "region":    kib-ra-a-ti  2,  43; 
5,  12;  6,  38;  33,  7,  12,  47;  kibratit1  i,  30. 

J"Q!D  kabtu  "weighty,  important,  powerful":  kab-tu  12,21; 
kab-[tar]  6,  92;  7,  30;  kabti(ti)  ideogr.  DUGUD  i.  44; 
33,  27;  kabtu  (ideogr.  DUGUD)  12,  22;  kabti  (ideogr. 
DUGUD)  22,  i o;  kabti  (ideogr.  ILIM)  53,  16;  ka-bit-ti 
9,  ioZ?;  kab-ta-a-tum  46,  6. 
kabittu  "disposition":  ka-bit-ta-ka  21,68;  ka-bit- 

ta- 30,  6. 

kabuttu?:  [ka?]-bu-ut-ta-ka-ma  61,  19. 
KU.DUB.DUB.BU:  30,  24;  40,  12;  62,  29. 
KUD.SIR(*"«):  12,  10. 
12   kummu  "thy,  thine":  ku-um-ma  29,  i. 
*l*\2   kanu    I  i    "to   be  firm,    to   stand  fast":    li-kun  12,  88 

II  i   "to  establish,  to  place,  to  set":  tukan(an)  12,  2,  4; 

15,   1 8,   19,   22;    21,  28;    30,  21,  23;    31,9;    40,9;    62,  25,  27; 

(an)    11,43;    H-kin    14,5;    mu-kin    2,47;    kun- 

nn(?)   12,  76. 


kimlu]  VOCABULARY  1-55 

kinu  "sure,  certain,  true":  ki-i-nu  15,7;  ki-iti  6,  86  D\ 
ki-nim  i,  51;  4,  44;  6,  86;  7,  24;  19,  32;  33,  36;  52,  2. 

kinis  "truly":  ki-niS  2,32,37;  6,62;  7,46;  8,4;  12, 
112;  22,  23;  27,  19.  > 

kittu  "truth,  righteousness":  kit-tu  9,  13;  kit-tit  9.  13 /?; 
kit-turn  54,  8;  &'/-#  i,  24;  6,45;  7,56;  12,58;  22,9, 
14;  54,  5- 

kaianu  "continual,  constant":  ka-ai-an  9,  18;  50,  24. 
kaian  "continuously":  ka-ai-an  12,117. 

"H  ki    "when,    as,    according  to":    £2-28,1;    10,35;    J3,  3°; 
18,  9,  ii. 

ki'am  "thus":  ki'am  12,  104. 

kima  "like,  when,  as":  ki-nta  8,15;  9,20;  11,6/2,38; 
12,  73  C,  8iC,  82  C,  83  C1;  32,  8;  50,  28  Z?;  kima  i,  6,  10; 
4,29;  6,73;  7,  11;  11,6,25;  12,34,35,50,69,70,71, 
73,  81,  82,  83;  13,  20;  37,  9;  60,  ii. 

KA.IZI  a  species  of  flesh:  *»>«KA.IZI  12,  7;  40,  10;  62,  28. 
"p?  kakku  "weapon":  wkakku  12,  23. 
KU.KU  ideogr.:  12,101;  30,25. 

"**"!   kakkabu  "star11:  kakkab  7,  16;   19,  18;  kakkabanifl  6,  78; 
39,  6;  62,  17,  18;  kakkabani  (MUL.MUL)  8,  22. 

KA.LU.BI.DA  ideogr.:  7,  53;  12,  i,  108:  47,  3- 

kalu  "all":  kal  53,  12;  kalu  (ideogr.  KAK)  7,54;  kalit 
(ideogr.  KAK.A.BI)  62,23;  kal  (ideogr.  K;AK)  4,9, 
ii ;  12,  113;  53,  8bi9;  59,  i. 

kalamu   "all,  of  every  kind":    ka-la-ma  10,  27;   kala- 

ma  (KAK.A-ww)  19,  9. 

kalis  "altogether,  completely":  ka-liS  9,  7,  8. 

**•}   "to  be  complete";  III  i   "to  make  complete":   II  i   u-kal- 
lil  n,  10;  —  III  i   Suk-lul  12,  53. 

kullatu  "the  whole":  kul-lat  2,  18;  3,  '5;  18,5521, 
52;  42,  3;  kul-lat-si-na  32,  12. 

r\V2   kimtu    "family":    kim-ti-ya    53,13? -**-?<*    XI'  23; 

-ti-ya  ii,  23  C. 


156  VOCABULARY  [kamfilu 


D   kamalu    uto   be    angry":    kam-lu  4,37;    6,  82  E\    7,19; 

kdm-lu  6,  82,  88;  7,  26. 
ODD   kamasu  4'to  bow  down,  to  humble  oneself":  kan(kdinP)- 

su  i,  ii  ;  50,  4;  kam-sa-ku  59,9;  kan(kdm?)-sa-ku  1,21; 

.....  -sa-ku  22,  52;   --   I  2  kit-mu-sa  9,  43. 
j-jJD  II  i   "to  prepare  carefully":  kun-ni  31,  10. 

kanu  ustrong(?)":  ka-nu-tu  2.45;  ka-nu-ut  1,29;  4,  14; 

5>  "5  9,  30. 
"pD  kunukku  "seal":    abnu  kunukku  12,  13;  wkunukku  12,  12, 

73;  05«w  nu  kunukku  12,  73  C 

KAN.KAL  a  plant:  *»»KAN.KAL  n,  25. 
HD!D   kasu  "to  bind";  II  i   "to  bind  fast,  to  fetter":  u-ka-as-si 

13,  23. 

kasitu  "fetter,  bonds":   ka-si-ti  30,  11. 
KAS.SAG    a  drink-offering:    2,10;    6,96;    12.5;  22,33; 

30,  23;  32,  3;  51,  ii. 
HDD  kaspu  "silver":  kaspu  59,  8. 
^liDD  kuppu  "well,  source":  kup-pi  12,  29. 
kapru  "bowl":  kap-ra  40,  9. 
karu  "wall,  fortress":  kar  22,  7;  &m  42,  15. 
karabu  "to  be  favourable,  to  bless":  lik-ru-bu-ka  6,129; 

9,  25;  22,  25;  lik-ru-bu-  .....  60,  17;  lik-ru-bu-ki  3,6; 

8,  19. 

ikribu    "prayer":    ik-ri-bi  7,  36,45;  33,  5;    ik-ri-bi  ii, 

27;  ik-ri-  .....  35,  12. 

kirubu(?)  "favourable  (?)":  ki-ru-ub  8,  i. 
karubu  "great,  mighty":  ka-ru-bu  49,  16. 
I  2  "to  draw  near":  ik-tar  ii,  19. 
kuru  "need,  distress":  ku-u-ru  22,  53. 
^  kurmatu  "food":  kurmat-su  22,  34;  kurmati*1  31,  9. 
karanu  "wine":  karani  30,  2. 

kurunnu  a  drink  made  from  sesame-seed:   ku-ru-[un- 

na]  57,  10. 

2   kasa,  kasi  "thee,  thyself":  ka-a-sa  6,49;  17,4;  ^- 
i,  21  ;   ka-$a   i,  22;  ka-a-Si  31,  5;  33,  13;  ka-  ..... 
7i  l6;  39,  2. 


*la'atu| 


VOCABULARY 


'  157 


kasadu  "to  attain  to,  to  capture,  to  overcome1':  ikiud- 
an-ni  21,  22;  iksuda-ni  12,  65;  lu-uk-Su-ud  8.  18;  9,  12, 
48;  54,  7;  lu-vk-sii-da  8,  13;  lukSud(nd)  22,  13. 

kisadu   "neck":  kiSadi-Su   12,116;  kiSadi-ya  12,67. 
KlSDA  i.  e.  rete  "knot":   12,  s(?),  6(?),  g6(?);  16,  n;   18, 

19;  21,  92;  22,  69;  28,  6;  34,  6;  38,  3;  39,  5;  41,  2;  42, 

25;  46,  10;  47,  7;  52,  4. 
kispu    "magic,    enchantment":    ktS-pi  7,  50;   12,  106,  109; 

kiS-pi-ya  50,  22;  UH  22,  12. 

kassapu  "sorcerer":  kaS-Sa-pi  12,  62,  8iC. 

kas§aptu  "sorceress":   kaS-Sap-ti  12,62,816";  kaS-Sap- 

tum   12,  62  -ffC". 
kasasu:  I  i   ikSuS(P)-an-ni  (ideogr.  US.U$)  53,  8;—  IV  i 

nakSu$u(?)-ni  (ideogr.  U&  US)  22,  12. 

kiSsatu  "host,  multitude,  the  whole":  kiS-Sa-ti  3,  6;  6, 
129;  8,19;  9,25;  53,3;  ^'Wfl/i,  53;  ^^/  (ideogr. 
§AR)  62,  i. 

kaskassu    "strong1':     ka$-ka$-$u   21,  39,  41;    ka$-ka-$u 
20,  14,  16;  ka$-ka$  27,  4. 


la  "not":  la  i,  9,  i9bis;  2,14,20,21;  3,12,16;  5,9;  6, 
47(?),  66bis,  122;  10,  21  ;  n,  3,  4,  iobis,  12;  12,  19^,  23(7), 
74  C,  82  C,  96;  13,4,7,11,30;  20,9,11,15,17;  21,9, 
22bis,  35,  37,  40,  41?  22,22;  27,14;  42,  nbis,  18;  46,  18; 
60,  7,8,  15;  61,  18;  la  i,  13,40;  4>  18,40;  6,84^,  113^; 
7,  21,  53,  61;  n,  18;  12,  52,  68,  74,  82,96^;  19,  n;  27, 
n^4;  50,15,17;  53,7.25;  54,3;  55-4;  56<  I0?  57.5; 
58,  7;  59-  >3,  21  ;  60,  20;  61.  15,  16  A',  62,  n. 

la'abu  "to  oppress":  la--bu  12,51;  la--bu-ma  12,53. 

^'u  "strong":    /z'-'-w  12,  20;    li--a  2,  21;   //'-'-  .....   13- 
4;  21,  40,  4i(?);  li-'-at  32.  14- 
la'u?  "strong":  lA-u  4,  12;  /^f-/«  4,  9,  n. 
litu  "strength":  H-i-ti  46,  17. 

Uto  burn":  la-it  21,  42;  60,  5. 


158  VOCABULARY  [libbu 


Hbbu  "heart":  lib-bi  8,  16;  13,22;  27,22;  libbu  6,  i  i  ; 
35,  6;  libbi  n,  44;  12,  8,  11,  116;  libbu-$u  4,  37;  6,  88; 
7,  26;  lib-ba-ka  u,  38;  lib-ba-ka  6,  130;  9,  26;  12,  88; 

21,  68;  27,  20;  28,  12;  46,  5;    lib-bi-ka  4,  7;    libba-ka  g, 
26  5;    27,20^;     lib-ba-ki    8,19;     libbu-ki    3,6;    30,6; 
/2<W/-  .....  8,  6;  37,3;  lib-bi-ya   11,5;  30,  13;  libbi-ya 
9,  i4/?;  u,  5^  libbi-ya  9,  14;  22,  15;  lib-ba-$u-mi  33,  18. 

"to  enclose,  to  surround":  II  i   lu-ub-ba-ku  12,  56. 
labanu  "to  cast  down":  IV  2  il-tal-bu-nin-ni  n,  3  ,4;  27, 

14;  it-tal-ban-ni  n,  3. 

libittu  "brick":  /##  21,  26. 

labaSu    "to  clothe  oneself,    be  clothed":    I  2   lit-bii-Su  3, 

n;    lit-bu-Su  2,  13;    46,  15;    lit-bu-sa  12,  53;    lit-bu-$i-$u 

53,  16. 

lubustu    "clothing":    lubustu    (ideogr.  SIG)  53,  9;    lu- 

buSti*1  (KU.ZUN)  53,16. 
lu  precative  particle;  "or":  lu-u  6,  1  18;  9,  18,  20,  2  iB;  10,  19; 

lu-u  8,9,  n,  15;  12,  97  D\  lu  8,  i2bis;  n,  16,  17;  12,  97bls; 

13,  10;  16,  i  ibis;   18,  i9bis;   19,  28;  21,  22bis,  25,  26bis,  g2bis; 

22,  69bis;    28,  6bis;    30,14;    34,  6bis;    38,  4bis;    39,  5bis;  41, 
2bis;  46,  iobis;  47,  7bis;  50,  24;  52,  4bis;  53,  13,  14,  15. 

li'u  "tablet":  i*uli--um   10,  35. 
LA.HAR  (la-bar?}  "grain  (?)":  illtla-bar(?)  12,  30. 
}?}   lallartu  "wailing,  loud  crying":  lallartu  i,  20. 

lamadu  "to  learn":    i-lam-ma-du  i,  9,  19;  i-lam-mad  n, 

9,  n;  lil-ina-da   i,  43;  33,  26;  lim-[da]  4,  30. 
limnu  "evil":    lim-nu   12,  62,  776*,  119;  50,  19,  23;  51,  16; 

57,  16;  lim-na  12,57;  ^m~  .....  21,64;  limnu  12,67; 
limni  12,  66;    limuttum(tum)   12,  746";    limutti(ti)  12,  74; 
50,  17;    limuttim(tim)  2,  6;  12,  68;    limuttu  15,  9;  61.  4; 
limutti  12,  66;   limutti  (ideogr.  HUL.GAL)  61,  12;  lim- 
nu-th  10,  3;    lim-nu-ti  8,  24;  49,  13;    lim-nu-  .....   47, 
2;    limnutipl   12,63,816*;    limniiti(ti)   7,51;    limniti*1  i, 
13,40;   4,18,40;    6,84^,113^;    7,21,61;    12,56;    19, 
n;    27,  n^[;  50,  15;  53,  25;  54,  3;  55,  4;  56,  10;  57,  5; 

58,  7;  59,  13;  60,  20;  61,  i6A]  62,  10,  n,  14;  limmti^-ya 
12,  73;  limntti^-ya  12,  83;  lim-na-titf)  58,  4. 


magiru]  VOCABULARY  159 

lumnu  uevil":  lum-ni  62,  10,  1  1  ;  lu-mun  22,  54;  lumun 
1,12,13,39,40;  4,17,18,39,40;  6,  ii3/^bis;  7,20,21, 
60,  61;  12,1,64,65;  19,10,11;  27,  n^bis;  50,14,15; 
53,24,25;  54,2,3;  55,3,4;  56,9,10;  57,4,5;  58,6, 
7;  59,12,13;  60,19,20;  61,16,16  ,4;  62,  i6bis,  17,  18, 
19,  20;  lumnu(nn)-u-a  12,  76. 

Dft7  lamassu  "guardian  deity1':  ilu  lamassu  8,  12;  12,110522,19. 
DDT5   lasamu:  ?  a-la-su-um   18,12. 

D^  lapatu  "to  surround":    II  i   lu-up-pu-ta-ku-ma   12,  56;  — 
III  2  ?uS-tdl-pi-  .....  21,  25. 

liku  "to  receive,  to  take1':  talaki(ki)-ma  12,  8,  talaki  30, 
26  [miiki]\  lil-ki  1,43;  33,26;  li-ki  18,14;  21,21; 
23,  3;  li-ki-ma  2,  33;  li^i-ma  2,  33  D;  li-ki-i  6,  80;  8, 
4;  likt-i  3,  2;  4,  35;  6,  80  £;  7,  17;  li-frat  9,  39;  33,  5. 

lisanu    "tongue":    li-$a-[nu]    6,  33;    liSanu   22,55; 
12,  66;  liSanu-su  12,  121;  lisani-  .....  4,  20. 


D 

MA:  *V«MA  12,  5. 
rna'du  "many":  ma-  -du  7,  47. 

ma'dutu,  madutu  "great  quantity":   ma--du-ti  6,  78; 

7,  16;   19,  18;  53,  6;  ma-du-ti  i,  23. 

maru  "son":    maru  (ideogr.  DU.U§)  46,  14;  56,  3;    mart 
(ideogr.  DU)  i,  42;  4,  48;  33,  23;  mar  (ideogr.  DU)  2, 
2bD\  22,  9,  22;  50,  12;  59,  17. 
martu  "daughter":  marat  (ideogr.  DU.§AL)  61,  5. 

IJ  I    "to    send,    despatch;    to  rule":    ii-ma-  -ir-ma    1,25; 

ii-ma-  -ir-an-m  12,  99;  inn-ma-*  -ir  19,  7. 
magaru  "to  be  favourable;  to  listen  to,  receive  favour- 

ably": mu-gu-ur  21,  2  1  ;  ma-ag-rat  8,  15  ;  9,  20;  magrat(at) 

14,  13;    ma-ga-ru    8,  9;    ma-ga-ra  9,  195    13,  85    22,  205 

magara  19,  29bis;  magari  (?$imt)  26,5;  30,20;  GlS.TUK 

35,  10. 

magiru  "favourable,    willing,  obedient":    ma-gi-ri  33, 

1  6;  ma-gir  6,  120. 


160  VOCABULARY  [m6 

IB   mu  "water":    mu  u,  43;   12,  2,  3;   15,  18;    ai,  28,  29;    30, 
21,  22;  31,  8;  33,  39;  62,  26;  wf/'  53,  17;  62,  24. 

musu  "night":    mu-$i  22,  63;  ;;/«.?/   i,  20,  26;  9,  43;   12,  2; 

21,  28,  86;  31,  8;  53,  8. 

mitu  "dead":  am'lumttu  6,  99;  10,  8;  28,  8;  59,  21. 
MI.HI  a  species  of  flesh:  **>«MI.HI  12,  7;  62,  28. 
mihhu  a  drink  (?)-offering:  mi-ib-ba  8,  21;  40,  12. 

I  J   k'to  oppose;  to  take,  accept;  to  implore":    am-bur-ka 
50,  20;    lim-bii-ri  10,  31;   lim-bu-ru-  .....  60,  16;  lim- 
bu-ru-ka-ma  46,  4;    mu-fyur  2,  33;  50,  21;    tnufo-ra-an-ni 
61,  17;    mub-ri-ma  4,  35;    mufy-ri-in-ni-ma  6,  80;    7,  17; 
ma-j}i-rat  9,  39;  mab-rat  22,  34;  --   II  i  u-ma-f}ir-ki  57, 
ii  ;  --  IV  i  im-maj}-  ba-ru  2,  14;  3,  12. 
mahru  ''before":  ?  .....  -fyar  6,  30;  maf}-ra-ka  50,4; 
ma-fyar-ka  9,  23;  21,  n,  62;  22,  57;  25,  4;  ma-bar-  ..... 
21,  21  ;  ma-bar-ku-nu  7,48. 
tamharu  "battle":  tam-ba-ri  27,  2;  46,  18;  tam-ba-  ..... 

21,  40. 

malu    "to  fill;    to  be  full":    ma-lu-u  2,  13;    ma-lu-u  i,  7; 

2,  13  j5;    3,  n;    -       II  i    u-mal-li   13,  24;  -      III11  i    ti$- 

mal-la  21,  59. 

mala  "as  many  as":  ma-la   n,  8;  62,  12. 

?  mi-lim-ma  n,  18. 
maliku  "arbiter,  prince":   ma-li-ku  6,  25;  50,  7;  ma-li-ki 

i,  34;  5,  16;  6,  19. 

milku  "counsel":  mil-ka  i,  14;  mi-lik-su  i,  19;  mi-lik.- 

$u  i,  9;  mi-lik-ka  27,  7. 
MU.MU  a  priest:  flW""/MMU.MU  60,  3. 
mamma,  mimma  "whosoever,  whatsoever":    ma-am-ma 

12,98;    ma-am-man  60,  8;  ;««-  ..........   i,  9,  19; 

mimma    (ideogr.    NIN)    12,  62,  67,  776",  ii9bis;    50,  23; 

57,  15,  l6- 

mimma    SumSu    "of    whatever    kind;    anyone,    any- 

thing":   mimma   sum-Su   7,52;    mimma  Sumsn    (ideogr. 

SA.NAM.MA)  7,55;  13,8;  21,89. 

mamlu  "strong":  ma-  am-  In  46,  13. 


'IT' 


matu]  VOCABULARY  .161 

f£   mannu  "who":  man-mi  n,  g,  10,  n. 

J-jjD  manu  "to  repeat,  recite":  limnu(nn)  60,4;  munu(nn)  2, 
10;  15,23;  18,  :gA\  24,7;  25,7;  32,4;  52,4;  mnmt(mi)- 
ma  12,117;  33,  41;  munu  12,103;  mumi-ma  6,96;  u, 
45;  3°,  27;  62,  30;  mnnu-su  12,  16. 

minutu  "repetition,  recital,  incantation":  mimituftii)  2, 
10;  n,  45;  40,  13;  62,  30. 

minitu:  ini-ni-ta  19,  23. 

massu  "ruler(?j":  massit-u  22,  2;  [mas sit] -it  22,  2  A 
"1\JD  massaru  "watch,  guard":  ma-sar  12,  105,  113. 

masartu  "watch":  masartu-'su  (ideogr.  IN. NUN)  53,  21. 
DpD   makatu  "to  fall":  ma-ak-tnm  6,  44. 

t*")D  marsu  "sick":  mar-$u  22, 1 1 ;  amll"marsu  12, 100;  amllumarsi 
12,  16. 

mur$u  "sickness,  disease1':  mu-ur-$i  21,  44;  mur$u  i, 
45;  4,19;  7,535  12,52;  30,12;  33,28;  50,17;  w/i/ryi 
12,  i ;  munis  12,  60;  mursi-yh  5,  5. 

sumrusu  "diseased":    suni-ru-su  22,  n;  sutn-nt- 

39,  1 6. 

marustu  4'inisfortune,  disaster,  sickness":  niantStu  7,53; 
12,  49;  22,  52;  30,  7  ;  mantSti  18,  14;  mamsti-ya  18,  14  />'. 

D  niasii  ''to  forget":  Ii  ma-Si-i  6,  66;  -  IV  i  im-uiaS-si 
60,  10 ; -ma-si  5,  7. 

masmasu  a  priest:  mas-mas  12,  88.  94;  60.  4. 
D  im-sir(P)  33,  6. 

2  matu  "land":  ma-a-ti  9.6;  52,5;  ;;/«//  6,112;  10,15:  n, 
28;  12,  65;  mati-ya  13,  25;  mati-yh  i,  13;  4,  19,  41?  6, 
113 /S  7,22,61;  19,12;  50,16;  53,26;  54,4;  55,  5; 
56,11;  57,6;  59,14;  60,21;  6i,i6yJ;  mati-a  1,4°;  27, 

n^;  58,  7;  ma-ta-a-ti  9,  33;  w<7- 39^  9; 

matati  i,  n;   12,  17,  39;  19,  7;  57,  i-J?  6l,  3- 


I  62  VOCABULARY  [nadu 


li-ni-    i,  49;  33,  33. 

nadu  I  i   "to  be  exalted;  to  praise(P)1':    ?  li-na-du-ka  n, 

29;  -       I  2    "to    exalt,    to  praise":    lu-ut-ta--id  12,89; 

lh-ta-id  21,  70;  Int-ta-id  5,  8;  lu-ut-ta-id-ma   n,  12. 

tanittu:    iwtanitti  (iwtikniti?,  ideogr.  &IM.GIG)  22,  32. 
naru  "stream11:  nari*1  12,  29;  25,6. 
nabu  "to  name";  Suma  nabu  "to  exist,  to  be":    na-bat 

11,8;  na-bi-at  n,  8  A. 

nabatu  "to  shine";  13  do.:  it-ta-na-an-bi-tu  39,  12. 
nubattu  a  festival:  (nm)  nu-bat(r)-ti  61,  11. 
nindabu  "offering":  nindabii  18,  13. 
nadu    "to  cast,    to  place":    I  i   tanadi(di)   n,  44;    12,  6bis, 

11,98;  17,  7;  -       13   it-ta-na-an-dit-u  21,73;    ittanandii 

21,  25. 

nadanu  "to  give11:    tanadinfin)  i,  14,  16;   id-din-ka-ma  2, 

17;  3i  ^5?  27i  9?    iddtii-Ka-ma  27<  Q  A\ -dan  3^? 

5;    ad-dan-ka  19,  19;    ad-dan-ki  4,  33;    addin-su  53,  18; 

nadnat(at)  9,  38. 

mandatu  "tribute":  man-da-ti-ya  12,  55. 
nabu  I  i   "to  be  weak;  to  rest":    an-fyu  4,  16;    an-Jja   12, 

41;    li-nu-ufy  12,88;    li-nu-fya  6,89;    7,27;    21,68;    27, 

20;  28,  12;  46,  5;  linulj(ub)  30,  6;  -  -  III  2  "to  appease, 

to  pacify1':  mu$-ti-ni-i/j.  33,  3. 
nuru  "light11:  nu-ii-ru  6,  108;  nu-u-ra  8,  2;  nu-ru  n,  i 

22,  35;   nu-ri  12,  69;  nu-iir  6,  100;  39,  9. 

nazazu  "to  stand1':  Ii  az-za-az  1,21;  azzaz(az)  ideogr. 
GUB  13,  6 ;  az-ziz  21,11;  22,  57 ;  izzizu  (ideogr.  GUB.BU) 
1,15;  li-iz-ziz  6,  122;  9,16,17;  10,  21;  22,17,18;  53, 
22;  li-iz-zi-zu  2,30,31;  7,42;  li-zi-zu  50,10;  li-ziz-zu 
2,  30/7,31  D;  lizziza(za)  ideogr.  GUB  60,  18;  iziz-ma 
(ideogr.  GUB)  12,59;  i-ziz-zi-im-ma  6,72;  7,10;  37, 
8;  i-ziz-zi-ma  4,  27;  ?  lu-ziz-ku  (lu-bat-tuk ?~)  n,  27; 
III  i  iiSizizu(su)  ideogr.  GUB. GUB  53,  9;  -  IV  i  na- 
aii-za-zu  9,  15;  --  I  2  at-ta-ziz  27,  18. 


u]  VOCABULARY  .163 

manzazu  "place,  station":   man-sa-za  2,  15;  3,  13;  22, 
16;  man-za-az-ka  27,  5;  man-za-az-ki  32,  7. 
nahlu  "date-palm (?)":  iia-aj^-la  12,  4. 
nabasu  "to  abound":  na-fya-$i  8,  3. 

nubsu  "abundance":  nii/jsn   12,27;  49>  3°;  58,2. 
}  natalu    "to   see,    behold":   i-na-ta-ln  18,  2;   ta-na-tal  18, 

7  /2;  at-tit-la  6,  116;   10,  18;  lut-tul  12,  113. 
3   "to  be  cunning":    Ii   ak-kil^)  6,  29;   —    IV  i    ~?  nam-kil- 
lu-ni-ma  22,  12. 

NI.KUL.LA  (*«*•)   12,  101. 

3   nakasu  "to  cut  off":  I  i   na-kas  50,  23;—  II  i  tnnikis(is) 
ideogr.  KUD  40,  9. 

3   nakaru    Ii   "to  rebel,    be  hostile";    II  i   "to  alter";    II 2 
"to  be  altered":    I  i   a-na-kar  59,  9;    na-kar  13,  1 1 ;  - 
II  i    nu-iik-kir(kirr)-ma   12,  60;    mu-na-kir  50,  2;  —   II  2 
nt-tak-ka-ru  60,7;    nttakkaru(ru)   12,19;   19,31;   33,36; 
53 5  23I  59i T  x ;  uttakkarnin(rum)'  i,  50;  nttakkar(ar)  12,  96. 
NIM  a  tree:  *V«NIM  12,  10. 
NAM.BUL.BI  ideogr.:  NAM.BUL.BI.I  62,  12. 

3  namaru  "to  shine,  to  be  bright":  II  i   "to  make  bright"; 
III11  i   do.;  II  2  "to  be  bright":  Ii   lim-mir  12,69;  //'///- 

mi-ru  8,  10;    nam-ral  i,  5;  —  II  i   u-nam-ma- 21, 

i;  tit-nam-mar  40,  n;  tunamwarf?)  ideogr.  LAH.LAH 
40,9;  nn-nm-mi-ir  11,20;  nu-um-mir  n,  2oC*;  mu-nain- 

mir  i,  2;    mu-na-mir  58,  17;   mu-na- 33, 

i ;  —  III11 1  tii$-nam-mar  12.  35 ;  muS-iia-ini-rat  39, 10;  - 

II  2  lii-nt- ta-mir  12,  83. 

namru  "bright":  nam-ru  16,4;  nam-ri^)  10,27:  •//<?;//- 

;v^-//  8,  23. 

namris  "brightly":  nam-ris  9.  23. 

namriru    "brightness,    splendour":    nam-ri-ri   46,   15; 

nam-ri-ru-ka  i,  7;  nam-ri-ir-ri-ki  8,  10. 

namirtu  "brightness":  na-mir-ti  i,  3- 

namurratu  "brightness":  na-mur-ra-ta  21,  59. 

j  nammassu  "reptile,  creature":  na-maS-Su-u  32,  13; 
mas-si-i  27,  10. 


164  VOCABULARY  [nammaitu 

nammastu  "reptile,  creature*':  na-ina$-ti  32,  10. 
namtaru:  nam-ta-ru  12,  42. 

NiD3  nisu  "to  remove,  to  tear  away;  to  be  removed":  I  i   li- 
is-su-u  12,  73C; —  Hi   lu-ni-is-su-u  12,73;  nu-us-si  12, 

60; -us-su  12,  60  j#;  —    IV  i    li-in-ni-is-si  1,45, 

48;  33i  28,  32;  linnisi(si)  ideogr.  BAD  30,  12. 

nistitu  "male  relatives":    ni-su-ti-yh  11,23;    *  ni-Su- 

u,  23  C. 

nasafru    "to    remove,    to  tear  away1':    I  i   tanasaj}(?)-nia 
(ideogr.  ZI)  12,  97;    nasabu  (ideogr.  ZI.GA)  27,  13;  - 
IV  i  linnasifrfib)  ideogr.  ZI  30,  12;  50,  23. 

napistu  "life":  na-piS-ti  12,70;  22,6;  33,8;  37,5:  nct- 
pisti(ti)  7,  37;  9,  5,  21 B,  38;  14,  4;  18,  i6£;  27,  9;  57, 
12;  napiStim(tim)  6.  60;  9,  21;  12,  io8j5";  18,  16;  37,  2; 
nap-sat  61,13;  napsat  $^  29;  napi&ti(tim)-ya  9,  22;  napisti- 
ya  9,  22  B;  50,  23. 

nasaru  "to  keep,  preserve":  as-sur  8,  9;  na-si-ru  22,  6; 
na-si-rat  9,  38. 

nik(i  "to  offer":  tanakt(ki)  [?  tiniki]  6,96;  12,5,7;  J5) 
27;  21,  30;  22,  33;  24,  6;  30,  23;  32,  3;  40,  12;  51,  n; 
62,  28;  tanaki(ki)-ma  2,  10;  8,  21;  ak-ki(?)  2,  45;  ak-ki- 
ka  i,  20;  akJfi-ka  2,  29;  —  II  i  ?nu-uk-ka  21,  79. 

niku    "offering":    wz'£«    ideogr.  DIM    (? tanaki)    11,43; 

12,  3;  21,  29;  30,  22;  62,  26;  niki  (ideogr.  DIM)  21.  70; 
immirunikii  21,  30;  immirunikl  12,  7;  40,  9;  62,  28. 

nirtu:  m-ir-tii  6,  58. 

nisu  "to  raise":  nisi-ma  12,  103;  na-aS  22,3;  na-sa-ku  18, 

13;  ;/z-j«  12,  78;  ;«'- i,  48;  33,  32;  ni-Su  12,  52; 

;«'-^  12,79;  35,14;  nis  i2,88C;  50,21;  niS  (ideogr.  IL) 
4,  35;  ",  48,  88;  13,  14;  23,  7;  40,  10,  13;  IL.LA  (=  nis) 
i,  28,  52:  2,  9,  42;  3,  9;  4,  8,  23;  5,  10;  6,  17,  35,  70,95, 
131;  7,  8,  33;  8,  20,  21;  9,  27;  10,  6,  26;  n,  41;  12,  95; 

13,  12;    14,  n;    15,  17;   16,  10;   17,  5;   18,  18;   19,  33:  20, 
7;  21,  24,  72,  75,  91  ;    22,  30,  68;  23,  6;  24,  4;  25,  5;  26, 
3;  27,  25;  28,  5;  29,  2;    30,  19;  31,  7;  32,  2;  33,  38;  34, 
5;  36,  6,  8;  37,  6;  38,  3;  39,  4;  40,  2;  42,  24;  43,  8;  44, 
2?  45>  41  46>  9;  47,  6,  9;  48,  16;  49,  20;  50,  28;  51,  9. 


samifcu]  VOCABULARY  165 

nisu  ''spirit  (?)":  ms  8,  i. 

nisu    "people":    ni-su  n,  28;    ni-si  9,  6;    nisi*1  i,  3,  4,  8, 
53;   4,  51   7,  595  9,  8,  40;   12,  39,  72;   13,  7,  16;   18,  5,  17; 
21,  12,  23,  go;  22,  7,  8,  67;  30,  18;  32,  n;  33,  34;  57,  2. 
"t^j  naSku  "weak(?)":  na-aS-ki  9,  36. 


D 

D2D   sabasu  "to  be  angry":  is-bu-su  i,  23. 
"T"iD   "to  arrange":  si-di-ir-ma  21,  88. 

saftaru  "to  turn  towards":  is-safy-ru  6,  52;  as-sa-bar  27, 
15;  is-J}U-ra  7,  54;  as-fair  (az-murs)  8,  n;  as-Uur-ka  6, 
28;  as-bur-ki  6,  73,  79;  33,  22;  asfrur-ki  i,  41;  4,  29;  7, 
ii,  62;  37,  9;  57,  7;  li-saU-ra  30,  jo. 

sukkallu  "messenger":  suk-kal-lu  6,  20;  snkkallu  6,  20  A 
PpQ   sakapu  "to  cast  down,  overthrow":  li-is-kip  12,  68. 
!"PD  II  J    "to  implore,    to    beseech":    i-sal-lu-ka-ma    i,  14,  16; 
5°,  5- 
silitu  "compassion":  si-ii-ti  30,  14. 

salatu  "female  relatives":    sa-la-ti-ya  53,  13;   sa-la-ti-ya 

n,  23. 
salahu  "to  sprinkle":    [ta]-sal-lajj.  62,  29;    tasalal}  12,  2; 

21,  28,  74;  30,  21  ;  31,  8;  33,  39. 
salamu    I  i    "to  be  favourable";    II  i   do.:    I  i  fas-lint  8, 

i2bu;    tas-livi  13,10;    lis-li-mu  1,24;  lislimu(mu)  i,  44; 

28,3;    33,27:    si-liin    2,35;    14,7;   16,  g(?);    22,61,62; 

sal-li-mu  9,  18;   Jrt/-//-  .....  6,  123;   10.  21;   salimu(mu) 

33,42;  32,5    (lislimit?};    salinin  6,122;   10,21;    ?  sa-la- 

ini-i  48,  18;  —   II  i   tu-sal-lam  2,  24;  21,  87;  .....  -J«/- 

/rtw  6,  55;  tit-sdl-latnft)  2,  24  ,5. 

salimu  "favour":    sa-li-mu  4,  6;  8,  8;  50,  25;  sa-li-ma 

33,  15,  16;  ..........  -via   12.  6iZ>;  saliina(ina)  12,61. 

suluppu  "date":  snluppu  12,  3;  21,  29;  30,  21:  62,  26. 

sa-ini-id  21,  26;  sa-mid  21,  16. 

sanaku    "to  harass;   to  shut  up,  to  fetter":    I  i  sa-ni-kn 

46,  12;  -       III  i    u-Sis-ni-ka  12,67;    n$isnika(ka)  12,74; 

tit-$a-as-ni-ka  12,  109  .£";  tu-Sa-as-ni-ka  12,109. 


1 66  VOCABULARY  [>ij.u 

HDD   sipu  "to  beseech":  II  i   u-sa-pi-[ka]  50,  20. 

supu,.  suppu  "supplication":  sn-pi-i  33,4;  sn-pi  1,37; 

33,  20;   sn-pi-ya  1,43;  21,  21;  33,  22,  26;   su-up-pu-u-ki 

8,  i. 
HDD   sapahu  I  i   "to  scatter,  to  loosen";  II  i  do.:  I  i   sn-pii-itfj 

5,7;    sa-ap-Ui    6,53;    sa-pi-ib-ti    32,  1 1 ;    su-np-pi-i/}-ma 

ii,  37- 

SIR. AD  ideogr.:   12,  6;  30.  24. 
p"lD   saraku  "to  pour  out":    a-sa-rak  18,13;   as-rnk-ka   1,20; 

as-ruk-ki  30,  3 ;  57,  9. 

sirku  "libation1':  si-riff  i,  20;  30,  3;  57,  9. 


"UD   pagru  "body,  corpse1':    pa-gar-su  2,  22;    amilu  pagar-Su  2, 
22  /?;  pag-ri-ya   12,  53;  53,  12. 

HID   padu   "to  set  free,  to  spare":   pa-iht-u  20,  15,  17;  46,  18; 

pa-da-a  5,  9. 

IE   pu  "mouth":   pu-u  6,  33;  //i   12,  68;  22,  55;  //  4,  5 ;  9,  8; 
10,  35;   12,  66,  72;  22,  8;  pu-sit  u,  14;  pu-Su  21,  25,  73; 

pi-i-ka  12,  62;   />/-/- 13,  32;  pi-ka  12,  80;   13,  1 1 ; 

pi-ka  21,  22;  22,  9;  42,  17;  /z'-£/  i,  43;  33,  25;  />/-£/  i, 
49;  pi-ya  9,  13  B,  49;  //-jw  6,  57;  22,  \\B\  pi-ya  9,  13; 
22,  14;  pi-ku-nu  62,  7. 

"1HD   P"bru  "totality,  the  whole":  pit-fair  27,  7^,9;  /7//^//;-  27, 
7;  puJpi  19,  28;  pu-fair-su-mi  i,  15. 
napbaru  "the  whole":  nap-Jjar  6,  40;  52,  5. 

"llOC   pataru  "to  tear,  to  loosen,  to  remove":  I  i   ta-pat-tdr  2, 

23;    ta-pa- 2,  23  £;    tapatar(ar)    12,99;    4°i  MJ 

tapatar-ma  30,  28;   lip-tur  12,  84;  pu-tur  2,  38;   u,  ig 

29,30,32,34,37;   18,14;   27,21; -///;-  49,  2 1 ;  ///- 

fur-ma    11,19;    pu-ut-ri   11,31,33;    pu-ut-ra    11,35;  - 
II  i   tu-pat-tAr  2,  23  Z>J;  li-pat-tir  10,  3;  —  IV  i   lip-pa-tir 
5,6;    7,48;    imippatiru(ru)   53,  7;  -       II 2    lip-ta-at-ti-ru 
12,  83;  lip-ta-ti-ru  30,  13. 

palabu  "to  fear,  to  reverence";  II  i   "to  terrify";  13  do.: 
I  i    pa-li-hi-ka    17,  4;   pa-ltb-ka    2,  35;    pa-lilj-ki    2,  7; 


pir'u]  VOCABULARY  -167 

-lib  28.  10 ;  46,2;  pal-Ua-ku  4,42;  pal-fta-ku-ma 

62,  15;  -  -   II  i    mu-pal-li-bi  53,  6;    -      13    up-ta-na-lal}- 

an-ni  53,  8. 

pulufetu  "terror":  pu-lufy-tu  2,  13;  3,  n. 

f/D  pulanu  "such  and  such1':  pulanu  i,  3Sbis;  2,  26bis;  4,  16; 
6,  27bis,  83 /;bis;  10,31;  12,  45bis,  go;  13,  5bis;  22,11,51; 
27,  "5  3°,  75  3i,4bis;  33,  2ibis;  39,  16;  54,  ibis;  57,  3bis; 

58,  5bis;    62,  I3bis;    pulani   i,  I2bis,  38,  39bis;    2,26;    4,16, 
1 7  bis,  39bis;    6,  27,  83  £,  84  £bis,  1 1 3  ^bis;    7,  2obis,  6obis; 
10,  31;   12,  45,90;   J3,  5;   22,  11,51;  27,  ii ;  30,7;  31,4; 
33,  21 ;  39,  16;  53,  24b;s;  54,  i,  2bis;  57,  3,  4bis;  58,5,6*'; 

59,  i2bis;    60,  i9bis;    61,  i6bis;    62,  13;    pulaintnm(tum)    i, 
38;    2,  26;    6,  27,  83  Zf;   12,  45;   13,  5;  31,  4;  33,  21;  54, 

i;  57,  3;  58,  5;  62, 13. 

DT'S  IV  i  "to  look  at,  to  regard  favourably,  to  pity,  to  show 
mercy":  nap-lis-an-ni  2,  37;  nap-lis-an-ni-ma  2,  32;  6, 
62;  naplis-an-ni  2,  37/2;  naplis-au-ni-ma  27,  19;  naplisa- 

ni-ina  2.  32  D:  21,66;  nap-li- 35,5;  nap-li-si-in- 

ni-ma  8,  4;  naplisu-uin-ni  7,  46;  mu-up-pal-sa-ta  2,  37; 
27,17;  inn-tip-pal-sa-at  2,37/^5  [nap]-/u-us-sa  4,26; 
[nap]-lu-us-ki  8,  2. 

HjD   panu  "face":  /««  2,  10;  8,  20;   n,  42;   12,  2,  5,  98;  13,  6, 

ki3;  18,  19^;  21,  28;  24,  6;  30,  20;  31,  8;  32,  3;  51,  10; 
52,  3;  pa-nn-nk-ka  14,  10;  18,  2;  pa-nu-ka  18,  3;  pa-ni- 
ka  2,  36;  27,  \jD\  panu-ka  10,  33;  22,  23;  pani-ka  i, 
nbu;  6,34;  12,66,70,75,76;  27,18;  53,  16;  pa-ni-ki  8, 
12;  pann-ki  i,  36;  33.  19;  pani-ki  33,  14;  /«-/«'- 

35,  4;  pani-ya  (ideogr.  SAG.KI)  53,  10. 
C££   pasasu  "to  loosen,  to  forgive  (sin)":  I  i   lip-su-su  12,  76; 

pu-si-si  50,  22;  -  -  II  i    nm-pa-si-su  62,  10. 
N*;»T   pi$atu  a  brightly- coloured  (?)  robe:  lubnitu  pi&ti  40,6. 

"PD  pakadu  Ii  "to  take  care  of,  to  rule,  to  entrust  to"; 
II  i  "to  visit,  to  resort  to":  I  i  ta-pa-kid  58,  3;  ip-kid 
27,  10;  ti-pi-ik-da-ni  ii,  26;  pa-ki-du  46,  13;  pak-dn  42, 
12;  -  -  II  i  lu-pa-kid  53,  20. 

N*1£   parutu  "alabaster":  alnupanitu  12,11,12,69. 

NY1£   pir'u  "offspring,  posterity":  pi-ir-i  12,75:  />/-//•-'    12, 


1  68  VOCABULARY  [paraldui 


D  par(mas?)-da-a  34,  3. 

D   parakku  "shrine":  parakkani*1  9,  7. 

V  i   "to  cease,  to  yield":  ip-par-ki  6,  124;   10,  22. 

D  parasu  "to  separate,  to  decide":  I  i  ta-par-ra-sa  62,  6; 
pu-ru-ns  12,  59-5;  pnrus(us)  12,  59;  50,  11;  purusi(si)  4, 
30;  7,  49;  paris(is)  12,  108^";  [pa]-ra-su  6,  74/^5  parasi(si) 
4,  28;  6,  74;  7,  12;  37,  10;  -  IV  i  ipparasu(su)  53,  28. 

parsu  "part":  par-su  48.  18. 
piristu  "decision";  pi-ris-ti  i,  17. 

purussu  "decision":  /«r«j  i,  n;  4,28;  6,74;  7,12; 
12,58;  13,28;  37,10;  purussa-ai  4,  30;  7,49;  12,59; 
50,  ii. 

D   parsu  "command":  par-su-[ki]  4,  12. 

pa§ahu  "to  be  pacified,  to  be  consoled":  pa-sa-Jja  8,  7. 
C?  Ill  i  sup-si-ka  9,  14;  22,  15;  inu-$ap-sik(pik?)  42,  16. 
D    pusku  "sorrow,  misery":  puski  9,  35;  31,  6. 

D   pasaru    "to   loosen,    to  free,    to  interpret":    I  i   lip-sii-ru 
12,  78;  lip-sur-an-ni  12,  84;  lipsnr-an-ni  12,  84^;  pn-snr 
2,38;    11,19,29,30;    50,22;    61,  18;    /<?-.?/>    6,5,6,7; 
BUR.RU.DA  22,12;—  II  i   ..........  -si-ru  62.  12;- 

IV  i   lip-pa-as-ru   i,  47;    lip-pa-a$-  .....  6,  13;   [lip]-pa- 

a$-[ra]  27,21/^5    ..........  -as-ra  28,  2;    lippasra(ra) 

21,  68;  nap-sur-su  u,  2. 

passuru  "dish,  vessel":  is»pa$$itru  40,  8;  61,  10. 

'K/D  pagasu  "to  rub,  to  anoint":  tapasa$(A$)  u,  35-,  puSuS  12, 
102;  51,  13;  pa-sa-su  58,  8. 

napgastu  "ointment;  vessel  for  ointment":  nap-sal-tuni 
12,  76;  wtnapSaStu  12,  8,  15,  116. 

itu    "to    open":    I  i    pi-tu-ii    60,  6;   //'-///-  .....    6,  98; 
pitii-u  12,  29;  —  II  i   hi-pat-li  6,  107. 


sirgarru]  VOCABULARY  169 


SI 

"mighty":  fi-i-nt  6,  20;  11,46;  si-ru  12,  19  A;  siru 
12,  19;  22,  36,  38;  60,  7;  sir-turn  9,  28;  j/r-#  i,  50;  4, 
43;  6,  85;  7,  23;  9,  10 ;  19,  31;  33,  36;  53,23;  $i-rat  60, 
1 1 ;  s.iratipl  60,  14. 

"field":  siru  8,  27;  49,  32. 

$abatu  "to  grasp,  to  seize";  abbuttu  sabatu  "to  inter- 
cede for":   I  i   ta-sab-bat  2,  21; -bat  12, 

43;  a$-bat  4,29;  6,73;  7,  n;  37,9;  51,6;  sabat-ma 
(ideogr.  DIB)  12,  16;  sab-ti-ma  i,  42;  33,  24;  sa-bi-ta 

9,  36;    sa-bi-ta-at  6,  90;   7,  28;  9,  36  A;    -at 

9,  45;  sab-ta-ku-ma   18,  9;  -  -  II  i  ii-sab-bit  13,  22. 
subatu  "garment":  subata-ka  (ideogr.  TUG)  51,  6. 
§ibittu  "imprisonment":  si-bit-ti-ka  10,  29. 

Uto  be  small":  af-sa-ftar  (az-za-mur ?)  2,  3. 
sifcru  "small":  $i-bi-ri-ya  n,  36. 

taslitu,    ti$l!tu  "prayer":    tas-li-ti  11,27;   J4i  3'»  2Ii^3; 
27,  19  D]    33.  4;    50,  21 ;    toW*V  2,  33;    9,  39;  59,  5;    ta- 

sil-ti  i,  18; -li-ti  49,  8;  tislitu  (ideogr.  A.RA.ZU) 

36,  9- 

Hi   "to  cover  over,  to  darken":  mu-$al-lil  21,  78. 

sillu  "shadow,  protection":  sil-lu  6,  120;  $il-li-ka  13, 10. 
sululu  "shadow,  protection":  su-lul  9,  6,  33;  22,  4;  zu- 
lul  9,  6  .Z?;  su-lul-ka  22,  58;  su-lul-ki  6,  92;  7,  30. 

salmu  "darkness":  ilu$almu  21,  13;  22,  49. 

salmu    "dark";    salmat    kakkadi   "the  black-headed 

(race),  mankind":  sal-mat  i,  4;  27,  9. 

salmu  "image":  salman*l-u-a  12,  54. 
H  i   k'to  think,  to  devise,  to  plan":    u-s.a-am-ma-ru  8,  18; 

9,  12;  54,  7. 
sirgarru  a  stone:  "*"«SlR.GAR.RA-£/'  8,  25. 


170  VOCABULARY  [KA 


KA  a  measure:  22,  31;  62,  25. 

katu  "hand":  ka-a-ti  35,  14;  ka-ti  61,  13;  £#//  12,  79;  13, 
14;  ^  2,  21 ;  g,  36  y2;  12,  16;  SlJ  (£tf/^  i,  28,  52;  2,  g, 
42;  3,  9;  4,  8,  23;  5,  10;  6,  17,  35,  70,  95,  131;  7,  8,  33; 
8,20,21;  9,27;  10,6,26;  11,41;  12,95;  13,12;  14, 
n;  15,  17;  16,  10;  17,  5;  18,  18;  19,  33;  20,  7;  21,  24, 
72,  75,  91  ;  22,  12,  30,  68;  23,  6;  24,  4;  25,  5;  26,  3;  27, 
25;  28,  5;  29,  2;  30,  19;  31,  7;  32,  2;  33,  38;  34,  5;  36, 
6,8;  37,6;  38,3;  39,4;  4°,  2;  42,24;  43,8;  44,2; 
45,  4;  46,  9;  47,  6,  9;  48,  16;  49,  20;  50,  28;  51,  9;  kat- 
su  12,  43:  ka-tuk-ka  2,  18;  3,  15;  27,  10;  kat-ta-ka  21, 
59;  kati-ya  4,  35;  12,48,88;  14,5;  50,21;  katadu  9, 
36;  12,  -jgC;  katadu-$u  12,46;  kali*1  11,26;  kattdu-ya 
12,  88  C 

"to  speak,  to  command":  I  i  a-kab-bu-u  8,  i5b!s;  9,  2Obis; 
tak-bu-u  45,  3;  likbi  19,  29;  lik-bi  12,  93;  lu-uk-bi  27, 
24;  lik-bi-ka  15,16;  16,9;  lik-bu-u  1,50;  2,40;  9,15; 
22,16;  33,35;  &'-#  5,  5;  9,21,22;  12,80;  19,22,28; 

21,  66;    kibi  12,  104;  kibi-ma  12,  99  ;  61,  4;  ki-bi-i  2,  5; 
4,  49;  8,  3;  9,  46;  ki-bi-ma  8,  14;  ka-bu-u  27,  14;  ka-bu-u 

n,  3;    kA-bu-u  27, 14  A',   kA-bu- 27,  \A,B\  ka-bat 

n,  14;  ki-bi-ka-ma  19,  13;  ka-ba-a  9,  19;  13,  8;  22,  65; 
ka-ba-ai  2,  32;  4,  27;   12,  59;  27,  19;  —  I  2  ik-ta-ba-an- 

ni-ma  1 1,  25 ;  tak-ta-bu-u  12,115; -«  12, 1 1 5  ^f. 

kibitu  "word,  command":  ki-bit  i,  43;   12,  62,  87,  114; 

22,  10,  66;  33,  25;  35,  15;  53,  27;   ki-bit-su   19,  8;  60,  7 ; 
ki-bit-sa  4,  26;   ki-bi-sa  33,  10;   ki-bi-ti-ka  9,  10;  53,  23; 
ki-bit-ka  6.  21 ;  19,  31 ;  50,  9;  60,  10,  1 1 ;  kibit-ka  9,  10^; 

50,9^4,26;    54,5;    ki-bit-ti- 7,  44;    ki-bi-ti-ki  4, 

435  6,85;  7,23;  ki-bil-ki  1,50;  8,2;  33,36;  ki-bit-su-un 
33i  !?!  ki-bit- [ku-nu]  7,  56. 

I  2  "to  oppose";  Part,  "warrior":  muk-tab-lu  21,42;  muk- 
tab-luni  46,  20. 

kablu  "battle;  middle,  waist":  ka-bal  12,  23;  ka-bal-su 
2,  14;  3,  12;  kabli-Su  53,  17. 


Jcitrudu]  VOCABULARY  171 

"Dp   kabru  "grave":  kab-ri  30,  n. 

kadadu  "to  bow  down";  II  2  "to  make  bow  down,  to 
bend":  uk-ta-ad-di-da-an-ni  n,  6;  nk-ta-ad-di-da-ni 
n,  6  A. 


p  kakkadu  "head":  kakkadu  (ideogr.  SAG.DU)  1,4;  27, 
9;  kakkad  (ideogr.  SAG)  12,  96;  kakkad-su  (ideogr. 
SAG.DU)  12,  121  ;  kakkadu-ki  (ideogr.  SAG)  8,  8. 

lp  ku  "barley  (?)":  ki-i  12,  30. 
1      ku  "cord":  ?  ki-i  22,  49;  62,  n. 
ktilu  "voice":  ku-la  12,  36. 

"to  bestow":  ku-Si-ma  39,  14;  ka-i-$u  22,5;  ]?a-i-$at  4,2$; 
7,  37;  [ka?]-i-sat  9,  39. 

Hi   "to  take,  to  seize":  ?  mu-kil-lu  7,40. 

killatu  "sin,  disgrace":  kil-la-tu  12,  78;  kil-lal  12,  78  C\ 
fcil-la-ti  5,7;  27,  2\D\  50,  18;  kil-la-ti-ma  2,39;  kit-  la- 
a-ti  9,  54. 

kimu    "grain":    ^ZA;«M  22,32;    26,7;    £/;«/  22,  31;  33,  40. 
kanu  "reed":  ?  ka-an-ni-ka  18,  10. 
^      kisru  "might,  strength":  /&/-«>  12,  83. 

"to  approach":  Ii   i-k&r-ri-ba  21,22;  i^-ru-bu-ni  7,57;  — 
II  i  ii-kar-ri-bu-u-ni  12,  77  £7;  u-kar-ri-bu-ni  12,  77. 

kirbu   "midst":    &'-;7#  12,  31,  83;    21,  10,  73;  32,  7,  15; 
62,  9;  £/-  .....  39,  13. 
k&r-bu-ni-ya  19,  26. 

?  ak-ri-dak-ka  13,  27. 

"|")p  kardu,  f.  karidtu  "brave,  valiant":  kar-du  14,15;  kar- 
da  21,  46;  ka-rid-tu  4,  10,  n;  kA-rid-tu  i,  29;  ka-rid- 
tum  5,  1  1  ;  kd-rid-ti  32,  6. 

l^arradu  do.:  kar-ra-du  n,  i^4;  k&r-ra-du  11,40;  fcarradu 
n,  i,  30,  34;  46,  21. 

ku  radii  do.  :  ku-ra-du  2,  25;  5,  14;  21,  77;  ku-ra-di  x,  32. 
kitrudu  do.:  kit-ru-du  46,  16. 


172  VOCABULARY  [>urdu 

kurdu  "valour,  might":  kur-di-ka  12,  92;  21,  85;  ku- 
ru-ud-ka  5,  9. 
kakkaru  "ground":  kak-ka-ri  32,  10. 

"I 

ramanu  " self":    ra-ma-ni-sa   n,  9;    ra-ma-ni-Sd- 

ma   n,9/2;  ra-ma-ni-ya  11,24. 
ramu  "to  love,  to  pity":  i-ram-mu  9,  34;  li-ri-mnn-ni  21, 

69;  ri-man-ni-ma  21,63; -man(min?)-ni-ma  2,5; 

ri-min-ni-ma  8,  3;  ra-im  9,  4. 

rlmu  "mercy":    ri-i-mu   12,  70;    ri-i-ma  12,  61  BC',  21, 

89;  22,  64;  rimu  21,  69;  30,  14. 

rimnu,  riminu  "merciful":    ri-mi-nu-u  n,  7  A;   ri-mi- 

nu-u  n,  2,  7:    28,  7;    ri-mi-nu-ii-um  n,  2/2;    ri-mi-nu-u 

21,  61;    ri-mi-ni-ya  6,91;  7,29;    ri-mi-na-ta  12,40;  27, 

i8/2;    ri-mi-ni-ta  27,  18;    ri-mi-ni-tum  6,  71^,  77;    7,  9, 

!5;  37i  7 >  !3;  57?  25  ri-mi-ni-tum  6,  71,  77/2;  rim-ni-tum 

4,  25;  rim-ni-tum  7,  35,  59. 

naramu,    f.  naramtu  "darling":    na-ram  6,  19;  22,  5; 

27,  4;  60,  6;  na-ram-[ta?]  6,  126;  10,  23. 
ruku    "distant":    ruk-ka(?)    13,  9;    ru-ku-tu    i,  36;    33,  19; 

rukiiti^1  62,  9. 

rikutu  "distance":  rik-ku-ti  59,  20. 
risu  "head":    ri-Si-ka  49,  19;    rtSi-ya  50,  24;    ri-sa-a  5,  i; 

6,  29;  ri-sa-a-ka  2,  16;  3,  14;  21,  60. 

ri§tu    "former,    original,   preeminent":    riS-tu-u  46,  14; 

riS-ti-i  i,  42;  33,  23;  riS-ti-i  4,  48. 
^4*1  risu    I  i    "to  shout  for  joy,    to  hail";    II  i    "to  cause  to 

rejoice":    I  i   li-ri$-ka  9,  24; -ris-ka  20,  5;  li-riS- 

[ki]  8,  18;  ?  riS-Sa  12,  36;  -  -  II  i   mu-ris  9,  3;  58,  18. 

risati  pi.  "shouts  of  joy":  ri-sa-a-ti  6,  121 ;   10,  20;  17,  3. 

ri-is-ta-a  (fr.  ristu?,  cf.  supra}  i,  20. 
"to    be  great";    III  i    "to  make  great":    li-sar-bu-u  3,  7; 

-M  5,  3- 

rabu    "great":    ra-bu-u   46,6;    ra-bu-u  46,  6  A\    rabu-u 
9,  9,  21 ;    n,  7;    rabu    9,  2iZ>;    26,  9;    42,  26;    rabi-i  22, 


rusfll  VOCABULARY  173 

22;  rabi  22,  g,  22  B;  ra-ba-ta  27,  6;  ra-bit  2,  44;  9,  29; 
rabitu(tu)  ig,  24,  34;  rabitum(tnm)  n,  31,  33;  27,3;  49, 
15:  rabita(ta)  6,  68;  rabtti(ti)  13,  6;  22,  10,  66;  27,  3  D\ 
46,3,  8;  59,  n;  62,22;  rabiiti*1  i,  n,  14,  17;  2,  15;  3,6, 
13:  6,130;  7,6;  8,19,23;  9,26:  10,5;  12,25,79,88, 
114;  i9i  55  33,8;  50,5,10,29;  61,14;  62,1;  rabati*1 
33,  ii. 
rubu  "prince":  rubu  9,2;  10,3;  19,26;  22,1;  nibi 

22,  9,  22. 

rubatu  "princess":  ru-ba-tii  19,  34. 
surbu  "powerful,  mighty":  Sur-bu-u  2,  12;  48,  17;  $ur- 
bu-u   3,  10;    6,1,2,18,97;    10,7;    20,8,10;    21,34,36; 
Sur-bat  60,  9;    $ur-ba-ta-ma    18,  6;    Sur-ba-ti  4,  12;    jtor- 
bu-tu  4,  24,  47;  6,  85  D\   Sttr-bu-tum  6,  71,  77,  85,  90;  7, 

9,  23,  28;  37,  7;  Sur- 38,  5- 

narbu,  nirbu  "greatness,  might":  nir-bi  6,  16;  21,7; 
nar-bi-ka  2,41;  5,8;  6,69;  7,2;  12,93;  18,17;  2I,  23, 
71?  23,  5?  50,  27;  nir-bi-ka  27,  24;  nar-bi-ki  2,  8;  6,94; 
7,  32;  nir-bi-ki  30,  15,  17. 

rabisu  a  demon:  r«^/>«  (ideogr.  MA&KIM)  6,  124;   10,  22. 

RIG  a  plant:  ^'«RIG  19,  17. 

"to  tread,  to  advance":  I  i   ir-di  8,  5;  —  III  i   Sur-dim-ma 
^30,  14. 

rid utu  "copulation;  dominion":  ri-du-su  53,9;  riduti(ti) 

59,  6. 

II  i  "to  raise";  IV  2  do.:  at-ta-ra-[am]  61,  13. 
"to  help,  to  deliver":  I  i  ru-sa-nim-ma  53,  4. 
rubu  "enchantment,  sorcery":  ru-foi-u  33,31;  ru-fa-i  12, 

81,  106. 
rakasu  "to  bind,  to  knot":  ar-kus-ka  2,  27. 

raksu  "bound":  rak-su-uia  50,  19;  53,7. 

riksu   "band,  cord":    rik-sa  2,  27;    rik-si  33,  44;    riksu 

(ideogr.  KI^DA)   12,  99;  30,  28;  40,  14. 
"to  be  loose'';  II  i   "to  loosen":  ru-um-[mi]  2,39. 
\CT\   rimku  "libation":  rini-ki  i,  54;  61,  12. 
i"lD"l   rusu  "magic,  sorcery":  ru-[su-u]  33,  31;  r»-«'-/  12,82. 


1  74  VOCABULARY  [rapftSu 

rapasu    "to  be  broad1';    II  i    "to  broaden,    to  enlarge'1: 
ru-tip-piS  5,  4. 

rapsu  "broad,  wide-spreading,  distant":  rap-su  7,  30; 
12,  20  A\  rap-Su  6,  92;  rapa$ta(.  .  .  .  •)  i,  7;  rapasti(ti) 
62,  8;  rapaStim(tim)  60,  5;  rap-$a-a-ti  9,  6;  rapSati(ti) 
61,6;  raptati*1  10,  1  1  ;  12,39;  18,17;  21,23,90;  22,42, 
67;  30,  18. 
/"l  ra§bu  "mighty,  powerful":  ra-as-bu  60,  13. 

rasubu  do.:  ra-Sub-bu   14,  16;  21,  93;  49,  25. 
ru§ubu  do.:  ru-$u-bu(?)   i,  i. 

to  possess;  to  grant":  a-ra-Si  n,  12  A;  a-ra-a$-$i  n,  12; 
.....  -rai-Si-ma  21,  75:  «;-.&'  12,  69;  0/--.fr  12,  69  C;  15, 
4,  5;  li-ir-Su-ni  12,  6u5;  50,  25;  HrSu-ni  (ideogr.  TUK) 
12,  6  1  ;  -  -  III  i  $ur-$i  13,  28. 


sa  rel.  pron.,  "who,  which11;  sign  of  the  genitive:  sa  i, 
9,  12,  13,  16,  19,  25,  38,  39,  40,  42,  45bis,  46,  50,  51;  2,  14, 
22,  2-3,  24,  26;  3,  6,  12;  4,  17,  19,  37,  38,  39,  41,  43,  44, 
46,  48;  6,  27,  40,  44,  49,  52,  53,  54,  55,  66,  82,  83  E,  85, 
86,  88,  89bis,  113  /^bis,  1  18,  122,  129;  7,  5,  19,  20,  22,  23, 
24,  26,  27bis,  5ibis,  54,  56,  60,  61;  8,  I2bis,  I3bis,  19,  22,  23, 
26;  9,25,34^;  10,19,21,35;  n,  i,  17,  26,  28-,  36;  12, 
nbis,  i2ter,  14,  1  9y4,  20,  31,  43,  45,  56,  60,  63,  64,  66,  67, 
68,  76,  81,  85,  86,  97  D,  101,  103,  105,  116;  13,  5,  7,  n; 
17,  8;  18,  8;  19,  8,  10,  12,  31,  32;  21,  2,  5,  6,  7,  8,  52,  62, 
74;  22,12,40;  23,9;  27,  n^bis;  30,  7,  10,  i2bis,  13;  31, 
4;  33,  10,  21,  24,  28,  29,  30,  36;  35,  i;  39,  16;  40,  3,  9; 
42,  9,  12,  18;  46,  15;  48,  17;  50,  14,  16,  1  8,  19,  23;  52,  5; 
53,14,20,21,23,24,26;  55,3;  56,1,9,11;  57,3,4,6; 
58,5,6,7;  59,2,11,12,14;  60,7,13,15,19,21;  61,  5, 
16.  \tA\  62,  13,  17,  18,  19;  s&  i,  23,  47;  2,  13;  3,  n;  6, 
48;  7,  50,  52,  55,  595  9,  34;  Jo,  30,  32;  12,  12  A,  19,  21, 
97;  13,19,20;  22,50;  31,2,3;  33,8;  35,  14;  50,  13: 
53,  6;  54,  i,  2,  4;  55,  5;  56,  8;  57,  2. 

Su,  Sunu;  SaSu  ,  $as"unu  pers.  pron.,  "he,  they;  him,  them": 
Su-u  53,15;  Su-nu  12,41;  $a-a-$u  13,20;  sa-Su-nu  12,14. 


VOCABULARY  -175 

su'atu;  su,  Sunuti  dem.  pron.,  "that,  those":  $u-a-tu 
12,  8,  1 1  A;  Su-a-ti  7,  62;  57,  7;  Su'atu  (BI)  30,  28;  Siiati 
(BI)  40,  15;  $u-u  60,  2;  BI  (=Su)  60,  2;  Su-nu-ti  12,  104. 
Sut  connective  particle:  Su-ut  2,  30,  31;  62,  17*". 

SA  a  measure:  n,  43;  12,3;  21,29;  25.8;  30,22;  40,8; 
62,  26. 

si'u  I  i  "to  look,  to  look  for,  to  seek";  I  2  "to  seek, 
look  for.  concern  oneself  with";  13  do.:  Ii  ta-Si-  27. 
8;  ti-$i-  27,  8C;  i-Si-'  2,  4;  a-$i--ka  1,21;  21,  n;  iS-i- 
ka  6,  28;  a-Si-'-ki  4,  29;  &-*-&'  6,  73;  7,  1 1 ;  37,  9;  - 

I  2   &-//-'-£  8,  10;    ?  ^j-//-/  (?  /;/«  //-/- >  6,  9;   iS-ti-- 

sii-ma  53,16;    is-ti--u-ka  27,16;    [i$-ti]- -i-ka  27,  i6Z>; 

lu-u$-ti-*-ma    n,  13;    -i(?)-ma    u,  13/^5  - 

I  3  iS-ti-ni-    6,  48. 

satu  "moment,  time":  j^/  i,  26;  22,  63. 

tasiltu  "decision(?)":  ta-Si-la-a-ti  2,  16;  3,  14. 

§iru    "flesh":    ^/V«    6,  no;    ^z>?  8,  16;    siri*l-ya  1.45;    33, 

29;  Sirifl-ya  53,  1 1 ;  siri^-Su-nu  18,  7  ^4. 
Strtu  "iniquity":    ^//--//  i,  26;    &r-ti  2,  38;   n,  19;   &r-tim 

2,  38  Z>^. 

saru  "wind,  breeze":  saru-ka  18,  15. 
"to  flee,  to  escape":  i- Si-it  n,  10. 
"to  be  satisfied":  lu-uS-bi  g,  23;  22,  23. 
Sabasu    "to    be    angry":    Sab-su    4,  37,  45;    6,87;    7,25; 

iab-sa  21,  87;  $ab-su-ma  6,  82,  88;  7,  19,  26. 
*ab-su  12,  55. 
SUB.SUB:  §UB.§UB^;  30,  24;  40,  12;  62,  29. 

ta-Sa-bit(?)  26,  5. 

§agganakku    a    governor    or  high  official:    Sagganakku 

19,  14. 
sigaru  "bolt":  iwsigaru  53,  22. 

21,43. 
a  tree:  *V«§ID   12,  5;  30,  25. 

"mountain":  $a-du-u  9,  32;  ^^«-«  33,  7?  ^-^-*  I2> 
28;  jfarf«V  21,  81;  32,  9;  Sadani*l(ni)  59,  3. 
sadabu  "to  move  along,  to  advance":  i$-di-bu  8,  5. 


176  VOCABULARY 

sidu  "guardian  deity11:  il*sidu  (AN.ALAD)  8,12;  12,110; 
13,  21 ;  22,  19;  50,  24;  ilusidu  (AN.DAN)  6,  32;  19,  29; 

22,  8,  64. 

sumu  "garlic":  Sumu  33,  45. 

sipu  "foot":    Sipu(f)- 4,3;    Sipadu  17,6;  Stpid"-ya 

12,  55;  22,  60. 
'   Sataru  "to  write,  to  inscribe11:  ta-Sa-far  6, 1 10;  $u-tur  27,  7. 

sTu  "corn,  grain":  Si- am   12,  4,  30. 

Sibu  "old  man1':  Si-bi  n,  6;  Si-bi-im   u,  6  A. 

I  i   i-$ib-Su  53,  18. 
'  Samu    "to    settle,    to    establish":     Ii    ta-Sim-ma    62,   5; 

-Sim-mi  21,  83;   Si-im  6,  113;  19,  21;    Si-i-mi  10, 

16; —  II  i   mu-Sim  6,  19;   19,  9;  58,  i. 
simtu    "destiny":    Sim-ti  6,  113;    10,  16;   19,21;    Si-mat 
6,  112;   10,  15;  22,3;  si-mat-ka  15,13;  Si-ma-a-ti  19,34; 
Sim&ti*1  6,  112  F;    15,  11;    19,  6,  9;    21,  60;    58,  i;  62,  2. 
Ptasimtu:  ta-Sim-ti  41,  3. 

sakaku:  tasakakt(ak)  ideogr.  UD.DU  12,  13. 
"  mastakal  a  plant:  **m ma$takal  n,  44;  12,  9. 

Sakanu  "to  set,  to  place,  to  establish;  to  lie,  to  be 
placed'1:  Ii  iSakna(na)  i,  12,  39;  4,  17,  39;  6,  84  £, 
113^";  7,  20,  60;  19,  10;  27,  ii  A;  50,  14;  53,  24;  54,  2; 
55,  3;  56,  9?  57»  4;  58,  6;  59,  12;  60,  19;  61,  16;  ta-Sa- 
kan  22,  49;  ta-sak-kan  6,  108;  taSakan(an)  2,  10;  8,  20; 
n,42,43,45;  12,3,4,7,11,14,15,102,116;  13,14;  H, 
12;  15,24;  18,19^;  21,29;  30,22,26;  32,3;  40,8; 
51,  u,  15;  62,  26,  27,  28;  ta$akan-ma  22,  34;  [ta-sa?]- 
ka-ni  33,  16;  li-sak-na  12,  70;  liS-ku-nu-ni  12,  61  B;  su- 
kun  22,60;  Su-kun-ma  19,  24;  Suk-na  6,  116;  10,  18;  12, 
iio^";  21,68;  22,65;  Sukun(un)  1,22;  Sukna(na)  12, 

no;    .y#£- 8,  7 ;    Sa-ki-nu  62,  10;   sakin(in)  i,  n; 

^^- 22,47;  Saknu(nu)  12,  67,  116;  Sa-ki-na-at  33, 

2;  sA-ki-in  1,3;  Sa-kin  21,38;  Sa-kin  20,12;  46,17; 
sak-na-At  11,28;  Sak-na-ta  42,8;  -  II  i  tu-Sak-na  i, 
o6;  33,  19;  -  III  i  $u-u$-kin  22,  14;  $Ji~nS-kin  9,  13; 
mu-$a-a$-ki-nu  46,  17;  -  IV  i  i$-$ak-na  13,  18;  is-sak- 
iiam-[ma]  13,  19;  is-sak-nu-nim-ma  27,  12;  lis-Sa-kin  i, 


Simfl]  VOCABULARY  177 

49;  4.5?  33i  34;  -  IV  3  it-ta-na-a$-ka-nam-ma  6, 
83/?£-;  7,  19. 

siknu  "creature":  Si-kin  33,8;  37,5;  Sik-nat  10,  13; 
61,  3- 

sikaru  "drink":  si-kar  i,  20;  2,  29. 

Salbabu  "mighty,  courageous(P)"  fr.  V^^)?:  Sal-ba-bu 
9i  3,  3i;  12,  17;  46,  20;  53,  3. 

suluhfcu:  $u-liil}-1j.i  58,  15;  su-lufy-fyu-su  48,  18. 

Sallatu:  ? Sal-la-tu  12.119. 

Salamu  I  i  "to  be  intact,  perfect,  complete,  to  be  pros- 
perous"; II  i  "to  preserve  intact,  to  cause  to  prosper": 
I  i  lu'US-lim-ma  8,  17;  9,  10;  12,  66,  90;  22,  13;  30,  15; 

54,  6;  hi- 45,  2; -iiS-lim 

1 2,  66  £7; —  Hi   sul-li-ma-am-ma  12,112;  mu-Sal-lim  9, 
5;  sul-hi-mu  4,  32;  6,  75;  7,  13;  37,  n. 
salmu  "intact,  safe  and  sound":    Sal-mu  6,  10;   n,  26. 
sulmu  "peace,  prosperity":    $u-ul-ma  58,4;   Sul-mu  4, 

26;    6,  124;  8,  ii ; -ma    45,  7;   Sul-mi  12,  113; 

Sulinu(mu)  10,  22;  12,  71 ;  Sultna(ina)  21,  67,  68;  Sulmi(miJ 
12,  105. 

salummatu  "light":  Sa-lurn-ma-ta  21,58;  Sa-lum-ma-ti 
46,  15- 

si  Ian  "setting";  a  point  in  heaven:  $i-la~an  9,  41. 

(tobt7'?)  n  !   mu-Sal-li-tu  62,  n. 

sumu  "name":  $u-mu  11,32;  $u-ina  11,8;  ^//ww  12,  75^; 
30,  14;  j//;;«  40,  15;  Siim-Sn  12,  120;  Sumu-ka  9,  8: 
Sumi-ka  8,  i ;  Sumii-ki  4,  33;  Su-wi-ya  19,  22;  Su-ml(pi?)-i 
1,32;  5.  14;  ^w-wz  5,  3:  12,75;  13,26;  Su-wi-S&-nu  19, 14- 
"to  hear":  Ii  //j-/«/  i,  43;  33,25;  lu-u$-mi(?)  i, 
26;  ^'-;«z  2,  32;  12,  59  />;  50,  21;  jf/-///«  12,  59;  13,  27; 
21,  63;  27,  19;  si-ma-a  2,  32  £":  Si-ini-i  i,  41;  6,  72  Zf; 
7,  10;  33,  22;  37,  8;  Si-mi-i  4,  27;  Si-mi-i  6,  72;  Si-mn-u 

7,  45;  Si-mn-2i(?)   10,  27;  5i-mu-u  21,  82; -/i 

59,  5?  Si-mat  7,  36;  21,  12;  33,  4;  $i-ma-a-at  21,  75;  .?/- 
Mrt/  19,  28;  Si-ma-a  9,  19;  22,  65;  -  III  i  tu-$a-a$-mi-t 
33,17;  -  IV  i  lt$-$i-mi  8,  14;  -  III  2  [mi4S]-ti(?J~iS- 
ma-at  33,  2. 


178  VOCABULARY  [simfl 


"obedient,  friendly":  Si-mu-u  u,  3;  27,  14. 
taSmu    "prosperity,    success":    taS-mu-u  4,  26;    8,  2,  9; 
taS-ma-a  33,  15,  16;  61,  19;  taS-mi-i  4,  6. 

sumilu  "left":    su-mi-lu-uk-ki  8,  13;   Su-mi-li-ya  9,  17  #; 
Sumili-ya  9,  17;  22,  18. 

Samu  "heaven":  Samii-u  3,5;  6,  128;  8,  18;  10,4,  24;  12, 
H9(?);  61,  8;  Saint  4,  15;  16,  12;  jte;;«-/  i,  5,  9,  30,  33; 
3,8;  4,24;  5,  12,  15;  6,  3,  4,21,71,  100,  107;  7,5,95  IO, 
9;  12,  64,  81,  83;  13,  20;  19,  7;  21,  6,  10,  15,  73,  81;  22, 
39;  27,5,8;  31,7;  32,7,15;  37,7;  39,  8;  46,  n;  48, 
17?  49,29;  5°,  3,8;  60,  5;  61,5;  62,  3,9;  .taww^  (ideogr. 
IDIN,  cf.  21,  81)  12,  28;  32,  9;  Sa-ma-mi  6,  78  DE\  7, 
16;  18,  4;  19,  18;  Sa-ma-ini  8,  24;  sA-ma-mi  6,  78. 

I  *  i-sam-ma-mu  53,  n. 

sammu  "plant":    Sammu  12,67,101,104,115;    Sammu-ka 

12,  97;  Sammi*1  12,  76. 
"  §amnu  "oil":  Samnu  (ideogr.  NI)  30,  28;  Samnu  (ideogr. 
NI.IS)    11,45;    12,  8bis,  n;    samni   (ideogr.  NI)    11,43; 
12,3,15,102,116;   21,29;   25,8;   30,22;  62,26;    samni 
(ideogr.  NI.I$)  n,  44;  30,  26;  51,  13. 

Sl.MAN  a  plant:  ^Sl.MAN  12,  10. 

Samaru  II  2  "to  revere,  to  worship":  I  2    ?  sit-mu-ru  60, 

15;  —    II  2    lu-u$-tam-mar  8,  17;    9,11;    12,91,92;  54, 

6;  lul-tam-ma-ra  21,  90. 
samru  "violent":  Sam-ru  21,  40,  41. 
&A.NA  "vessel  for  incense;  censer":    2,  9;  8,  20:   n,  42; 

12,  4,  86,  118;   13,  14;   16,  n;   18,  19;    21,  74,  92;  22,  69; 

28,  6;    32,  3;    33,  39;    34,  6;    38,  4;    39,  5;  41,  2;  46,  10; 

47,  75  5i,  n;  52,  45  62,  27. 
Sanitu    "  .....  times":    Sanitu   6,  96;    8,  21;    12,  16,  99, 

103,  117;   15,  23;   18,  igA;    25,  7;    30,  27;  32,  4;  40,  13; 

52,  45  61,  4;  62,  30. 
sananu  "to  oppose,  to  rival":  I  i  Sa-na-an  i,  19;  —  IV  i 

ii-ia-na-an  60,  10. 

1    §asu  "to  speak,  to  call,  to  invoke,  to  command":  I  i   ta- 
Sa-as-si  6,  109;  al-si-ka  6,  61;  al-  ..........  6,34; 

al-si-ki  4,  27;  6,  72;  7,  10,  62;  37,  8;  57,  7;  Si-si-ma  50, 


VOCABULARY  -179 

10 ;  sA-su-u  11,4;  —  II  i  u-Si-is-sa  13,  21;  mu-Sa-as- 

21,  3- 
i  Saptu  "lip":  Sap-ti-ya  13,  22. 

£££?'   sapaku  "to  pour  out":  taSapak(ak)  12,3;   15,20;  21,29; 

30,  21 ;  33,  40;  62,  26;  taSapak  12,  4;  Sa-pi-kat  g,  37. 
££?'  saplu  "that  which  is  beneath;  beneath,  under":  Sa-ap-la 

6,  46;  Sap- 57,  13,  14;  Saplu  21,  55;  Sapli-ka 

i,  15;  Saplati*1  59,  4. 

I1'  Saparu  "to  send":  iS-pur-an-ni  12,98;  lu-uS-pur-ki  4,36; 

6,  81;  7,  '8. 

Sipru  "letter,  message":  Si-pir- 16,  3. 

>'  §aku   "to   be  high":    *'/ (glossed  iS)-k:i-u  12,  54;    Sa-kA-ta 

18,  4;   --  III  i   tu-Sa-aS-fca  2,  21. 

Saku  "high,  exalted":    [$A]-ku-u  27,  5  CD;  sA-fcu  27,  5; 

Sa-ka-a  2,  16;  3,  14;  21,  60;  Sa-kA-a  13,3;  Sa-ku-tum  6, 

T7  D  f?'     1      1C*     OT      T2 

yyz^^i,    /,  i^),    j/,  i,). 

>'  misru  "property,  wealth":  miS-ra-a  8,  13. 

'   mi§ritu:  mis-ri-tu-u-a  10,  4. 

>'  Sarbu  "powerful":  Sar-fyu  12,  18. 

Sitrabu  do.:  Si-tar-fyu   n,  46. 
>'    §arabu   Ii    "to   be  bright(?)":    j^-^rt/  i,  6;  -      II  i    "to 

make  bright(?)":  Sur-ru-fyat  6,  22. 

sarbu  "bright(?)":  Sar-fa  i,  18;  Sar-bu-tum  8,  22. 
>'?  $ar(?)-ta-a-ki  8,  6. 

§urmtnu     "cypress":     w«  Surminu     12,   15,   102;     51,  13? 

iwSurmini  30,  26. 
>'  Saraku  "to  offer,  to  present":    ta-sAr-rak  21,  74;  31*  IO? 

AS-ruk-ka  2,  27,  28;  Sur-ka  19,  23;  Sur-kant-ma  9,  19-^? 

Sur-kAm-ma  9,  19;  $ur-ki  8,  17. 
>'  saruru  "splendour":    Sa-ru-ru  i,  30;    Sa-ru-ur  5,  12;    ta- 

ru-ra-ki  8,  9. 

Sarru    "king":    Sar-[ru?]   60,2;    tarn/    1,5°^?    12,20; 

iQ,  H,  15,  25;  33,  35;  4i,3;  46,i8;  52,  5;  terrw  (ideogr. 

MAN)  i,  50;    tarn  61,  13;   tar  6,  38,  91;  7,  29?  22^  4»; 

62,  31;    tar    (ideogr.    MAN)    12,  87;    LUGAL    60,  2; 

sarrani  62,  31. 


l8o  VOCABULARY  [Sarratu 

Sarratu  "queen":  sar-ra-tum  12,89;  27i3;  49>  !55  $ar~ 
ra-ti  24,  3;  27,  3  C\  $ar-rat  4,  9,  1 1 ;  9,  31,  32;   12,  89  C\ 

33,  9.  47- 
Sl.Sl  a  plant:  *«»»§L§I    12,  10. 

nnttf   satu  "to  drink":  jte//-jte  (ideogr.  NAK)  53,  17. 

Sittu  "misery":    si-it-ti  6,8;    .?zV-/z/:  12,78;   sit-ta  12,  78  C. 
sittutu(P):  sit-tu-tu  u,  16;  Sit-tu-tii-um   u,i6£T. 

n 

TU  a  plant:  *«?«TU  19,  17. 

tamtu  "ocean":   &m/z  61,  6;  ta-ma-a-ti  18,  3;  21,  81;  ta- 
ma-ti  61,  6;  tamati*1  12,  28;  22,  42;  32,  9. 

tirtu    "soul,    spirit":    ^rutirtu-u-a    (SlR.UR.US)    12,  58; 
sirutirtitl-$u-nu  (SlR.UR)  18,  7. 

tibu  "to  come":  III  i  u-Sat-bi  13,  26. 

"to  carry  off,  to  take  away":  lit-ba-lu  59,  10. 

taru  I  i   "to  turn,    to  return";    II  i   "to  bring  back,    to 
restore":    Ii    7/^59,21;    li-tu-ra  6,87;    7,25;    u,  39; 
litura(ra)   4,  45;  -       II  i    ti-i-ru-u    9,15;    22,16;    ti-i-ru 
22,  1 6  B;  ti-ru-u  9,  15^;  tutira(ra)  2,  22. 
tairu    "pitiful,    compassionate11:    ta-ai-ra-ta  6,63;    27, 
16;  ta-ai-rat  27,  16  A. 
tairatu    "compassion'1:    ta  -  ai-  ra  -tu-ka    46,   6;    ta- 

ai- 22,  58;  ta-ai-ra-tu-ki  6,  92;  7,  30. 

?  ti-i-ri  1 8,  9. 

tahazu  "battle": -fya-zi  2,  49. 

tukultu  ''help,  aid":  tukulti(ti)  2,  46;  9,  4. 

II  i   ?  mu-t&l-lum  58,  1 6. 

III  i   "to  entrust,  to  bestow":    li-Sa-at-li-ma   12,  85  C\    li- 
$at-lim-ma  12,85;  Su-ut-li-ma-am-ma  6,119;   10,19;  22, 
20;  60,  22; -ma-am-ma  6,  68. 

HDD   tamu  "to  speak,  to  declare1':    I  i    li-ta-mi-ka  6,  125;   10, 
22;    lu-ta-mi  53,  29bis,  30;   lu-ta- i,  26;  la-ta-am 


TI.SAR]  VOCABULARY  .  181 

18,  17;    li-ta-mu-u    12,  112;    li-tam-mu-u    12,  112  E\  - 

IV  2  ?  a-ta-ta-ma  (==  *attatwu?}  21,  ig,  20. 

tamitu  "word,  oracle":  ta-mit  i,  16;  ta-mit-ti-ka  i,  17. 
HOD   tamabu  uto  hold,  to  grasp":  tarn-bat  2,  18;  3,  15. 
tappu  "helper":  tap-pi-i  6,  117;   10,  18. 

tapputu  uhelp":  tap-pu-ti  13,  4. 
tarrinnu    a    sacrificial  feast:    tar-rin-nu  2,  28;    tar-rin-na 

2,  28  £7?. 
TI.§AR  ideogr.  12,  102;  30,  26. 


APPENDIXES. 


I.—  LIST  OF  PROPER  NAMES. 

Ai  (ilu):  HP  Tf   N  6,  126;   10,  23. 

AZAG  (ilu):  HP  4$  12,  86. 

AZAG.IZU  (ilu):  H"  ^H  ^MPPF  ",  86  C 

Anu  #/«;:  HP  ^  ^^J  i,  9;  6,  2,  4,  6,  24;  7,  7;  8,  24;  10,  25; 
",  35;  43,  6;  46,  14;  50,  6;  60,  n;  61,  5,  7;  62,  17. 

AN.HUL.[(LA.)MI$]:  HP  I^IT  ",  67,105;  H~  I^TT  }"** 

12,  II,  13,   14,  101,  104,  115;    >^Hf~  I*^!T  ^1  T*^*^-    12,  103. 

Anunnaki  (ilu):  ^  T^fflf  *~^T  ^M  I2»  32;  27,  2;   ^  f< 

4,  13- 
ASSur:  ^^  2,  26Z?;  50,  13;  56,  8. 

AsSur  («/«;:  *£]]  &  9,  i. 

A§§urttu  ^/«;:  ^   ^  *@T  ^ITI  ^  ^T  SO,  13;  5^,  8;    HP 


Assur-ban-apli  ^:      -^-         S1        2,  26  £>; 

50,  12;  55,  2;  56,  7;  y  ^^  ^:  c^  £^T  27,  n^f. 

ia  ^7«;:  H~  ^ITTT  Tl  3,  7?  4,  7i  I0^  "i  !5;  5,  18;  9,  24;  10,  25; 
12,  85^,  87,  89,  99,  105;    27,  7;  53,  4,  29;  61,  20;   62,  17,  21; 

2,  33;  ^Hh  ^  <H7  ^TI^  9,  2;  22  5; 


PROPER  NAMES.  .  183 

»,  87;  ^!H  tW  ££  SIT  4,  *-, 

-Hf-    »~<    12,  87^,89  £\ 

I-A  .....  :  £yTyy  T?  H  4,  14- 

igigi  (iiu):  HF-  EE  W!A  WTA  2,  44;  31,  1  1  (?);  HF-  V?  TT 

4,13;    6,  ii  i;    10,15;    12,88;    18,  20;   30,  30;  36,  10;  39,  9; 

49,  51  HP  HPPF   ^   T1"^  ",  32. 


2,  45  7,  4;  9,  4;  22,  4;  33,  s. 
^yy  4,  i4;  9,  3;  53,  3;  5s,  is. 

tkur:  ^yy  V  i,  16;  2,  16,  31;  3,  14;  4,  43;  6,85;  7,  23;  21,60. 
I.MAH.TIL.LA:  ^M  ^11  ^<  ^T  9,  5- 
IMINA.BI  ^7«;:  HP  ^  JlJ  52,  5. 

Isagila:    t]]]]  ^]]^  t]]]^^  1,42;    7,3;    9,4,32;    14,8; 
16,  8;  22,  3,  4o;  33,  24. 

Irua  ^7«;:  ?^Hf-  T|  S^^  ]gf/  11,31. 
1R.NI.NA  ^7«;:  ->f-  Sff  S?=  ^^y  4,  ii. 
ISbara  ^7«,  kakkabu)'.  ^Hf"  ^TT  W<  ^TT  7,595  57,  2,  13; 

^Hf-  -MIT  *=  7,  34- 
I§um  (ilu)\  ^^~  ^  ^S^  7,  39. 
tSara:  t-]]]]   &  ^]]  2,  12;  3,  10;  6,  22. 

IStar  («7«;:  ^  ^TT  «^r  i,  29,  33;    5,  ",  IS?    *,  3J    ^   <W 
8,  20;    -HP   <^Ay    30,  19.  20;    31,  8;    32,  6,  I4;    3Q,  3; 

»^TVT  8>  20;  32,  2,  3. 

UD.DA.GAN  (ilu?):  ^  ^  £±JT  t$E  12,  36. 

utgaiiu  ftiu)'.  +JT  ^y  -^yrry  JEff  2,  i4;  3,  12. 

Ba'u  (ilu):  >-^~  ^  ^  4,  24,  47;  6,  71,  77,  85,  90,  95;  61,  21. 
BU  .....  (ilu):  ^f   ^  jgl  fe  r.  ^  V-  ^?)    6,  125; 

JO,   22. 

Babilu:  ^S=|  -4-  ^y  <Ef  9,  4,  33;   ^T  ^   ^T  ",  6. 


1 84  APPENDIX. 

Bil  (ilu):  >^TII  ^TIT  J,  34;  2,  ii,  17,  30;  3,  10,  15;  5,  16;  6,  19, 
25,30;  7,75  9,24;  10,  25;  27,  g#;  43,6;  60,6;  ^TII -TTT  T 

19, 33;  *-*{-  t?  27,  9;  ^^P  *~<  9,  41;  5°,  7;  62, 17. 

Bint  (iiu):  -HP  ^1  ^TT!  35,14;  ^HP  £^T  *£ElI  21,58. 

Bilit-ili  (ilu):  HP  *~<  C^  Efr  Sh  6,  ~i\E;  7,  9,  15,  23,  28;  9,34. 
Borsippa:  E&  *HBJ  <I@T  33,  9',  fcgSl  ^H  ^-T  «^T  <£I 

22,  4. 

Gibil  ^7«;:  -HP  ^k^T  ^ITA  ^  6- 

GlS.BAR  ^/«;:  >-HF~  ^|  HP  12,  86. 

Dagan  (iV«;:  >^HP   ST!  -^  2,  44;  5,  g(?). 

DU.DUL.KU  (ilu)-.  -HP   ^  <Jgf  <W  9,  3i. 

DI.KUD  <?/«;:  -HP  ^T^f1  ^^  5,  10 

DU.KIRRUD.KU  (ilu):  -HP  -£  KfE!  ^T  12,  24. 

Damkina  ^/»;:  -HP   £~£ET  ^ISf  *^"T  3,  8,  9;  4,  g;   12,  89. 

Dur-ilu:  *4^J?=  -^   ^I^f  6,  18. 

ZA.GAR  (ilu):  -^   R  ^^  i,  25. 

Zarpanitu  (ilu):  -HP   AT  ^ffl  »~^T  *"HP  ^I@[  22,  2. 

KAK.SI.DI  (kakkabu):  ^y-HP   ^    ^1!   ^f=  49,  20;  50,  29. 

KIRRUD.AZAG.GA:  <ygf   <}^  ^Jiy^  46,13. 

KU.TU.SAR  (u,,)-.  -4-  Jgf  -^T  ^H  2i,59;  4e,  12;  -4- 
I@f  ^T  A  27, 3. 

LUGAL.KIRRUD  (ilu):  -HP  t^g  <jgf  12,  25. 
MUL.MUL:  ^-Hp  ^f-^  47,  6;  48,  16. 
MI.MI  (ilu):  -HP  !-  ]^  34,  5- 

Marduk  (ilu):  -^  4$^]  4,  46,  48;  6,  gi,  g;,  102;  7,  29;  9,  3, 
g,  21,27;  10,3,6,7,10;  11,1,7,30,40,41,42;  12,2,16,17, 
21,26,27,95,98,114;  13,12,13,31;  14,11,12;  15,17;  16, 
10;  17,5;  18,19^;  22,9,41;  42,26;  53,3,4,2/;  59,  18; 


PROPER  NAMES.  ,g- 

f    ^y    2,  47;     13,  15;     22,  24|  36?  38;    43     2.     ^ 

^T<M  ££?5  A  12,  85,  88,  io5,  n4;  62,  25;  -*f-  ^y 

^£l!   18,  ii,  18;  22,  i,  70;  33,6. 

Mustabarru-matanu  (kakkabu):  ££f-*f-  ^  »~<  J{  >/-  46,  9. 
Nabu  W:  -HP-    ~TT    K    <TTT  ",  70;  ^MSf  ",  3^;  22, 

3,  30,  37,  62,68;  33,23;  ^y£3  1,42;  ?^ityg  22,28. 

NA.GAL.A  ^:  ^  ^  ^  y^  XIi  36< 
XI.DU.[NI?j  rW:  -4-   E^£T  ^   [^1]  53,  2O,  2,. 
Namra§it  ^7«;:  >-^f-  *—  +^^E\  ^  z<  ,9< 
Nam  tar  (ilu):  >-*^-   ^l^  «^-  i,  49. 


-  -HF-  44,  i. 

(ilu)  :  -4-   t^ET   Tf  |6i,2i. 
NIN.A.KU.KUD.DU  (////):  ^   £>ET  Tf  R<  -^  P  42,  23. 
Xinib  (,'/«):  -Hf-^-ETfcH  2,25,42;  -4-  HP  50,29;  55,  *(?). 
NIN.GAL  (//„):  -Hf-   ^ET  EF  i,  3M  5,  U- 
NIN.MIN.NA  (,/„):  ^  ^ET  ^^^1  ^!  20,6;  27,4. 
XU(N).NAM.NIR  (//,/):  ^  ^  ^TI^  ^RR  27,  i  ;  ^f-  -fflff 

-TI^  ^Rff  27,  i  A 
Nannaru  (////),  cf.  Sin. 

Nusku  (//*):  ^   t^Igf  6,  18. 

Nirgal  (,/«):  ^  <^y  X1|3^.  27,4,15^,25;  28,5;  46,11; 
**T~  ^^  27,  10. 

SIB.ZI.AN.NA  (kakkabu):  tt^^~  ^IgJ  ^TI^  ^  ^ 
50,  i,  28;  51,  9,  10;  52,  3. 

Sin  (ilu):  ^  <^<  j,  ,,  2,  I2,  l6i  3I,  3g;  4>  I?,  39;  5,  ,3;  5,36, 
63.  64,  65,  66,  113  F;  7,20,60;  ig,  10;  27,11^;  23,8;  24. 
5.  6;  27,  8;  31,  i  i  ;  50,  14;  53,24;  54,2;  55,3;  56,9;  57,4; 


1  86  APPENDIX. 


58,  6;  59,  12;   61,  16;  62,  16;  60,  19;  ^^-       *i 

28;  24,  4;  25,  5;  26,  4;    >-Hf"  ^11  ^TT   *~^T  23,  6;   26.  3; 
i-Hf-  Km*  <Jgf  1,1;  6,70. 
Pisu  (kakkabuY  ££^Hp-  *T  46,  n. 

Rammanu  (z'/«):    *-*7~    4^TT    2°,  loi  J^'»    2I^  J9i  24i  25^  2^i  32^ 
36,  41,  72,  73,  76,  91;  50,  8;  59,  18. 

Sala  («/«):  ^  "gTT  ^T  29,  2. 

Samas  («7«):  ^HF"    ^T  i,  10,32;  5,  14;  6,  112,  127;   10,  15.  23,26, 
30;    12,35;    32,8;    45,  3;    53,4,6,16,23;    56,2;    59,8,18; 

60,  4,  5;  62,  1  6;  >->f-  ^  Q+-  53,  19. 

TaSmitu  (//«):  ^>f-   JtJ   |>^  t^I^  i,  37,  51,  52;  2,  9,  10;   n, 
33;  33,  10,  20,  37,  38. 

II.-  LIST  OF  NUMERALS. 
I:    I    12,  II,  I2ter. 

II:  yT  22,  31;  35,  9;  51,  9,  10;  61,  n. 

in:  yyy  6,96-,  8,21-,  12,16,99,103,117-,  15,23-,  18,19^-, 

25,  7;   30,  27;   32,  4;  40,  13;  52,  4;  61,  4;  62,  25, 

29,  30. 

VII:  ?p  ii,  37;  25,  8;  31,  9;  40,  7;  61,  ir. 
VIII:  RR  48,  1  8. 
XV:  <^  61,  ii. 
XIX:  <$  61,  ii. 
XX:  «  61,  12. 
XXX:  <«  i,  1  8;  61,  12. 
XXXVI:  <«ffi  40,  8. 

L:  <$  35,15- 
CXXXIV:  TT-<«V  30,31- 


LIST  OF  NUMERALS  ETC.  187 


III.—    PORTIONS  OF  WORDS  AND  IDEOGRAPHS 
OF  UNCERTAIN  READING. 

i,  i   u- ;   4  to- ;  24  ni- ;  26  KAB.MIS-, 

31 -in-nin-na\   32 -mat',    34  <fo- ;   35 -mii\ 

u -  tu    dan- ;    36 '';     2,   i -da\    4 

-ki\    6 -ka\    45 j}-ti\    48 -.fcr,    50 

-ra\  4,  2 -Jw;  6 -ni\ -$ut(?)- ; 

7   si(lim?)- ;     13 -mi-at;     15 -ti\    16  $u-ut- 

lu- ;   21   im- ;    28  dug-gun(f)  di- ;   33  aS- ; 

34  lut(d)- ;   38  Sa- ;  47 -zi-zu;    5,  i   ri-i- ; 

2  ti-ki- ;  4 -bn-ri;  5 -ur(lik?  i.  e.  [j}ul]-lik)\ 

12 -tu;  13 -in-nin-ni;  14 -am-ti\  16  da- ; 

17 -imr,  u ;  18 -turn;  19 -pur(?)- 

ru-u\  6,  23  ii-pak-ku-.  .  .  .  ,;  25  IS ;  26  uS-ti- ; 

29  ri-i- ;  29^  Sa- ;  30 -kid- ;  31 

-ya\ -#>;  32  ilu ;  36  na- ;  40  gi- ; 

51 -H-- 5 -ti\  52 -i-ma\  53 -nun- 

Su;  54  tnk(isu?) ; -nam\  56 -mu\ -ya; 

57 -sa\  58 -at\  59  fru- ; -u\ -Sa- 

nu-nim-ma;  60  i-ta-$u-u$- -bi\  61 *l\  68  ki-i- ; 

79^" -kid(dan?)-ki\  83  da-ta- ;  84  a-ta- ; 

90  a- ;  91  pu- ;  101 -tu-ki\  103 -ka\ 

104 -bi-ti\  1 06 -//;  1 08 -na-di- ; 

109 -ar-ma; -ta-a\  no -///);  117 -Su- 

tu\  119  ka- ;  121  lu- ;  128  //- ;  7,  16 

-kid?-ki;  28  a- ;  29  pu- ;  41  da- ; 

55    &-*i- ;    58/2- ;    63 -$a(?)\     8,  5   UZ-ki\ 

li- ;    22  mu- ;    25 -ki\  su- ;   26 -stt- 

ti-,  MU-u\    27 -^«;    9,  24   UD.DU-ka\  28  SA.TAR  i- ; 

30 -tum\  1 ;  36  .'  .  .  .  .-ma-li-tu\  42    UD.DA.GAN-, 

sa-an-dak?\    43 -/«/(/3)-^/;    44 -ki\    ma- ; 

-ut-ki;    47 -kir\    49 -bil\    51 *.    55 

-ki  Suk- :    56 tum(dumf)- ;     10,  3 

-ri-$ti-nu;    5 -li-$a(?};    n   ni- ;    12 -riS 

a-tu- ;    13 -/«;    18 -$u-tu',    19  ka- ;  20 

lu- ;  24  li- ;  25  //- ;  28 -ka\  30  nap- 

ti- ;  31 -tic,   32 -la\  33  RA  ZIB.BA  Ml ; 

Zi 


1 88  APPENDIX. 

34 A ;    ii,  14  ar-ra- ;    16 -ka;   17 

-a;   ig -ka\  22 -ni;   12.  5  '>«^E[5    ma-kan- 

na(?};    10  ARA-rad  [?  istinis(nis)  RAD];    13    GU.GAD;    14  AT/; 

17 -ru-bu;     18 -u-um;     19 -sar-su;    20 

sit- ; -lum\   21  sa- ; -su;   22  a-li- ; 

23 -iz-zu\    24 pl\    26 -ik;  31 -;;//(?)- 

su-nu;    34 *l\    36 -sir-si-na;   37 -turn; -ri- 

bu;    41 -rum-    44  si- ;    46  AKA ;  ib- ; 

47  it-ma- ;    51   ta- ;  52  it-Sab- ;  53  £«(?)- ; 

54    su- :    57    BAR.DA    (mas-dal};    60    SAG  NA;    60  B 

-ya\    63  B -u;    80 C  KI.R1B  MU.NLNLSU.U;    96 

it-tu-bu- ; -pat-su  BI-u;  Kl  SA  NU;  96 D -u; 

97 -bu-ti-su;   102  ARA  [isttnis(ni$}1];   104  UD.DU [mubur?]\ 

HUR;    1 08 HUR;  109  Urn- ; -/;    13,  2  ///- ; 

3  /- ;    7   ma- ;    1 1   li- ;    16 -la-at;    17 

-ba  sit-ka- ;     18 -sap',    22    u- ;    30 

in- ;     33    mab- ;     14,  2 -lim(J}-man-ni\    5 

-turn;    13 -lit-su\    14 -<£«;    18 *l-$u\ 

15,  i -ya\    2 -turn-,    3 -ku;    6 -tuk\ 

12 -sut-ka-,   13 -mu\   14 -bu-ka\   21   -bu- 

ku;   25 -az\   26 -ku-nu;    16,  5 -tu\  8 -ka\ 

17,  3    GUR.UD ;    4   lu- ;    6   ....  .-mi;    1AR(at)\ 

7 -za;     18,   i  A -ku-[tit]\    3    ma-a- ;     19,  2 

-su;    3    ma- ;     20 -rat-ti-ka\    23    PAL-ma\ 

27 -rz;     20,    i -ka;    4 -//;«;    5 -da 

Si- ;  6  DAGAL  (ummut]  MA  SUR ;   13  AN.ZA ; 

1 8 -kip;  19 -ni-bu  la-- ;  20 -zu 

sar- ;  21,  i  ^'(?)- ; -ru-su;  2  ga- ; 

3  tik- ; -tint ;  4  pa- ;  5  sur- ;  6  na- ; 

-ti\  7 -ti-ya;  nap- ;  9  mu- ; -nu\ 

10  al- ;  u  sa- ;  12  ilu ;  /- ;  13  da- ; 

14  ta- ;  15 -ka;  16 GAR; -In: 

ru- ;  17  di-bi- ; -an;  18 -am-ma; 

19 -ka;  26  ru- ;  27 -2$; -in-na- : 

30 -tafy-f}a-ma;  31  ^77" ; -i-ri- ; 

32  ki- ;  33 -«/;  38 -bu- ;  39  ,  .  .  .  .-a- 

ld- ;  42 -ri  as-tu- ;  43 -i-di  mus-tar- ; 

44  in-ni- ; -pal-lu-u  sal- ;  45  si- ; 

du- ; -iz  ta-sib- ;  46  ni- ;  mi- ; 


PORTIONS  OF  WORDS  AND  IDEOGRAPHS.  '     189 

47  ilu J -#(?);    49  tu- ;  51 >/;  ab- ; 

53 -tak-ku-u;    54  ta- ;    62  bal- ;  69 -ya; 

74 -fa;     76 -ta-as-nu;     77 -#/'- ; 

-ul-j}u-,     78 -pi-i-ti;     79 -tu- ;     82 

-mu-ka\    83 -du-u;    84 -bi-i;    85 -fa 

it-bu- ;     86 -Sa-am    iz- ; -ti-ma;     87 

U.A;  go -ka;    22,  13  GUB.BU.DU;   19 -kiS; 

21  a-ta- ; -//  liS- ;  22  iltt ;  ki- ; 

24  KAN ;  KAN.SIR-ka(>);    25  a? ;    26  a» ; 

-ka;    29  / ;    32  ARA  [?isttnis(nis)]\   34 -i; 

35 ~u\    39 -mar-raS;    40 -tu-u;    43    ii-tak- 

ku ;    46   ki-di- ;    47 --a-tu;    48 -na 

ik-sa- ;   DI.Dl(i$);    49    UGU-ma;     50  kil-lim- ;    51 

-ka;    52   im-mur- ;    53 -a-ni;    54 -/*'; 

55  ka- ; -ya;    56 -Sid;    57 -ka;    58 

-a;    23,  4 -da-ar-ti;  9 *l\    24,  i -id', 

2 -bit  ik- ;    3    ra- ;    25,  2    dir- ;   3  a- 

ti(dil}-ra- ;    4    lu- ;    6 -ki-im\    7 -//'; 

26,  2 -bil;   5 -Si', -Sal-tu;  8 -an-ma; 

10 -&ur;   ii -tim;    27,  6  LA.TI-Su;  22 -fir; 

26  A IN.DUL-ki;  28,  7 -u;  29,  3  a» ;  30,  4 

in-na- 55  a-ku- ;  Si- ;  8  di- ;  9  ki- ; 

ii   //- ;    12  MUN.GU-,  da- ;    20   URU  77;   24  SID(di)-, 

25  ARA  [>istinis(nis)]\  26  MU.SAL-,  Ml;  29  ki- ;  tu- ; 

31,  7    ilu ;    9    tar-bi(?);     32,  i -bu;    6 -na; 

8 -ti-ina\    12 -ni-ki-ma;    ba- ;    13 -ru- 

ki;     15 -ki-ma;     33,  i -zu-zu;    7    dan(!)- ; 

IL    du-ru- ;     13 -i-kiS-ki;     14 -ri; 

-si-na  US.LIK;   16 -at;   17 -riS-ma; -nu; 

18  is- ;    19 '';    40 GA;    44   TAG-ma;    45 

///(?)- ;  46 KAMSAHQ);  u- ;   35.  3  Si- : 

7  DIM ;    ii   $AG.GA ;    13 -mi-ik-ti;  id- ; 

15 -**£(?);  A.BA  (arkatl};  DA.RA;    36,  i -ki;    2 

-zi- ;    4    $ur~ ;    6    ilu ;    9 -m-.i\ 

10  ha-si- ;    37,  i    ilu 53 >';    38,  i   di- ; 

39,  6    sar- ;     7 -/-//';    /'- ;     n -bu-u; 

13 -ki;    14 -ya;   15 -ni-ma;   17 -mab~ 

ra  dan- ;   40,  i DI;  3 >'-J»;  1M.IL  ilu ; 

4 -at-,   5 KUR.NA   TU.UD.TA;  6 -nis-su- 


1 90  APPENDIX. 

1111-  nu  SIR\  lubuitu ;    7 -rit-ta-su;    tu- ;    S 

AS.A.AN  SIR ;    9 -na;   ZU.DU;    10    SLIL(kd); 

v 

13 -su\  14 -su  DIM. SID \  15 -bu-ina;  42,  2 

na- ;    4  u-tag-ga(^}- ;    5 -ri-   ki- ;  6  ta- 

ta-na-rn- ;    7   ri-i- ;    9    ZIG.GIR-ka;    n    D1M.KU; 

ir- ;    12  pi- ;    14  mun-nap(b]- ;   16    UD ; 

17  ki- ;   19  a-zu- 521   ul- ;  43,  i -bu- 

;  44,  3 -tu;  4 KU*l\  5 -»«;    45,  i 

-ti\  3 -urn;  4  tlu ;  6 -ra-ka;  8 -na 

;    10 -bit;    46,  3 -ka;    6 -ka; 

-si;     12 -ti;    21 -tu;    22 -//;    47,  i 

-i  ru- ;    4 -na-ku-nu;    48,  i -ni-ti;  2 

-a-ti;    4 -sa\    5 -a-ti;    6 -li-ku;    7 

MJN\    8 -n;    9 -.?«;     10 -ya,-,     n 

-0z>;    12 -si;    13 -^>;   15 -ki;    49,  2 

-u-ti;    3 -mar;    4 -#-/r,    7 -ai-ti;    9 

-/«;    10 -/«(?);    ii -wz;    12 -ru-sa- 

a-ti;    13 -u;    14 -^;    17 -ma--u;   18 -si- 

la-ku;    24 -ru-ti;    26 -sa-an-nu;    27 ^;    50, 

ii  ^4 -^';     19    u-sab- ;     23^    u-sur- ;    27^ 

kakkabu ;    iluDUMU ; -ti- ;    51,  3   -pal; 

5 -ma;    6    u- ;     12 -za-za;    14 SI; 

wNAM ;  53,  2 -&;   15  GUR  TAP.PI DU; -su; 

17   SU.A.RU.LA;    18  **~^^;   SA.KASKAL;    20  f.  [NI]DU 

GAL  (inusilii,  or pitut  rabut};  22   nam-sa-ki-su-nui^);  27 -kis- 

su;    28 -ya; -pal-su;    30 ";    56,  2  '7" ; 

4    ^- ;    5    in- ;    57,  n   *««- ;    J7    ^- » 

19 -mi- ;    58,  i pl\    3 ^5  9 ~an- 

;    10 -ka;    n -na;    12 fyu;   15 -si- 

ni;    1 6 -;«/;    18 -ki;    59,  i pl;  2 -;«'; 

-DWS ;   3  NUN ;    4  BUR ;  8  nu- ; 

9   ir- ;     n -ti-ka;     15 -ya  Us- ;     16 

-li-na-an-ni   ma-fyi(}}- ;     17    in-an-na- ;     19 

-tab-ba-la-ka  fa- ;    60,  4    KI]    12 tl-ka;    14 

at-ta- ;    15 -di-ri-ka;   sa- ;    16    SI. MIS;    17 

-mat;   18 -ri  NI.RUS;  22 -us;    61,  2 -sat- 

ki;    3 IN  77;  nu- ;    10  SA.LA;    15  at-ta-.  .  .  . 

17    GU.ZUR-ki   u-kul-li- ;     18 -pi-ka;    Hl-ka;    19 


PORTIONS  OF  WORDS  AND  IDEOGRAPHS.  '191 

an- ;     20 -tu-un;     22 MA  GU ; 

62,  4 fl\  7 -la-mu\    g -bu\    \\ -da- 

a-ti\   14 ";    1 8 ^^is-sal- ;   19 /';  ,'/. 

ti-ify- ;    24 -ak-ki  SAR. 


ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS. 

P.  3,  1.  II  leg.:  "ug-da-Sa-ra",  for  "ufc-ta-Sa-rcT.  --  Pp.  3,  11.  18, 
20;  113,  1.  31  leg.:  "sal",  for  "sal".  --  Pp.  3,  I.  22;  33,  1.  18  A-.: 
"fif,  for  "fif.  -  -  P.  3,  1.  23  leg.:  "muk",  for  "muk".  —  Pp.  3,  1.  25; 
12,  1.  9  leg.:  "rik",  for  "rik".  —  Pp.  3,  11.  27,  32;  57,  1.  1 6  leg.:  "ya", 
for  >".  -  -  Pp.  3,  1.  32;  31,  1.  6  leg.:  "Sir",  for  "Sir".  —  P.  3,  1.  35 
/f«.:  "kd",  for  "kan.  -  -  Pp.  4,  1.  2;  29,  1.  33;  104,  1.  22  leg.:  "di-par", 
for  "DI.BAR".  P.  4,  1.  10  leg.:  "puldnltum",  for  "puldnitum".  - 

Pp.  4,  1.  1 6;   28,  1.  36  leg.:    "zmid-ki",  for  "imid-ki".   -  -  P.  4,  11.  19,  20 
/<-.:    "ziK\    for  "zik".   -  -  Ibid.,  11.  21,  24  for  "li-fd-kil"   poss.   read  "//- 
ta-rid",  cf.  DELITZSCH,  Handw.  p.  303.   --  Pp.  4,  1.  22;  97,  1.  25  leg.: 
"W,    for  "bil".  -  -  Pp.  4,  1.  25;    97,  1.  37    leg.:  "lid-dip-plr>\   for  "///- 
-  Pp.  4,  1.  25;  97,  1.  28  leg.:  "li-ni-",  for  "It-sal-".  —  Pp.  4, 
1.  25;    17,  1.  29;    24,  1.  29;    44,  1.  17;    97,  11.  2,  29;    103,  1.  10;    no, 
1.  15  leg.:    "tin",    for  "kin".   -  -   P.  4,  1.  37   leg.:    "bi-il-tum",   for  "bi-il- 
•   Pp.  5,   1.  18;    35,    1.  34;    60,  1.  33    leg.:    "newly  shining",  for 
"unique".   -       P.  5,  1.  24  leg. :    "is  mighty",    for  "he  gathers".  -  •    P.  6, 
1.  7  del.  "(with)  shouts  of  joy".  —  Ibid.,  1.  21  leg.:  "Torch",  for  "Lady  (?)". 
-  Pp.  7,  1.  3;    19,  1.  17;    27,  1.  33;    35,  1.  8;    42,  1.  36;  47,  1.  5;  99, 

I.  5  leg.:  "accept",  or  "accepteth",  for  "remove",  or  "take(th)  away".  - 
P.  8,  1.  8  f.  leg.:  "incantations",   for  "incantatious".   --  P.  10,  1.  19  leg.: 

"far",  for  "for".    -        P.  n,  1.  28  leg.:  "HP'>  for  "^f-*-".    •    •    Pp.  13, 

II.  14,   15,  23;    25,  1.  30;    56,  1.  6;    57,  1.  22;    68,  1.  6;   105,  11.  21,  24 

"«/.?",  for  "»?j?".  —  P.  13,  1.  27  leg.:  "ipui",  for  "£///$".  —  Pp.  13, 
1.  28;  16,  1.  23;  22,  1.  6;  52,  1.  26;  105,  1.  24  leg.:  "minu/u",  for 
"minu/u".  •  P.  13,  11.  35  ff.  del.  note  to  1.  30.  -  Pp.  15,  11.  7,  31; 
44,  1.  4  leg.:  "drt"  for  "ziz".  —  Pp.  1 6,  1.  1 8;  17,  1.  17  leg.:  "//#',  for 
"/*#'•  -  -  Pp.  16,  I.  19;  17,  1.  23;  29,  1.  21 ;  31,  1.  24;  32,  1.  20  leg.: 
"nar-bi-ki(kay,  for  "Iib-bi-ki(ka)".  —  P.  16,  1.21  leg.:  "burdsi",  for 
"Intrasr.  —  Ibid.,  1.  28  leg.:  "/*",  for  "6u".  —  Ibid.,  1.  33  leg.:  "/ui-/t-Sirn. 
for  "tuS-ti-Sir».  -  -  P.  17,  1.  1 1  leg.:  "pu",  for  "bu".  —  Ibid.,  \.  26  leg.: 
"bit",  for  "&'/".  —  Ibid.,  1.  34,  n.  7  add.  "The  dupls.  B  and  C  I  have  since 
"joined",  and  it  is  now  clear  that  the  reading  of  B  for  1.  24  is  |||  *ffT 
C^n.  —  Pp.  1 8,  1.  5;  19,  1.  26;  30,  1.  8  leg.:  "greatness",  for  "heart". 
-Pp.  18,1.33;  27,11.23,26;  35,1.2540,1.15;  Ii5,l.i9^-: 
"judgment",  for  "judgement".  -  •  P.  19,  1.  24  leg.:  "esteem",  for  "com- 
mand". —  Pp.  20,  1.  13;  79,  1.  38;  83,  1.  30;  90,  1.  14;  loo,  1.  8; 
104,  11.  6,  19  letr.:  "KISDA",  for  "$AR".  —  P.  22,  1.  15  add.  "but 


1 92  ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS. 

cf.  LYON,  Sargon,    p.  81".   -  -   P.  23,   11.  27,  33  leg.:    "bu",  for  "pu"  in 

Surbii.    -  -   P.  24,  1.  27   poss.  read    "3.  [rubu]  u  [Sagganakku] ". 

Ibid.,  1.  28  leg.:  "li-kir",  for  "//-/#".  Pp.  24,  1.  33;  25,  1.  3; 
58,  1.  30;  119,  1.  ii  leg.:  "kal",  for  "kal".  —  P.  25,  1.  6  leg.:  "TCR", 
foT"T(7£".  --  Hid.,  \.  7  leg.:  "[it] -pi- [si]",  for  " -//- ". 

—  Ibid.,  1.  25   leg.:   "lim-[da]'\  for  "Si- ".   —  Pp.  25,   1.  29;   32, 

1.  4;    38,  1.  6;   75,  1.  5;    79,  1.  7  leg.:    "ib-$a-ki(ktt)   uznd'iu-ai",  for  "/>- 
$a-ki(ku)  uznddu-ai",   i.  e.   "I  have  considered  thee!".        -    Pp.  25,  1.  32; 
32,  1.  32  f.;  38,  1.  9;  41,  11.  4,  6;  44, 1.  34  leg.:  "kam",  for  "gam".  —  Pp.  26, 
1.  6;  32,  11.  2,  10,  1 6,  21   leg.:  "Bau",  for  "Ban".  -  -  P.  28,  1.  13  leg.: 
"I?  it",  for  "/z  V.  —  P.  29,  1.  16  leg.:  "sti",  for  "su".   —  Pp.  30,  1.22; 
31,  1.  i;  34,  11.  n,    igf.  leg.:    "Nusku",    for  "Nuzku".            P.  30,  1.  22 
leg.:   "i",  for  "//".   -  -  Ibid.,  1.  27   leg.:  a-bi  [Hani*1]",  for  ('a-bi]- ". 

-  Ibid.,  1.  31   leg.:  'vfc/Y",  for  "Ml".   -  -   P.  31,  1.  17   leg.:  "bu-iuk-[lum]" , 
for    "£«-/«£-/£» ?J".  Pp.  32,    11.  /,   14;    38,    1.  19;    44,    1.  23    leg.: 

-kam",  for  "gdm".  -  -  P.  32,  1.  19  leg.'.  "///",  for  "///".  -  -  P.  33,  1.  33 
leg.:  K  8605",  for  "K  3605"  -  Pp.  33,  1.  34;  74,  11.  23,  26;  79,  1.  5 
leg.:  "'simdti*1",  for  "Simdti*1".  —  P.  37,  1.  12  add.:  "but  see  ZA  I, 
p.  56".  -  -  P.  39  1  14  leg--  "(«)".  for  "W-  -  -  Ib^.,  1.  16  /^.:  "51. 
dr-$a-si-i  limnuti(ti)  So"  etc.  —  Ibid.,  1.  1 8  leg.:  "maruSlu",  for  "$a 
murfu".  —  Ibid.,  1.  19  leg.:  "kalu",  for  "&*/«".  —  Ibid.,  1.  22  /^.: 
"<//•,  for  "up".  —  P.  41,  1.  1 6  leg.:  "ri-min-ni-ma" ,  for  "rimi-nin-ni-ma". 
Pp.  41,  1.  25;  82,  1.  15  leg.:  "dumki",  for  "damiklu".  P.  41, 

1.  32    leg.:    "lut",    for    "////".  P.  43,  1.  6    /<?§•.:    "countenance",    for 

"brightness".  Pp.  43,  1.  17;    46,  1.  16  leg. :    "revere",    for  "behold", 

cf.  TALLQVIST,    Maqlii  p.  144.  P.  44,    1.  4:    K  10354,  11.  2 — 7,    is 

dupl.  of  No.  9,  11.  i — 5.  -  -  Ibid.,  1.  13:  L.  9  is  expanded  to  form  5  11. 
in  K  10243,  which  is  dupl.  of  No.  9,  11.  I — 13.  Ibid.,  1.  19  leg.: 

"-«",  for  "«".   --  /&#.,  1.  22  /eg-.:  'W,  for  "jte/";    "-»",  for  "-*-".   - 
7^.,  1.  28  leg.:  "UD.DU-ka",  for  "urru-ka".  Ibid.,  1.  33   /^.:  "//- 

/-«-«",  for  "/i-rw".  —  P.  45,  1.  5  /^.:  "Z?^7",  for  "TUR".  •  Ibid., 
1.  8  leg.:  "bul",  for  "^«/".  -  -  Ibid.,  1.  38  leg.:  "A",  for  "/?".  -  -  P.  46, 
1.  24  leg.:  "19.  Grant  speech,  hearing  and  favour!"  -  Ibid.,  1.  29  leg.: 

" ",  for  "light".   -  -  P.  48,  1.  25  leg.:    "Ai",  for  "MaliW.    -  -  Ibid., 

1.  26  leg.:    "-ram-",    for  "-ram".  --  Ibid.,  1.  30  leg.:    "-«",   for  'V.  - 
Pp.  51,   1.  10;   52,   11.  ii,  15;    no,  1.  19  leg.:    "karradu",   for  "karradu". 

—  P.  51,  1.  12   leg.:    "ban",   for  "pan".    —    Ibid.,  1.  27   leg.:    "mndu-ii", 
for  "mudti  u".    -  -   Pp.  51,  1.  31 ;  88,  1.  5  leg.:  "bu",  for  "pu".  -  -  P.  51, 
1.32   leg.:   "ml",  for  "mi".   --  Ibid.,   1.  36  leg.:   "mudu-u",  for  "mudu -/i". 

-   P.  53:  del.  1.  8f.   -  -   Pp.54,   1.  10;   87,   1,7;   95,  1.3   leg.:  "gusuru", 
for  "guSuru".     —     P.  54,  1.  14    leg. :    "giir",  for  "giir".  Ibid.,  1.  18 

leg.:  "arki",  for  "arta".  -  Pp.  55,  1.  2;  58,  1.  16;  82,  1.  29;  87,  1.  8 
leg.:  "bulul",  for  "tubbal".  —  P.  55,  1.  4  leg.:  "sabai-ma",  for  "sulut- 
ma".  --  Ibid.,  1.  18  leg.:  " pitii-u  kup-pi" ,  for  "bil  ii-g(k)up-pi" .  --  Ibid., 
I.  26  /^.:  "ik",  for  "#".  -  -  Pp.  55,  I.  29;  57,  II.  ii,  30;  59,  I.  4  leg.: 
"///",  for  "/«".  --  P.  56,  I.  n  leg.:  ''-A/",  for  "Ai".  --  Ibid.,  I.  15 


ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS.  "193 

"-up-pu-",  for  "-u6-6u-".  -  -  Ibid.,  1.  18  leg.:  "/*>/«",  for  "//;-/«";  "«&/. 
fa-ma",  for  "ri- fa-ma".  —  7Bi</.,  1.  22  /^.:  "61.  ili-ya  ilui$tar  amiliiti 
salima(ma]  lir$u-ni".  —  Ibid.,  1.  25  leg.:  "itifyu-ni",  for  "ififyu-ni".  — 
Ibid.,  1.  29  /^.:  "limutti",  for  "limniti".  -  -  P.  57,  1.  2  7^.':  "£/r",  for 
"&ir".  —  72/<7.,  1.  10  7^.:  "«/",  for  "«/".  —  Ibid.,  1.  15  7^.:  "fabM*1", 
for  "tdbdtit1".  —  2bid.,  1.  19  7^.:  "dumku",  for  "dami&iu".  -  -  Ibid., 
1.31  after  "reads"  «<&/.  "ina  pi-ka";  leg.:  u^\]]^\  for  "^Uf".  — 
/to.,  1.  32  7<gr.:  "AT",  for  "AT".  —  P.  58,  1.  14  leg.:  "KU.KU",  for 
"DUR.DUR".  —  Ibid.,  \.  1 8  after  "HUL"  add.  "LA".  —  Ibid.,  \.  25 
leg.:  "/«-",  for  "-tu".  Pp.58,  \.  27;  68,1.13;  114,1.19  7^.: 

"dumb?,  for  "damku".  —  P.  58,  1.  33  /<£.:  "/«-«",  for  "7«-«".  --  /to., 
1.35^-:  "/«-",  for  "-/«".  —  P.  59,  1.  8  7^.:  "121.  inurna  amilu 
fcakkad-su  ikkal-$u  li$anu-$u  u-zak-kat-su" .  —  Ibid.,  1.  36  leg.:  "far", 
for  "for".  —  P.  60,  1.  I7f.  leg.:  "oil  in  a  vessel  of  urkarinnu-vtoodT ', 
for  "the  oil  of  certain  woods".  —  P.  61,  1.  2  leg. :  "illustrious",  for 
"illustrations".  —  Ibid.,  \.  9  leg.:  "29.  Who  openeth  wells  and  springs, 
who  guideth"  etc.  —  Ibid.,  1.  14  leg.:  "benefactor",  for  "director".  - 
Ibid.,  1.  34  leg.:  "disturbed",  for  "bewitched".  -  -  P.  62,  1.  2  leg.'.  "61. 
May  my  god  and  the  goddess  of  mankind  grant  me  favour!".  --  Ibid., 

1.  27  leg.:    "ointment",  for  " ".    —    P.  65,  1.  1 6  add.:    "JENSEN, 

ZA1X,  p.  128,    and  TALLQVIST,  Maqlii,  p.  134".  P.  66,  1.  6   leg.: 

"transliterated",  for  "translitarated".  —  Ibid.,  1.  27  add.:  "but  cf. 
DELITZSCH,  Grammar,  §  138  (end)".  —  P.  68,  1.  2  leg.:  "/as",  for 
"taS".  •  P.  70,  1.  22  leg.:  "nam-",  for  "-nam-".  —  P.  72,  I.  23  leg.: 

" ",   for  " ".  P.  74,  1.  21   leg.:    "4.    bil  bill 

".  —    Ibid.,  1.  26  leg.',  "kald-ma",  for  "kala(?)ma".  - 

P-  75.  I-  7  leg-'  "•?«",  for  "jte".    —    Ibid.,  1.  17  leg.:   "«",  for  "«".    • 

/fo/.,  1.  29  leg.:    "4.    Lord  of  lords! ".  Pp.  76,  1.  29;  78, 

I.  24  leg.:  "u-pi-i",  for  "u-mt-i".  —  P.  77,  1.  1 1  leg.:  "clouds",  for 
days".  —  Ibid.,  1.  13  leg.:  "unsparing",  for  "unconquerable".  -  -  P.  78, 
1.  9  leg.',  "-ktir-",  for  "-/#-".  —  Pp.  78,  1.  10;  79,  1.  15;  116,  1.  18 
leg.:  "dalili-ka",  for  "dalili-ka".  —  P.  78,  I.  16  leg.:  "GAB",  for 
"GAL".  —  Ibid.,  1.  28  leg.:  "la-it  muk-jab-lu",  for  "la-id  muk-tap-lu". 

-  Ibid.,  \.  38  before  "ilu"  add.:  " ";   leg.:  "Saplu",  for  "iaplti". 

-  P.  79,  1.  4  leg.:   "iluKU.TU.SAK\  for  "iluMarduk  tu-Sir".  --  Ibid., 
1.  13  leg.:  "KSd-cT,  for  "li$d-an.    —  Ibid.,  1.  14  leg.:  "nik?,  for  "nik?. 

Ibid.,  1.  25  leg.:    "-i-ti",  for  "-*-//".    —    Jbid.,  1.  30  leg-'.    "«",  for 
"«".  P.  80,  1.  33  leg.:    "the  goddess  "KU.TU.SAR",  for  "the  god 

Marduk".  —  P.  8 1,  1.  13  leg.:  "Ruler  of",  for  "who  destroyest".  —  Ibid., 
1.  23  leg.:  "go",  for  "89".  —  P.  82,  1.  7  leg.:  "SU  GIDIM(UTUG1}.MA 
##(?)",  for  "kdt  utukki-ma  imat".  —  Ibid.,  1.  12  7^.:  "-«",  for  "«".  - 
/^.,  1.  33  7^.:    "abkallu",    for  "abkallu";  "mudu-u",  for  "mudH-u".   - 
P.  83,  1.  3  7^.:  "tamati*1",  for  "tamati*1".  —  P.  84,  1.  10  7^.:  "Bene- 
factor",   for  "Director".  --  Ibid.,  del.  \.  22.  —  P.  85,  1.  9  leg.:  "abun- 
dance", for  "life".  --  Ibid.,  1.  10  7<^.:  "65.  Speech  and  hearing  bestow 
upon  me!".  —  Jbid.,  1.  20  7^.:  "abkalli",  for  "abgalli".  —  P.  86,  1.  16 

2  A 


194  ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS. 

leg.:   "K  12922",  for  "K  13922".   -  -  P.  87,  1.  24  leg.:  "fur",  for  "fur". 

-  Ibid.,  1.  27  leg.:  "kid",  for  "kid".  —  Ibid.,  1.  28  add.:  "K  8953   -f- 

K  8987,  cited  as  D,  is  dupl.  of  No.  27,  11.  i — 22;  the  variant  readings 

of  D  are  cited  in  the  Vocabulary".  —  P.  88,  1.  37  leg.:  "A",  for  "£". 

—  P.  89,  1.  9  leg.:  "art  glorious",  for  "treadest".    —   P.  90,  1.  n   leg.: 
"<rf",  for  "far".    •       Ibid.,  1.17   leg.:    "ub-",  for  "-«£-".    —    Ibid.,  1.  19 
add. :  "since  printing  off  I  have  joined  No.  28  to  K  6639,  the  dupl.  A 
of  No.  46,    and    to  K  8953  etc.,    the    dupl.  D    of  No.  27".  P.  92, 
1.  26  leg.:  "linnasify",  for  "linasift";  "linnisi",  for  "linasi".  —  P.  93,  1.  14 
leg.:  "Suatu",  for  "Suatu".    —  Ibid.,  11.  33  ff.  leg.:  "12.  May  the  s.  of 

ray  b.  be  removed,    may    there  be  torn  away  the of 

13.    May  the  g.  of  my  h.  be  loosened".  —  P.  94,  1.  35  leg.:  "dannati", 
for  "dannati".    —    P.  95,  1.  4  leg.:  "kurmati",  for  "kurmatt".  Ibid., 

I.  1 8  leg.:    "Prepare",  for  "Place".       -    P.  97,  1.  8  leg.:  "US.LIK",  for 
"azkur(ury.  —  Ibid.,  1.  15  f.   leg.:   "pulanitum",  for  "pulamium".  —  Ibid., 

II.  24,   27    poss.  restore  "lit-[(a-rid]",    for    "lit-[ta-kil]".    —    Ibid.,  1.  26 
leg.:    "ru",  for  "rn".   --   P.  98,  1.  4  leg.:    "uS-kin-ma",  for  "$ukkil(ki}- 
ma".  —  Ibid.,  1.  5  leg.:    "sdlimu",    for  "Salimu".  -  -    P.  102,  1.  19  leg.: 
"li$lttu",  for  "tijlitu".   —    P.  103,  1.  17   leg.:    "pardsi",  for  "parasi".   - 
P.  105,  11.  25,  27  leg.:  "(dr)",  for  "(ar)".  —  Ibid-,  1.  26  leg.:  "Suati",  for 
"Suati".  -  -  P.  no,  1.  4  leg.:  "///",  for  "/#".   --   Ibid.,  1.  18  /^.:  V, 
for  "lab".    •   •    f.m,  \.  2  leg.:  "unsparing",  for  "invincible".    •  -   Ibid., 
1.  9  leg.:  "13",  for  "12".  —  P.  114,  1.  25  leg.:  "K  2808",  for  "K  2801". 

—  P.  115,  1.  30  leg.:  "besought",  for  "glorified".   -  -    P.  119,  1.  13  leg.: 
"im*l-ya",  for  "ini*l-ya".    —    Ibid.,  1.  20  f.  leg.:    "mtsiru",  for  "misiru". 

—  Pp.  139,  1.  20;   157,  1.  7  leg.:  "38,  4",  for  "38,  3". 


INDEXES. 


INDEX  TO  TABLETS  AND  DUPLICATES. 


Number! 

<D 

M 
9 

£ 

0) 

"3 
& 

Tablet 

Duplicates 

I 

3 

I 

Ki55 

K  3332,  cited  as  A;  Sm.  1382;  K 

6019    (No.  5),  11.  ii  —  17,.  cited 

as  B\    K  3432  +  K8i47   (No. 

33),  11.  19—38,  cited  as  C. 

2 

16 

4 

K  2487  +  K  2502 

K8i22  (No.  3),  11.10—16,    cited 

4-  K259i 

as  A;    K  6477,   cited  as  B\    K 

9706,   cited  as  C;    K  223,  cited 

as  D;  K  11929,  cited  as  E. 

3 

23 

6 

K8I22 

K  2487    etc.    (No.  2),    11.  ii—  20, 

cited  as  A. 

4 

24 

7 

K  8105 

K  12938,    cited    as  A;    K  10729, 

cited  as  B. 

5 

29 

9 

K  6019 

K  155    (No.  i),    11.  29—35,    cited 

as  A. 

6 

30 

10 

K2io6  +  K2384 

K  3285,    cited  as  A;    K  3330  etc. 

+  K3393  +  K 

(No.  7),    11.  9  —  32,    cited   as  B\ 

6340  +  K  8605 

K  9087  (No.  37),  11.  7  —  13.  cited 

+  K8983  +  K 

as  C;  K  8815,  cited  as  D;  Rm. 

9576  +  K9688 

96,  cited  as  E\  Sm.  336  -j-  Sm. 

+  K  11589  +K 

1385,    cited   as  F;    K  5980  etc. 

I29ii+Ki3792 

(No.  10),  11.  7  ff. 

+  K  13800 

7 

37 

i5 

K3330+Sm.394 

K2io6    etc.    (No.  6),    11.  71—94, 

+  81—2—4,244 

cited    as    A;    K  9087    (No.  37), 

11.  7—13,    cited   as  C;    K  8815, 

cited  as  D;  Rm.  96,  cited  as  E 

2  A2 


196 


INDEX. 


Number 

<u 
ee 
a 

PH 

V 

"rt 

£ 

Tablet 

Duplicates 

8 

dl 

18 

K  2396  -4-K  1893 

9 

10 
ii 

12 
13 

44 

48 
5i 

54 
67 

iQ 

21 
23 

26 
•3,2 

K25584-K9i52 

K  5980  +K  8746 
K  235  +  K  3334 

Ki63  +  K2i8 
K  3220 

K  3429   +  K  8657,    cited    as   A; 
K  2538  etc.,    Rev.   Col.  Ill,  11.  I 
—  2i    (see  IV  R,  pi.  21*),    cited 
as  £;  K  10243;  K  10354. 
K  2106  etc.  (No.  6),  11.  97  ff. 
K  3283,  cited  as  A;   K  6537,  cited 
as  C. 
K  6733,  cited  as  A;  K  3  151  b,  cited 
as  B;  K  2379  -j-  K  3289,  cited 
as  C\    K  10807,  cited  as  Z>;    K 
7984,  cited  as  E. 

14 

69 

34 

K  2793 

IS 

69 

34 

K  2586  +  K  7  185 

16 

70 

3*5 

K  11681 

17 

72 

3^ 

K  5668 

18 
ig 

72 
74 

36 
38 

K  8009 
K34 

K  6804,  cited  as  A\  K  11326  + 
K  11975,  cited  as  B. 

20 

76 

40 

K  10406 

21 

77 

41 

K274I  +K3i8o 
+  K32o8  +  K 
5043  +  K  6588 
+  K66i2  +  K 
6672  -f  K  6908 
4-  K  7047  4-  K 
8498  4-  K  9157 
4-  K  9770  4-  K 
iO2i9-f-KiO497 
+  KI343I+K 
i  ^793 

22 

23 
24 

81 

85 
86 

45 

48 
18 

K  140  -f  K  3352 
-f  K875i  +K 
10285 
K  13277 
K  12922 

K  6334,  cited  as  A;  K  6853,  cited 
as  B;  K  8982,  cited  as  C. 

25 

86 

48 

K  13296 

26 

27 

87 

87 

48 
49 

K  10550 
K237i  +Ki379i 

K  2836  +  K  6593  >  cited  as  A; 
K  11549,  cited  as  B\  Sm.  398, 
cited  as  C;  K  8953  -f  K  8987 
etc.,  cited  as  D. 

TABLETS  AND  DUPLICATES. 


Number! 

£ 

<D 

Tablet 

Duplicates 

28 
2O 

90 
02 

50 
CO 

K3355[+K6639 
+  K8953  +K 

8987] 

K  I  3QO7 

K  2371  etc.  (No.  27);  K  11153  etc. 
(No.  46). 

•!» 

on 

V 

02 

Dw 
c  I 

y^ 
94 

53 

K  7207  +K  9675 

+   K  I  3274 

00 

QC 

^  ^ 

K  1.3.S84-K  0047 

O* 

33 
04. 

yo 
96 

IOO 

54 
s6 

K  1  1876 

K  155  (No.  i),  11.  36—52,  cited  as  A. 

o^ 

q  c 

IOO 

e6 

K   27^7 

OD 
36 

r  O2 

o^ 

C7 

"•  ^  /  0  / 
K  Ol  2  tJ 

ou 

37 

18 

103 

I  04 

D/ 

57 

eg 

•^  y  *  ^o 
K  9087 

fin      QT  C  Q      l6 

K  2106    etc.    (No.  6),    11.  71  —  77. 
cited  as  A;  K  3330  etc.  (No.  7), 
11.  9—15,   cited  as  J9;    K  8815, 
11.  3  —  9,   cited   as  D;    Rm.  96, 
11.  1  —  7,  cited  as  E. 

o° 

qn 

104 

0° 

eg 

K8Q7O 

oy 

4O 

T  O^ 

Du 

CQ 

K  2^67 

<J.U 

*U0 

1  06 

DV 

CQ 

IV    ^^^/ 

42 

I  06 

oy 
60 

K   3221 

I* 

40 

IO7 

60 

K  i  3  3  ^  ^ 

'to 
44 

IVJ/ 

I  O7 

60 

x  *•  l  oooo 
K.  142  10 

t-*t 

>1  C 

i\->/ 
inft 

60 

fi"          1          72       Tin 

*tj 
46 

47 

109 
III 

61 
62 

Kiii53  +  Rm.582 
K  8808 

K  6639  etc.,  cited  as  A. 

T-/ 

48 

T  T  2 

62 

K8i  16 

<J.U 

/i  n 

T  T  7 

61 

D  T  65 

iy 
5° 

1  X0 

"3 
1  16 

U3 
64 

66 

K  2808  +  K  9490 
KSioo 

83  —  i  —  18,  500,   cited   as  A;    K 
12937,  cited  as  B. 

CO 

T  T  7 

66 

Oz 

CO 

1  *  / 

TTO 

67 

K-iRcQ  4-Sm  383 

Do 

C.4 

i  ly 

T  9  T 

U7 
no 

CHI     c  i  ? 

3** 

c  e. 

uy 
6n 

Kf\i  r\  "> 

OD 

*6 

T  7  ? 

°9 
no 

K2«IO 

ou 

17 

122 

U9 
7r> 

K  OQOQ 

eg 

/u 

K^>^/i  1 

D° 

CQ 

I23 

T  7  /I 

7O 

K   7078 

' 

Dy 
60 

1  ^^ 
T  9  C 

jx  79/0 

61 
62 

1  •"=  J 
126 

127 

7  •* 
73 

74 

K8293 

K  "7S.O1 

K  3342,  cited  as  A. 

1 98  INDEX. 


II 
INDEX  TO  REGISTRATION-NUMBERS. 


N.B.  The  registration-number  by  which  a  tablet  is  cited  is  printed  in  black 
type;  when  two  or  more  fragments  have  been  "joined",  the  tablet  so  formed  is 
cited  by  the  lowest  of  their  registration-numbers.  References  are  placed  within 
parentheses;  -\-  =  "joined  to";  dupl.  =  "duplicate  of. 

K  34  (No.  19);  K  140  (No.  22);  K  155  (No.  i);  K  163  (No.  12); 
K2i8  (+  Ki63);  K  223  (dupl.  No.  2);  K  235  (No.  n);  K  2106 
(No.  6);  K  2371  (No.  27);  K  2379  (dupl.  No.  12);  K  2384  (-+-  K2io6); 
K  2396  (No.  8);  K  2487  (No.  2);  K  2502  (-f  K  2487);  K  2538  etc. 
(dupl.  No.  9);  K  2558  (No.  9);  K  2567  (No.  40);  K  2586  (No.  15); 
K259I  (+  K  2487);  K274I  (No.  21);  K  2757  (No.  35);  K  2793 
(No.  14);  K  2808  (No.  50);  K  2810  (No.  56);  K  2836  (dupl.  No.  27); 
K  3151  b  (dupl.  No.  12);  K  3180  (+  K  2741);  K  3208  (+  K  2741); 
K  3221  (No.  42);  £3229  (No.  13);  K  3283  (dupl.  No.  u);  K  3285 
(dupl.  No.  6);  K  3289  (+  K  2379);  K  3330  (No.  7);  K  3332  (dupl. 
No.i);  K  3334  (+  K  235);  K  3342  (dupl.  No.  61)5X3352  (+Ki4o); 
K3355  (No.  28);  K3358  (No.  32);  K  3393  (+  K  2106);  K  3429 
(dupl.  No.  9);  K  3432  (No.  33);  K  3448  (No.  30);  K  3463  (No.  60); 
K  3859  (No.  53);  K  3893  (+  K  2396);  K  5043  (+  K  2741);  K  5668 
(No.  17);  K  5980  (No.  10);  K  6019  (No.  5);  K  6334  (dupl.  No.  22); 
K  6340  (+  K  2106);  K  6395  (No.  52);  K  6477  (dupl.  No.  2);  K  6537 
(dupl.  No.  n);  K  6588  (+  K  2741);  K  6593  (+  K  2836);  K  6612 
(+  K  2741);  K  6639  (  +  K  3355);  K  6644  (No.  58);  K  6672  (+  K274i); 
K  6733  (dupl.  No.  12);  K  6792  (No.  55);  K  6804  (dupl.  No.  18);  K  6853 
(dupl.  No.  22);  K  6908  (-1-  K  2741);  K  7047  (+  K  2741);  K  7185 
(+K2586);  K7207(No.3i);  K  7593  (No. 62);  K  7916  (No.4i);  K  7978 
(No.  59);  K  7984  (dupl.  No.  12);  K  8009  (No.  18);  K  8105  (No.  4); 
K8n6  (No-48);  K8i22  (No. 3);  K8i47  (+  1^3432);  KSigo  (No.si); 
K  8293  (No.  61);  K  8498  (-f  K  2741);  K  8605  (+  K  2106);  K  8657 
(+  K3429);  K8746  (+  K  5980);  K  8751  (+  K  140);  K  8808 
(No.  47);  K  8815  (dupl.  Nos.  6,  7,  37);  K  8930  (No.  39);  K  8953 
(+  K3355);  K  8982  (dupl.  No.  22);  K  8983  (+  K  2106);  K  8987 
(+  K  3355);  K  9047  (+  K  3358);  K  9087  (No.  37);  K  9125  (No.  36); 


REGISTRATION-NUMBERS. 


I99 


K9i52  (+  K2558);  K  9157  (+  K  2741);  K  9490  (+  K  2808); 
K  9576  (+  K2io6);  K9675  (+  K  7207);  K  9688  (+  K  2106); 
K  9706  (+  K  6477);  K  9770  (+  K  2741);  K  9909  (No.  57);  Kioi38 
(4-  K  6395);  K  10219  (+  K  2741);  K  10243  (dupl.  No.  9);  K  10285 
(+  Ki4o);  K  10354  (dupl.  No.  9);  K  10406  (No.  20);  K  10497 
(-J-  K  2741);  K  10550  (No.  26);  K  10729  (dupl.  No.  4);  K  10807 
(dupl.  No.  12);  K  11153  (No.  46);  K  11326  (dupl.  No.  18);  K  11549 
(dupl.  No.  27);  K  11589  (+  K2io6);  K  11681  (No.  16);  K  11876 
(No.  34);  K  11929  (dupl.  No.  2);  K  11975  (+  K  11326);  K  12911 
(-f  K  2106);  K  12922  (No.  24);  K  12937  (dupl.  No.  50);  K  12938 
(dupl.  No.  4);  K  13274  (+  K  7207);  K  13277  (No.  23);  K  13296 
(No.  25);  Ki3355  (No.  43);  Ki343i  (+  K274i);  Ki379i  (+  K237i); 
K  13792  (+  K  2106);  K  13793  (+  K  2741);  K  13800  (+  K  2106); 
K  13907  (No.  29);  K  14210  (No.  44);  Sin.  336  (dupl.  No.  6);  Sm.  383 
(+  K3859);  Sm.  394  (+  K333o);  Sm.  398  (dupl.  No.  27);  801.512 
(No.  54);  Sm.  1382  (dupl.  No.  i);  Sm.  1385  (+  Sm.  336);  D.T.  65 
(No.  49);  Bm.  96  (dupl.  Nos.  6,  7,  37);  Rm.  582  (+  K  11153); 
81-2-4,244  (-J-  K3330);  82-3-23,119  (No.  45);  83-1-18,500 
(dupl.  No.  50);  Bu  91  —  5—9,  16  (No.  38). 


Bavarian    Academy    Press:    F.  Straub,    Munich. 


CUNEIFORM  TEXTS. 


N.B.     The  numbers  which  precede  the  foot-notes  refer  to  the  corresponding 
numbers  in  the  text;   when  a  note  refers  to  one  sign  only,  the  number  is  placed 

to  the  right    of  the  sign   in  the  text   (e.  g. *);   when   a  variant  reading  is 

given  of  more  than  one  sign,    the  number   of  the  note   is  placed   on  each  side  of 

the   signs   referred   to    (<?.  g.   * *) ;   when   a  note  refers   to  a  whole 

line  of  the  text ,  the  number  of  the  note  is  placed  at  the  beginning  of  that  line. 
Duplicates  of  a  text  are  cited  by  the  capitals  A,  JB,  C  etc.  Restorations  are  placed 
within  brackets  [  ];  dupl.  =  "duplicate";  1.  =  "line";  r.  =  "restored  from". 


PLATE  i. 


IS0.1.  OBVERSE.. 


ro 


IS 


<fHg^^ 

Viir-w4-prfi|rir.MfpF 


PLATE  2. 


NO.-f.OBY.  (CONT.) 


Ef 


3_  3 


-*rf 


<  ^w«» 


35- 


NO.-f.  REVERSE. 


46' 


<n, 


C  . 


PLATES 


NCU.  Rev.ccow.) 


.       8. QuHtJutf    f^tttei.  <m. C . 


PLATE4. 


20 


Kaitt,<f.to-,i,*ttC^}cXmA,«  <**+!. *f (tM-ZOj  «AH'il'Ja&L«*&l»ffl'fu  f*~?*''   . 
ktfotjeO&LtuC    *  cL+l.  of  &.**-**]  K.«\cJU*/0,  *  <t~*l.^U.l*~*9;  o^UKLIf^AJ 

tt.Y-o^ccf^^e,  t* AL*<.+fu.  W.-4Z.    i.5uo-/»^^«o«^a/f9^^vt-^' 

JVwvx,  «VE.^^.«W^  Zw»ii>t,»»t«^ts^Oi^A.    5.A«£tff^-    4  A^"f  A^«'^ 


T4. 


1if.r:SD. 


NO.  JL  REVERSE. 


PLATE  5 


*  < 


3K_fc«r    A 
*PtT  «$— 


TF 


rf  ®r  v  ^^c 


t3 


<X  _  1i  < 


N0.3 


! 


<          ^ 


^^^"t*^^^  *tft*x 


<  ]       <  ff  If 


10 


16- 


3. 


NO. 4.  OBVERSE.. 


N0.4.  REVERSE  . 

^///////^//^^^^ 


30 


40 


PLATE  9. 


MO.  5-. 


^m^m^w^m^^/^ 


NO.  6.  OBVERSE. 


PLATE  10. 


70 


14- 


»»f  Tf 


I 


I 


W//////////y/s////////////Y///////////w^^^ 


No.  6.  OBV.CCONT.) 


30 


S-* 

/*ff    N- 

tit  rw    a: 


IfO 


.  3 


NO.  6  .  OBV.  CCONT.) 


.    S-.vrCE.   6  rrC  . 
U.  0»^it«t  4v  S  . 


/ 

.  8  B 


9  ^ 
.    fV.CE 


NO.  6.  REVERSE.. 


PLATE  13 


/^^^^^ 


f.cftf  HMf/MMr 

E  .  ft 


NO.  6.  RE.V.CCONT.) 


PLATE  14 


(PLASTER      SUPPORT) 


miiiiMi/^w/iwiMim 


NO.7.  OBVERSE.. 


% 


u  ^y-T  fr^T"  PJjC Hn 


fo//////S///M/////////W/4////M^^ 


l 


PLATE  16 


NO.7.  OBY.CCONT.) 


NO.7.  REVERSE.. 


n* 


fr 


1 

I 


.    i. 


.    4.  r-.AD.    5". 


.  ff.it 


NO.  7.  REV.  (CONT.) 


1.V. 


PLATE  18. 


NO. 8. 


IS 


N0.9.0BVERSE. 


PLATE  19. 


«i* 


NO.  9.  REVERSE. 


PLATE  20. 


1 


'f#W.  &&.    V 


NO.  10.  OBVERSE. 


PLATE  21. 


PLATE  22 


NO.  10.  REVERSE., 


PLATE  23 


NO. If.  OBVERSE. 


PLATE 


N0.1t.OBY.(CO/VT.) 


NO.  11.  REVERSE. 


fee 


W- 


56- 


PLATE. 25. 


NO.  11.  REV.(CONT.) 


4o 


40 


45- 


NO.  11.  OBVERSE. 


PLATE. 26 


< 


(1- 


K 6753^ 


NO.U.  OBV.CCONT.) 


%-^FFF<   jr*f 
HffriSfr&r    I 

^r 

<  wrr 


Z .  T.  A  .      3 


NO.U.OBY.CCONT.) 


PHTE.29. 


NO.U.  REVERSE  . 


SO 


^-*fr-r£ff        tfTF  ^T 


wf-tfF 


£K 


IT 


TFIT 


p— 
B= 


TFTF 


IT 


;  (i.8fa^L88 


uru  C  <w> 


.     tt. 


< 


NO.U.REV.CCONT.) 


PLATE.  30 


r? 


$r  KV —    £n 

:  CWFJ    IF     [  *fcf  ] 

nr  <w  i^n 

^r      «i 

«^r     ETK  g^ 


<E — 


trr 


< 


.  D 


-  TOO 


.   s.  DFTTT^.   «  .  D 

^  O  .     to.  V:O  . 


NO.a.REV.CCONT.) 


ff5 


r  ^rrr 


tl^t,  w  E  .    8.  E 


PLATE. 32. 


NO.  13.  OBVERSE:. 


% 


IT 


<®  — 


TF 


•v. 


% 


J 

4X 

m 


wmw/mmm 


\ 


NO.  73.  REVERSE. 


PLATE33 


NO.  14. 


PLATE  34. 


NO.  15. 


r  prrrr 


pruiffflnrp—j  ^^r^. 


NO. 16. OBVERSE. 


PLATE  35 


% 


NO.  J6.  RELY  ERSE 


*'*Kt** 


10 


NO.  1. 


-p** 
f 


PLATE 3fi. 


NO  Id.  OBVERSE. 


^^^ 


A 


TF 


Jr. 

i 
8.  A 


^*>  ^  A  , 


^  A  .     6.  A 


.     7. 


ro 


A  «*i«f  6. 


PLATE  37. 


NO.  18.  REVERSE. 


r7 


20 


///^^^ 

'frWff///f/'"" 


.    3.r:8;A 


.     7- 


V 


NO. f9.  OBVERSE. 


PLATE  36. 


**?  WT   < 


IHT 


pr* — 
A^EL     r> 


rr 


rr  TF 


?o 


NO.  19.  REVERSE. 


26* 


< 


NO.  z.0.  OBVERSE. 


PLATE  40. 


M 


NO. *0.  REVERSE. 


'PLATE4I 


NO.Zf.  OBVERSE. 


N0.21.0BY.(CCNT.) 


PLATE43 


5-4- 


6s 


<^F 


REVERSE. 
\ 

I 


"% 

i= 


[If  If] 


w 


¥ 


%/ 


rmr-        V   ^T     IT 


V          TF  V— 


Jfc   If 


NO.if.RElV.CCONT.) 


PLATE44. 


PLATE45 


NO. II.  OBVERSE. 


^r 


E  r 


7i 


mk 


20 


PLATE46 


N0.22.0BV.CCONT.) 


r.S 


.    5.  v.  6 


NO.  2.2,.  REVERSE:. 


PL  AT  e47 


NO.  13. 


.PL ATE  48 


> 


W^*, 


NO. 


NO.  t6. OBVERSE. 


i^m 


NO. 


, 


if  ^p1Bfl$ 


nrj 


NO.  16.  REV  ERSE. 


f  .^f.4-  of  NO.  14-,  (.if 


23 


'///////////////w////////^^^ 


<rf-tf.4v.M-.    I.r.AB 


t     ... 

t5-AH^.^ 


NO.Zfi. 


PLATE  50. 


** 


///y///////y/////^^^^ 


H- 


WW/^///^/W^////^^^ 


10 


NO. 


1.  or 

4*= 


-27;  ^.  r  .- 


NO.  so.  OBVERSE. 


PLATE  51. 


NO.  30.  REVERSE. 


PLATE  52 


IF 


rf 


tr 


MT  r 


rr 


/ 


JOO 


SO 


.3.     3. 


PLATE  53 


N0.3t. 


<rf 


«y/*^/^///^///^^ 


N0.33.  OBVERSE. 


PLATE  54 


ZO 


fffif  £T 

lffc«ir»»«r*'* 

VYjr 

w**~- 


Tf  < 

erff 

^-^•^•^<5p^<m^r^ 

*«#^^jjm 

^   <^<&rWti 


if 


IT 


L 
r< 


N0.33.  REVERSE. 


PLATE  55 


30 


w- 


V 


n? 


fl* 


3o 


35 


40 


'illinium ^f 


.     9.Ar- 


PLATE  5« 


NO.  34.. 


IF 


'^//w////^^^^^ 


w///////////^///^///^^ 

NO.  55,  OB  VERSE. 


% 


*rrr 

^  <     „,/ 

^r»^      ~mi' 

\L^T 


N0.3S  REVERSE. 


N0.36. 


PLATE  57 


\ 


TF 


NO.  37 


^ 

Tf 


[ 


*  * 


,n     ^...-. 


PLATE  b8 


NO.  38. 


r 

tF 


'/0//tWW/#WMflWVW///////WMirWl//W/WVW/''fl'//#/W//<#/4t* 


NO.  39. 


S  """f/a. 

#  r^r     i^n 


N0.40. 


PLATE  59 


MS/////;/;/////////////;/////////;///. 


*r 


N0.41. 

WnMIWMlW/H/fMMf/MMUn/l/tfH/lltl1'        V'1 


C  IP 


etc. 


N0.4J..OBYEKSE:. 


N0.«.  REVERSE. 


PLATE. 60 


N0.43. 


% 


N0.44-. 


NO.4-5!  OBVERSE. 


N0.45.REVCRSE. 


a 

"//^nn.'llll 


PLATE  61. 


N0.46. 


/  me  if  #r  py 

m 


w//////////////////w//>y^^^^^ 


*-      TK 


I  B^-wK 


ftV<&# 

tf% 


UK 


F 


01  A. 


N0.47 


PLATE  62 


fv 


IFF 


N0.48.0BVERSE. 


<Tr- 


|ff=V 


FfrvK 


ro 


PLATE  63 


N0.48.  REVERSE. 


*nwi^wH^ 


<  ^ 


N0.49-  REVERSE. 


N0.49  OBVERSE. 


* 


IT  wf< 


wn= 


ffj 


'W////r////^/////////////////y//^^^^ 


y////////////' 


PLATE  64. 


N0.50.0BVERSE. 


%> 


""//,%, 


PLATE  66 


NO.  50.  REVERSE. 


1* 


N0.5I. 


PLATE  66. 


\ 
\ 


rr 


^^ 


N0.5X,. 


, 


<P^%^////////////////////^^^^ 


nr 


PLATE  67 


N0.53.  OBVERSE. 


py 


PLATE  6«. 


N0.55.REVERSE. 


PLATE. 69. 


NO.  54. 

y////////////////////////////^^^^^ 


'1%. 


N0.55 


<      ^  ^      H^     ITI 

//////////^/////////////^///^^^^^ 


PLATE  70 


IM0.6T  OBVERSE. 


10 


D*r  rr4rr4r~ 

K»K     $S 


if  HT  TF 


N0.57.REVERSE. 


1* 


H 


%* 


ll/"' 


N0.58.03YERSE. 


N0.58  REVERSE. 


^r  ^r      v 
#*  <  #  TT  H^  rF, 

p^ 

rrf 


/5 


N0.59. 


PLATE  71. 


PLATE  72 


N0.60.  OBVERSE. 


^ 


NO.  60.  REVERSE.. 


N0.6T. 


PLATC73 


V 


'HtWIIHIIHttlllllHIHIll* 


[ff 


IT 


VIIII/lltlHII/lllllltlllll. 


< 


%P    I 


m 


Kfi 


A. 


fi0.6t.  OBVERSE. 


PLATE  74. 


PLATE  75. 


N0.6Z.  REVERSE. 


40 


IT  &fc 


^    £8r^*HA^j 

t& 


A 


5o 


40 


ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS. 


PlATETS 


(se«. 


rn* 


ttP 


tar 


m 

A. 


•riflo 


TF 


(BROKEN 


w 


Mo. 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
