Antiquities of Mexico, Vol. VIII (Lord Kingsborough (Edward King), 1848)
========================================================================
Kingsborough's Antiquities of Mexico, Vol. 8. Completes the 9-volume set. Public domain. Internet Archive.

ras 

30 

ANTIQUITIES OF MEXICO: 

COMPRISING 

FAC-SIMILES 

OF 

ANCIENT MEXICAN PAINTINGS AND HIEROGLYPHICS, 

PRESERVED 

IN THE ROYAL LIBRARIES OF PARIS, BERLIN, AND DRESDEN ; 
IN THE IMPERIAL LIBRARY OF VIENNA ; 
IN THE VATICAN LIBRARY ; 
IN THE BORGIAN MUSEUM AT ROME; 
IN THE LIBRARY OF THE INSTITUTE AT BOLOGNA ; 
AND IN THE BODLEIAN LIBRARY AT OXFORD. 

TOGETHER WITH 

THE MONUMENTS OF NEW SPAIN, 

By M. DUPAIX: 

WITH THEIR RESPECTIVE 

SCALES OF MEASUREMENT AND ACCOMPANYING DESCRIPTIONS. 

THE WHOLE ILLUSTRATED BY MANY VALUABLE 

Huevited PHanuscripts, 

By LORD KINGSBOROUGH. 

THE DRAWINGS, ON STONE, BY A. AGLIO. 

IN NINE VOLUMES. 

VOL. VIII. 

PRINTED BY RICHARD AND JOHN E. TAYLOR, RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET, 

PUBLISHED BY HENRY G. BOHN, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN. 

M.DCCC.XLVIII. 

SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES. 

[The following Nores are a continuation of those inserted at the end of the Sixth Volume. | 

Nore XXXI. 

PARKHURST, quoting in his Hebrew Lexicon a passage from Plato, cited by Grotius in a note subjoined to the 
twelfth chapter of the fourth book of his treatise ‘De Veritate Religionis Christiane,’ immediately adds, “Can one 
help thinking that Plato had seen, or at least heard of, Isaiah’s prophecy, chap. liii. ver.2.? since in the second book of 
his Republic (Edit. Serrani, vol.ii. p. 361.) he says, that in order to exhibit the character of a man perfectly just, it is 
necessary that his virtue should be stripped of all external recommendations, so that by others he should be reckoned 
a wicked person, should be mocked,—‘ paorrywoera, orpeBrwcerar, Sednoeta, exkavOnoerar Tw OPOalpw, redevTwy 
mara kaka Trabwy, avacywovdevOncera, —scourged, tortured, bound, have both his eyes burnt out, and at last, having 
suffered all kinds of evils, be cut in pieces as a sacrifice, or (as some think the Greek word signifies) be hung up or 
crucified.” Stephens in his Greek Lexicon, referring to the same passage of Plato, assigns the signification of ‘ cruci- 
fied’ to avacywévAevOncera. “ Porro ejusdem originis cum cywevAnorc est compositum avacyvevAevecbar, idem significans 
quod avackoXomecOa, in palum tolli, in crucem tolli, ut apud Plat. lib. 2. De Rep. reAeutwy wavta Kaka avacywovdev- 
Onoerat. Apud Hesychium non per x sed per x scribitur avacy wovAeves bar, avackoAomoOnva.” But Parkhurst appears 
to prefer the signification of ‘ cutting in pieces’, evidently from a regard to the meaning of the verb avacyifw, of which 
it is a derivative, which signifies ‘to cut up’, and when applied to animals would mean the act of cutting them in 
pieces for the pot or cauldron, or of preparing them for the spit; whence the verb avacywdvAcvecIa might in the first 
instance have acquired the signification of ‘in palum tolli, and afterwards of ‘in crucem tolli. The authority of 
Stephens, who adduces that of Hesychius in corroboration of his definition, is doubtless great; but the etymological 
argument is on the side of Parkhurst ; and there can be no reason why the verb avacywdvAcveoOa should not be under- 
stood both in the sense of ‘ being crucified,’ and of ‘being cut up for the cauldron.’ If, however, there are grounds 
for supposing that the above passage in the Republic of Plato relates to the sufferings and crucifixion of Christ (and 
that there are strong grounds for so thinking cannot be denied, although it is much more probable that the early 
Christian Fathers interpolated the works of that philosopher, as they did those of many other ancient authors, than 
that Plato should have perused the prophecy of Isaiah), may we not refer to the seventy-third page of the Borgian MS., 
which represents Quecalcoatle both crucified, and as it were cut in pieces for the cauldron, and with equal reason 
demand, whether any one can help thinking that the Jews of the New World applied to their Messiah not only all the 
prophecies contained in the Old Testament relating to Christ, but likewise many of the incidents recorded of him in 
the Gospels. Few, we will venture to say, can doubt, after reading the note subjoined to page 107 of the sixth volume 
of this work, which contains a list of the names and types under which the Mexicans adored Quecalcoatle, that this 
was the case. The history of the life of that mysterious personage, which will be found at page 258 of the same volume, 
especially if considered in connection with what is said of Totec* at page 179,—who, like John the Baptist and 

* The literal signification of Totec is ‘ our stone’; that proper name being compounded of fo ‘ our’, and tecpatl ‘a stone’; to which 
derivation the interpreter of the Codex Telleriano-Remensis alludes when he says, at page 130 of the sixth volume, that the signification 
of the proper name Iztapaltotec is ‘the bloody knife of Iztapali’. It might be alleged as a reason for the Jews representing Elias with the 
symbol of a stone knife, that their ancestors circumcised their male children with a knife of that description, and that Elias was the patron 

4 NOTES. 

Elias, went about clothed in a skin*, calling on the people to repent, and, like the latter, was dreadful in the vengeance 
which he took upon his enemies f, flaying them alive when he overcame them,—will serve still more to strengthen the 

of that rite, whom they believed to be more zealous even than Moses for its due performance, and to be invisibly present at the circums 
cision of all Jewish children: hence the Rabbis direct that a vacant chair should be placed for Elias near that of the Mohel, or the cir- 
cumciser. The Mexicans, it deserves to be remarked, had a similar custom of placing a vacant chair at every angle of their streets for 
Tezcatlipoca!, who they imagined to be frequently present amongst their habitations. The adoption of that honorary distinction might 
have been borrowed from the command which God gave to the Jews to place a seat for him upon the ark, and between the cherubim in 
that part of the tabernacle which was called the Holy of Holies; which seat was named the Mercy Seat, and was a principal appurtenance 
to the tabernacle. The numerous seats which were placed for Tezcatlipoca in Mexico might have been intended to show, that the mercy 
of that supreme god of the Mexicans was everywhere present in his favourite city and amongst his chosen people. We must not omit, in 
explaining the signification of the proper name Totec, to remark further, that ‘a stone’, ‘a tried stone’, ‘a foundation stone’, ‘ a corner stone’, 
are expressions frequently made use of by the Hebrew prophets, to which the signification of the word Totec might bear some allusion. 

* St. Mark, in the sixth verse of the first chapter of his Gospel, says of John the Baptist, «« And John was clothed with camel’s hair, 
and with a girdle of a skin about his loins; and he did eat locusts and wild honey.” It deserves to be remarked, that the Mexicans like 
the Jews ate locusts. Sahagun says, at page 361 of his History of New Spain, that these locusts were named by them Acachpoli. 

+ Elias, who is otherwise named Elijah in Scripture, called down fire from heaven upon his enemies, in the manner related at page 405 
of the sixth volume of this work. He was considered by the Jews a precursor of the Messiah, and another Moses; and as the latter was 
esteemed a harbinger of Christ, so the former was accounted a forerunner of John the Baptist, although there are grounds for supposing 
that the credulous amongst the Jews might have imagined that Moses himself would become incarnate in the person of the Messiah, and that 
Elijah would discharge the office of Aaron. It is deserving of notice, that the Mexicans, like the Jews, manifested a predilection for two 
heads in their hierarchy; to which the latter, who were unacquainted with the doctrine of the Trinity, might have been further disposed, 
from the mention which is made in the fourteenth verse of the fourth chapter of Zechariah, of the two anointed ones that stood by the 
Lord of the whole earth, whom they might have supposed to be Moses and Aaron, the one of whom had been anointed a prophet, and 
the other a priest by God. Elyah is praised in terms of almost extravagant eulogy in the forty-eighth chapter of the Book of Ecclesias- 
ticus; in the thirteenth verse of which it is said, that “after his death his body prophesied :” and he is extolled in the seventeenth and 
eighteenth verses of the fifth chapter of the General Epistle of St. James, for causing by his prayers rain to be denied to the earth for three 
years and six months ; which passage we shall here transcribe, on account of its wonderful resemblance to what is said at page 177 of the 
sixth volume of this work, of the virtue and efficacy of the prayers offered up by Quecalcoatle om a similar occasion, although the period 
during which the Mexicans believed that the earth had suffered drought was not three years and six months, but four entire years. “ Elias 
was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain: and-it rained not on the earth by the space of 
three years and six months. And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.” From what is said 
in the seventeenth chapter of St. Matthew, of Moses and Elias appearing to Christ at the time of his transfiguration, and from the 
questions put to the latter by his disciples, and his reply to them, it is evident that John the Baptist was really prefigured in the person of , 
Elias, than whom Christ declares a greater had not been born of woman: and the general belief of the Jewish populace in Elias is 
further apparent from the forty-ninth verse of the twenty-seventh chapter of St. Matthew. From all which it is evident that the Jewish 
belief in the coming of the future Messiah was intimately connected with their belief in the coming of Elias; or in other words, that 
Christ’s would not be an isolated advent; which renders the coincidence the more singular, that the Mexicans should have believed both 
in Quecalcoatle and Totec. 

1 This fact is stated by Sahagun in the second chapter of the third book of his History of New Spain, where some of the names and 
attributes of Tezcatlipoca are also enumerated. Amongst the former, Yaotzin is very deserving of notice, which is the same as Yao, 
with the addition of the reverential termination ézin. The Jews were accustomed to bestow many names upon Jehovah, as is plain from 
the words of Hosea in the sixteenth verse of the second chapter of his Prophecies; “ And it shall be at that day, saith the Lord, that thou 
shalt call me Jsh?, and shalt call me no more Baali:” which passage of Scripture is very remarkable, as it clearly shows that the Jews 
worshiped God under the name of Baali, and reminds us that they frequently offered human sacrifices to Baal. The meaning of the 
proper name Tezcatlipoca is explained at page 487 of the sixth volume; and it is there said to be compounded of T’ezca (a metaphorical 
name in all probability for Mount Sinai), ¢d/ ‘dark’, and poca ‘ smoke’, and to refer to the manner in which the supreme God of the 
Mexicans manifested himself to their ancestors when on their pilgrimage from Aztlan. The Jews might have been led, from remi- 
niscences of the flight of the children of Israel from Egypt, when the Lord went before them in a pillar of cloud by day, and a pillar of 
fire by night, and of the promulgation of the Mosaic code of laws? amidst fire and smoke from Mount Sinai, to bestow the name of 
Tezcatlipoca upon Jehovah. It deserves also to be remarked, that one of the attributes which David ascribes to the Deity in the Psalms, 
is the causing hills and mountains by his mere touch to smoke: “He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth ; he toucheth the hills, and 

@ The Mosaic code is pronounced to be a fiery law in the second verse of the thirty-third chapter of Deuteronomy ; which name was 
given to it either from the manner of its delivery, or from its adjudging criminals in so many cases to be burnt alive. 2 

NOTES. 5 

conviction ; since who, on reading (in the last-mentioned page) of Quecalcoatle* and Huemac being joint kings: of 
Tula ; of the cup with which Titlacaoa or Tezcatlipoca presented Quecalcoatle to drink, accosting him at the same 
time with the salutation of My Son}; of his unwillingness to taste it, and of his weeping bitterly after having drank 
its contents ; of his forsaking his temporal kingdom of Tula for the immortal kingdom of Tlapallan, being called away 
by the god who was the Sun{; of his departure on the day to which the sign of four earthquakes{ was dedicated in 

* Tt was foretold that the Messiah of the Jews should be a king, a priest, a prophet, and the son of God; and it is singular that the 
Mexicans should have believed that Quecalcoatle united in his own person these various characters. ‘Thou art a priest for ever after 
the order of Melchizedek,” was spoken of the future Messiah by David, whom Melchizedek the king of Salem typified, to whom Abraham 
paid tithes, and who is said, in the eighteenth verse of the fourteenth chapter of Genesis, to have been both king and priest: “ And Mel- 
chizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was the priest of the most high God.” Extraordinary importance’ has 
always been attached to the fact of Abraham having paid tithes to Melchizedek; yet no commentator on Scripture has been able to 
explain who Melchizedek was; of whom even St. Paul, in the second and third verses of the seventh chapter of his Epistle to the 
Hebrews, speaks in such ambiguous terms, as to leave it doubtful whether he does not mean that he was Christ himself: since how can 
the description, “ without father, without mother, without descent (or rather whose generation is undeclared, for that is the strict meaning 
of ayevendoynros), having neither beginning of days, nor end of life,” apply to a mere mortal? And does not the Apostle, in using the 

expression ayevexAorynros, seem to refer to the words of Isaiah in the eighth verse of the fifty-third chapter of his Prophecies, confessedly 
spoken of the Messiah, “ Who shall declare his generation?” The passage in the original Greek is as follows ; « ATATML, GUNTWo, dryevEct 
AoynTos’ pte & exHY Hyucowv unre Coons Teds exwyr &hwmormpevos de TH viw Tov Osou, paver legeus eig ro Siyvexes’: and it deserves to be noticed, 
that the Mexicans bestowed the appellation of the orphan god upon the deity whom they named Cinteotl. “Of the fruit of thy body 
will I set upon thy throne,” is a prophecy occurring in the hundred-and-thirty-second Psalm, to which St. Peter appeals in the thirtieth 
verse of the second chapter of the Acts, to prove that Christ was a king, who on several occasions named himself the King of the Jews: 
and it is generally supposed that the wise men of the East intended to recognise him in the triple character of a king, a priest, and a 
prophet, by presenting to him three kinds of gifts, gold, frankincense, and myrrh, each suitable to these three offices. 
' + Vide the fourth chapter of the third book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain ; 3; where he mentions Quecalcoatle’s extreme unwilling- 
ness to taste the cup presented to him by Titlacaoa, and his first declining it,—a fact not noticed by Torquemada. 

{ The appellation of ‘ the Sun’ is bestowed upon God in more places than one in Scripture. Isaiah, in the twentieth verse of the sixtieth 
chapter of his Prophecies, uses the allegorical expression of ‘thy Sun’ to signify God; and David names God ‘a Sun’ in the eleventh verse 
of the eighty-fourth Psalm: “ For the Lord God is a Sun and shield; the Lord will give grace and glory; no good thing will he withhold 
from them that walk uprightly.” It is scarcely necessary to observe, that ancient mythology frequently confounds allegories with facts, 
reducing the whole into an incongruous mass. 

§ The sign of four earthquakes placed immediately under the chair of Quecalcoatle in the forty-fourth page of the Borgian MS. , may 
either allude to the day of his departure or to his second advent and the destruction of the world, when the sun should be i in the sign 
of four earthquakes; which is probably what is signified by the same sign carved in the centre of the ancient piece of Mesican 
sculpture usually designated the Mexican Calendar, a representation of which will be found in the American Monuments of. Baron de 
Humboldt. In the upper compartment of the above-mentioned plate are the signs of the Cane and the Rabbit, both of which were dedi- 
cated to Quecalcoatle; but whether the latter in this place is symbolical of suffering innocence, or may not, from being placed within a 
pitcher of water, afford grounds for supposing that the Jews attributed to their Messiah the miracle recorded in the New Testament of 
water being changed into wine, it is impossible to decide. The circumstance of Christ declaring himself in the first verse of the fifteenth 
chapter of the Gospel of St. John to be the true vine, singularly coincides with the fact that Mexi (the other name which the Mexicans 
gave to Quecalcoatle) should also signify the pulp of the aloe, from which they obtained wine, as stated by Torquemada in the twenty- 
third chapter of the third book of his Indian Monarchy; which passage it is unnecessary to cite, as it will be found in the note su bjoined 
to page 232 of the sixth volume of the present work ; where likewise, at page 63, will be found some further reasons, chiefly grounded on 
the Mexican marriage ceremonies, for supposing that the Mexicans might have been acquainted with that history ; since their retaining so 
many customs analogous to those which existed amongst the Jews in the age of Christ, argues their having retained analogous traditions 
likewise: and it is highly probable that they worshiped Quecalcoatle as the god of wine under the other appellation of Ometochtli, 
which name signifies ‘two rabbits.’ It has been observed at page 211 of the same volume, that the signification of the Mexican proper 
name Centzontotochtin—which name is compounded of centzontli four hundred, and totochtin (the plural of tochtl) a rabbit—affords 

they smoke,” is a passage which occurs in the hundred-and-fourth Psalm ; to which the invocation in the fifth verse of the hundred-and- 
forty-fourth Psalm,—* Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down; touch the mountains, and they shall smoke,” —nearly corresponds. 
That to give a name to God, itself significant and commemorative of some divine interposition, was not foreign to Hebrew usage, may 
be proved from the example of Hagar, who is said in the thirteenth verse of the sixteenth chapter of Genesis to have: given a name.to 
him, commemorative of the circumstance of his having seen her: “ And she called the name of the Lord that spake unto her, Thou God 
seest me: for she said, Have I also here looked after him that seeth me?” But how much more important an event in Hebrew history 
was his manifestation of himself to the Jews on Mount Sinai, than his conversing with Hagar! and how much greater reason would 
‘there appear for a name to have been given him from the former than from the latter circumstance ! 

VOL. VII. Ge») 

6 NOTES. 

the Mexican calendar ; of his promise to return again with great power to avenge himself of his enemies, and to 
redeem his people ; and of the belief of the Mexican kings, that the sceptre should not depart from them till Quecal- 
coatle came ;—but must immediately recollect what is said in the New Testament of Christ frequently naming himself 
the king of the Jews, confessing at the same time that he was only their spiritual king, their temporal sovereign being 
Herod; which name, due attention being paid to the genius of the Mexican language, which excluded from its 
alphabet the letters 7 and d, is a near approximation to that of Huemac; of his prayer to his Heavenly Father to let 
the cup pass away from him, which is recorded by St. Matthew in the thirty-ninth verse of the twenty-sixth chapter 
of his Gospel; “‘And he went a little further, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, 
let this cup pass from me ; nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt,” and which was pronounced more than once, 
as we learn from the forty-second and forty-fourth verses of the same chapter, “ He went away again the second time, 
and prayed, saying, O my father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink.it, thy will be done.” “And 
he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying the same words ;” and which is likewise men- 
tioned by St. Luke in the following passage of the twenty-second chapter of his Gospel, to which the painting con- 
tained in the seventy-fourth page of the Codex Borgianus may bear some allusion; “ And he came out, and went, 
as he was wont, to the mount of Olives; and his disciples also followed him. And when he was at the place, he said 
unto, them, Pray that ye enter not into temptation. And he was withdrawn from them about a stone’s cast, and kneeled 
down, and prayed, saying, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me; névertheless not my will, but thine 
be done. And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him. And being in an agony, he prayed 

also some indication that they were acquainted with the miracle of the legion of devils being driven into the herd of swine: nor is there 
a possibility of denying, after it has once been proved that they were acquainted with one miracle or prophecy recorded in Scripture, 
that they were acquainted with more :—on the contrary, the alternative which might have appeared improbable at first, becomes the 
greater probability. Quecalcoatle is represented in the same plate as receiving an offering of blood, or propitiatory sacrifice, as is more 
fully explained i in the note subjoined to page 274 of the same volume: and repugnant as the idea may appear to Christians, many 
passages might be adduced from the Old Testament, which might have led the Jews to suppose that the future Messiah would require 
the blood of his enemies by way of expiation, and for the fulfilment of prophecy. One of the earliest prophecies relating to the advent 
of the Messiah occurs in the thirty-second chapter of Deuteronomy, where Moses introduces in his Song, God declaring in his own name 
that he would take vengeance on his enemies, and that the Messiah would take vengeance on them also. The passage containing this 
prophecy is as follows: “I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh ; and that with the blood of the 
slain and of the captives, from the beginning of revenges upon the enemy. Rejoice, O ye nations, with Ais people ; for he will avenge 
the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people.” This 
passage deserves to be compared with another quoted from the Revelations in the note subjoined to page 98 of the sixth volume, in 
which the remarkable words, “I saw an angel standing in the sun,” occur ;—a conception which has been embodied in painting in the 
twenty-third page of the Mexican MS. preserved in the Imperial Library at Vienna. The latter passage in the Revelations relates to 
the second advent of the Messiah and to the day of judgment, to which it is probable that the representation of Quecalcoatle seated on a 
throne, in the sixth page of the Borgian MS., refers. It is singular that Christ’s prophecy respecting his second advent, as recorded by 
St. Matthew in the twenty-fourth chapter of his Gospel, should abruptly terminate with the words “ For wheresoever the carcase is, there 
will the eagles be gathered together ;” since the connection between that verse and the preceding, “ For as the lightning cometh out of the 
east, and shineth even unto the west, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be,” is by no means apparent, although it may possibly 
allude to the punishment of the wicked, and to the prophetical language of Isaiah in the eleventh verse of the forty-sixth chapter of his 
Prophecies, “ Calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man that executeth my counsel from a far country.” ‘That the passage referred to 
in the thirty-second chapter of Deuteronomy must be understood of the Messiah, will be evident from considering the same passage as it 
stands in the Greek Septuagint, which varies not a little from the original Hebrew; a circumstance that does not derogate from its 
authority, since the omitted sentence, mpooxuvycarwoay airy mavres dyyeros Ocou, “let all the angels of God worship him,” is verbally cited 
by St. Paul in the’sixth verse of the first chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews; and these words can only refer to the Messiah. The 
language of David in the hundred-and-tenth Psalm nearly resembles that employed by Moses in his Song; and it never has been doubted 
that the entire of the following passage relates to the coming of the future Messiah, “The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou 
art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek: the Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath: he shall 
judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead bodies ; he shall wound the heads over many countries : he shall drink of the 
brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up the head.” The fulfilment of the concluding prophecy, ‘he shall drink of the brook in the 
way,” is nowhere recorded in the New Testament: but the Mexicans had a tradition of Quecalcoatle’s coming to the fountain Cozcaapan 
or Goaapan, and throwing strings of beads into it; but whether he drank of it also must remain unknown. A singular representation 
of a male figure wounded in the head, and in the act of offering incense to a cieonaee whose neck’ is adorned with the symbol of the sun, 

occurs in the fortieth page of the Borgian MS. 

NOTES: 7 7 

more earnestly ; and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood* falling down to the ground ;’—of his describing 
himself in his speech to four of his disciples as a traveller about to take a far journey, which is thus related by St. 
Mark inthe thirty-fourth verse of the thirteenth chapter of his Gospel, “ For the Son of Man is'as a man taking a far 
journey ;” of his drinking vinegar from a reed, as recorded in the thirty-sixth verse of the fifteenth chapter of the same 
Gospel ; of his declaration that he was going to his Heavenly Father ; of the great earthquake} which occurred at the 
Crucifixion, which is mentioned in the fifty-first and fifty-second verses of the twenty-seventh chapter of St. Matthew, 
“And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, and the earth did quake, and the 
tocks rent, and the graves were opened, and many bodies of the saints which slept arose ;” of his sudden disappearance 
from his disciples, and ascent into heaven, as related in the fifty-first verse of the twenty-fourth chapter of St. Luke, 
which recalls to our recollection what is said at pages 119 and 82 of the sixth volume of the present work, of the my- 
sterious disappearance or death of Quecalcoatle whilst hastening on his journey to the kingdom of Tlapallan ; and of the 
Mexican tradition of Huitzilopuchtli being seated on the left hand of Tezcatlipoca; of his having previously foretold to 
them his second advent and the day of judgment, which was to be ushered in with earthquakes and an eclipse, like 
_ those which occurred on the day of the Crucifixion, verifying the words of the prophet Joel, as cited in the second chap- 
ter of the Acts, “And I will show wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath ; blood and fire and vapour 
of smoke: the sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before that great and notable day of the 
Lord § come ;” and of his promise that the Holy Ghost should descend upon the earth after he had left it, to which 
and to the account in the second chapter of the Acts of the descent of the fiery tongues upon the Apostles, the 

* Such appear to be represented in the painting. 

‘+ Boturini affirms, as has already been mentioned in the note subjoined to the fifth page of the sixth volume of the present work, that 
the Tultecas recorded in their historical paintings the great eclipse which took place at the Crucifixion; and Balboa asserts, in his Miscel- 
lanea Antarctica, that the Peruvians had a tradition of the graves being opened about the same period. It would not, therefore, have been 
surprising if the Mexicans, who were descended from the Tultecas, had preserved a tradition of the earthquake that accompanied the 
eclipse, and which was the cause of the graves being opened, and had introduced it in their paintings. Having referred to the note at the 
fifth page of the above-mentioned volume, we shall take occasion to observe, in reference to a remark there made respecting the probable 
age of Christ at the time of his crucifixion, that that remark is justified by the answer which the Jews are recorded, in the fifty-seventh 
verse of the eighth chapter of St. John, to have made to him on his telling them that Abraham rejoiced to see his day; “Then said the 
Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou seen Abraham?” Nor need it be pointed out that the argument to which 
the Jews had recourse required that they should state, as nearly as they could, the full age of Christ. The observation in the sixth page 
of the volume referred to, that the primitive Christians anticipated the end of the world as an event momentarily at hand, is grounded on 
the words of Christ in the thirty-fourth verse of the twenty-fourth chapter of St. Matthew; “ Verily I say unto you, This generation shall 
not pass till a// these things be fulfilled :” but some of the things foretold in the above-mentioned chapters were the end of the world and 
the day of judgment. We shall not, however, run the risk of being accused of pedantry, by recurring in this place to syllogistic forms. 
Job’s imprecation, in the third chapter of his Book, on the day in which he was born, and the night in which he was conceived, and his 
ejaculation in the sixth verse, “As for that night, let darkness seize upon it, let it not be joined unto the days of the year, let it not come 
into the number of the months,” might have suggested to the Jews the idea of commemorating great national calamities, such as the 
destruction of their temple and the dispersion of their tribes, by setting apart certain days in their calendar as bitter, and not joining them 
to the days of the year, or reckoning them in the number of the months; which was precisely what the Mexicans did with the five days 
named by them Nemontemi, which, though included in an intercalation, were not, joined to the three hundred and sixty days of their 
year, nor admitted into the number of their eighteen months, each of which was allotted to a particular festival. It is probable that the 
institution of the Nemontemi, or bitter days, amongst the Mexicans, preceded and led to the institution of the bitter year at the expi- 
ration of every cycle of fifty-two years; when if the year, as in the case of the Nemontemi, had been intercalated without being added to 
the number of the years which preceded and followed it, the Mexican and the Hebrew jubilees would have consisted of the same number 
of years, and we should further discover traces of a Sabbatical year. 

t It is singular that the Mexicans should have believed that Quecalcoatle departed on the day of four earthquakes, and that the end of 
the world would occur on the same sign, as stated, by the interpreter of the Codex Telleriano-Nemensis, at page 111 of the sixth volume 
of the Antiquities of Mexico, and by the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus, at page 208. We may here observe, that the Mexican 
tradition that the world would be destroyed when the sun should be in the sign of four earthquakes, seems really to relate to the advent of 
Quecaleoatle, who was typified by the sun, and to the destruction of the world by fire produced by earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. 

§ «The day of the Lord’ and ‘the year of the Lord’ are Scripture phrases, significative of the day of judgment or of retribution. 
St. Luke employs the latter in the nineteenth verse of the fourth chapter of his Gospel; and Isaiah declares, in the second verse of the 
sixty-first chapter of his Prophecies, that he had been sent “to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our 
God.” :Teoxihuitl, which literally signifies ‘the year of God,’ was a name given by the inhabitants of Tlascala and Cholula to the festival 
which they celebrated every four years in honour of Camaxtle or Quecalcoatle; and Torquemada, in the thirty-first: chapter of the tenth 
book of his Indian Monarchy, describes the dreadful immolation of human victims that accompanied it. 

3 NOTES. 

Mexican fable noticed above at page 108 of the sixth volume,—of Quecalcoatle preparing the way for Tlaloc, and of the 
latter being the secretary. of Providence, who wrote his laws in lightning and published them with thunder,—might 
bear some allusion. Having instituted a close comparison between the brief history of Christ as contained in the New 
Testament, and that of Quecalcoatle as recorded in the mythological traditions of the Mexicans, with the intention of 
showing that the Jews feigned that the principal prophecies in the Old Testament relating to the former were verified 
in the person of the latter, we shall proceed to point out some paintings in the Codex Borgianus, in which are sha- 
dowed in a much more clear manner than the types of the Old Testament foreshadow the Messiah, the accomplish- 
ment of the most famous prophecies relating to Christ; for by that name those to which the Evangelists them- 
selves appeal, to prove that he was the real Messiah and the truth of the Christian religion, are justly entitled to 
be called.. And we shall first notice the painting contained in the seventy-third page of the above-mentioned MS., which 
is explained at page 166 of the sixth volume of this work, declaring unreservedly what is there only hinted at,—that 
the subject of that painting seems plainly to allude to the celebrated prophecy in the tenth verse of the’ sixteenth 
Psalm, “ For thou wilt not leave my soul zm hel/*; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption :” which 
prophecy is cited in the twenty-seventh and thirty-first verses of the second chapter of the Acts, and in the thirty- 
fifth verse of the thirteenth chapter of the same Book. In reference to this painting, and to. the acquaintance which 
itwould imply on the part of the Mexicans with the article of the Resurrection, we must observe, that a very curious 

* The descent of Christ into hell is a tenet of Christianity ; and since the article in the Apostles’ Creed which recognizes it, is distinct 
from that which relates to his death and burial, it is evident that the words “ he descended into hell” cannot mean simply that he descended 
into the grave, but that he went to the place of departed spirits, or as the Greeks would have expressed it, eis “Adou. It was the opinion 
of the ancients that the region of the dead was beneath the earth, and to that belief Euripides alludes in the passage, 

“Huw, vexpov xevluova xar oxoTOU mUAcS 

Army, iv Aldns xupis dures Oewy, 

Tloavdagos, “ExaBys mass yeyws ths Kiooews, 
in the opening scene of one of his tragedies. Under the denomination of ‘the regions below’ they included both the Elysian fields and 
hell or Tartarus ; which latter place was not the same as Hades, and was approached by a very different road from that which conducted 
to Elysium, as Virgil testifies in the sixth book of the Aineid, in the lines 

; « Hac iter Elysium nobis; at leva malorum 
Exercet poenas, et ad impia Tartara mittit,” 

which he has put into the mouth of the Sibyl. It has been supposed that the ancient fable of hell being surrounded by the river Styx, 
which the dead were of necessity obliged to pass, originated in the funeral ceremonies of the Egyptians, which partly consisted in placing 
the body of the deceased in a barge and rowing it across the Nile, a rite frequently represented on the leaves of the papyrus discovered 
upon mummies: and it may create some surprise to find that an analogous notion prevailed among the Mexicans, who, as Sahagun 
asserts in the first chapter of the Appendix to the third book of his History of New Spain, believed that the dead had to pass a river in 
order to arrive at the region of Mictlantecutli, the Mexican Pluto, and that dogs discharged the office of Charon. The name of the river 
was Chiconaoapan, which being compounded of chiconaui ‘nine’, atl ‘water’, and pan (a particle of local reference), literally signifies 
‘the nine streams’; a most appropriate name for the river Styx, which was fabled nine times to encompass hell, forming in this manner 
nine regions, each separated from the other by a different meander of the stream, and on each of which the Mexicans might have bestowed 
the appellation of Hell, and have thus framed to themselves the fiction of nine hells. It has already been observed, at page 219 of the sixth 
volume of this work, that it is a Catholic doctrine that hell is situated in the centre of the earth ; and from various passages of the Old Tes- 
tament, where the phrase of going down into the pit is used ina sense equivalent to that of dying, it might be inferred that the Jews in ancient 
times believed that a hollow cavity in the earth was the place of repose for the dead, where the mass of mankind went, the souls of a 
comparatively small number of persons, such as Moses, Joshua, Elias, and the prophets, and those perhaps of children excepted, whose 
services to their country, favour with God, reputed sanctity of life, and freedom from sin, might have obtained for them a place in the 
kingdom of heaven, which was first preached generally to the Jews by John the Baptist, as Christ declares in the twelfth and thirteenth 
verses of the eleventh chapter of the Gospel of Saint Matthew: “And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven 
suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force. For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John.” In reference to which 
passage we must observe, that a commentator has remarked, that the translation “is gotten by force, and they that thrust men” would be 
an improved version of ‘suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force ;” and that it is at this passage in the New Testament that the 
interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus glances in page 227 of the sixth volume of this work.—Having offered these observations preparatory to 
the remark that the notions of the Mexicans about heaven, hell, purgatory, and the dead, are all strongly tinctured with Judaism, we may 
add that the twenty-eighth chapter of the First Book of Samuel furnishes strong grounds for supposing that the Jews in the age of Saul 
believed in Hades, and that it was a region situated beneath the earth. The address of Samuel to Saul, in the fifteenth verse of the 

same chapter, might have strengthened the conviction:amongst their posterity. 

NOTES. 9 

representation of a person ascending from a cross of the shape of the Greek letter T, occurs in the thirty-seventh page 
of the Mexican painting preserved in the Imperial Library at Vienna. It is very remarkable that in-the lower com- 
partment of the former painting, the bones of the person who is there represented crucified are bare and exposed to 
view, which was perhaps to mark the fulfilment of the prediction contained in the seventeenth verse of the twenty- 
second Psalm, “I may tell all my bones*, they look and stare upon me ;” which Psalm is famous in Scripture as being 
precisely the one appealed to by the Evangelists to prove that the events which they assert occurred at the Crucifixion 
took place in order that Scripture might be fulfilled. It contains however other predictions, to which the Mexican 
painter appears to have attached more importance than the Evangelists, since their accomplishment is no where 
pointed out in the New Testament. We insert here nearly the whole of that Psalm, that the extraordinary coinci- 
dence between the events there foretold, those which happened at the death of Christ, and those which are repre- 
sented in the last pages of the Borgian MS. as having accompanied the crucifixion of Quecalcoatle}, may be fully 
apparent. The prophecies which are printed in capitals are those which are cited verbally in the New Testament, 
or there stated to have been accomplished ; those which are in Italics are not referred to by the Evangelists, and 
appear to have had a literal fulfilment only in the above-mentioned paintings. On both these we shall venture pre- 
sently to offer a few observations. “My Gop, my Gop, wHY HAST THOU FORSAKEN ME? why art thou so far from 
helping me, and from the words of my roaring? O my God, I cry in the daytime, but thou hearest not; and in 

* In the Septuagint, “they have reckoned all my bones :” ’Efnpidunoay nayra ra bore pov. 

‘+ Quecalcoatle’s descent into hell’ is represented in the seventy-third page of the Borgian MS. ; and it deserves to be remarked, that the 
inhabitants of Guatemala? had also a tradition of their god Exbalanquen having descended to hell, and of his returning victorious from 
thence. ‘Torquemada thus records it: “En el reino de Quauhtemallan, cuios moradores se dice, que tuvieron noticia del diluvio ; 
antes de él, dicen algunos, que tenian, y adoraban por dios al gran Padre, y 4la gran Madre, que estaban en el cielo, y lo mismo 
despues del diluvio; y que Ilamandolos cierta muger principal, encomendandose 4 ellos, le aparecié una vision, que le dijo: No dlames 
ast, sino de esta manera, que yo te aiudare, del qual nombre aora no se acuerda ; pero que le parece, que aquel nombre era, 6 significaba 
lo que aora nosotros decimos Dios. Despues creciendo, y multiplicandose las gentes, se publicé, que avia nacido un dios en la pros 
vincia, treinta leguas de la cabecera, que es Quauhtemallan, llamada Otlatla, y la provincia se nombra aora la Vera-Paz, al qual dios 
llamaron Exbalanquen. De este cuentan, entre otras mentiras y fabulas, que fue 4 hacer guerra al Infierno, y peleé con toda la gente 
de alla, y los vencié, y prendié al Rei del Infierno, y 4 muchos de su exercito; el qual buelto al mundo con su victoria, y presa, le rogé 
el rei de aquellas tinieblas, que no le sacase de alli, porque estaba y4 tres 6 quatro grados de la luz; y que el vencedor Exbalanquen le 
dié una céz, con mucha ira, diciendo: Buelvete, y sea para ti todo lo podrido, y desechado, y hediondo de esos infernales lugares. Bol- 
vidse Exbalanquen, y en la Vera-Paz, de donde avia salido, no le recibieron, con la fiesta, y cantos, que él quisiera; y por esto se fue é 
otro reino, donde le recibieron & su placer: y este vencedor del infierno, dicen que comengé el sacrificar hombres. Donde quiera que 
por aquellas tierras ofrecian sacrificio de cosas vivas, tenian ciertos cuchillos de piedra de navaja mui agudos; los quales dicen, que 
caieron del cielo; y que cada pueblo, y personas tomaron los que avian menester: 4 estos cuchillos lamaban Manos de Dios, y del 
idolo, 4 quien sacrificaban: estos cuchillos tenian en tanta reverencia, por hacer como hacian con ellos los sacrificios, que adoraban, y 
quando menos, los tenian en grandisima veneracion: hacianles mui ricos cabos, y remates, con figuras, segun su posibilidad, de oro, y 
de plata, y de esmeraldas, y otras mui ricas, y preciadas piedras: tenianlos siempre guardados, con los idolos en sus altares.”—Monar- 

' It deserves to be remarked that the expression infierno, in the malediction which the Mexican high-priest pronounced against the 
king of Mexico who failed in the performance of his public duties, must be understood in the sense of Hades, or of hell, in the significa- 
tion in which the latter term is used in the Apostles’ Creed. The form of the malediction will be found in the sixth chapter of the sixth 
book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain; and it appears highly probable that the Mexican custom of anathematizing the king was 
borrowed from the Jews, whose priests and prophets, imitating the example of Samuel and Nathan, frequently rebuked their own kings, 
declaring to them that God had rent the kingdom from them. 

? Original Indian traditions record that the province of Guatemala was in early ages colonized by the Jews, who assumed the name 
of Tultecas, and established a powerful monarchy in that district of America, which lasted until the arrival of the Spaniards, when it 
experienced the fate of the Mexican empire. It is a singular fact, stated by Juarros in the first chapter of the second part of his History 
of Guatemala, that Montezuma, when in the power of the Spaniards, dispatched an ambassador secretly to the sovereign of that state to 
request his assistance: and the same author asserts, that the Mexicans and Tlascatecas, who accompanied as allies the invading army 
which the Spaniards sent against Guatemala, claimed kindred and cdentity of origin with the people of that province, and immediately 
formed intermarriages with them. The province of Guatemala is supposed by some writers to have derived its name from Jiutemal, 
the second king of the Tultecas who reigned in Utlatlan, its ancient capital: and although it is extremely difficult to trace the derivation 
of American proper names,—still to suppose that Judah may have entered into the composition of the proper name Jiutemal, by no means 
implies a forced etymology. 

VOL. VIII. ( D) 

4 

10 NOTES. 

the night season, and am not silent. But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel. Our fathers trusted 
in thee: they trusted, and thou didst deliver them. They cried unto thee, and were delivered : they trusted in thee, 
and were not confounded. But I am a worm, and no man; A REPROACH OF MEN, AND DESPISED OF THE PEOPLE. 
ALL THEY THAT SEE ME LAUGH ME TO SCORN: THEY SHOOT OUT THE LIP, THEY SHAKE THE HEAD, SAYING, HE 
TRUSTED ON THE LoRD THAT HE WOULD DELIVER HIM: LET HIM DELIVER HIM, SEEING HE DELIGHTED IN HIM. 
But thou art he that took me out of the womb: thou didst make me hope when I was upon my mother’s breasts. I 
was cast upon thee from the womb: thou art my God from my mother’s belly. Be not far from me; for trouble is 
near; for there is none to help. Many bulls have compassed me: strong bulls of Bashan have beset me round. 
They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring lion. I AM POURED OUT LIKE WATER, and all my 
bones are out of joint: my heart is like wax ; it is melted in the midst of my bowels. My strength is dried up like a 
potsherd ; and my tongue cleaveth to my jaws; and thou hast brought me into the dust of death. For dogs have com- 
passed me: the assembly of the wicked have inclosed me: THEY PIERCED MY HANDS AND my FEET.’ I may tell all 
my bones: they look and stare upon me. THEY PART MY GARMENTS AMONG THEM, AND CAST LOTS UPON MY 
VESTURE. But be not thou far from me, O Lord: O my strength, haste thee to help me. Deliver my soul from the 
sword; my darling from the power of the dog. Save me from the lion's mouth: for thou hast heard me from the 
horns of the unicorns.” The exclamation of David, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” with which 
this Psalm begins, and the expression, “I cry,” in the passage immediately following,—which words, as well as those 
that immediately precede them, correspond so exactly with the phrase dwyncac povy peyady, used by Saint Luke in 
the forty-sixth verse of the twenty-third chapter of his Gospel, have always been considered prophetically to fore- 
shadow the exclamation and “cry” which Christ uttered on the cross, as recorded in the forty-sixth verse of the 
twenty-seventh chapter of Saint Matthew, “And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, 
lama sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” and by Saint Mark in the thirty- 
fourth verse of the fifteenth chapter of his Gospel. The celebrity of the fact of Christ having cried with a loud voice 
and uttered an exclamation on the cross, is plain from three of the Evangelists having recorded it; and it is equally 
evident that the passage in the twenty-second Psalm, in which David foretold it, contaims a famous prophecy of one 
event connected with the Crucifixion ; which makes it the more singular that the phonetic symbgl placed before the 
mouth of the figure represented in the attitude of a person being crucified, in page 75 of the Borgian MS., should 
render it probable that the Mexicans were acquainted with that prophecy. The passage “ But I am a worm, and no 
man,” in the sixth verse of the same Psalm, is particularly deserving of attention, as it suggests the idea that the Jews 
might have been acquainted with the cochineal, and that the mysterious Tyrian purple was obtained from the blood of 
that insect*. The words which immediately follow in the same context, “a reproach of men and despised of the 

quia Indiana, lib. vi. cap. 26. After reading with attention the above curious passage, we cannot refrain from pointing out the possi- 
bility of the Mexicans having had some acquaintance with the legendary fable of Christ’s descending into hell and compelling the devil to 
acknowledge him to be the Son of God. This legend is preserved in one of those histories of the life of Christ to which the title of 
‘spurious Gospels’ is commonly given, but of the origin of which so little is known; nor is a pretended prophecy wanting to impose upon 
the credulity of the superstitious and the ignorant, since the words of David in the twenty-fourth Psalm,— Lift up your heads, O ye gates ; 
and he ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in. Who is this King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, 
the Lord mighty in battle,’—are alleged to have been sung on that occasion, as if David had foreseen the Messiah’s victory over death 
and hell. 

* The Hebrew word ny>in, which is supposed in the sixth verse of the twenty-second Psalm to mean ‘a worm’, signifies in every other 
passage in Scripture in which it occurs, purple or scarlet; and is usually joined with the word °3, signifying ‘ double dyed’, or the insect 
from which the dye is made. The most literal interpretation therefore of the Psalmist’s words would, according to the opinion of a learned 
commentator, in a note subjoined to page 622 of the first volume of the English Universal History, be, ‘ But as for me, I am ‘a scarlet 
insect, and nota man ;’ which expressions would seem ficuratively to allude to the body of Christ becoming, through his bearing the sins of 
the people, of the colour of sin, which was red or scarlet (as was likewise the colour of the skin of the heifer that was commanded in the 
nineteenih chapter of the Book of Numbers to be burnt without the camp of Israel, that its ashes mixed with water might become a 
purification for sin; and to which Saint Paul expressly refers in the thirteenth verse of the ninth chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews as 
a type of Christ; and again in the eleventh and twelfth verses of the thirteenth chapter of the same Epistle), and to his body being 
bruised, and his blood shed like that of the scarlet worm, from which by such a process the purple dye must formerly, as at present, 
have been obtained by the Jews, supposing the worm alluded to was indeed the Cochineal, and that this insect became known to the 
Jews through the Tyrians in the days of David, with whom they were then united in the closest ties of amity, as they were in the ensuing 
reign of his son Solomon, frequently embarking in the same mercantile enterprises, and perhaps trading with the subjects of Hiram to 

NOTES. 11 

people,” are acknowledged to be prophetically spoken of the Messiah. Isaiah employs nearly the same language in 
the third verse of the fifty-third chapter of his Prophecies, having just before foretold that the future Messiah should 

some of the West Indian islands, or to a portion of the continent of America, as has already been supposed at page 182 of the sixth volume 
of this work. It cannot be deemed surprising that the Jews should have imagined to themselves some fanciful connection between sin and 
scarlet, sin being so frequently compared in the Old Testament to scarlet; as in the eighteenth verse of the first chapter of Isaiah, where 
God is supposed to apostrophize the Jews in the words “ though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow ; though they be red 
like crimson, they shall be as wool,” and Moses having been commanded to use scarlet in sacrifices for sin, and to burn scarlet cedar-wood, 
and hyssop along with the heifer whose ashes were to purify the people from uncleanness contracted by sin; and whose skin was to be red, 
as a type that like the scapegoat it bore the sins of the people ; which mystical transfer of sin from the body of the actual sinner to that 
of an animal or of some innocent person, was a doctrine that wholly engrossed the minds of the Jews, that was continually incul- 
cated in their daily sacrifices of atonement, that is declared by Saint Paul to have been exemplified in Christ, who uses the following 
strong language in. the thirteenth verse of the third chapter of his Epistle to the Galatians, ‘‘ Christ hath redeemed us from the curse 
of the law, being made a curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree;” citing in confirmation of what might 
there appear to be a startling truth, the declaration of Moses in the twenty-third verse of' the twenty-first chapter of Deuteronomy, “ He 
that is hanged is accursed of God.” And that appears to have suggested to the Mexicans and the Peruvians the idea that the sins of a 
father might be transferred to the person of his son, and that tie former would be forgiven by the latter dying to appease the anger of the 
deity,—an opinion which Acosta says, at page 300 of the sixth volume of this work, was very prevalentin Peru, and led to the sacrifices of 
children by their parents; and which appears to have been shared by the ancient Jews, if wemay judge by the proverb, “ The fathers have 
eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge,” which is declared in the eighteenth chapter of Ezekiel to have been common 
in the days of that prophet in the land of Israel, and which is explained in the twenty-ninth and thirtieth verses of the thirty-first chapter 
of Jeremiah to allude to children dying for the sins of their fathers,—a belief which might have been adopted by the Jews from uwnder- 
standing in a wrong sense the denunciation contained in the second commandment against the children of idolaters, and which possibly 
led to the vicarial human sacrifices which for so many ages after the Christian era polluted the soil of the New World. It is needless 
to remark, that the ancient Hebrew sacrifices of atonement were typical of the Messiah, whose future advent, and the happiness and 
blessings which the Deity was about to confer through him upon mankind, it would scarcely have been reasonable to suppose would have 
been foreshadowed by the deaths of a countless number of involuntary victims, whose blood bedewed the land of Palestine for nearly two 
thousand years before the Christian era. On the contrary, it would have appeared far more probable, that a mysterious joy diffusing 
itself through all animate creation should have been the visible sign of the salvation predestined to mankind from on high. Such at least 
it may be presumed would have been the opinion of Pythagoras, who, if a Hebrew rabbi had attempted to convert and to lessen his ab- 
horrence for living sacrifices, by referring to the Bible to prove that beasts were created merely to perish, were without souls, and therefore 
that the Deity would view with pleasure their blood flowing upon his altars,—would have found’ in these very arguments an additional 
reason for protesting against them ; nor would he have been able to comprehend why the scheme of man’s salvation should necessarily have 
involved in it the destruction of many millions of irrational animals. And here we must observe, that the language of Dr. Parkhurst, at 
page 63 of his Hebrew Lexicon, where treating of the origin of sacrifices and their relation to the future Redeemer, he says, “ What in 
nature could be so proper a standing type of Him in this respect, as the firstling of an animal, agonizing and dying under the knife of the 
priest, and then consumed by fire ?” is calculated to create surprise; especially if considered in connection with the observations contained 
in the concluding paragraph of the same article, which are as follow : “ It may be further remarked; that a perversion of the true tradition 
concerning the redemption of man by the sufferings and death of the great first-born, was no doubt one source of the idolaters’ sacrificing 
their own children, particularly their first-born. See 2 Kings, chap. ili.ver. 27 ; chap. xvi. ver. 3; chap. xxi. ver. 6;’chap. xxiii. ver. 10; 
Jeremiah, chap. vil. ver. 31; chap. xix. ver. 5; Ezekiel, chap. xxiii. ver. 37 ; Micah, chap. vi. ver.7. ‘And in countries and ages far distant 
from those mentioned in Scripture, we find thatthe Peruvians of quality and those too of mean sort would sacrifice their first-born to redeem 
their own life, when the priest pronounced that they were mortally sick ; and that the inhabitants of Florida sacrificed their first-born, if a 
male, to the Sun.” Having already accounted on Scriptural grounds for the mysterious association, in the opinion of the Jews, of sin with the 
colour of scarlet, we shall here insert a passage from the English Universal History, and another from a treatise entitled, A View of the 
Jewish Religion, elsewhere quoted, illustrative not only of that point, but of the gross practical absurdities into which the doctrine of the 
atonement was perverted in the middle ages amongst them. The author of the Universal History, after describing at page 619 of that 
work the ceremonies with which the Jews were accustomed to celebrate the festival of Chipur, or the atonement, adds: “One thing, 
however, is worth observing, that on the eve of this solemnity the Jews of old used to take a white cock if it was to be had, if not of any 
other colour but red, and after a prayer they struck their heads with that of the cock three times, saying, Bear thou my sins; suffer thou 
the death I here deserved ; die thou for me,—and make thou reconciliation for me, that I may be admitted into a blessed life with all the 
people of Israel. After which they killed the cock, confessing that they deserved the death they inflicted on him, and threw his-entrails on 
he top of the house, in hopes that the crows would bear'them and their sins into the wilderness. It is true this ceremony is looked ‘upon 
by the Dutch Jews as sinful; and that’ Leo de Modena, who owns that it was practised heretofore in the Levant and Italy, adds ‘that it 
was afterwards left off, because it was found to be a mere piece of superstition for which no tolerable reason could be assigned.’ But he 
seems to have forgot that they gave one, which however ridiculed by our learned Goodwin is not without a singular meaning. © It is this; 
the word 121(geber) in the Scripture signifying ‘a man’, and in the Talmud and Chaldee, «a'cock’,—the Divine Justice required that as geber 
in the first sense had sinned, geber in the other sense should bear his sin. Now what other foundation can this custom have than the 

_ 

12 NGO EES: 

be without beauty or comeliness, and should have a marred visage*, and that he should grow up as a tender plant 
before the Lord. To which latter prophecy, and the prediction contained in the twelfth verse of the sixth chapter of 

prophecies, that the Messiah as geber in his human nature should expiate for the sins of man; unto whom therefore they substituted this 
typical geber or cock, till the antitypical one should accomplish that expiation by his death. And might not the Christians urging this 
against them be the motive of their abolishing it?” The author of the View of the Jewish Religion makes the following mention, at 
page 3565 of his treatise, of the Jewish feast of atonement: “ From the beginning of the year to the tenth day in which they celebrate the 
feast of atonement, they call the ten days of repentance, in which they fast and pray much with great affectation of pietie, in so much 
that although God hath writ any of them in the book of Death, and destined him an unhappie year, they think he will now look upon his 
repentance, and good works, revoke his sentence, and restore him to the book of Life. Every day in the morning they do thrice make their 
confession, neither doe they excommunicate, go to law with, or require an oath from any one, &c. The ninth day they rise early, go to 
the school, sing much and pray. So soone as they return home, all the males, as well boys, as men, take in their hands a cock, the 
women a henne, and those of them which are great with child both a cock and henne. Then each master of a family standing with his 
cock in his hands, says out of the Psalmes, Fools because of their transgression and because of their iniquities are afflicted. Their soul. 
abhorreth all manner of meat: and they draw near unto the gates of death. Then they cry unto the. Lord in their trouble; he saveth 
them out of their distresses. He sent his word and healed them: and delivered them from their destructions. O that men would praise 
the Lord for his goodnesse : and for his wonderfull works to the children of men: And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving, and 
declare his works with rejoycing. And also out of Job, If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to shew 
unto man his uprightnesse, then he is gracious unto him, and saith, Deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransome 
(viz. the cock). After this he goes about his work of atonement, striking the cock thrice against his head, and saying at each stroke, Let 
this cock be in change for me, let him be in my place, let him be an expiation for me, let death be unto this cock, but unto me and all Israel 
life and prosperity. Amen. This he does thrice ; for himself, his sonnes, and the strangers that are with him, as the high Priest made 
atonement, Levit. 16,17. Then he kills the cock, and binding hard the skin of the neck, his meditation is, that he hath deserved to be so 
strangled: cutting the throat presently with his knife, he considers that he hath deserved to perish by the sword, then flinging him against 
the ground, shews by that, that he is worthy to be stoned. Lastly, roasting it; by that he designs his acknowledgement that he hath de- 
served to be destroyed by fire. These four kinds of death doth the cock undergoe for the Jews. The entrails they commonly fling to the 
top of their houses, out of charitie to the birds that they may participate something of their offering. But others say this is done by them, 
upon another account, namely, they think that their sinnes being internall, not externall, do therefore stick in the entrails of the cock, and 
the crows flying away with them, carry their sinnes too into the wildernesse, lke the scape goat. They endeavour what they can that the 
cock they prepare for this offering may be white; a red one they never use, looking upon it as already full of sinne, and therefore not able 
to receive theirs, because sinne is said to be red, Isa. 1, 18. Though your sinnes be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow, though they be 
red like crimson they shall be as wool: now the white one they think is infected with no sinne, and so fittest to bear those of the Jews.” 
From the curious description in the first chapter of the Appendix to the third book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, of the funeral 
rites of the ancient Mexicans, it appears that they sacrificed on such occasions a dog with a red skin, burning it to ashes with the corpse of. 
the deceased; which superstitious custom arguing their belief that red was the colour of sin, probably originated in a confused tradition of the 
sacrifice of the red heifer enjoined in the nineteenth chapter of Numbers, and of its ashes purifying the Jews from their sins. The reason for 
supposing that the colour of the dogs burnt at the Mexican funerals referred to sin, is grounded on the assumption that, like the Jews and 
the Peruvians, they believed in the possibility of transferring sin from the guilty person to the body of an innocent victim, and of thus 
averting the indignation of the Deity from themselves to the hapless object of his vicarial wrath. This doctrine it must be confessed was 
both odious and unjust, and it is illustrated in the parting advice which the Mexican priest gave to the penitent who had just confessed 
and received absolution for his sins, recommending him to reconcile himself to God by purchasing a slave, and making him an offering, 
perhaps a burnt sacrifice for sin. The entire of the speech of the Mexican priest to the penitent, which is very curious and completely 
Jewish both in tone and sentiment, will be found in the seventh chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History. of New Spain. Mention 
having been made of the sacrifice of the red heifer, and of its ashes mixed with water being used by the Jews as a purification from the 
defilement of sin, we may here observe that the rabbis declare, that the blood of the red heifer polluting the priest who was commanded 
to sprinkle it seven times before the tabernacle of the congregation, and the water of separation (the name which was given to its ashes 
mixed with water) purifying the unclean and yet polluting the clean, involves the greatest mystery of any contained in the Bibie, which 
even “Solomon, who was master of all other mysteries and knowledge, and could account for every precept in the law, even those which 
forbad the eating of swine’s flesh, or wearing of mixtures of linen and wool, yet owned himself ignorant of ;” the solution of which mystery 
seems entirely to depend upon the right comprehension of the Jewish doctrine of the ideal transfer of sin or uncleanness from the body of 
the sinner to some other body, such as that of the red heifer, which in the beginning was presumed to bear the sins or the uncleanness of 
the people, and to be sacrificed for them; the touch therefore of so unclean a body made the clean, unclean; but its ashes being of a 
mixed nature, and their original uncleanness having been purified either wholly or in part by the combined action of fire and of water, they 
became fit recipients of the future uncleanness of the people; whilst the use for which they were destined, or perhaps a residue of unclean- 
ness still attaching to them, rendered their touch sufficient to pollute the clean. It may not be very complimentary to the judgment of Solomon, 
to say, that it appears much more difficult to understand why the Jews were prohibited to sow their fields with mingled seed, and to wear 
* In the Septuagint, aarz to cidos atrou a&rimov, xa exAeimoy mapa sous vious twv &vOpwmwy, which considerably varies from the Hebrew 

reading of the passage. 

NOTES: % 13 

Zechariah, “that his name should be the branch,” which is cited in the note subjoined to page 107 of the sixth volume of 
this work, and also at page 167, the Mexicans might have alluded in naming Quecalcoatle, Ceacatl, the signification of 
which proper name is the cane, to which the numeral ce, meaning ‘one’, is prefixed; and although the cane is not a plant 
the root of which grows out of dry ground’, still it should be remembered that “a tree planted by the side of deep wa- 
ters” is a Scriptural metaphor,—that the Messiah is designated allegorically calamus and ‘cinnamon’ in the same passage 
in the fourth chapter of the Song of Solomon as that. in which he is termed “a well of living waters,”—and that the 
American cane is no less distinguished for the sweetness of its juice, than for those qualities which the poets of the 
East have commended in odes descriptive of its extreme verdure, its graceful height, cool shade, and the music of 
the breeze sighing through its branches. To have named therefore the Messiah ‘the Cane’, instead of ‘the Branch’ : 
would only have been substituting a specific for a generic appellation, although it remains still to be proved that 
Christ when he did appear was ever named ‘the Branch’ and ‘Emmanuel’ in the current dialect of any particular 
country, as Quecalcoatle was named Topiltzin and Ceacatl in that of Mexico ; and the founder of the united monarchy 
of the Medes and Persians, Cyrus, in the language of Persia, whose coming, and the favour which he showed to the 
Jews,—restoring them to their country, rebuilding Jerusalem, and laying the foundations of the temple,—would not 
have fulfilled the words of ancient prophecy, if he had only in a solitary instance been named Cyrus, and then for 
the purpose of accomplishing the prediction of Isaiah in the third verse of the forty-fifth chapter of his. Prophecies. 

It has been observed, at page 167 of the sixth volume of the Antiquities of Mexico, that the Jews might have under- 
stood in an exaggerated sense the words of Isaiah descriptive of the personal appearance of the’ Messiah, “his visage 

b) 

was so marred more than any man, and his form more than the sons of men}” in corroboration of which opinion we 
shall here remark that the Talmud declares that the Messiah is a leper seated amongst the sick at the gates of Rome, 
awaiting the determined period of. his advent; which ridiculous belief seems to be founded on what is said in the 
Old Testament of the sufferings of Job, and is an exaggerated inference drawn from the often-cited text of the fifty- 
third chapter of Isaiah, “He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief.” This 
curious Jewish fable will serve also to remind those who meditate on the mysterious mythology of the Mexicans, that 
the Mexican god Tonatiuh was, before his voluntary sacrifice, designated Nanahuatzin, i.e. ‘the man afflicted with sores’ 5 
and it is not unworthy of observation that the leprosy was accounted a morbus sacer amongst the Mexicans, as it was 
among the Jews; to which vulgar. prejudice the names teococoliztli and teococolizpalaniliztli, words signifying in the 
Mexican language ‘ the leprosy’, allude. The Mexican fable of Nanahuatzin being changed into the Sun will be found 
at page 372 of the sixth volume of this work; and it deserves to be compared with Sahagun’s account of the same 
transmutation in the second chapter of the seventh book of his History of New Spain, which contains an extraordinary 
history of the gods who were assembled on the plains of Teotiuacan all dying shortly after the Sun’s new appearance 
in heaven, who must have nearly resembled those gods mentioned in the following passage of the eighty-second Psalm, 
which is cited by Christ in the thirty-fifth verse of the tenth chapter of Saint John: “I have said, Ye are gods; and 
all of you are children of the Most High. But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.” The seventh 
and eighth verses of the twenty-second Psalm, “All they that see me laugh me to scorn; they shoot out the lip, they 
shake the head, saying, He trusted on the Lord that he would deliver him; let him deliver him, seeing he delighted 

a vest of een and of woolen aiftaedls or Ski being commanded in the nineteenth verse of the nineteenth chapter of Leviticus not to let 
their cattle breed with those of a face kind, mules were held in such high estimation amongst them, that Solomon was led about 
the city of Jerusalem on the mule of David, to receive the salutations of the people as king; and that the Hebrew and Syriac names for 
a mule are reces and achastheranim, both of which, according to Nieremberg, in his treatise, De miraculosis Naturis Terre Promisse, 
signify, a highly valued animal.—Before terminating this digression we may observe, in reference to the supposition at the commencement of 
the note, that the famous Tyrian purple might have been the production of the cochineal, and procured by the Phcenicians from the West 
Indian Islands or the adjoining coast of Nicaragua,—that Melcartus the Tyrian Hercules, who it may with probability be supposed was a 
great voyager, was the reputed inventor of it, by accidentally remarking a dog’s tooth stained with it. Itis not unworthy of remark, that 
the same mystery which attached in early ages to the invention of the Tyrian dye, seems in later times to have spread the veil of oblivion 
over the history of the load-stone, the nature of which was in the beginning much misrepresented by those who were interested in the 
secret of its wonderful properties not being too generally divulged. With respect to the proper name Melcartus, Bochart supposes 
that the Tyrian Hercules was so called, because he was snyp 279 (Melec-cartha), 7. e. ¢ the king of the city’; but Sir Isaac Newton i imagines 
he received that appellation from being the founder or prince of Carteia, a city in Spain. 

* The expression in the Septuagint is fife 2v yy Onbaoy, “a root in a thirsty soil,” which epithet would be not unsuitable to a soil 
producing reeds, and subject to frequent irrigations. 

VOL. VIII. (E) 

14, NOTES. 

in him,” contain a famous prophecy of the contumelious treatment which Christ when crucified was to experience from 
the Jews; the concluding portion of which is cited almost to the letter in the following passage of the twenty-seventh 
chapter of Saint Matthew: “And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads, and saying, Thou that de’ 
stroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross. 
Likewise also the chief priests mocking him, with the scribes and elders, said, He saved others; himself he cannot 
save. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him. He trusted in 
God ; let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he said, Iam the Son of God. The thieves also, which were 
crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth.” And its fulfilment is recorded also by Saint Mark in the fifteenth 
chapter of his Gospel : “And they that passed by railed on him, wagging their heads, and saying, Ah, thou that 
destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, save thyself, and come down from the cross. Likewise also the 
chief priests, mocking, said among themselves with the scribes, He saved others; himself he cannot save. Let Christ 
the King of Israel descend now from the cross, that we may see and believe. And they that were crucified with him 
reviled him.” And by Saint Luke in the twenty-third chapter of his Gospel: “And the people stood beholding: 
and the rulers also with them derided him, saying, He saved others ; let him save himself, if he be Christ, the chosen 
of God. And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and offering him vinegar, and saying, If thou be the 
King of the Jews, save thyself. And a superscription also was written over him in letters of Greek, and Latin, and 
Hebrew, THIs Is THE KING OF THE Jews. And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on him, saying, If 
thou be Christ, save thyself and us. But the other answering, rebuked him, saying, Dost not thou fear God, seeing 
thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly ; for we receive the due reward of our deeds: but this 
man hath done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom. 
And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise.” The fulfilment of the 
above-mentioned prophecy seems intended to be alluded to in the fourth page of the Codex Borgianus, by the 
painting of two persons on the right and the left hand of another in the attitude of a person crucified, whom they 
seem to be in the act of reviling: their position and number would favour the supposition that they were the two 
thieves mentioned in the New Testament; but, since they are not represented themselves as crucified, they perhaps 
only ‘signify a mixed multitude of scoffers and mockers. We cannot refrain from here remarking, in reference to an 
observation at page 84 of the sixth volume of the present work, that legendary tales began probably at a very early 
period to be mixed up with the Evangelical accounts of the Crucifixion ; that there occur three remarkable discre- 
pancies in the several accounts given by the Evangelists of three events connected with the Crucifixion, themselves 
important and allied to ancient prophecies, and which therefore require some elucidation. The first discrepancy 
relates to the two thieves:—Saint Matthew and Saint Mark declare that they both reviled Christ, while Saint 
Luke says that one of them railed on him, and that the other rebuked him for so doing. The crucifixion of the 
thieves along with the Messiah, and Joseph of Arimathza, the rich man, begging the body of the latter and burying 
it in his own sepulchre, was foretold by Isaiah in the ninth verse of the fifty-third chapter of his Prophecies : 
“ And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, because he had done no violence, neither 
was any deceit in his mouth.” The second discrepancy relates to the death of Judas Iscariot: and the third to the 
purchase of the potter’s field with the thirty pieces of silver, the sum for which Christ was betrayed by Judas to the 
Jews. According to Saint Matthew, Judas Iscariot hanged himself, and it was the chief priests who purchased the 
potter's field, as is very unequivocally declared in the following passage of the twenty-seventh chapter of his 
Gospel: “ Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, and brought 
again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the 
innocent blood. And they said, What is that to us? see thou to that. And he cast down the pieces of silver in the 
temple, and departed, and went and hanged himself. And the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not 
lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood. And they took counsel, and bought with 
them the potter’s field, to bury strangers in. Wherefore that field was called, The field of blood, unto this day. 
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying, And they took the thirty pieces of silver, 
the price of him that was valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value; and gave them for the potter's field, 
as the Lord appointed me.” In the first chapter of the Acts it says, on the contrary, that Judas Iscariot purchased the 
field, and that he fell headlong and burst asunder in the midst : “And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of 

NOTES: 15 

the disciples, and said, (the number of the names together were about an hundred and twenty,) Men and brethren, 
this Scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost by the mouth of David spake before concerning 
Judas, which was guide to them that took Jesus. For he was numbered with us, and had obtained part of this 
ministry. Now this man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity; and falling headlong, he burst asunder in 
the midst, and all his bowels gushed out. And it was known unto ail the dwellers at Jerusalem; insomuch as that 
field is called in their proper tongue, Aceldama, that is to say, The field of blood. For it is written in the Book of 
Psalms, Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dwell therein: and his bishoprick let another take.” The 
prophecy of Jeremiah to which Saint Matthew refers is not to be found in the Old Testament; and hence it appears 
possible that by a slight inadvertence that Evangelist might have written Jeremy instead of Zechariah, since in the 
eleventh chapter of the latter prophet such a prophecy does seem to occur, if indeed the term prophetical allegory 
would not better characterize the following passage in which it is contained : “‘ And I took my staff, even Beauty, and 
cut it asunder, that I might break my covenant which I had made with all the people. And it was broken in that 
day: and so the poor of the flock that waited upon me knew that it was the word of the Lord. And I said unto 
them, If ye think good, give me my price: and if not, forbear. So they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver. 
And the Lord said unto me, Cast it unto the potter: a goodly price that I was prized at of them. And I took the 
thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the potter in the house of the Lord.” The language of David in the ninth 
and tenth verses of the twenty-second Psalm, “ But thou art he that took me out of the womb: thou didst make me 
hope when I was upon my mother’s breasts. I was cast upon thee from the womb : thou art my God from my mother’s 
belly,” nearly resembles that employed by God in his address to Jeremiah in the fifth verse of the first chapter of his 
Prophecies, “Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee *; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanc- 
tified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations.” And it is scarcely necessary to observe that the words 
of David refer to the future Messiah, who was to be consecrated from the womb, and to be a Nazarite unto God; an 
event which was foreshadowed at a very early period of Jewish history by the type of the angel appearing to the 
wife of Manoah, and announcing to her that she should bear a son who should begin to deliver Israel from the 
Philistines: ‘ For, lo, thou shalt conceive and bear a son, and no razor shall come on his head; for the child shall 
be a Nazarite unto God from the womb, and he shall begin to deliver Israel out of the hand of the Philistines.” To 
this passage in the thirteenth chapter of Judges is sometimes referred the passage in the Gospel of Saint Matthew: 
“ And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, He 
shall be called a Nazarene.” The city of Nazareth might possibly have received that appellation from its being a 
common place of resort for Nazarites; and on this supposition, Christ’s going thither and being called a Nazarene 
might have been the fulfilment or perfect manifestation of that which ages before was typified of him by Samson. 
A very remarkable prophecy respecting the colour of the Nazarites, whose visages were to become blacker than a 
coal, occurs in the fourth chapter of the Lamentations of Jeremiah: “ Her Nazarites were purer than snow, they were 
whiter than milk, they were more ruddy in body than rubies, their polishing was of sapphire: their visage is blacker 
than a coal ; they are not known in the streets; their skin cleaveth to their bones; it is withered, it is become like a 
stick.” We cannot refrain from connecting this prophecy with the sable hue of the faces of some of the figures in 
the Mexican paintings, and especially with the black and deformed visage of Quecalcoatle in the seventy-second 
page of the Borgian MS. The passage in the Psalms, “They gaped upon me with their mouths as a ravening and 
a roaring lion,” may perhaps be alluded to by the heads of ferocious animals in the seventy-first page of the same 
Mexican paintings. The sentence which immediately follows, “I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out 

* The Mexicans believed that children were created by Tezcatlipoca before the foundation of the world, but that they were without 
form and material existence until after he had fashioned them in their mother’s womb. The idea which they likewise entertained, that a 
hollow cavity in the centre of the earth was the general receptacle for the dead, seems to have been derived from a Hebrew source; and 
the language of David in the fourteenth and fifteenth verses of the hundred-and-thirty-ninth Psalm, “ My substance was not hid from 
thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth ; thine eyes did see my substance, yet being un- 
perfect; and in thy book all my members were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them;” might 
have furnished the rabbis with a pretext for maintaining this absurd doctrine; since, it being declared elsewhere in Scripture, that man 
goeth whither he came, it is evident, if these words are to be understood literally, that if children were formed by God in the lowest parts 
of the earth, the dead would have to return thither ; a notion which in the opinion of a Jew would acquire a further degree of probability 
from the concluding portion of the thirty-second chapter of the Prophecies of Ezekiel, which seems on the first perusal so strongly to favour it. 

16 NO) RES 

of joint,” contains a prophecy evidently referring to the water that flowed from the side of Christ after he had been 
pierced with the spear: and it seems also to predict that the Messiah would be put to the torture; a fact not recorded 
by the Evangelists, although unequivocally foretold in the following passage of the second chapter of the Wisdom of _ 
Solomon, a book which it is proper to observe is of apocryphal authority: ‘‘ He professeth to have the knowledge of 
God: and he calleth himself the child of the Lord. He was made to reprove our thoughts. He is grievous unto us 
even to behold: for his life is not like other men’s, his ways are of another fashion. We are esteemed of him as 
counterfeits: he abstaineth from our ways as from filthiness: he pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed, and 
maketh his boast that God is his father. Let us see if his words be true: and let us prove what shall happen in the 
end of him. For if the just man be the son of God, he will help him, and deliver him from the hand of his enemies. 
Let us examine him with despitefulness and torture, that we may know his meekness, and prove his patience. Let us 
condemn him with a shameful death: for by his own saying he shall be respected.” This passage we have the more 
readily inserted, because Quecalcoatle is frequently represented in the Mexican paintings suffering various kinds of 
torture. In the seventy-fifth page of the Borgian MS. the joints of his wrists, knees, and ancles seem to be severed, 
and. from each wound the ministers of torture appear to be extracting a heart: the instruments which they employ 
are knives of flint, and the heart may be symbolical of life-blood flowing from mortal wounds. The coincidence is 
singular, that the next sentence to “all my bones are out of joint” should be “ my heart is like wax, it is melted in 
the midst of my bowels,” since a large heart occupies the centre of the same painting, which appears to be melting 
away in a stream of blood. Thata heart is signified by the oval ball in the hands of the smaller figures, will be 
evident from comparing that painting with others representing human sacrifices, one of which will be found at the 
seventy-third page of the Borgian MS., where a similar symbol is represented in the hand of the priest who officiated 
and tore out the heart of the victim through the aperture previously made in his breast. In the twenty-ninth page of 
the Borgian MS. a figure occurs which it is to be presumed, from the sign of the earthquake and the cross that accom- 
pany it, is intended to represent Quecalcoatle, both the hands and feet of which appear to be dislocated ; and in the 
sixty-eighth page of the same MS. there is a similar figure lying as it were among the pots. «It is highly deserving of 
observation, that “all my bones are severed” would well express the meaning of the Hebrew passage which in 
the Septuagint is translated SteoxopmoOn mavra ra dora pov, “are scattered.” But here occurs a great difficulty, the 
full force of which must be felt in the Greek passage, and would also be felt in the Hebrew but for the alteration of 
the word “severed” into “dislocating” or “putting out of joint” by the English translators of the Bible; since how 
would this prophecy accord with that cited by Saint John in the nineteenth chapter of his Gospel, “But when they 
came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs*: but one of the soldiers with a spear pierced 

* The Jews resembled the Mexicans in mixing mock humanity with revolting cruelty in the execution of their penal laws: and it 
would be extremely difficult to say whether the custom of burning victims alive, and at the same time of throwing powder of Yauhtli 
into their faces to diminish their sufferings, as related of the Mexicans by Sahagun; or that of crucifying them, and of afterwards breaking 
their legs to hasten their death, on the eve of the Sabbath, was most shocking. Here, however, as elsewhere, the palm must be con- 
ceded to the Jews; since it is impossible that they could have derived their custom from the Mexicans, whilst it is extremely probable 
that the latter people borrowed their notion of burnt sacrifices from the Hebrews, whose ancient leader Jephtha offered up the first 
human burnt sacrifice to the Deity recorded in history, as is unequivocally declared in the thirty-ninth verse of the eleventh chapter of 
Judges. We shall here insert the passage of the Gospel of Saint John, in which mention is made of the Hebrew custom of breaking 
the legs of crucified persons to hasten their death, on the eve of the Sabbath; since from that passage it appears plain that this barbarity 
was not a wanton act resorted to on one particular occasion, but an established usage amongst the Jews, who applied in the first instance 
to Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor, for leave to carry it into execution. “The Jews therefore, because it was the Preparation, that the 
bodies should not remain upon the cross on the Sabbath-day, (for that Sabbath-day was an high day,) besought Pilate that their legs might 
be broken, and that they might be taken away. Then came the soldiers, and brake the legs! of the first, and of the other which was crucified 
with him: but when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs.” The text of Scripture to which Saint 
John refers, to prove in this instance the accomplishment of prophecy, are the words of David in the thirty-fourth Psalm, “‘ Many are the 
afflictions of the righteous; but the Lord delivereth him out of them all. He keepeth all his bones ; not one of them is broken. Evil shall 
slay the wicked; and they that hate the righteous shall be desolate :” which, like many other passages of Scripture, it required inspiration 

1 The Mexicans were accustomed to break the legs of a crucified person on one of their most solemn festivals, and to leave him to die 
upon the cross. This curious fact is stated by Motolinia in the tenth chapter of the first part of his inedited treatise concerning the 
idolatry of the Indians of New Spain. 

NOTES. 17 

his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water. And he that saw it bare record, and his record is true ; and 
he knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe ; for these things were done, that Scripture should be fulfilled, 
A bone of him shall not be broken. And again another Scripture saith, They shall look on him whom they pierced*.” 
It would rather agree with the words of Jeremiah, in the third chapter of his Lamentations, “ My flesh and my skin 
hath he made old, he hath broken my bones,” which the Jews understood to have been prophetically spoken of the 
Messiah, as has been already observed in the note subjoined to page 109 of the sixth volume of this work, and which 
implied no denial on their part of David’s' prophecy in’ the sixteenth Psalm, “ For thou wilt not leave my soul in 
hell, neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.” It would appear, on the contrary, from the painting 
of the descent of Quecalcoatle into hell, as represented in the seventy-third page of the Borgian MS., that they 
applied the fulfilment of the latter prophecy to him. It is extremely singular that several Mexican paintings should 
represent Quecalcoatle with his side pierced with a spear, and water flowing from the wound; and it will appear 
still more so, if considered in connection with the superstitious belief of the people of Cholula, that water would 
_ flow from the side of the temple of Quecalcoatle, and destroy their enemies, if need required ; and with the curious 
ceremony of the priest Quetzalcohuatl throwing a spear at the side of. the god Huitzilopochtli, in order to kill him, 
to eat his body,—an account of which will be found at page 415 of the sixth volume of the present work ; and 
finally, with what Baron de Humboldt says of an animal resembling the paschal lamb, which, according to the tradi- 
tion of the Mexicans, was the symbol of suffering innocence, which animal they painted with its side pierced with a 
spear, in the manner represented in the seventeenth page of the Borgian MS. The paintings which represent Quecal- 
coatle pierced with a spear, and water+ issuing from the wound, occur at the sixty-first page of the Borgian MS., and 

to know was prophetical of the Messiah ; since the obvious sense of the entire context is simply, that God protects the good from harm, 
and punishes the wicked. It should also be observed, that the paschal lamb (the flesh of which was eaten for ages, as a type, by that 
very people who have ever rejected the sacrament of the communion,) foreshadowed the Messiah; and Moses ordained, in the forty-sixth 
verse of the twelfth chapter of Exodus, that none of its bones should be broken, and repeated the prohibition in the twelfth verse of the 
ninth chapter of Numbers. Some writers have gone so far as to imagine that the bone, which by a miracle was preserved unbroken 
in the hands of Samson until he had slain a thousand of his enemies the Philistines, and from the side of which water afterwards 
miraculously flowed forth, was mysteriously typical of the war which the Messiah would wage with Antichrist, and of the victory which 
he was to achieve upon the Cross. Having already remarked, in the note subjoined to page 84 of the sixth volume of this work, that the 
primitive Christians would in all probability haye considered Samson a type of the Messiah, we may add to the reasons which are there 
enumerated, that the words of Isaiah, in the twelfth verse of the fifty-third chapter of his Prophecies, “ Therefore will I divide him a 
portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong,” which prospectively relate to the Messiah, may retrospectively 
allude to the account, contained in the fourteenth chapter of Judges, of Samson slaying a lion, and afterwards discovering honey in its 
carcase, which he ate,—an event which, if it had not been connected with some hidden mystery, would scarcely have been recorded of 
Samson in the Bible. 

* Saint John here alludes to the passage, “ and they shall look upon me whom they pierced,” in the tenth verse of the twelfth chapter 
of Zechariah: but if Zechariah intended to predict in that particular passage, (as commentators on the prophecies do not scruple to 
maintain,) the future conversion of the Jews to Christianity, and the remorse which they would feel on account of their ancestors haying 
put to death the Messiah,—how does this accord with what is there said, of their giving expression to their grief by mourning, according 
to the prescriptions of the Mosaic law, the rites of which Christ came into the world to abolish ?-—for to the enactments of the Hebrew 
ritual must be referred the custom of men’s separating themselves from their wives on solemn religious occasions, and at periods of public 
mourning, a custom enjoined in the fifteenth verse of the nineteenth chapter of Exodus, referred to in the fourth verse of the twenty-first 
chapter of the First Book of Samuel, and exemplified in the following passage of the twelfth chapter of the Prophecies of Zechariah, 
“¢ And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications; and they 
shall look «pon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for 
him, as one that is in bitterness for his first-born. In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Ha- 
dadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon. And the land shall mourn, every family apart; the family of the house of David apart, and their 
wives apart; the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives 
apart; the family of Shimei apart, and their wives apart; all the families that remain, every family apart, and their wives apart.” The 
interpreter of the Vatican Codex asserts, at page 210 of the sixth volume of this work, that ‘ the Mexicans, on every sign dedicated to 
fasting, separated themselves from their wives :” and Acosta declares, at page 303 of the same volume, that the Peruvians observed a like 
superstitious usage on the solemn festival of Ytu. Other authors of less celebrity declare that the same custom prevailed amongst the 
ruder Indian tribes of the Oronoco. 

+ Water was a Hebrew type of the Messiah, and the phrase “ living waters” occurs in the eighth verse of the fourteenth chapter of 
Zechariah, in which it is declared that on the day of the Lord the feet of the Lord should stand upon the Mount of Olives, which should 

VOL. VIII. Gh) 

18 NOTES. 

at the ninth page of the Mexican painting preserved in the Library of the Institute at Bologna. In the former of these 
paintings it is his Jeg, and not his side, that is pierced, and blood as well as water flows from the wound; in both 

be cleft in the midst. To this prophecy, however little regarded by Christians, the Jews, who always understand the text of Scripture in 
a literal sense, would in all ages have attached the greatest importance, understanding it to refer to their own restoration, and to God’s 
taking vengeance upon their enemies; and hence perhaps the reason why cleft mountains, as well as cleft houses, are so frequently 
represented in the Mexican paintings. The frequent occurrence of the latter symbol in the Mexican painting preserved in the Imperiaj 
Library at Vienna, has already been noticed at page 96 of the sixth volume of this work. ‘The phrase “living water” occurs in the New 
Testament in the fourth and seventh chapters of the Gospel of St. John, in the former of which Christ discourses with the Samaritan 
woman about the living water; and in the thirty-eighth verse of the latter chapter he declares, “ He that believeth in me, as the Scripture 
hath said, out of his belly? shall flow rivers of living water.” It is extremely singular that the Mexicans should have had their living 
water, and living bread, the latter of which they named Toyoliatlaquatl* ; and mention is made of the former in the thirty-seventh 
chapter of the sixth’ book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, where the midwife thus addresses the infant which she was about to bap- 
tize:—“‘ Despues de esto, echabale el agua sobre la cabeza, diciendo: O nieto mio, O hijo mio, recibe y toma el agua del Sefior del 
mundo que és nuestra vida, y és paraque nuestro cuerpo crezca y reverdezca, es para lavar y limpiar; ruego que entre en tu cuerpo y 
alli viva esta agua celestial azul y azul clara; ruego que ella destruya y aparte todo lo malo y contrario que te fue dadé antes del 
principio del mundo, porque todos nosotros los hombres somos dejados en su mano, porque es nuestra madre Chalchiuitlycue.” 
« After this, she sprinkled the water upon its head, saying: O my child and grandson, receive the water of the Lord of the world, which 
is our life, that causes our bodies to grow, and to arrive at maturity, and which is for cleansing and for purification; I pray that this 
heavenly and blue water, this transparent blue water, may enter into your body and dive there’; I pray that it may destroy and remove 
whatever of evil or misfortune was assigned to you before the beginning of the world, for we mortals are all:committed to its hand, for it 
is our mother Chalchiuitlycues”’ The belief of the Mexicans*, both in the doctrine of original sin and predestination is here plainly 
declared ; but the expression “¢ before the beginning of the world” must be understood to mean, before the birth and conception of the 
infant; since it was the sin of Cioacoatl, which was committed after the commencement of the world, that brought sin into it and entailed 
it upon her posterity. Whether the doctrine of original sin was perverted by the ancient Jews to the purposes of fraud and judicial 
astrology, it would be difficult to say; since the policy of the early Christian Fathers consigned to oblivion every fragment of profane 
Hebrew history. We only know that the Jews in the age of Christ were great astrologers, and possessed books for divination, many 
of which were brought to the Apostles and destroyed. There are however strong grounds for believing that such was actually the, case 
amongst the Mexicans’; since Sahagun informs us, in the thirty-sixth chapter of the sixth book of his History of New Spain, 
that Mexican parents eee after the birth of their children sent for the tonalpouhqui, or diviner, to learn the good and evil 
qualities which the child had brought with it into the world; which, after taking the horoscope of the infant, and inspecting the 
calendar, in order to know the nature of the sign which presided at its birth, he presently informed them. It being once conceded 
that the Mexicans were acquainted with the doctrine of original sin, upon which foundation Christianity and Judaism may be said 
to be based, little surprise will be felt at learning, from the following passage of the inedited work of an esteemed Spanish writer, 
that they were acquainted with many other facts recorded in the third chapter of the Book of Genesis. “ They also believe that 
this supreme being created a man and a woman in a delightful garden, and that from this single pair all mankind are descended ; 

and they represent them in their paintings almost in the manner in which we depict them: But the sin which they committed, aad 
which caused their expulsion from that pleasant habitation, I find no mention of in any of the writings which I possess explanatory 
of these historical paintings; but still [cannot persuade myself that the ancient Tultecas were ignorant of it: on the contrary, 
I have positive grounds for believing that they preserved the knowledge of it, and that it was one of those traditions which they were 

1 The Mexicans sometimes painted’a river of water flowing from the bellies of their mythological personages ; an example of which 
occurs inthe twentieth and fiftieth pages of the Borgian MS.: in the former of which the ‘cross, in the shape of the Greek letter T’, 
deserves to be noticed; the skulls in that peenne Se that the wine is Zonpantli, ‘a word which exactly corresponds in signification 
with the Hebrew term Golgotha. 

2 The Mexicans named the bread which they ate at their communion Toyoliatlaquatl, which word is compounded of to, signifying 
in the Mexican language “our’; yolotl ‘a heart, metaphorically meaning also ‘life’; atl ‘water’; and tlaqualli, defined by Molina, in 
his Mexican Dictionary, to be ‘comida 6 vianda,’ solid food. It may be presumed, from the painting in the fourth page of the Codex 
Borgianus, (the subject of which appears to be the crucifixion of Quecalcoatle, and the institution of the rite of teoqualo amongst his 
disciples,) that it was customary'for the Mexican priests, if not for the laity, to drink blood as well as to eat bread at their communion. 
But if surprise should be felt at the part of the body of Quecalcoatle from which blood seems to flow, that surprise will be somewhat 
abated ‘by the ‘consideration that circumcision was a sacrament in the Jewish church to which no manner of exception has ever been 
taken, and 'that par est ratio may be pleaded by the apologists of the ancient Mexicans. 

8 Water was dedicated to the Mexican goddess Chalchiuitlycue, and was esteemed by the Mexicans essential to regeneration. 

4 The people of Yucatan believed likewise in regeneration by means of baptism, as has already been remarked at page 414 of the sixth 
volume of the present work. 

5 Vide the note subjoined to page 6 of the sixth volume of this work. 

NOTES. 19 

he appears to be crowned with thorns; whilst the symbols of the smoking mirror and the cross denote that it 
is Quecalcoatle against whom Death is directing his spear. It has been already observed that the teotecpatl, or 
divine stone, was revered as a religious symbol by the Mexicans*, and placed by them.upon their altars; and we 

most anxious to transmit, by means of the art of painting, to their posterity ; since, amongst the paintings which I have inspected, there is 
one, having the appearance of great antiquity, which is drawn upon very coarse paper of the aloe, and represents a garden with a 
single tree, round the root of which is entwined a serpent, whose head appearing above the foliage displays the features and counte- 
nance of a woman; and a similar representation is found in other paintings. Those who explain its signification say that it is one of the 
goddesses, whom they afterwards worshiped in idolatrous ages, to whom they gave the name of Cihuacohuatl, which signifies < the 
woman-serpent?!. ‘Torquemada admits the existence of this tradition amongst them, and agrees with the Indian historians, who affirm 
that this was the first woman in the world who had children, and from whom all mankind are descended; they accordingly give her 
the name of Oxomozco, which others write Otzomozco, and interpret ‘ the gluttonous pregnant woman’, compounding it of the word 
otztli, which signifies ‘a pregnant woman’, and of moxtipthuant, which means ‘a longing for food’. ‘They bestowed upon her likewise 
the epithets of Titiel, which signifies ‘ our mother’, or ‘ the womb from which we are born,’ and of Teoxaomuiqui, which signifies ‘ the 
goddess who gathers to herself the souls of the dead’: they dedicated to her one of the months of the year, in which they celebrated a 
festival in commemoration of their deceased kindred, and erected famous temples to her, as we shall presently see. Iam induced, from 
all these circumstances, to believe that the ancient Tultecas were very well acquainted with the sin of the first man, committed at. the 
suggestion of the woman, herself deceived by-the serpent, who tempted her with the fruit of the forbidden tree, who was the origin of all 
our calamities, and by whom death came into the world; and that this was what they intended to represent in their symbolical paintings, 
hoping by their means to hand down the history to their posterity, which ignorance afterwards disfigured and mixed up with. fables, 
obscuring the truth and corrupting real religion. Possibly the confusion and horror with which they were in the beginning accustomed 
to contemplate these symbolical figures,—which perpetually reminded. them of the sin of the first man, the prime cause of, the greatest 
calamities that could have befallen the human race, the root of all evil, and the origin of death,—furnished ignorance with a plea, when 
the just horror for that sin had degenerated into idolatry, for inventing the story of this goddess, who gathered to herself the souls of 
the dead. I likewise find another analogy in the name which they have from ancient times to the present day. given to the. serpent, 
which is Cohuatlahueliloc, which signifies ‘the serpent-devil’, that being the epithet they most commonly apply to the serpent in the 
Mexican language.”—The above passage is taken from the first chapter of the first book of the History of the Origin of the Indians 
who peopled New Spain, by Don Mariano Fernandez de Echevarria y Veitia, a Spanish author of the last century. 

* Selden observes in the third chapter of the Preface to his treatise De Diis Syris, that the phrase 6 Seog ’ABoaap, 6 Seog "Iouux, 6 
Seog ’IaxwB, which so frequently occurs in the Old Testament, led the ancient Jewish cabalists, availing themselves of the equivocation 
caused by the omission of the Greek article tov before these proper names, to maintain that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were gods. 
« Td quod toties occurrit, 6 Seog "ABounp, 6 Seog "Ioaux, 6 Seog "IaxwB, jamdiu est cumin carmina transmigravit magica; atque ita est 
sumptum, ut nec Abraham, nec Isaac, nec Jacob, alius quam deus ob amphiboliam censeretur: de qua re, si placet, consulendus 
Origines adversus Celsum, lib. iv. et ejusmodi alia habet lib. i. et v. uti etiam Trallianus medicus, lib. xi.” It is not surprising that 
the Jews should have been inclined in all ages to pay superstitious reverence to their deceased patriarchs, or even to invoke their tutelary 
aid in seasons of calamity; since other nations, whose darkest idolatry ® fell infinitely short of the Hebrew profanation of whatever 

1 Amongst the specimens of Mexican sculpture copied from the valuable collection of M. Latour Allard, and inserted in the fourth 
volume of the Antiquities of Mexico, will be founda serpent with a human face, occupying a place in the same plate with the bust 
of Chantico, or the sacred wolf; which animal, whether from any fanciful association of it with the rising sun, or from its delighting in 
carnage, and on that account being a fit type of Huitzilopochtli, was held in the highest honour by the Mexicans. 

? The idolatry of the Mexicans was no less compatible with a belief in the unity of the Deity than the idolatry of the ancient Jews; 
and indeed, when we consider that the latter acknowledged a multitude of angels, archangels, principalities, thrones, dominions, and 
powers, as the subordinate personages of their hierarchy, it is difficult to recognise any great difference between their Unitarian creed 
and the polytheism of the ancients; nor would it be surprising if the line of distinction should become still more faint, ‘due allowance 
being made for the latitude of signification which the Greeks assigned:to the term @<os, and the Romans to Deus, epithets which 
equally belonged to him whom the Greeks styled doior0s, jueyioros, and the Romans declared to have no equal, “ cui nullum simile aut 
secundum,” and to the lesser gods of Olympus.. Having shown that the religion of the Mexicans resembled that of the Jews, both in 
their acknowledging the unity of the Deity in the person of Tezcatlipoca, and in their worshiping at the same time a multitude of idols, the 
beings of their own imagination, we shall proceed to point out another striking analogy between the religions of the two people. . They 
both believed in a plurality of devils subordinate to'one head, or prince, whom the Mexicans named Mictlantecutli or Zontemoque, and 
the Jews, Satan. And from the following passage of Selden, whose authority on a question of this kind is generally allowed to possess 
great weight, it will appear highly probable that'the deprecatory worship which the Mexicans paid to Mictlantecutli: originated in the 
offerings which the Jews were accustomed to make to the Devil on the day of Chipur, or the Atonement, and which are mentioned in the 
sixth chapter of the second part of the above-mentioned author’s treatise De Diis Syris: ‘* Volunt autem Samaelem proprium esse 
Diaboli nomen, qui primos parentes fefellit, eumque colubro cameli speciem ferente vectum. Rambam Aégyptius More Neboch. ii. c. xxxi. 
Coluber fuit equitatus, et ejus quantitas sicut cameli, et equitatus ejus fuit sicut ille qui decepit Evam, et ipsa fuit Zamael, (de Samaele 

20 NOTES: 

may further remark, that figures of hills or mountains frequently occur in their mythological paintings; and that they 
had a superstitious custom, described in the seventy-second page of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, of making 
dough images of mountains. This observation is here introduced in reference to the painting of a mountain in the 
tenth page of the MS. of Bologna, the heart of which, emblematical perhaps of Votan, is represented pierced with a 

was sacred in religion, have observed the same custom. Our principal reason, however, for here recurring to the ancient super- 
stitious usages of the Jews, is to show the probability that when they first colonized America, they exalted to the rank of tutelary 
divinities Adam, Eve, and a long list of patriarchs and prophets, gzving them a place in thei calendar, with a view to obtain their 
propitious influence over the destinies of their descendants. Nor on such a supposition would it have been at all surprising if the 
teotecpatl or divine stone which the Mexicans placed upon their altars was intended as a symbol of the Rock of Israel. Some persons 
may even imagine that the tradition of the flint that the goddess Citlalicue bore to the god Citlalatonac, which was cast from heaven, 
and falling on the earth gave birth to sixteen hundred gods, was founded on that of the stone which the builders refused becoming 
the head stone of the corner, and upon the saying in Scripture, that it would be easy for God from the very stones to raise up 
seed unto Abraham,—which is perhaps alluded to in the seventh page of the Codex Borgianus, where flints appear to be giving 
birth to a family of circumcised children. Torquemada records, in the following passage of the forty-first chapter of the sixth book 
of his Indian Monarchy, the Mexican tradition of the fall of the flint from heaven, The entire of his account is too long to 
transcribe :—‘ Cuenta el venerable, y mui religioso Padre Fr. Andrés de Olmos, que lo que coligié de las pinturas, y relaciones, 
que le dieron los caciques de Mexico, Tetzcuco, Tlaxcalla, Huexotzinco, Cholulla, Tepeaca, Tlalmanalco, y las demas cabeceras, 4 
cerca de los dioses que tenian, es, que diversas provincias, y pueblos, servian, y adoraban 4 diversos dioses, y diferentemente relataban 
diversos desatinos, fabulas, y ficciones, las quales ellos tenian por cosas ciertas; porque sino las tuvieran por tales, no las pusieran 
por obra, con tanta diligencia, y eficacia, como se dice tratando de sus fiestas. Pero ya que en diversas maneras cada provincia daba 
su relacion, por la maior parte venian 4 concluir, que en el cielo avia un dios llamado Ciilalatonac, y una diosa llamada Citlalicue; y 
que la diosa parié un navajon, 6 pedernal, que en su lengua Ilaman Tecpatl ; de lo qual admirados, y espantados los otros sus hijos, 
acordaron de hechar de el cielo al dicho navajon, y asst lo pusieron por obra, y que caid en cierta parte de la tierra, donde decian Chi- 
comoztoc, que quiere decir siéte cuevas. Dicen salieron de &1 mil y seiscientos dioses y diosas.” The continuation of the story is a 
mere allegory; and the fable of the voluntary death of the sixteen hundred gods on the first appearance of the Sun in the heavens, might 

intelligo). Hoc autem nomen dicunt prescise de Diabolo. Veteri commemoratione sanctorum Ecclesiz Orientalis legitur : Accusationis 
Samaelis ne recorderis, memento autem defensionum Michaelis. De Asmodzo videre licet historiam Tobit. Diverbium est et Ebreis : 
‘ Date munus ipsi Samael in die Expiationum’: ita Elias. Nominatur astrologis Judeorum, angelus ille quem diei Martis preesse 
nugantur, Samael. Notissimum Satan nomen est et velut Diabolo seu cacodemonum principi proprium. Et ut dia6od0s calumniator, 
Satan adversarius sive inimicus, hoc est fat, interpretatur. Utroque instrumento obvium est. Et in Enochi Apocryphis vetustissimis, si 
fides autori Testamenti Patriarcharum, occurrit. Princeps vester est Satanas: de quo nomine, vide si placet, que Justinus Martyr 
dialogo ad Tryphonem Judeum. De Luciferi nomine consulendus Eusebius in Demonstrat. Evangelic. lib. iv. cap. ix.” The rabbinical 
tradition noticed by Selden is extremely curious, and the story of the serpent which resembled a camel reminds us that the representa- 
tions of serpents of very extraordinary form, combining the head of ‘a quadruped with the tail and body of a reptile, not unfrequently 
occur in the Mexican paintings preserved in the Bodleian Library at Oxford. The fact in itself, that the Jews in past ages should have 
been accustomed to offer gifts to Satan on the festival of the Atonement, being curious, and one which, if substantiated, must be fertile in 
inferences, and would tend to explain the mixed worship of the Mexicans, who adored Tezcatlipoca, and presented at the same time depre- 
catory offerings to Mictlantecutli,—we shall quote a passage from the twenty-first chapter of the treatise entitled “ A View of the Jewish 
Religion,” elsewhere referred to, in which mention is made of that mysterious rite: “ In brief, this day of atonement they are so holy and 
zealous, that the Devil himself would be forced to commend their piety. Hence you may read in R. Eliezer this dialogue: In the day 
that God gave the law, the unclean spirit Samael spoke thus unto him: O Lord of the whole world, thou hast given me power over all 
the nations of the earth, but over Israel thou hast given me no power. God answered, In the day of atonement, if thou find sin in them, 
I will then give thee power over them; if not, I will not give thee power. Therefore, they give gifts to Satan on that day, that he may 
not interrupt their offering. But when Samael had on this day found the people of Israel without sin, he said unto God, Thou hast a 
people on earth like unto the angels in heaven; for as they stand upright, neither eating nor drinking, and are at amity one with another, 
such also is this people of Israel in that day. When God hears this from the evil spirit, he presently pardons their sins, and hears 
their prayers. In another place it is said that they give a gift to the Devil, because they would blind his eyes that he may not accuse 
them,—Exod. xxiii. 8: A gift blindeth the wise.” Whether Christ, in using the phrase “ your father the Devil,” to the Pharisees, 
could have alluded to any undue homage which the Jews in his age paid to Satan, it would be difficult to determine: but the ninth verse 
of the fourth chapter of Saint Matthew informs us that the Devil entertained the hope that he could induce, by a promise of temporal 
power and dominion, the second person of the Trinity to fall down and worship him; from which it might be inferred, that having 
received adoration from the chosen people of God, he ‘was so presumptuous as to hope to obtain it from God himself. The temptation 
of Christ by the Devil is the subject of the fourth chapter of Saint Matthew, and of the fourth chapter of Saint Luke; but the order in 
which the temptations follow each other in those two chapters is not the same, the cause of which, at this distance of time, it would be 
vain to try to account for. 

NOTES. on 

spear, while separate streams of blood and of water appear to proceed from its base: in the lower compartment. of 
the same page is a mysterious image of the Sun transfixed by a spear,—symbolical it is to be supposed of Quecalcoatle, 

have originated in the tradition of the religion of Quecalcoatle, who was typified by the Sun, having triumphed over all the other religions 1 of 
the country, and of many persons of adverse sects having been sacrificed on the occasion, Nor will this supposition appear so inad- 
missible, when it is recollected that the Mexicans applied the epithet of Teulis or ‘ gods’ to their own priests, and also to the Spaniards, 
exhibiting by so doing a strange conformity with the manners of the ancient Jews, who styled the princes of their several tribes gods, as 
appears from the language of David in the first verse of the eighty-second Psalm, which is translated in the Septuagint, ‘O @zos gory 2v 
cuvayuryn Seay, 2y ueow de Seous Ssaxgives. “ God stood in the assembly of the gods; he arbitrates in the midst between the gods.”. The seventh 
verse of the same Psalm, “ I have said, Ye are gods ; and all of you are children of the Most High. But ye shall die like men, and fall 
like one of the princes,”—is appealed to by Christ in the thirty-fifth verse of the tenth chapter of Saint John, with the intention, as it 
would appear, of lessening the irritation which the Jews felt at his styling himself the Son of God, by reminding them that the appellation 
even of “gods” had been given in Scripture to righteous persons predestined to die. The following passages in Scripture, in which God 
and the Messiah are metaphorically designated “ stones”, occur in Deuteronomy, the Psalms, the Books of Isaiah and Daniel, and the 
New Testament: they are here cited, not with the intention of multiplying Scriptural quotations, but in the full belief that a perversion of 
the meaning of these particular passages, and the substitution of typical acts for typical expressions, led to the senseless superstition 
among the Jews of later ages, which, in contradistinction to idolatry strictly so named, or the worship of carved images, may be called 
rock or flint? worship. “ He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are judgment : a God of truth and without iniquity, just 
and right is he.”— Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast forgotten God that formed thee.’—“ How should one 
chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up ?’—*« For their 
rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges.”—“ I will say unto God my Rock, Why hast thou forgotten me? 
why go I mourning because of the oppression of the enemy ?””—“ To show that the Lord is upright: he is my Rock, and there is no 
unrighteousness in him.”—“O come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us make a joyful noise to the Rock of our salvation.’—* The Stone 
which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner.”— Therefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion for a 
foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner-stone, a sure foundation: he that believeth shall not make haste.” —“ Hearken to me, 
ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek the Lord: look unto the Rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit 
whence ye are digged.”—“ Thou sawest till that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image upon his feet that were 
of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces.”——“ Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the Scriptures, The Stone which the 
builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner; this is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes ??— And 
have ye not read this Scripture; The Stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner?”— And he beheld 
them, and said, What is this then that is written, The Stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the 
corner ?”—“ This is the Stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner.” We may here 
remark that Cephas and Boanerges were names given by Christ to two of his disciples, the former signifying a ‘ stone,’ and the latter 
‘the son of the thunderbolt’. These names were undoubtedly symbolical, and Saint Peter appears to allude to them in the fifth verse of 
the second chapter of his First General Epistle, “ Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up 
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.” When it is recollected that Christ named two of his disciples ¢ thunderbolts,’ the 
coincidence will appear not a little singular,—that the Peruvians, according to Calancha, should have styled their priests sons of thunder, 
that the Mahometans should have applied the epithet of Ceyuf Ala, or‘ Knives of God’, to Abubequer, Othman, Omar, and Ali, the four 
compilers of the Koran; that the word tequepatl should signify in the Mexican language both a stone-knife and a thunderbolt, and that 
the Indians of Guatemala should have called the knives which they employed in sacrifice, ‘ the hands of God’, as stated by Torquemada 
in the twenty-sixth chapter of the sixth book of his Indian Monarchy. Most authors agree that the ancient Egyptians and the Hebrews 
employed stone knives for religious purposes, from whom the Arabs might have borrowed the honorary. appellation which they bestowed 
upon the four immediate successors of Mahomet. It may be proper to add, that Balboa is the author upon whose authority we have 
stated that Ceyuf Ala was a title of the principal founders of the Mahometan faith, who thus expresses himself in the eighth chapter of his 
Miscellanea Antarctica :—“ Los quatro dafiados apostatas pusieron por obra lo que se les havia encargado, y asi se partio cada uno 4 la 

1 A legendary story records, that on the first arrival of Mango Capac and his companions in Peru, the king of Cusco happened to be 
engaged in the celebration of a religious festival in the gardens of his palace, when the sun suddenly shone forth with such intense 
brightness that the king was compelled, desisting from the completion of the rites, to seek shelter in the shade. This. simple incident 
was construed by some who were present into an omen that he would be forced to flee from his kingdom, through the. heat of the new 
religion: which Mango Capac had come to preach to the Peruvians. The event, as it would appear, soon afterwards verified the predic- 
tion, the king being obliged to quit Peru, and retreat to the snowy mountains of Chile. Christianity, blended with Judaism and the 
worship of the Sun, was, according to the account of an anonymous writer, the religion of the Ingas, the annals of whose long’ pontificate, 
time has covered with an impenetrable veil of mystery. 

® From the representation of flints with mouths carved upon them, in the seventh page of the Codex Borgianus, there is reason to 
suppose that the Mexicans might have offered, like the Jews, meat- and drink-offerings to stones; which species of idolatry is repro- 
bated by Isaiah in the following passage of the fifty-seventh chapter of his Prophecies: “ Among the smooth stones of the stream is 
thy portion; they, they are thy lot: even ¢o them hast thou poured a drink-offering, thou hast offered a meat-offering.” 

VOL. VIII. GG) 

92 NOTES. 

who, like the Hebrew Messiah, was typified by the Sun*. Many passages of Scripture might have induced the Jews, 
after gross superstition had completely taken possession of their minds, to place stones and the images of hills: and 

‘parte y region que le cuypo en suerte: 4 Abubequer, que fue subcesor de el falso: Mahoma, le cupo en suerte la Suria, y otras provincias 
obtenidas por el pueblo Romano ; 4 Odman, le cupo el Egipto, y Africa; 4 Omar, la Persia; y 4 Ali, la parte de la India oriental: estos 
quatro (4 quien los Arabes Ilamaron Ceyuf Ala, que quiere decir, cwchillo de Dios) escrivieron cada uno por su parte en libros los preceptos 
y leyes de Mahoma, poniendo y componiendo 4 su alvedrio, lo que mas les parecia convenir para conseguir sus daiiados intentos: 4 la 
recopilacion que Abubequer hizo, Ilamaron Melquia, 4 la de Odman, llamaron Buanefia, 4 la de Omar, Asafia, 4la de Ali, Hamelia: esta 
ultima (que quiere decir pontifical) dafté y corrompié la Persia yla Arabia, y de ella procedio la abusion endemoniada de los Morabitos, 
y esta‘misma corrompio, y iva corrompiendo la gran India Oriental, quando nuestros Christianos entraron en ella, como se dira en su 
lugar.” 

* The Mexicans appear to have blended together the worship of Quecalcoatle and of the Sun; and the remark of Tertullian, that there 
were some who were inclined to assimilate the religion of the primitive Christians to that of the Sun, is deserving of notice; since the 
symbolical name of * the Sun,’ which was given to the Messiah in the Old Testament, might have led those who entertained that opinion 
into the above-mentioned error. The ancient Persians—with whose religion the Jews, from the local vicinity of their state, as well as from 
other causes, must have been well acquainted—adored the Sun under the name of Mithra, and they acknowledged a good and an evil 
principle, which they typified by the appropriate emblems of light and darkness. The same Christian Father, describing the worship 
of Mithra, in his treatise De Prescriptione, cap. 40, thus expresses himself, “ The priest of Mithra promises absolution from sin 
on confession and baptism; and if I rightly remember, Mithra marks his soldiers in the forehead with the chrism, (the Egyptian Kouphi): 
he celebrates the sacrifice of bread, which is the resurrection, and presents the crown to his followers, menacing them, at the same time 
with the sword.” Origen, treating of the ceremonies of the cave of Mithra, declares that the priests celebrated mysteries which consisted 
in imitating the motion of the stars, the planets, and the heavens, when the initiated took the names of constellations, and assumed the 
figure of animals: one was a lion, another a raven, and a third a ram; whence Volney is inclined to think that the custom of wearing 
masks in theatrical representations first originated. It may reasonably be inferred that the Jews were no less addicted to religious 
processions than the votaries of Mithra ; but whether they ever wore masks, or disguised themselves in the skins of animals, such as those 
of a lion, a lamb, and a serpent—which animals in the Old Testament were typical of the Messiah—it is impossible to say. ‘That the 
Mexicans were accustomed to wear such masks on’some of their religious festivals, is evident from the representation of a procession in 
the thirty-second page of the Mexican painting preserved in the Bodleian Library at Oxford. Volney, in the very curious chapter 
of his Meditations upon the Revolutions of Empires, which he entitles “ Christianisme, ou Culte allégorique du Soleil, sous ses noms 
cabalistiques de Chrisen ou Christ, et d’Yésus ou Jésus,” imagines that Christianity imbibed many superstitious notions from astronomy. 
And it is a fact which does not admit of doubt, that the early astronomers, by their division of the stars into certain constellations exhibit- 
ing ideal animal forms, to which they gave the names of various animals, favoured the growth of superstition? and of judicial astrology, 

1 History records that the Roman emperors sometimes sentenced the Jews to be put to death clothed in the skins of wild beasts, which 
mode of punishment might possibly have alluded to the practice of rites forbidden to them by the Roman laws. In the reign of Trajan 
the Jews revenged themselves on the Romans by massacreing great numbers of them, whose skins they wore in triumph, if the testimony 
of respectable historians is to be credited. This act of ferocity must be ascribed wholly to religious fanaticism, since the history of the 
Jews, revolting as is the religious picture which it presents, obliges us to confess that courage and humanity were virtues to which their 
nation was no stranger. Of the Jewish commonalty taken in the mass, it may with truth be said, that they were a most ignorant people, 
always under the guidance of a most flagitious set of priests. 

2 The following passage of Selden’s treatise De Diis Syris, where, treating of the Hebrew Teraphim, he supposes, with Rabbi Kimchi, 
that they might have been a perversion of the legitimate mode of consulting the Deity by Urim and Thummim, will serve to illustrate 
the truth of this observation :—“ Quisquis autem SyAous, dmogbeyyomevous, dwriopous, sive IND ea censet jure. appellanda, et prasdicendi 
sive futura monstrandi in iis fatetur simul facultatem; id est, Soaouvg esse rg dAnfeses, quo nomine vocantur etiam Urim et Thummim, 
quorum sanctitatem Teraphim simulabant, apud Siracidem capite xlv. comm. 12. Hujus generis fuere statuze ille, queis arcendi mala, 
ac oracula reddendi vis inerat, et de quibus frequens apud scriptores traditio: aureas faciebant vetustissimi Orientalium Zabii, sive 
Chaldwi, ex quorum libris plurima retulit R. Moses Egyptius, et argenteas effigies: has lune, illas soli dicabant; et edificaverunt 
palatia, ut scribit ille in More Nebochim, lib. iii. cap. xxx., et posuerunt in eis imagines, et dixerunt quod splendor potentiorum stellarum 
diffundebatur super illas imagines, et loquebantur cum hominibus, et annunciabant eis utilia: quod optime cum eis quadrat, qui 
secundum praecepta astrologica, ra Teraphim fieri solita, et ad certos siderum positus, volunt, (quemadmodum ea, que orowyei Greecis 
dicuntur) et secundum figuras in ccelo creditas, uti velut &A¢&yrypios seu Averrunci Dii essent, formata. Nec sane quantum ad astro- 
logicam rationem spectat, ororyeia a Teraphim differunt, nisi, quod heec futuris preedicendis, illa arcendis malis fuerint destinata : qui vero 
rome formabant, croyeimparixo dicebantur. Eos ita meminit autor Carpi, quod vulgus astrologorum Ptolemei Centiloquium 
nominat. Ta, inquit, év ry yeveoes xo Qbopa cidy mayer Ino Tov odgavioy eidwy. Sim ToUTO ~pwvTal ToUTOIS of TTOIYEIMLATIXOL, THs emElL 
Cucese Tov XoTEpwOY TXOMOUYTES 2x adra; habetur themate ix. et in eo codice qui cum commentariis Haly Aben Rodoan, sive is sit Abu- 
gepher qui ea scripsit, olim prodiit, ita latine redditur. Vultus hujus seculi sunt subjecti vultibus ccelestibus, et ideo sapientes, qui 
imagines faciebant stellarum, introitus in ccelestes vultus inspiciebant, et tunc operabantur quod debebant. Mentem.textus Greeci, fere 

NOTES. 93 

mountains in their temples, and to consider them as religious symbols, and even to deify the Teotecpatl. The ‘ Rock 
of Israel,’ ‘ the corner-stone,’ or simply ‘the stone,’ ‘the hill made without hands,’ are all names bestowed in the Old 

although that division was only intended to enable them the better to recollect the number and relative positions of the stars. That the 
Mexicans were acquainted with some of the signs of the zodiac, and had formed to themselves various imaginary constellations, may be 
inferred from the words of Sahagun, in the fourth chapter of the seventh book of his History of New Spain, who there speaks of the constel- 
lation called Citlalzunecuilli, and of the sign to which they gave the name of the Scorpion. Calancha likewise asserts, in the eleventh chapter 
of the second book of his Chronicle of the Order of Saint Augustin in Peru, that the Peruvians named.one of the stars Urcuquillay,. or the 
Ram, and believed that it protected sheep or lambs; agreeing so far with the ancient Chaldean astrologers, (whose notions are explained by 
Maimonides in his Treatise entitled More Nevochim,) in supposing that every species of animal had its likeness in the heavens, and 
was under the protection of some ruling constellation called by the same name:: “ Otros Indios que vivian en las montafias, adoravan otra 
estrella, que ellos llaman Chuquichinchay, que dicen es un tigre, & cuwyo cargo estan los tigres, osos i leones. Tambien adoravan otra 
estrella, que llaman ellos Anchochinchay, que dicen conserva otros animales; i otra que llaman Machacuay, @ cuyo cargo. estan las 
serpientes t culebras, paraque no les hagan mal; 2 generalmente todos los animales i aves que ay en-la tierra, ereyeron que. uviese un su 
semejante en el cielo, & cuyo cargo estada su procreacion 1 aumento; i asi tenian cuenta con diversas estrellas que lamavan Chacana 
i Topatorca,.Mamana, Mirco, Miquiquiray, i otras asi; ide cada una destas cuentan su fabula, como usaron los gentiles de Europa 
i Grecia.”—La Coronica de S. Augustin en el Peru, lib. 2. cap. xi. It is worthy of remark that the Jews have from the earliest ages 
been addicted to the study of judicial astrology and the art of interpreting dreams; and the Tultecas are said to have been the first who 
introduced the use of paintings amongst the Indians for these express purposes. It hence becomes.extremely interesting to inquire into 

verba vides. Vultus autem illi coelestes non modo xlviii. constellationes globis depictas, verum innumeras et portentosas etiam illas 
figuras denotant, que, Perse, Indi atque A®gyptii cum unoquoque signi decano, seu quolibet decani gradu ascendere tradebant: 
quarum in numero est illa, quam in primo Virginis decano sphere Persice collocant. Virgo nempe pulchra, capillitio prolixo, duas 
spicas manu gestans, residens in siliquastro, educans puerulum, lactans et cibans eum. Pro exemplo hanc magis attuli, quod non solum 
Aboasar, quem falso, ut docet J. Picus, Albumasarem vocant, decanum illum, uti cceleste unici Salvatoris Jesu nativitatis symbolum 
notaverit Mahumedanus ; verum etiam insignis ille mathematicus, et vir, ultra sane quam seculum suum tulerit, doctus, Rogerus Baconus 
Oxoniensis et Minorita Alboasaris sententiam fuerit amplexus. Opere enim tertio, quod ad Clementem quartum dedit, Alboasaris verba 
ab Hermanno Dalmata latine ex Arabico facta citat, subjungitque: Intentio est quod Beata Virgo habet ficuram et imaginem infra 
decem primos gradus Virginis, et quod nata fuit quando Sol est in Virgine, et ita habetur signatum in calendario, et quod nutriet filium 
suum Christum Jesum in terra Hebreorum: et ad hanc rem ille liber cui titulus, Ovidius de Vetula ad Virginem Mariam, 
O Virgo felix, O Virgo significata 
Per stellas, ubi spica nitet..... 

De quo libro, et hac re, vide, si placet, Robertum Holkot in Sapientiam Lect. xxi. De decanis vero eorumque figuris Alboasar seu 
Albumasar ille satis in Introductorii parte sexta. Eadem etiam, ex Aben Ezre initio Sapientia, transcripsit latine cum igyptiorum 
monomeeriis, id est, figuris singulorum graduum uniuscujusque decani, ad spheram barbaricam Manilii nobilissimus Scaliger. 
Atqui, ad locum illum Carpi, Arabs Haly, In hoc, inquit, capitulo vult Ptolemeus multa imaginum ‘secreta patefacere, et vultus, quos 
in hoc seculo esse dixit, sunt species animalium et species planetarum ; et ideo dicit quod omnibus istis speciebus dominatur sibi vultus 
consimiles in coelo manentes. Verbi gratia: Scorpio ccelestis terrenis scorpionibus dominatur: ét ccelestis serpens terrenis serpentibus ; 
et sapientes imaginum inspiciebant quando planeta de sub radiis solis egrediebatur et ingrediebatur hos vultus, eumque in ascendente 
ponebant; et vultum quem impetrabat sculpebant in lapide, et miscebant cum eo alia ad hac necessaria, faciebantque cum eo ex aptatione 
vel destructione quod volebant, et vis illa in lapide multis temporibus durabat. Ita redditur ille Arabs: Scorpio ad hunc modum fictus 
scorpiones abigendi morsusque eorum curandi vim habuisse credebatur. Historiam de re simplici citat Josephus Scaliger in epistola 
Gallice conscripta ad Vazetum, ex geographo Arabe. Et crocodili imaginem plumbeam, ‘ad crocodilos repellendos conflatam, igne 
solvisse Achmed Ben-Tolon Aigyptius Calipha dicitur, ut ex Arabum monimentis scribit Julius Scaliger Exercitat. cxxxvi. tmem. 6.” 

1 The ancient astrological notions of the Jews are noticed at considerable length by Selden in his disquisition concerning Gad; or Good 
Fortune; and a doubt may arise in the minds of some,—on reading in the subjoined passage of the twelve signs of the zodiac, and an 
order of angels designated by the’same name of Mazaloth,—whether the Tonalametl or. Mexican calendar might not have been invented 
by the Jews, who,—in assigning twelve houses to twelve of its signs, and placing the latter under the influence of nine superior powers or 
spirits, causing the thirteenth or ruling sign, which was the first in order of the signs, and perhaps the symbol of the Sun, to. enter éach 
house successively—would seem to have borrowed some of their notions from the Egyptians, with whose astrological doctrines they were 
likely to have been better acquainted than with those of the Greeks. The Egyptians, it deserves also to be remarked, are believed to have 
been the inventors of the nine astrological decans,—if indeed the merit of that invention be not due to the J ews, who, arrogating to them- 
selves the knowledge of things heavenly, refer to the fourteenth verse of the first chapter of Genesis, to prove that astrology was a. science 
of divine institution, and declare Seth to have been the first famous astrologer. Ebreorum aliqui Fortunam Bonam hic -intelligunt, 
Leamque loquutam, quasi partui bene esset ominata; unde vulgata editio, que D. Hieronymi dicta, Feliciter pro Bagad habets Nam 
Ebrei resolvunt 122 Bagad in 1182 Ba Gad, id est, Venit Gad, quod interpretantur per 20 >in 89 Ba Mazal tob, id est, venit Fortuna 
Bona, sive sidus bonum, bonus demon. Et Masorethis, est hac una ex quindecim dictionibus que scribuntur ut una, et leountur ut 

D4, NOTES. 

? 

Testament upon the Messiah, to which Christ himself refers in his speech fouPeteracuilinou arene enanahupon 
this rock I will build my Church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. . And I will give unto thee the 

the n ature of the Tonalamatl, or ritual calendar of the Mexicans, which, as Sahagun observes 1, was, properly speaking, an art of divina- 
tion, and not a calendar, since its object was not to compute time, or to determine seasons, but to predict good or bad fortune to children, 
according to the sign in which they happened to be born, That the Tonalamatl was, in point of time, a later invention than 
the Mexican calendar, properly so named, cannot be doubted; since it would be unreasonable to suppose that the Mexicans had invented 
an art for divining the good or bad fortune of the days of the year, before they had determined the precise number of days of which the 
year should consist, and distributed them into lesser corresponding periods of time. The improbability, therefore, of the Mexican 
calendar having borrowed its numbers or its signs from the Tonalamatl, is evident; although it is not equally apparent that the twenty 
signs: of the days of the year employed in the latter were not taken from the former, notwithstanding Sahagun is of a different 
opinion; especially as it is generally admitted that the eighteen months of the Mexican year were distinguished by their proper 
symbols, which would have been an anomaly if the twenty days comprised within each of these months had no hieroglyphical characters 
allotted to them. A reason might: be assigned for the scanty information imparted to us by Sahagun on this point, since it would have 
been impossible for him to have treated fully of the Mexican calendar without at the same time noticing the subject of Mexican 
chronology, which, founded upon the system of the Tultecas, and computing time after the Hebrew fashion by jubilees, began with the 
creation of the world-in the year Ce Tecpatl, or One Flint, and with the history of the formation of Adam and Eve; proceeding 
to record the’ Deluge, the preservation of eight persons in the ark, the building of the Tower of Babel, the confusion of tongues, 
and the dispersion of tribes, assuming even as an epoch the sun’s having stood still in the age of Joshua, which event. they believed 
to have occurred in the year named Seven Rabbits, or 2555 after the creation?; and that the sun then remained motionless 
during the space of one entire day,—which singularly agrees with the account contained ‘in the thirteenth verse of the tenth chapter 
of the Book of Joshua——We shall here insert some passages from the second chapter of the inedited History of the Origin of the 
Nations who peopled New Spain, a work composed by the learned Don Mariano Fernandez de Echevarria y Veitia, which will 
clearly prove how well acquainted the ancient Tultecas were with the most important events recorded in the Hebrew chronology ; 
who, it should be observed, are declared in the chapter immediately preceding, to have adored one supreme and only God, whom 
they named the Creator of Heaven and Earth, and upon whom they bestowed the epithets of Tloque Nahuaque, and Ypalnemchualoni; 
the meaning of which latter word is, ‘ Him by whom we live and exist,’ who was the same as Viracocha and Pachacamac, the supreme 
deity of the Peruvians. The following is the title of the chapter quoted, and the extracts follow each other in the order in which they 
there occur :—“ De la Noticia que alcanzaron del Diluvio, y de la Torre de Babel, y Confusion de Lenguas, y de las siete familias del 
idioma Nahuatl, que vinieron 4 poblar estas Regiones.” ‘¢ The belief, then, having been established that the world had been created 
by Tloquenahuaque, they began to compute time from the year of the Creation; they marked that year with the hieroglyphic of One Flint 
in their chronological system (the nature of which I shall explain presently), and from it they commenced their reckoning of time and the 
computation of their years; and they affirm that at the completion of thirty-three of their ages (each of which consisted of fifty-two years) 

due. Volunt autem plerique Mazal tob, Jovis stellam (quam pr¥ 2212 Coceb Thedek nuncupant, id est, Stellam Justicie) denotare; quod 
uti notat Munsterus, iberorum generationi, secundum astrologorum dogma, radizs suas conducat. Unde etiam puelle desponsate traditur 
annulus in quo scriptum est Mazal tob. Nam Mazal est sidus seu stella, wnde dicunt Rabbini, non esse aliquam herbam in terra, que 
non habeat proprium bi Mazal sew stellam influentem et dirigentum in clo: quod ait ille Mazal vero numero secundo, nempe Mazaloth 
(quod et, immutato nonnunquam 4 in 4, Mazaroth exaratur) nunc Planetas, nunc XII. signa significat. In 2. Reg. cap. xxiii. adolebant 
incensum | Baal, Soli, Lune, Planetis (ubi Ebraica veritas: moto Lamazoloth, LX X. autem rois Mafoupwo habent) et universe militice 
coeli, ubi Procopius Gazzeus, Mafoupwi, inquit, dorepos dvope, 5s einos rou “Ewopopov ac si unicum aliquod sidus denotaret: sed Suidas; 

Matovpui, re cvorypara tov dorepwy o ev cuvydere Cwdie xarouvrou. De Mazaroth et Mezarim videsis Job. cap. xxxvil. comm. 9, et cap. 
XXXVI. comm. 32. Sed astronomi Judei zodiacum mibion y518 Ophan Hamazaloth, id est, circulum Mazaloth, seu signorum, et ipsa 
signa nim Did est, duodecim Mazaloth vocant. Cabalistis autem ordo quidam angelorum Mazaloth apellatur : adi, si placet, Dogmata 
Cabalistica ii. vii. et xlvii. et, in ea Archangeli Commentarios. Sed vero, maxima apud Ebreos ratio, qua 319 519 seu Sidus beneficum 
sive Jupiter aut Fortuna, que astrologis a siderum positura pendet, heic intelligitur, ex lingua petitur Arabica, in qua, aiunt, sidus illud 
beneficum ‘3 appellatur. Ita Rabbi Moses sacerdos apud Cimchium in Isaiz caput lxv. et in radicibus. Idem memorat etiam Aben- 
Ezra ad dictum Geneseos locum. Certe al Gad Arabibus bonus seu beneficus est, adeoque Jovis stellam denotat, ex hoc Mosis loco 
aut hac apud Ebreos notione, forsan primd sumtum. Ut Ebreei autem, ita Chaldzi locum illum Geneseos, de verbis Lez, anteiictantar 
Onkelos enim habet 12 sh Atha Gad, id est, venit Fortuna, seu Gad. 

1 Vide the Appendix to the fourth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain. 
2 It. hence appears that the Mexicans as well as the Jews were accustomed to date leading historical events from the creation of the 

world. ‘When serious attention is bestowed upon this analogy in the manners of two nations. so widely removed from each other, and 
yet in many respects ‘so similar, surely it would be ascribing too much to accidental causes to suppose that chance might have led the 
former to adopt the same’mode of chronological computation as the latter;—to limit the age of the world to nearly the same number of 
years; to reckon time by jubilees; and to interweave with their own mythology a train of events, if not the same, yet exactly resembling 
those recorded in the Pentateuch. ‘Had Aineas believed the wars of Troy, which he beheld painted in the hall of Dido, to be -the 
accidental creation of the imagination of the artist, that supposition would not have been more unreasonable. 

NOTES. 25 

keys* of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever 
thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven,” which famous passage of the sixteenth chapter of the Gospel of 

after the creation of the world, which comprise a period of one thousand seven hundred and twenty-six years, in another year, which 
was likewise marked with the same hieroglyphic of One Flint, the human race suffered a horrible calamity from excessive rains, accom- 
panied with thunder and lightning, which deluged the whole earth 1, the highest mountains being covered with water caxtolmalictli, 
which signifies fifteen cubits®, and that only eight persons escaped from this general calamity in a flapélipetlacallz, which signifies a 
house resembling a closed ark, which they represent in their paintings as a little bark with an awning above, over which are eight 
heads, which are placed there to denote that from these eight persons the world became re-peopled.” “ Resuming, then, the thread 
of our history, I say that the human race having multiplied considerably, mankind, according to their tradition, fearing lest another 
deluge should occur, and wishing to render their name famous’, resolved to build a very high tower, to which they gave the name 
of Zacualli, and that at the expiration of four centuries (which are eight ages of those comprising a period of fifty-two years) after 
the Deluge, in a year which they likewise mark with the sign of One Flint, when they were most intent on building the tower, their 
languages were suddenly confounded in such a manner that they could not understand each other; on which the building ceased, and 
they all separated, scattering themselves over the whole surface of the earth. This history, so punctually recorded by the Tultecas, from 
whose historical paintings the historians of the monarchies of Mexico and Tezcuco derived their knowledge of it, was in like manner 
preserved amongst the Indians of Chiapa, as Don Francisco Mujfioz de la Vega, the bishop of that diocese, certifies in. the ‘Prologue 
to his Diocesan Constitutions; declaring that an ancient manuscript of the primitive Indians of that province, who had learned the 
art of writing, was in his record office, who retained the constant tradition that the father and founder of their nation was named Tepo- 

* Hence, keys became in early ages a religious symbol and a mark of episcopal rank,—a fact which occurred to the recollection of 
Calancha when explaining, at page 328 of his Chronicle of the Order of Saint Augustine in Peru, a curious inscription discovered upon a 
rock in Calango, a place situated at the distance of fifteen leagues from Lima, an engraving of which is inserted in his work. This inscrip- 
tion consisted of a row of letters, either alphabetically or numerically employed, and horizontally carved in the rock; and beneath the 
lines a foot is sculptured, and what appears to be an anchor; as also two symbols resembling very old-fashioned keys. Two other 
stones containing inscriptions in Hebrew and Greek letters, are stated by Calancha, on the authority of Brother Raymond Urtado, to 
have existed in the neighbourhood, who further adds, “ They tell me that in the year 1625, the Licentiate Duarte Fernandez, the visitor 
of the archbishop, ordered these letters to be defaced; I cannot credit so vile a thing :—‘ El afio de mili seycientos i veynte i cinco, 
me dicen que el Licenciado Duarte Fernandez, visitador de Argobispo, mandé picar las letras; no puedo creer cosa tan mala.’ ” There 
is nothing improbable in the latter portion of the statement, since Nunez de la Vega, the Bishop of Chiapa, committed a no less wanton 
act in destroying the history of Votan, in the manner related at page 407 of the sixth volume of this work. 

1 The Peruvians were acquainted with the Deluge, and believed that the rainbow was the sign that the earth would not again be 
destroyed by water. This is plain from the speech which Mango Capac, the reputed founder of the Peruvian empire, addressed to his 
‘companions on beholding the rainbow rising from a hill; which is thus recorded by Balboa in the ninth chapter of the third part of his 
Miscellanea Antarctica: “ Legaron 4 vista de un cerro llamado oy Guanacauri y un dia al amanecer vieron el yris 6 arco de el cielo que 
levantava el un pie de encima de el mismo cerro, y Mango Capac dixo 4 los demas Buena senal.es aquesta que ya no se acabara el 
mundo-por agua; seguidme, y subamos en este cerro y de alli. veremos el lugar donde havemos de poblar y permanecer: y echadas sus 
suertes, y hechas las ceremonias y supersticiones 4 su modo, caminaron hazia el cerro.” “ They travelled on, until a mountain, at present 
named Guanacauri, presented itself to their view, when, on a certain morning, they beheld the rainbow rising above the mountain, with 
one extremity resting upon it, when Mango Capac exclaimed to his companions, This is a propitious sign that the world will not be again 
destroyed by water ; follow me, let us climb to the summit of this mountain, that we may thence have a view of the place which is destined 
for our future habitation. Having cast lots and performed various superstitious ceremonies after their manner, they directed their course 
towards the mountain.” It is scarcely necessary to observe, that to draw omens or to determine chances by throwing lots, was an an- 
cient Hebrew custom, resorted to on the most solemn, as well as the most trivial occasions. Proof having been afforded in the passage 
quoted from the History of Balboa, that the Peruvians were acquainted with the history of the rainbow, as given in the ninth chapter of 
Genesis, it may be interesting to add, that according to the account of an anonymous writer, they believed that the rainbow was not only 
a passive sign that the earth would not be destroyed by a second deluge, but an active instrument to prevent the recurrence of such 
a catastrophe: the latter curious notion proceeded upon the assumption that as the water of the sea (which, like the Jews, they believed 
to encircle the whole earth) would have a tendency to rise after excessive falls of rain, so the pressure of the extremities of the rainbow 
upon its surface would prevent its exceeding its proper level. 

2 This nice agreement with the Mosaic account of the height which the waters of the Deluge attained above the summits of the 
highest mountains is certainly extraordinary ; since we read in the twentieth verse of the seventh chapter of Genesis, “ Fifteen cubits 
upward did the waters prevail, and the mountains were covered.” 

5 ¢ Let us make us a name” was the exhortation which the builders of the Tower of Babel are said, in the fourth verse of the eleventh 
chapter of Genesis, to have used to each other when planning their city and tower. 

VOL. VIII. (Cle) 

96 NOTES. 

St. Matthew was that which caused the Church of Rome to lay claim to spiritual supremacy, and the Popes to style them- 
selves the Vicars of Christ. In the eleventh page of the MS. of Bologna, a tiger is represented pierced with a spear; and 

nahuaste, which signifies ‘ the lord of the hollow piece of wood’, and that he was present at the building of the Great Wall, for so they 
named the Tower of Babel, and beheld with his own eyes the confusion of languages; after which event God the Creator commanded 
him to come to these extensive regions, and to divide them amongst mankind.” “ ‘They represent the confusion of languages in their 
paintings by the symbol of a round hill, the fore-ground of which is occupied by a medallion with a face resembling that of an old man 
with a long beard engraven upon it, and round the medallion on the outside are many tongues, which encircle and form a border to it. 

1 The Teponahuaste, or Teponahuatl, was a hollow wooden drum, in frequent use among the ancient Mexicans, the shape of which 
M. Dupaix compares to that of a canoe. Since a bark or canoe might have been the phonetic symbol employed by the Tultecas to 
signify the proper name Noah, a reason for the epithet Teponahuaste might be found in that circumstance, as well as inthe Mosaic 
account of Noah having invented the art of making wine; which beverage was seldom drunk to excess by the Indians, except at their 
religious dances, which were always accompanied with the music of the Teponahuatl or drum. 

2 There can be little doubt that Echevarria is here mistaken, and that Mount Sinai was really signified by the symbol of the 
round hill in the above-mentioned paintings. ‘The Mexicans represented a teocalli and a mountain by such different symbols, that it is 
very unlikely they would have substituted the one for the other, even had they known that what are supposed to be the ruins of the Tower 
of Babel is now a shapeless mound of earth on the banks of the Euphrates; whilst there is great probability that the medallion in the 
front of the mountain was the symbol of the proper name Tezcatepec, which signifies ‘ the mountain of the mirror,’ the Mexican mirrors 
being formed.out of a round piece’of semitransparent stone, named Ytzli; that the head of the old man with the long beard, within the 
medallion, was Tezcatlipoca; and that the supposed tongues round the medallion on the outside, represented the fire and smoke which 
proceeded from Mount Tezca when that deity manifested himself to the Mexicans on their pilgrimage from Aztlan. It has already been 
observed, at page 248 of the sixth volume of the present work, that in Mexican paintings, tongues or languages are represented by the 
same symbol as smoke; and we may here remark, in reference to the previous supposition, that the history of the migration of 
the Aztecas from Aztlan commenced, like that of the pilgrimage of the children of Israel. from Egypt, with the account of their God 
speaking to their leader out of a burning bush; that the two proper names, Tezcatlipoca and Huitzilopochtli, are analogous compounds, 
—pochtli ‘ smoke,’ or popoca (by syncope poca) ‘ to smoke,’ forming the concluding portion of each: whence it may be inferred that the 
concealed deity who is supposed by Torquemada, at page 237 of the sixth volume of this work, to have spoken to the Mexicans 
out of a tree, in the form of a bird, inviting them to proceed on their pilgrimage,—to which circumstance both the proper name 
Huitzilopochtli, and the bird’s head in the first page of the original Mexican painting, which once formed a portion of the historical 
museum of Boturini, would seem to allude,—was he that appeared to the Mexicans in the smoking mountain of the mirror; and 
it is highly probable that the head of the bird in that painting, is symbolical of the presence of Huitzilopochtli within the burning’ 
bush, which may be fancifully represented by the three boughs horizontally and vertically placed over each other, from which smoke 
appears to issue. It deserves to be remarked, that the head of a bird, with a bill resembling that of the Huitzilan, occurs as a sacred 
symbol at page 91 of the lesser Vatican Codex; and since Sahagun, in the first chapter of the first book of his History of New Spain, 
affirms that the device of Huitzilopochtli was the head of a formidable dragon, and such a device is painted on the heads of two of the 
figures with serpents in their hands, in the ninety-second and ninety-third pages of the same MS., it may with probability be presumed 
that if those two figures represent Huitzilopochtli, so also does that which immediately precedes them. ‘The shape of the bill of the 
Huitzilan will immediately be perceived by referring to the symbol of the tributary city of Huitzilopucho, in the twentieth plate of the 
Collection of Mendoza, which city Clavigero supposes received its appellation from the name of the tutelary god of the Mexicans, 
as it appears likewise to have done its phonetic character. Those who have considered with attention the history of the migration of the 
Mexicans from Aztlan, will admit that a human head placed within the bill of a bird was a no less appropriate symbol of the deity 
who spoke to the leader of the Mexicans through the song of the bird im the bush, than the smoking mirror was of the god who 
appeared to them on mount Tezca, and that there was as much reason to confer on him a name commemorative of the former as.of the 
latter circumstance. But if it be inquired why the Huitzilan, rather than a bird of another species, became the symbol of Huitzilopochtli, 
a more probable reason cannot be assigned, than that the plumage of that bird was extremely beautiful; that its green feathers, named 
Quetzalli, were supposed to resemble in colour the plumage of the serpent, which of old was the type of Quetzalcoatle; and that from 
its being accustomed to remain in a torpid state during the winter and to awaken in the spring, the Mexicans might have deemed it a fit 
type of the resurrection and the immortality of the soul. It has already been imagined, in the note subjoined to page 82 of the sixth 
volume of the present work, that the head-dress of one of the figures standing at the side of the cross in the temple of Palenque, might 
bear some mysterious allusion; and the following passage, taken from a valuable MS. preserved in the library of the Escurial, in which 
mention is made of the Huytzitzitl forming a portion of the head-dress of Quecalcoatle, and being suspended to a bone inserted in his 
mitre, renders this supposition extremely probable:—“ Esta figura és de un demonio llamado Quetzalcouail, que quiere decir, Culebra 
hecha de pluma: este tenian los Indios por dios del ayre, y pintanle los Indios la media cara de la nariz abajo de palo, con una trompa 
por do soplaba el aire; y encima de la cabeza le ponian una coroza como mitra de cuero del tigre, y de ella salia por penacho un 
hueso, del qual colgaba mucha pluma de patos de la tierra, que ellos llaman Xumictl, y en fin dél esté atado un paxarito que se llama 
Huytzitzitl.” “ This figure represents a devil named Quetzalcouail, which signifies ‘ The serpent made of feathers,’ whom the Indians 

NOTES. OT 

the place which the tiger occupies in that painting, induces us to suppose that it is intended to represent the lion of the 
tribe of Judah, which the Jews of the New World metamorphosed into the tiger. It is scarcely necessary to observe, 

This manner of painting the confusion of tongues under the similitude of a hill, accords well with the accounts which we receive from 
ancient and modern travellers, who testify that they have seen the remains which still exist of it; and on their authority Father Augustine 
Calmet affirms, in his Dissertation upon the Tower of Babel, at the beginning of his Commentary upon Genesis, and in his Dictionary 
of the Bible, when defining the word Babel, that this tower was a solid mass of masonry within, and more resembled a mountain than 
a building. There remains at the present time an irrefragable monument both of the lasting and perfect recollection which these 
nations, as being the descendants of those who resolved to carry into execution so presumptuous a design, retained of. the building of that 
famous tower, and of the plan of its construction. This is the famous tower of Choloyan', constructed by the Ulmecas, one of the 
nations that first peopled the country of Anahuac, and with the same proud intention of rendering their name famous: and there remains 
in our days a considerable portion of its ruins in the said city of Choloyan, at about the distance of a league from Puebla de los Angeles, 
resembling in shape a hill of masonry, with an ascent on the outside. They affirm, then, that at the time of the confusion of tongues, 
there were seven families who spoke the same language, which was the Nahuatl, that which is still spoken by the Mexicans; and since 
they understood each other, they united, and forming a single company, proceeded on their journey through divers lands and countries, 
as chance directed them, and without any particular destination, in search of a convenient habitation; and having travelled during a 
century, (which amongst them was a period of time amounting to one hundred and four years,) passing in the interval mountains, rivers, 
and arms of the sea, which they note down in their paintings, they arrived at the place where they made their first settlement, in the 
northern part of this kingdom, which they named Tlapalan, which signifies ‘the red country,’ on account of the soil being of that. colour ; 
and even still, in all modern maps, they give the name of the Red Sea to the gulf which is situated between the eastern shores of 
California and the western coast of the provinces of New Mexico and Sonora; and the river which flows into the northern part of 
the gulf is named the Red River. They called that state in after-times Huehuetlapalan, which signifies Old Tlapalan, in order to dis- 
tinguish it from the other, which was founded many years afterwards, bearing the same nanie, as we shall observe in the proper place.” 
The following extract, which is taken from the third chapter of the history of the same author, contains the Mexican tradition of the sun 
having stood still, (which has already been referred to at page 374 of the sixth volume of the present work,) as affording presumptive 
evidence of either Jews or Christians having in early ages colonized that continent. “The city of Huetlapalan having been peopled, 
and. the number of its inhabitants having greatly increased, being straitened for room they began, as 1 have already said, to extend 

believe to be the god of the air, and whom they paint with the lower half of the face, from the nose downwards, of wood, with a trunk, 
through which he blows the air; and they place upon his head a crown resembling a mitre, made of the skin of a tiger, out of 
which protruded a bone by way of a plume, to which they hang many feathers of the ducks of that country, which they name Xumictl, 
and they tie at the end of it.a bird named the huytzitzitl.” This passage is extremely curious, since it explains: the reason why the 
Mexicans were accustomed to paint the face of Quecaicoatle with a trunk, viz. to denote that he was the god of the air, reminding us 
that M. de Humboldt has noticed this striking deformity of feature in some of the personages of the Mexican mythology; who 
expresses at the same time his surprise how, being unacquainted with the elephant, they should have formed to themselves the idea of 
a trunk, or proboscis, such as is peculiar to that animal and cannot be said to belong to the tapir. Had Vishnou, the Chrisen of the 
Hindoos,—-who is sometimes represented in Eastern paintings as a man with the head and trunk of an elephant, in allusion to his having 
become incarnate in the “body of that animal,—ever made his appearance in America, or had the Jews who penetrated to the New 
World blended any of the fables of Oriental mythology with the history of Quecalcoatle, a reason might be assigned for the visage of the 
latter being disfigured with the addition of a trunk ; which, it deserves to be noticed, is the organ through which the elephant breathes, 
and is the only portion of its body which, when swimming, it keeps above water, and was therefore a very proper symbol, whether 
accidentally or designedly made choice of by the Mexicans, to signify the act of blowing air. ‘There is not, however, the slightest 
ground for supposing that the Mexicans or Peruvians were acquainted with any portion of the Hindoo mythology :. but since 
their knowledge of even one species of animal peculiar to the Old Continent, and not found in America, would, if distinctly proved, 
furnisha convincing argument of a communication having taken place in former ages between the people of the two hemispheres, we cannot 
but think that the likeness to the head of a rhinoceros, in the thirty-sixth page of the Mexican painting preserved in the collection of Sir 
Thomas Bodley; the figure of a trunk resembling that of an elephant, in other Mexican paintings ; and the fact, recorded by Simon, that 
what resembled the rib of a camel (la costilla de un camello) was kept for many ages as a relic, and held in great reverence, in one of the 
provinces of Bogota,—are deserving of attention. 

1 The great antiquity of the temple of Chollula may be inferred from the Indians sometimes confounding it with the Tower of Babel, 
and sometimes with the Temple of Jerusalem. The tradition of Tonacatecutli having destroyed it by lightning, in order to punish the 
presumption of those who purposed to build it so high as to reach heaven, assimilates it to the Tower of Babel, which J. osephus says in 
the first volume of his Jewish Antiquities, was declared by the Sibyl to have been destroyed by a tempest, who recorded that event in 
the verse dyewor peyay tots mugyoy prpav, (“ Winds overthrew the great tower”), The famous prediction of Quecalcoatle, that the 
destruction of the temple of Chollula would happen soon after his departure to the kingdom of Tlapallan, appears to identify itself with 
Christ’s prophecy concerning the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem. 

28 NOTES. 

that the lion and the lamb were both names given to the Messiah by the prophets; and it may easily be supposed under 
what discordant images the Mexicans would have represented him, when once they began to embody in paintings the 

their habitations on all sides around it, dividing themselves into towns and hamlets, from which period the great Chichimecan empire 
began to date its existence; whence, in later ages, so many powerful monarchies proceeded. The houses in which they dwelt, in the 
city as well as in the'villages, were then, and for many ages afterwards, even when they had kings and an established form of govern- 
ment, nothing more than caves, which they found ready formed by nature, in imitation of which they made others ; and these were their 
only habitations. Their food consisted of fruits, herbs, and animals which they killed in the chase; their dress was formed out of the skins 
of the same animals, fashioned.somewhat in the manner of close drawers, which they named maxtles, and wore fastened round their 
loins. At the expiration of three centuries after the foundation of their capital city of Huehuetlapalan, they record an extraordinary 
occurrence, of which’ they retain so perfect a recollection as to constitute it an epoch in their chronological computation of succeeding 
events. They affirm, then, that in the year which was marked with the hieroglyphic of Seven Rabbits, the sun stood still for the 
space of one entire day, which caused an intense and unprecedented degree of heat, from whence sprung such swarms of mosquitos 
that they suffered no one to enjoy repose or tranquillity. They founded a fable afterwards upon that event, affirming that a mosquito, on 
perceiving that the sun had stood still, presented itself before him, and said, ‘ Lord of the world, how happens it that you are motion- 
less and-cast down, and do not perform the duties of your office ?—can it be your intention to destroy the world with fire, and to reduce 
it to ashes, turning a deaf ear to the prayers of mortals? Go on, resume your wonted activity, and discharge the proper duties of your 
station.’ But when the sun appeared indifferent to his reasoning, the mosquito approached him, and stinging one of his legs compelled 
him to move and to continue his accustomed course. A century amongst them consisted of one hundred and four years; the three cen- 
turies accordingly, which they say had intervened between the foundation of their city and this event, comprise three hundred and twelve 
years, which, if reckoned from the year two thousand two hundred and thirty-seven of the world (which was the era of the foundation 
of the said city), would terminate in the year two thousand five hundred and forty-nine, which was marked with the hieroglyphic of One 
Flint, as will be seen by referring to the tables: but since they expressly declare that the sign of the year in which this phenomenon 
occurred, was that of Seven Rabbits, it appears more correct to refer it to the year two thousand five hundred and fifty-five of the world, 
that being the first year after the three centuries which is marked with this hieroglyphic. This event, the recollection of which the 
Indians preserved in their history, is very similar to. that which the Scripture records in the tenth chapter of the Book of Joshua, both as 
regards the alleged epoch of its occurrence and the length of the time during which the sun stood still, since it agrees with what is said 
in the thirteenth verse of the same chapter, ‘ The sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole 
day ;’ and as regards the epoch, most authors fix it, with little difference, at the same period as the Indians. On this subject consult 
the learned dissertation of Father Calmet, at the beginning of his Commentary upon the Book of Joshua, where he maintains that the 
sun stood still in the year two thousand five hundred and fifty-three of the world; so that there is only a difference of two years in the 
computation of the Indians. Two thousand seven hundred and sixteen years after the Deluge, and eight centuries after the sun had 
stood still, in a year which they mark with the same hieroglyphic of One Flint, they record another terrible calamity, produced by furious 
hurricanes, which, tearing up the trees in the mountains by the roots, and overthrowing rocks, caused a dreadful destruction of human life, 
many thousand persons perishing, and only those who sought refuge in caves escaping, who, on coming forth when the tempest had 
ceased, found, as -they affirm, the earth full of apes, with which species of animal they were until then wholly unacquainted : and since 
the latter event occurred at a moment when their own numbers were greatly diminished by the quantity of persons who had perished in the 
hurricane, they invented another fable——that the men had been changed into apes; which, in later ages, ignorance understood in such a 
literal acceptation, that even at the present day there are not wanting persons amongst the silly vulgar who affirm it to have been a fact, 
and add, that they were dissolute and good-for-nothing persons who were changed into apes, as a punishment for their sloth. ‘They believe 
that they know how to speak ; and that the reason of their not doing so is, that they may not be forced to work. It appears, from a com- 
parison of the tables with their calculations, that this event ought to be referred to the ‘year three thousand four hundred and thirty-three 
of the world. They affirm that the greater portion of the giants who inhabited the country of Anahuac perished in that calamity, and 
that only some few of those who had proceeded further into the interior, and lived near the banks of the river Atoyac, between the city of 
Tlaxcalla and Puebla de los Angeles, escaped. Some of our Spanish writers, who have treated of the affairs of the Indies, and have 
become acquainted with the tradition of giants having existed in these regions, take considerable pains to prove, by arguments and 
authorities sacred as well as profane, their real existence, as well in the New World as in the old continent. But I, adhering to my pro- 
posed plan, and not indulging in vague speculations, simply relate that which I find in the histories of the Indians. All unanimously 
agree that giants existed and dwelt in various parts of this continent; but whether their origin is the same as that of the other nations who 
peopled it,—that is to say, whether they are descended from those seven families who united at the dispersion of Babel,—or whether it is 
different, it would be difficult to determine. Some of the native historians assign the same origin to them, and declare that in the long 
journey of the seven families from the plain of Senaar, a few companies got before the rest, who, from being of larger stature and more 
robust, were enabled to travel with greater speed, and to arrive first in these regions ; and that the others followed in their track, who, 
marking the signs of the road which they had taken, accomplished the journey many years later, and found them established in these 
parts. Boturini, however, appears to have assigned a different origin to them; for he says that they were of the posterity of Cham the 
son of Noah, who at the confusion of tongues scattered themselves over many countries, whence some of. them journeyed’ until they 
arrived at America. Be that as it may, it is certain that when the great bulk of the people who were descended from those seven families 
arrived in these parts, after their long journey through Asia, they found the giants already established in them, who in many places 

NOTES. 29 

types and the symbols of the Old Testament. The interpreter of the Codex Telleriano-Remensis affirms that the Mexi- 
cans bestowed the appellation of Tepeolotlec on the tiger and on the earth, and that they had a tradition that the Deluge 
ceased at the reverberation of the echo which proceeded from the heart of the mountains. Since the notion of the 

opposed their progress, and resisted their attempt to occupy the land?. Since, however, it is my intention to return to this subject when 
I treat of their total extirpation, it is sufficient for me at present to observe that the calamity and destruction which befell the giants from the 
hurricanes was highly pleasing to the other inhabitants of this territory ; for being, as they represent them, a proud, cruel, and brutal race, 
who only lived by rapine, inflicting upon them at the same time many other wrongs, they kept them continually occupied in devising 
means of self-defence, and security from their aggressions for the future; and to this cause they ascribe the origin and commencement of 

‘ Yxtlilxochitl gives the name of Philistines to these giants in several passages of his Historical Relations 5 and it is a singular coinci- 
dence, that the history of the Jews and the Mexicans should agree in recording a fact so improbable, and yet so well attested, as that the 
respective territories of each people were originally inhabited by giants, with whom their ancestors at first waged sanguinary wars, and 
at last succeeded in completely extirpating. ‘The Mexicans gave the giants, with whom they were acquainted by tradition, the twofold 
appellation of Zocuillixeque and Quinametin ; and the Jews bestowed the triple epithet of Emim, Anakim, and Zamzummim upon the 
giants of the holy land, of whom mention is made in the second verse of the ninth chapter of Deuteronomy, “ Hear, O Israel; thou art 
to pass over Jordan this day, to go in to possess nations greater and mightier than thyself, cities great, and fenced up to heaven; a people 
great and tall, the children of the Anakims, whom thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard say, Who can stand before the children of 
Anak?” The vast stature of the Anakims, as compared with that of the Jews, may be inferred from the evil report which the spies who 
had been sent to explore the land of Canaan are said, in the following passage of the thirteenth chapter of the Book of Numbers, to have 
brought back to the children of Israel: “ And they brought up an evil report of the land which they had searched unto the children of 
Israel, saying, The land, through which we have gone to search it, is a land that eateth up the inhabitants thereof; and all the people 
that we saw in it are men of a great stature. And there we saw the giants, the sons of Anak, which come of the giants: and we were in 
our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight.” Some commentators upon Scripture, who do not appear to recollect what 
is said of the Anakims in other parts of the Pentateuch, and only take into consideration that ten of the twelve spies are declared in the 
succeeding chapter of Numbers to have died by a plague inflicted upon them by God, on account of the evil report which they brought up 
of the land flowing with milk and honey,—assume, that because their report was evil, it must necessarily have been false; and treat as a 
mere fiction the story of the Jews having conquered the holy land from a nation of giants, its original possessors: they contend, with a show 
of probability, that if the spies could have attempted to throw discredit upon their own previous testimony in favour of the fertility of the 
land of Canaan, by afterwards declaring that it was a land which ate up its inhabitants ; they might have invented the history of the giants 
the sons of Anak. It is important, however, to observe, that the particular passage in the thirteenth chapter of the Book of Numbers, to 
which they refer as involving a self-contradiction upon the part of the spies, and which is thus translated in the Septuagint, Tyy yyy fv 
magnons adtyy xaracxepacto, yy xarerbiovon Tous xeroimouytas én’ adrys ori, may with great probability be supposed to allude to the 
frequency of earthquakes in the land of Canaan; the whole soil of Palestine, according to the testimony of the most respectable modern 
travellers, even still exhibiting symptoms of once having been the theatre of frightful volcanic eruptions, which, if the geographical fact of the 
proximity of the deserts of Arabia to the ancient territory of the Jews be taken into account, might lead one to suppose that Popocatepec 
would be a no less appropriate epithet for Mount Sinai than that of Tezcatepec—The following passages, in which further mention is made 
of the giant brood which God cut off from the holy land, are taken from the second chapter of Deuteronomy, in which Moses rehearses to 
the Jews the manifold acts of kindness which the Deity had vouchsafed to them, and their own base ingratitude : “ And when we passed 
by from our brethren the children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir, through the way of the plain from Elath, and from Eziongeber, we turned 
and passed by the way of the wilderness of Moab. And the Lord said unto me, Distress not the Moabites, neither contend with them in 
battle : for I willnot give thee of their land for a possession ; because I have given Ar unto the children of Lot for a possession. The Emims 
dwelt therein in times past, a people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakims; which also were accounted giants, as the Anakims; but the 
Moabites call them Emims.”—“ So it came to pass, when all the men of war were consumed and dead from among the people, that the 
Lord spake unto me, saying, Thou art to pass over through Ar, the coast of Moab, this day: and when thou comest nigh over, against 
the children of Ammon, distress them not, nor meddle with them: for I will not give thee of the land of the children of Ammon any 
possession; because I have given it unto the children of Lot for a possession. That also was accounted a land of giants: giants dwelt 
therein in old time; and the Ammonites call them Zamzummims; a people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakims;. but the Lord 
destroyed them before them; and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead.” From the above passages we are warranted in 
drawing two conclusions: first, that the Emims and Zamzummims (whether the same or a different people who merely inhabited bor- — 
dering cities is immaterial,) were a race of giants distinct from the Anakims; and secondly, that their destruction preceded the arrival of 
the children of Israel in the land of Canaan possibly by some centuries. It is, however, very deserving of remark, that the Lord is said 
to have destroyed them, and to have given their land for a possession to Moab and Ben-ammi the sons of Lot, whose country was 
situated on the shores of the Asphaltic Lake, and whose mothers were the daughters of that patriarch, as is very unequivocally declared 
in the thirty-sixth verse of the nineteenth chapter of Genesis.—The above-mentioned circumstances, and some others, induce us to think 
that the Mexican and Peruvian tradition of giants destroyed by fire from heaven was a fable of Jewish origin, 

VOL. VIII. él) 

30 NOTES. 

Deluge ceasing at the voice of thunder* occurs in the seventh verse of the hundred-and-fourth Psalm; and the Mexicans 
appear, in bestowing the appellation of Creator upon Quecalcoatle, to have had some regard to the tradition that the 
world and manhad been created by the word of their supreme deity Tonacatecutli},—it cannot be unreasonable to suppose 

warfare amongst them, and the necessity of their first becoming soldiers and military leaders.” ‘The continuation of the history of the 
giants will be found in the twelfth chapter of Echevarria’s History ; and the account of their final destruction by fire from heaven, was, 
it is to be presumed, a fable of Jewish invention, which the vulgar in after ages religiously believed, for the reasons assigned by the 
same author in the concluding paragraph of his third chapter, whose words are as follow: “ Tanto estas como las demas fabulas las 
adopt. despues la ignorancia en sw material sentido con una ciega credulidad, 4 que contribuyé mucho la supersticiosa persuasion de 
sus hipocritas sacerdotes.” 

* Tlaloc was believed by the Mexicans to be the god of thunder and lightning. 

‘+ The literal signification of the proper name Tonacatecutli is ‘ the god of flesh’, a title to which God expressly lays claim in his de- 
claration to Jeremiah, in the twenty-seventh verse of the thirty-second chapter of his Book of Prophecies, “ Behold, I am the Lord, the 
God of all flesh: is there anything too hard for me?” Its etymology has been explained at page 517 of the sixth volume of this work, 
and it is enumerated in the list of divine names contained in the note subjoined to page 128 of that volume. Quecalcoatle is said to 
have been begotten by the breath of Tonacatecutli, who created the first pair by his word, at a period long antecedent to the age of the 
Virgin of Tula. Quecalcoatle was nevertheless believed by the Mexicans to have had a prior existence to the creation of the world, and 
to the first pair, although born at so much later an era; and they styled him Creator, in allusion to their belief that he had a share in 
the creation of the world, as St. John in the first chapter of his Gospel, and St. Paul in the first chapter of his Epistle to the 
Hebrews, expressly affirm of Christ. They also named him the Morning Star, maintaining that the light of that luminary had an 
existence prior to that of the sun; and while they asserted that there was only one supreme God, whom they named Tezcatlipoca, they 
admitted that there were others, his co-equals in power and majesty. How, it may reasonably be demanded, are such conflicting 
notions to be reconciled with each other? And may we not be permitted to suppose, with the interpreter of the Vatican Codex, that 
the Manicheans had in early ages carried over their doctrines to America, and instructed the Mexicans in the peculiar tenets of their 
sect, which—founded upon their own heretical exposition of the first chapter of St. John, and upon the words which Christ is made 
to utter in the sixteenth verse of the last chapter of the Revelations, “ I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in 
the churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and morning star,”—went so far as to maintain that Christ 
was changed into the morning star; a doctrine which drew down upon the authors of it a bitter persecution, and attached such 
odium to the name of Manichean, that their opponents, who were the more powerful party, found it easy to persuade the laity to 
believe that they worshiped the Devil under the name of Lucifer, because Scripture names him likewise the morning star; whilst 
their more prudent adversaries, who were no less anxious that the Manichean heresy should not be referred to Scripture, contented 
themselves with deriving it from the ancient fire-worship of the Persians, affirming, that Manes brought it from Persia, and that he 
was the first who tainted Christianity with Zoroaster’s notions of a twofold principle. We shall here insert the entire passage 
of the Gospel of St. John above alluded to, observing at the same time, in reference to a note subjoined to page 411 of the sixth 
volume of this work, that the word, and the spirit, or the breath of God (avevpa @zov), were distinct from his intelligence, and that 
Macrobius errs in confounding vous with Aoyos, and, in making airy vibrations, mind. “In the beginning was the Word, and the 
Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him; and 
without him was not anything made that was made. In him was life; and the life was the light of men. And the light shineth 
in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not. There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. ‘The same came for a 
witness, to bear witness of the Light [See infra, Note (a) page 36.], that all men through him might believe. He was not that Light, 
but was sent to bear witness of that Light. ‘That was the true Light, that lighteth every man that cometh into the world. He was 
in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not.” 

1 It is unnecessary to observe that the children of Israel first assumed a decidedly military character when they entered the land of 
Canaan, their previous habits having been those of shepherds. 

2 The Mexicans had a tradition that Tonacatecutli divided by his breath the waters which were under the firmament from the waters 
which were above the firmament: and since mention is made of the breath, the spirit, the word, and the inspirations of Tezcatlipoca, in 
the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, it is possible that the breath of Tonacatecutli was the same as the spirit of 
Tezcatlipoca; and if the latter deity was worshiped under the name of Pachacamac, or the Creator, by the Peruvians, and their god 
Viracocha was the same as the Mexican Tlaloc, we should perceive the reason why some learned Spaniards, and amongst others Simon, 
in his inedited Noticias Historiales, were inclined to think that the Devil had assumed the name of Viracocha, which signifies ¢ the foam of 
the sea,’ in order to usurp to himself the honour of having made the division of the waters. The meaning here assigned to that proper 
name is that which was generally given to it by the Spaniards who first arrived in Peru, as Balboa admits in the fourteenth chapter of the 
third part of his Miscellanea Antarctica, where, treating of the excellence and antiquity of the proper name Viracocha, he says that the 
Spaniatds were in error in attributing to it that signification, for that cocha signified properly «a lake’, and was a name given in later ages 
by the Peruvians to the sea, when they became acquainted with its existence, and vira was ‘lard or fat’ (manteca), and not ‘ foam’, for 
which the name in the Peruvian language was puczw; and that the entire word Viracocha was a name of great excellence (nombre de 

NOTES. bl 

that they might have also believed that Quecalcoatle was the voice at the sound of which the Deluge ceased, and that 
the proper name Tepeolotlec, which signifies ‘the heart of the mountain’, being compounded of fepetd ‘a mountain’, 

grandisima excelencia), which was given by the Peruvians to the Spaniards, not on account of their believing that they were the offspring of 
the sea, but as a mark of their dignity, and because they resembled, in the features of their countenances and their beards, certain strangers, 
who, many ages before, had arrived in Peru, whom they also named Viracochas. It is evident that Balboa was not acquainted with the 
very curious reason assigned by the licentiate Polo de Ondegardo for the Spaniards receiving that appellation, some account of which will 
be found in the note subjoined to page 520 of the sixth volume of the present work. Nor even on the supposition that the true meaning of 
Viracocha was ‘ the fat of the sea’, and that such a metaphor could never have been employed by the Peruvians to signify its foam, will the 
change of signification in the sense attributed to that proper name in the least affect the argument which assimilates the Peruvian deity 
Viracocha to the Mexican god Tlaloc, nor the probability of the supposition that the Peruvians might have had a tradition of the spirit of 
their God moving upon the face of the waters, and thence have named him Viracocha, since it is a property of all unctuous substances to 
float upon the surface of water. The interpreter of the Vatican Codex declares that the Mexicans painted Tlaloc seated on the water, and 
he is so represented in the fifty-seventh page of the same MS. If the Mexicans were descended from the Jews, or acquainted with the 
books of the Old Testament,—and it is the second proposition by which that interpreter attempts to prove the first,—there would have been 
nothing surprising in their borrowing images from passages in the Psalms and other books of the Bible descriptive of the Deity or of his 
attributes, or in their applying the language of Scripture to Tezcatlipoca and their other principal divinities; and hence David’s apostrophe 
to Jehovah, in the tenth verse of the twenty-ninth Psalm, “The Lord sitteth upon the flood ; yea, the Lord sitteth King for ever,” —which, 
it may be supposed, alluded to the creation, and to the spirit of God moving upon the face of the waters, as described in the second verse 
of the first chapter of Genesis, “ And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep; and the spirit 
of God moved upon the face of the waters,’—might have induced the Mexicans to represent Tlaloc sitting upon the waters, and have 
further suggested to them the idea of embodying in painting the Mosaic account of the spirit of God moving upon the face of the waters, 
which it has been already supposed is the subject of the third page of the Borgian Codex. It deserves to be remarked, that in the sixth 
and seventh verses of the last chapter of the Book of Daniel,—with which book it has been supposed, at page 364 of the sixth volume 
of this work, for the reasons there alleged, that the Mexicans might have had some acquaintance,—that prophet records his vision of a 
man clothed in linen, seated upon the waters of the river, whom some commentators maintain was the Messiah, and whose appearance 
is described in the following passage of the tenth chapter of the Book of Daniel: “ Then I lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold 
a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with fine gold of Uphaz: his body? also was like the beryl, and his face as the 
appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet like in colour to polished brass, and the voice of his 
words like the voice of a multitude.” ‘The famous historian Esdras—who has been accused of too great a partiality for following, if not 
adopting as his own, in the apocryphal books which go under his name, the visions of earlier prophets—likewise makes mention, in 
the thirteenth chapter of his Second Book, of the Messiah, under the similitude of the man who came up from the midst of the sea, who 
dealt destruction upon countless multitudes, “ the peaceable multitude” excepted, whom he called unto himself, who were those of the 
seed of Abraham, Jews by birth, or at least proselytes to Judaism. It may be interesting to quote, in conclusion to this note, the 
passage from Balboa’s inedited MS. in which that author discusses the true signification of the proper name Viracocha:— Ya dexamos 
dicho como Yaguarguaca Ynga uvo en su muger Mamachiguia 4 Viracocha> Ynga, eredero universal de su sefiorio y mando; 
y antes que sus bodas, vida y hechos tratemos, me parece convendra tratar de su nombre, pues es el mismo que 4 nosotros los 
Espafioles, nos tienen puesto en este Peru los de esta nacion; y verdaderamente 4 algunos parecer4 novedad lo que aqui se dira, segun 
tiene el vulgo recibida esta significacion de nombre muy en contrario de lo que ellos—es asi: que los primeros que de nuestro Piru y 

@ Hence it would appear that his costume—which probably differed only in the superiority of its quality from the apparel of the 
Jews in that age—was of the same description as that worn by the Mexicans; consisting of a mantle, and a maztle or girdle tied round 
the loins; since, except on this supposition, the body and limbs of the man seated upon the waters would not have been visible, 
and therefore could not have been described by the prophet Daniel. 

® Some Spanish writers express great surprise that the Peruvians should have named one of their Ingas after their supreme deity, 
Viracocha; and the Peruvians themselves, when the embalmed body of Viracocha Inga was ignominiously burned by the Spaniards, who 
plundered his tomb, were inclined to attribute it to a divine judgment, on account of his presumption in taking the name of Viracocha: 
it deserves however to be remarked that it was a Hebrew custom, as we learn from the fifteenth chapter of Jeremiah, in the passage 
cited at page 371 of the sixth volume of the present work, for the Jewish prophets to assume the honorary appellation of Jehovah, who, 
in so doing, appear to have imitated the usages of Chaldea, the land of their nativity, as may be inferred from the speech of Nebu- 
chadnezzar in the eighth verse of the fourth chapter of the Book of Daniel, “ But at the last Daniel came in before me, whose name was 
Belteshazzar, according to the name of my God, and in whom is the spirit of the holy gods; and before him I told the dream, saying ....” 
The phrase in the Latin Vulgate is “ cui nomen Balthasar secundum nomen Dei mei ;” and in the Septuagint version of the Scriptures, 
od To bvoma Badracup xara To dvouce rou Ozov ov. It would hence appear, that the plan of the temple of Belus, which was represented 
in miniature in the brazen altar mentioned in Leviticus, and imitated on a larger scale in the great altar which the tribes of Reuben, Gad, 
and the half-tribe of Manasseh built on this side of the river Jordan, as related in the twenty-second chapter of the Book of Joshua, and 
which had so nearly caused bloody dissensions between the Jews on their first entrance into the land of Canaan, was not the only vestige 
of Chaldean antiquity of which they long retained the recollection. 

32 NOTES. 

and yolotl ‘a heart’, might have been given by the Jews to their Messiah, in allusion to the ancient Hebrew type of the 
stone which was carved without hands, that became a mountain, which, from its connection with another Hebrew 

de sus cosas escrivieron historias, sembraron por el mundo en sus escritos que este nombre Viracocha queria decir y significava espuma 
de la mar, y que por haver venido nosotros en navios y navegando por el mar, tuvieron por cierto los Yndios que eramos engendrados y 
nacidos en sus ondas y de sus espumas, haciendo 4 los Yndios harto mas insensatos de lo que ellos son; pues hablando sujeto 4 las 
protestaciones tanto de me repetidas*, digo que es engafio introducido y recibido de el vulgo, decir que por lo arriba dicho nos llaman los 
Yndios Piruleros en su lengua general Viracocha, porque este vocablo vira quiere decir manteca, y el mar no la tiene; y si me responden 
que en la lengua general de los Yngas espuma es lo mismo que manteca, digo que asi mismo reciben engafio, porque la espuma llaman 
los Yngas puczw, de donde consta claro el error: mas deben saber (y es asi verdad muy averiguada y cierta) que este nombre Viracocha 
entre los antiguos Yndios fue y ha sido nombre de grandisima excelencia, en tanto grado que quando se cayo en la cuenta de que 
havia en el cielo un universal y todopoderoso movedor y causa de las demas causas, (como se dira adelante,) por excelencia y grandeza, 
y por no hallar nombre que significase mas magestad, le llamaron Ticci Viracocha, y segun esto, mas onor nos atribuyeron en este 
nombre del que hasta aqui sea entendido: y para mayor muestra de el error en este particular recibido, bien debe aver colegido el 
lector curioso, que de este nombre Viracocha se ha usado desde muchos centenares de afios antes que los Yndios Piruleros supiesen que 
havia mar en el mundo, ni tuviesen noticia de que Dios tal cosa huviese criado, porque ellos 4 qualquier laguna, por pequefia que fuese, 
lamaron cocha, y este nombre mismo dieron al mar quando lo alcanzaron 4 ver la vez primera, lo qual fue en vida de Topa Ynga 
Yupangui (como diremos 4 su tiempo). En la vida de Lluqui® Yupangui, tercero en la succesion de los Sefiores Yngas, bien se debe 
acordar el lector haver echo particular memoria de un varon estimado entre los grandes de aquellas edades, llamado Pachachulla Vira- 
cocha ©, que quiere decir Viracocha unico en el mundo, de donde se debe entender quan antiguo y venerable sea este nombre, y que 4 

4 It was customary for Spanish writers of that age, and especially for those who, like Balboa, wrote histories of the Indians, to protest 
that they submitted everything which they said to the correction of the Catholic and Apostolic Mother Church. This protest is on some 
occasions introduced where it is impossible to perceive that the subject has any connection with religion; but Balboa, in treating of the 
signification of the proper name Viracocha, might have judged it expedient to refer to those protests which he had already made use of in 
other parts of his work. 

> The celebrated Garcia was much surprised at discovering that several of the Ingas had the appellations of Paul and Titus prefixed 
to their surnames; which fact induces us to point out in this place the resemblance of Lluqui, (the name which was borne by the third of 
the Ingas,) to the apostolic name Luke. The passage in which Garcia notices this singular conformity between the above-mentioned 
Christian and Peruvian proper names is the following, which is taken from the seventh chapter of the sixth book of his extremely rare 
treatise, entitled Predicacion del Evangelio en el Nuevo Mundo viviendo los Apostoles:—‘“ No es de menor admiracion, que se hallasse 
entre los Incas reyes del Piru el nombre de Paulo, que fue del Apostol, y el de Tito que fue su dicipulo. De la historia consta, ‘que 
tuvo Huayna Capac Inca; un hijo que se llamé Paulo, cuyo hijo que quando se baptizé se llamo Don Carlos, favorecio siempre la parte 
de los Espafioles contra Manco Capac su hermano. A este Don Carlos dize el Padre Acosta que conocio, el qual escrive que Huascar 
Inca, hijo legitimo y sucessor de Huayna Capac, se llamé primero Tito Cussi Hualpa: un tio del qual hermano de su padre Huayna 
Capac, se llamé Tito Inca Rimachi: tambien huvo otro Inca que se llamé Tito Yupangui, de quien yo hago mencion en mi Monarquia 
de los Incas. 

¢ The question whether Viracocha was a man, or a god, or both, and whether he was the same deity as patiatanac: seems never to 
have been determined by the Spaniards, if we may judge from the following passage of the sixth book of Garcia’s treatise entitled 
Predicacion del Evangelio en el Nuevo Mundo viviendo los Apostoles; in which that learned author first declares Garcilasso de la 
Vega’s sentiments respecting the ancient religion of the Peruvians, and next proceeds to deliver his own :—‘“ Demas de adorar al Sol por 
Dios visible, 4 quien ofrecieron sacrificios y hizieron grandes fiestas (como en otro lugar diremos) los reyes Incas y sus Amautas, que 
eran los filosofos, rastrearon con lumbre natural al verdadero sumo Dios, y Senor nuestro, que crio el cielo y la tierra como adelante 
veremos en los argumentos y sentencias que algunos dellos dixeron de la divina magestad, al qual llamaron Pacha Camac. Es nombre 
compuesto de pacha, que es mundo universo, y de camac, participio de presente del verbo cama, que es animar, el qual verbo se deduze 
del nombre cama, que es anima; Pacha Camac, quiere dezir, el que da anima al mundo universo: y en toda su propia y entera signifi- 
cacion, quiere dezir, el que haze con el universo, lo que el anima con el cuerpo: tenian este nombre en tan grande veneracion que no 
le osavan tomar en la boca (*), y quando les era forgoso tomarlo, era haziendo afectos y muestras de mucho acatamiento, encogiendo los 
ombros, inclinando la cabeca y todo el cuerpo, alcando los ojos al cielo, y baxandolos al suelo, levantando las manos abiertas en derecho de 
los ombros, dando besos al ayre, que entre los Incas y sus vassallos eran ostentaciones de suma adoracion y reverencia(®), con las quales 

(*) It is very deserving of notice, that these acts, collectively and individually, were all external signs of devotion amongst the Jews, 
as many passages might be adduced out of the Old Testament to prove. 

(®) It would hence appear that the proper name Pacha Camac resembled, in being imecaples the Hebrew term mim, the true pro- 
nunciation of which Walton observes, at page 49 of the Prolegomena to his Polyglott Bible, is supposed to have been lost, from an 
absurd apprehension on the part of the Jews, that if their enemies became acquainted with it, they might invoke the aid of Jehovah 

NOTES. 33 

type, that of the lion of the tribe of Judah, might have also come to signify the tiger to which the Mexicans gave 
the appellation of Tlatocaocelutl, or The man tiger, and represented as a man clothed in a tiger-skin; and it 

* This proper name is compounded of ¢latocayo, defined by Molina to be ‘rey coronado’ and ogeluél ¢ a tiger.’ 

nosotros no se nos puso por lo que algunos dicen en sus historias, sino por grandeza, dignidad y excelencia, como tambien se lo pusieron 
4 este Ynga de cuya vida trataremos. A ciertos hombres venerables que aparecieron en estos reynos (de que dejamos echa mencion en 
el capitulo seis de esta tercera parte) tambien llamaron Viracocha, por no hallar nombre qui signifique mayor dignidad; y seria possible 
porque nosotros tenemos los rostros y barbas, como se dice que ellos las tenian, llamarnos como 4 ellos los llamavan.’ ’— Miscellanea Antarc- 
tica, tercera parte, cap. 14. Domingo de Santo Thomas, in his Dictionary of the Peruvian language, printed at Valladolid in the year 
1560, assigns no other meaning to the word Viracocha than that of ‘a Christian,” adding, thatit was “an expression applied to Christ,’”— 
« Christiano, dicho de Christo ;” which latter phrase appears to imply that the early Spanish missionaries gave the name of Viracocha to 
Christ. It is rather singular that the Peruvians, who Acosta declares were acquainted with the doctrine of the Trinity, although he 
attributes their knowledge of that article of the Christian faith to Satan, should have named their supreme deity by the three names of 
Ticci, Viracocha, and Pachacamac, the last of which signifies the Creator of the Universe, being compounded of pacha ‘ the universe,’ and 
camac, the participle of the verb cama, signifying ‘ to animate’; which proper name is thus defined by Calancha, “ Es nombre compuesto 
de pacha, que es mundo universo, i de camac participio de presente del verbo cama, que es animar, el qual verbo se deduce del nombre 
cama. Pachacamac quiere decir, el que da anima al mundo universo, i en toda su propria i entera significacion quiere decir, el que aze 
con el universo lo que el anima con el cuerpo.” ‘The author of the Peruvian Dictionary seems. intentionally to have omitted all mention 
of the proper name Pachacamac , not noticing its component parts either in or out of composition; but Calancha, whose definition has 
been just cited, had equal opportunities of acquiring a perfect knowledge of the Peruvian language, and he agrees with Balboa in 
explaining vira to be ‘ fat, and cocha ‘ the sea” or ‘a pool of standing water.’ Having made mention of the Manicheans in the begin- 
ning of the note, whose exterior marks of devotion might perhaps have resembled those of the Mexicans,—we shall conclude by 
observing that Joshua is said, in the tenth verse of the seventh chapter of his book, to have fallen down upon his face before the ark, 
in the very manner in which the interpreter declares, at page 172 of the sixth volume of this work, that the Mexicans adored 
Tezcatlipoca. The passage alluded to is the following, which may be compared with the preceding sixth verse, in which Joshua is 
said to have fallen upon his face and remained in that position until the evening: “ And the Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee up: 
wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?” In the preceding verse it says, “And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face 
before the ark of the Lord, until the eventide, he and the elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads.” It hence. appears that the 
custom of falling down upon the face, and putting dust on the head, was in general use amongst the Jews in the age of Joshua; but to 
eat earth, both amongst the Jews and the Mexicans, was a mark of still deeper humiliation. Garcia particularly notices, that the 
Peruvians were accustomed to rend their garments as a sign of grief; and he instances the example of the Inga Guaynacapac, who rent 
his clothes on hearing that his son Atahualpa had sustained a defeat from the enemy, and been forced to seek safety in flight: ‘¢ Aquesto 
mismo hacian los Indios, como se verd en la Monarquia de los Ingas del Peru, que muchas vices he prometido sacar 4 luz, en la qual se 
dice, que como supiese Guaynacapac, que su hijo pepuelee a retirandose i huiendo del campo contrario, rompid su vestidura 
rasgandola por delante.”—Origen de los Indios, lib. iii, cap. 3. sec. 

demonstraciones nombravan al Pacha Camac, y adoravan al Sol, y reverenciavan al Rey y nomas: pero esto tambien era por sus grados 
mas y menos; 4 los de la sangre real acatavan con parte destas ceremonias, y 4 los otros superiores, como eran los caciques, con otras 
muy diferentes, é inferiores. Tuvieron al Pacha Camac en mayor veneracion interior que al Sol, que (como he dicho) no osavan tomar 
su nombre en la boca, y al Sol le nombravan 4 cada passo. Preguntado quien era el Pacha Camac? Dezian que era el que dava vida 

r 

against his chosen people: “ Videntur posieriores Judai similes fuisse Romanis, de quibus Plinius (Hist. lib. 28. c. 2.) dicit, quod nomen 
Dei, sub cujus tutela erant, studiose occultarunt, ne nomine cognito hostes ipsum evocarent.” Basnage informs us, in his History of the 
Jews, that in later ages they employed a@ hieroglyphic instead of alphabetical characters to signify Jehovah, which fact is scarcely less 
deserving of attention than another mentioned by the same author, namely, that a Samaritan medal was preserved in the cabinet of 
Christina queen of Sweden, which represented on one side Mount Gerizim, with a temple on its summit, to which there was an 
ascent by a staircase of three hundred steps;—the whole description nearly corresponding with the draft of a Mexican temple, and 
reminding us, that if the temple on Gerizim was modelled, as there can be little doubt, after the plan of the temple of Jerusalem, 
and the Mexican teocallis after that of Gerizim, the latter temples must likewise have been constructed after the plan of the temple of 
Jerusalem. The appellation of the mountain of the house is sometimes given to the Hebrew temple in the Old Testament; and it deserves 
to be remarked, that art had fashioned Mount Moriah, upon which it was founded, exactly in the shape of a truncated pyramid. 

@ The following is a prayer which the Peruvians were accustomed to address to Pachacamac. It is taken from the ninteenth chapter 
of the second book of Calancha’s Chronicle of the religious order of Saint Augustine in Peru, and is here inserted not only because its 

VOL. VIII. (K ) 

34 NOTES. 

deserves to be remarked, that a slip of tiger-skin was fastened by the Mexicans to the mitre of Quecalcoatle, 
which no doubt had some secret signification. The Jews have in all ages been inclined to attach a mystical 

al universo, y le sustentava: pero que no le conocian, porque no le avian visto, y que por esso no le hazian templos, ni le ofrecian sacrifi- 
cios: mas que lo adoravan en su coragon (esto es mentalmente) y le tenian por dios no conocido. Augustin de Zarate libro segundo capi- 
tulo quinto, escriviendo lo que el Padre fray Vicente de Valverde dixo al Rey Atahualpa, que Christo nuestro Sefior avia criado el mundo, 
dize que respondio el Inca: que el no sabia nada de aquello, ni que nadie criasse nada sino el Sol, 4 quien ellos tenian por dios, y 4 la tierra 
por madre, y 4 sus Guacas, y que Pacha Camac lo avia criado todo lo que alli avia, &c. De donde consta claro que aquellos Indios le 
tenian por hazedor de todas la cosas. Esta verdad que voy diziendo que los Indios rastrearon con este nombre, y se lo dieron al verdadero 
Dios nuestro, la testificd el demonio mal que le pes6é, aunque en su fauor como padre de mentiras, diziendo verdad disfrecada con mentira, 
6 mentira disfregada con verdad. Que luego que vio predicar nuestro Santo Evangelio, y vio que se bautizauan los Indios, dixo a alguno, 
familiares suyos en el valle que oy llaman Pacha Camac (por el famoso templo que alli edificaron a este Dios no conocido) que el Dios 
que los Espafioles predicavan y el, era todo uno, como lo escrive Pedro de Ciega de Leon, en Ja demarcacion del Peru, capitulo setenta 
y dos. Y el reverendo padre fray Geronimo Roman en la Republica de las Indias Occidentales, libro primero, capitulo quinto dize lo 
mismo, hablando ambos deste mismo Pacha Camac, aunque por no saber la propia significacion del vocablo se lo atribuyeron al demonio. 
E] qual en dezir que el Dios de los Christianos, y el Pacha Camac era todo uno, dixo verdad. Porque la intencion de aquellos Indios, 
fue dar este nombre al sumo Dios que da vida y ser al universo: como lo significa el mismo nombre. Y en dezir que el era el Pacha 
Camac mintio, porque la intencion de los Indios, nunca fue dar este nombre al demonio, que no le llamaron sino Zupay, que quiere 
dezir diablo, y para nombrarlo escupian primero, en sefial de abominacion, y al Pacha Camac nombravan con la adoracion, y demonstra- 
ciones que hemos dicho. Empero como este enemigo tenia tanto poder entre aquellos infieles haziase Dios, entrandose en todo aquello 
que los Indios veneravan y acatavan por cosa sagrada. MHablava en sus oraculos y templos, y en los rincones de sus casas, y en otras 
partes, diziendoles que era el Pacha Camac, y que era todas las demas cosas a que los Indios atribuyan deidad, y por este engafio 
adoravan aquellas cosas en que el demonio les hablava, pensando que era la deidad que ellos imaginavan, que si entendieran que era el 
demonio las quemaran entonces como aora lo hazen, por la misericordia del sefior que quiso comunicarseles. ‘Los Indios no saben de 
suyo, 0 no osan dar la relacion destas cosas con la propia significacion, y declaracion de los vocablos, viendo que los Christianos Espa- 
fioles las abominan todas por cosas del demonio, y los Espanoles tampoco advierten en pedir la noticia dellas con llaneza; antes las con- 
firman por cosas diabolicas, como las imaginan. Y tambien lo causa el no saber de fundamento la lengua general de los Incas, para ver 
y entender la deduction y composicion, y propia significacion de las semejantes dictiones. Y por esto en sus historias dan otro nombre 
a dios, que es Ticci Viracocha, que yo no se que signifique, ni ellos tampoco. Este es el nombre Pacha Camac, que los Historiadores 
Espafioles tanto abominan, por no entender Ja significacion del vocablo, y por otra parte tienen razon: porque el demonio hablava en 
aquel riquissimo templo, haziendose dios debaxo deste nombre, tomandolo para si. Pero si a mi que soy Indio Christiano Catolico por 
la infinita misericordia, me preguntassen aora como se llama Dios en tu lengua? Diria, Pacha Camac: porque en aquel general 
lenguage del Peru, no ay otro nombre para nombrar a Dios sino este. Y todos los demas que los historiadores dizen, son generalmente’ 
improplos: porque, 6 no son del general lenguage, 6 son corruptos, con el lenguage de algunas provincias particulares, 6 nuevamente 
compuestos por los Espafioles. Y aunque algunos de los nuevamente compuestos, pueden passar conforme a la significacion Espafiola, 

style is exceedingly Scriptural, but likewise because it shows what elevated notions the Peruvians entertained of the Deity: “ O acedor, 
que estas desde los cimientos i principio del mundo asta en los fines del, poderoso, rico y misericordioso, que diste ser i valor 4 los 
ombres, 7 con decir, sea este ombre, 2 esta sea muger, iziste, formaste 7 pintaste A los ombres i 4 las mugeres; 4 todos estos que iziste i 
diste ser, guardalos, i vivan sanos i salvos, sin peligro ien paz. Adonde estas? por ventura en lo alto del cielo 6 bajo? 6 en las nubes i 
nublados, 6 en los abismos?: Oyeme i respondeme, i concedeme lo que pido. Danos perpetua vida para siempre, ten nos de tu mano, 
i esta ofrenda recibela 4 do quiera que estuvieres, O acedor.”——“ O maker, who dost exist from the foundation and beginning of the world 
until its end, powerful, rich and merciful, who givest being and life to man, and by saying, let this man be, and let that woman be, hast 
made, formed, and painted men and women; preserve all those whom thou hast made and created, and let them live in health and safety, 
free from danger and in peace. Where art thou? in the height of heaven peradventure, or beneath? or in the clouds and dense mist, or 
in the depths? Hear me, and answer me, and grant my request. Give us eternal life, uphold us with thine hand, and accept this offering 
wheresoever thou art, O maker.” The adjuration with which this prayer concludes, would almost argue an acquaintance, on the part 
of the Peruvians, with the language of Isaiah, in the eleventh verse of the seventh chapter of his Prophecies, “ Ask thee a sign of the Lord 
thy God ; ask it either in the depth, or in the heighth above.” Which passage in Scripture is the more remarkable, from its connection 
with the verse which immediately follows: “Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign, Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a 
son, and shall call his name Immanuel,” which is explained to be prophetical of the birth of the Messiah. Since the above prayer of the 
Peruvians to Pachacamac affords evidence of their belief in the immortality of the soul, and of their acquaintance with the Mosaic account 
of man having been created by the word of God, it may be proper to adduce Calancha’s testimony in favour of its genuine character 
and authenticity, who prefixes to it the following brief notice: « El Obispo Fray Luis Geronimo Ore, en su Simbolo Catolico Indiano 
capitulo nueve, folio quarenta, pone la oracion que el Inga i los Indios decian al Pachacamac, i como él la traduce en nuestro 
Castellano es esta,”—“ The Bishop Brother Luis Geronimo Ore, inserts in the fortieth page of the ninth chapter of his Catholic Indian 
Creed, the prayer which the Inga and the Indians addressed to Pachacamac, which, according to his translation of it into Spanish is 
as follows.” Such testimony as this, it need scarcely be observed, does not require further corroboration. 

NOTES. 35 

meaning to passages in Scripture in which mention is made of the voice of God; and the eighth verse of the 
third chapter of Genesis, in which it is said that Adam and Eve, after they had sinned, “ heard the voice of 

como el Pacha Yachachec, que quieren que diga hazedor del cielo, significando ensefiador del mundo, que para dezir hazedor, avia 
de dezir, Pacha Rurac: Porque rura, quiere dezir hazer: aquel general lenguage los admite mal: porque no son suyos naturales, sino 
advenedizos. Y tambien porque en realidad de verdad, en parte baxan a Dios de la alteza y magestad, donde le sube, y encumbra este 
nombre Pacha Camac, que es el suyo propio. Y paraque se entienda lo que vamos diziendo, es de saber, que el verbo yacha, significa 
aprender, y afiadiendole esta syllaba chi, significa ensefiar, y el verbo rura, significa hazer, y con la chi, quiere dezir, hazer que hagan, 
6 mandar que hagan, y lo mismo es de todos los demas verbos que quieren imaginar. Y assi como aquellos Indios no tuvieron aten- 
cion a cosas especulativas, sino a cosas materiales: assi estos sus verbos, no significan ensefiar cosas espirituales, ni hazer obras 
grandes y divinas, como hazer el mundo, &c. sino que significan hazer y ensefiar artes, y oficios baxos y mecanicos, obras que pertenecen 
a los hombres, y no a la divinidad. De toda la qual materialidad esté muy agena la significacion del nombre Pacha Camac, que (como 
se ha dicho) quiere dezir, el que haze conel mundo universo, lo que el alma con el cuerpo, que es darle vida, ser, aumento, y sus- 
tento, &c. Por loqual consta claro la impropriedad de los nombres compuestos nuevamente, para darselos a Dios (si han de hablar en 
la propia significacion de aquel lenguage) por la baxeza de sus significaciones. Hasta aqui Garcilaso. 

“ Del discurso deste capitulo de Garcilaso, se coligen dos cosas. La primera, que conocieron los Indios del Piru, que avia un Dios 
Criador del cielo y de la tierra, a quien lamaron Pacha Camac, que es lo que insinuamos arriba. La segunda, que el nombre 
Conticci, 6 Ticci Viracocha Pacha Yachachec que davan al mismo Dios, fue inventado, y nueuamente compuesto : pero no le con- 
cederemos al sobredicho autor, que lo inventassen, y compusiessen nuestros Espafioles, como el alli va probando, si bien concede que 
6 no es del general lenguage, 6 es corrupto con el de algunas provincias. Y en otra parte haze cargo desto tambien a los Indios, diziendo 
que esso lo hizieron por adular a los Espafioles, por dezir que les dieron el nombre del Dios mas alto y mas estimado que tuvieron. La 
invencion deste nombre y su composicion no la hizieron realmente los Espafioles. Porque si bien quando entraron en aquel reyno 
ignoravan aquel lenguage, despues huvo muchos que lo entendieron muy bien para informarse de los Indios de muchas cosas, y entre 
ellas, que nombre davan al sumo Dios Seftor Nuestro. Y assi no hallo razon paraque ellos la hiziessen: y para los Incas, y sus vassallos, 
si, qual es la que arriba dimos. Conviene 4 saber: que el nombre de Viracocha, lo introduxo el rey que huvo deste nombre, diziendo, 
que el dios Viracocha le avia hablado. Y esto tambien lo escrive Garcilasso, el qual, hasta llegar a tratar deste Inca, no escrive 
palabra de aquel nombre. Y que Pacha Cutec hijo del Inca Viracocha, dio a conocer los demas que afiadian al de Viracocha que 
davan a Dios, conviene a saber el de Ticci, y Pacha Yachachec, consta claramente de lo que escrivio acerca desto el Padre losef de 
Acosta, tratando de la victoria que tuvo este rey, con el favor del dios Viracocha Pacha Yachachec, que es lo mismo que yo tengo 
escrito en mi Monarquia de los Incas, sacado de lo que averigué Iuan de Betancos. Finalmente digo, que supuesto que aquellos Indios 
tenian nombre para dar a Dios, que es el de Pacha Camac, y muy antiguo, pues es compuesto de la lengua Quichua, que despues 
tomaron los Incas, por caer el Cuzco (que fue su Corte) en la provincia donde es materna, argumento que fue la composicion deste 
nombre antes de su monarquia: el de Ticci Viracocha Pacha Yachachec, no fue sino el que dieron a aquel hombre blanco y barbado 
que alli aparecio, tenido (comose dixo arriba) por Dios Criador del mundo, con industria y traga del demonio. Y parece que tniradas 
atentamente aquellas vozes, particularmente la de Ticci, y la de Pacha Yachachec, quadran 4 un apostol, 6 dicipulo. La de Ticci, 
porque significa fundamento, nombre que da San Pablo a los apostoles. La de Pacha Yachachec, que (como lo prueva muy bien 
Garcilaso) es lo mismo que ensefiador, maestro, 6 doctor del mundo: porque este titulo les dio Christo nuestro: Sefior quando los 
gradué, diziendo que eran sal de la tierra, y luz del mundo, y en otra parte mas claramente, docete omnes gentes. Que es: Yo os hago 
dotores de todas las gentes. Demas pues de la tradicion que ay (segun se ha dicho arriba) de aver entrado por el Piru, aquel hombre 
blanco y barbado, que presumimos era apostol, 6 dicipulo, me conté un religioso de la orden de nuestro Padre San Augustin, que 
estuvo mucho tiempo enel Piru, y dotrindé los Indios en el distrito del Cuzco, como esté en medio de un rio, (que ni el me dixo el 
nombre, ni yo se lo pregunté) una palma muy alta, la qual dizen los Indios que se hizo de un baculo que llevava un hombre blanco, y 
barbado como Espafiol (que ellos Ilaman Viracocha) el qual passando aquel rio lo dexa alli hincado. En la provincia de Calua diez 
leguas de la ciudad de Loxa, esta cerca del pueblo llamado Conzanama, una piedra grande, donde ay una huella y pisada de hombre, 
que segun parece no es hecha acaso de la naturaleza, ni de industria con arte humana, sino milagrosamente (como se ha dicho de otras) 
que alli'qued6 estampada de aquel hombre blanco y barbado, que presumimos era apostol 6 dicipulo. Desde que en la creacion del 
mundo mandé Dios a la tierra que produxesse arboles que diessen fruto segun su especie, crid en este reyno del Piru uno que lleva una 
fruta aquien los Espafioles llaman granadilla, por la semejanca que tiene en los granos, a la nuestra quando comienga a madurar, cuya 
flor es mysteriosissima ; porque en si contiene la cruz y las demas insignias de la passion de Christo nuestro Sefior. Es de la manera 
de una agumena como una campana, blanca por defuera, y pintas leonadas por de dentro, de color de rosa, contiene dentro de si (como 
avemos dicho) todas las insignias de la passion, en esta forma. En el circulo baxo salen unos ramales de color de sangre que parecen 
agotes, en medio del centro inferior se levanta una coluna verde, y al pie della tres hojas que hazen hechura de tres clavos, y la misma 
campana de la flor es a modo de corona de espinas, dentro de si las venas estan dispuestas de tal manera, que vienen a hazer a la vista, 
langa, cafia con esponja, escalera y cruz. Quando afio de mil y quinientos y ochenta y siete entramos veynte y quatro religiosos con 
nuestro Provincial por el districto de Quito, para cuya provincia aviamos salido de Espafia, nos mostraron esta flor, la qual nos causé 
grande admiracion y pasmo, y no nos hartavamos de mirarla y contemplarla, alabando al que la crio con las insignias de su passion. 
La tierra original donde se da esta fruta es (segun me informaron) en la que llaman de los Quixos, jurisdicion de Quito. Despues 
venido yo a Espafia, y escriviendo este Tratado, he reparado mas en el mysterio, que en esta flor esté encerrado. Y assi juzgo con mi 
rudo y corto entendimiento, que con sabiduria y providencia soberana estamp6o Dios en ella tantos siglos antes los instrumentos de la 

36 NOTES. 

the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day,” has given rise to much idle reasoning amongst the 
Rabbis, who; with their usual inquisitiveness on all unexplained points of Scripture, would fain know to whom God 

passion que, hecho hombre, avia de padecer por salvar al genero humano: y que fue criada alli en aquel reyno, paraque sirviesse a sus 
moradores de pronostico, symbolo, y geroglifico de lo que despues aquel apostol, 6 dicipulo (que vamos probando ser el hombre blanco 
que aparecio en el Piru) avia de predicarles. 

Note (a) referred to at page 30.—The Mexicans named Quecalcoatl ‘Light,’ and believed that light was created before the sun. Pedro 
Simon, in the second chapter of the fourth book of his inedited Historical Notices treating of the religious opinions of the Indians of the 
kingdom of New Granada, expresses himself in the following terms: “ Proceeding then to treat of the belief which our Indians of the kingdom — 
(of New Granada) entertain of their beginning and origin, I have found that, preserving their ancient traditions from generation to genera- 
tion, they are acquainted with the creation of the world, which they explain by saying, that when it was night, which means, according to 
their interpretation, before this world had any existence, light was contained in a great house—to signify which, they employ the term 
Chiminigagua,—from whence it afterwards went forth, and that that thing, or Chiminigagua, which contained this light (which they 
assert is the same as that which we name God), began to beam forth, and to reveal the light which it contained within it; and that that 
first light beginning the work of creation, the first things which it created were some large black birds, which it commanded at the instant 
of their existence to proceed through the world scattering breath or air from their bills, which air was quite light and brilliant; who, 
having done what they commanded them (lo que les mandaron) the whole world became illuminated with light?.” Simon next proceeds 
to observe, that this Indian tradition of the origin of light was devoid of foundation, the sun being the true source of light. It hence 
appears that the tradition in the Pentateuch, that light was created before the sun, was known in various parts of the New World very 
remote from each other. And when we read in the second verse of the first chapter of Genesis, of the chaotic state of nature before 
the creation, and of water and darkness covering the surface of the earth, and compare that description with the mythological delineation 
in the third page of the Codex Borgianus, which seems to represent a chaotic mass of matter covered with darkness and water,— 
recollecting at the same time the tradition of the Indians of New Granada, that light was diffused throughout the universe by birds,—we 
can scarcely refrain from believing that the subject of the third page of the Borgian MS. is the creation of the world by Tezcatlipoca, or 
Hometeuli, who, as the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus informs us, at page 158 of the sixth volume of the present'work, was believed 
by the Mexicans to have created the first pair by their word; and in fact we seem to recognize, in the painting of the Borgian Codex 
above referred to, the figures of Tezcatlipoca and of two other deities, which reminds us of the tradition of the Indians of the island of 
Cuba, that the world had been created by three persons; of which a more particular account will be found at page 393 of the sixth 

volume of this work. 

a This passage is so extremely curious that we shall here insert it in the original Spanish, accompanying it with an extract from the 
first book of the third volume of the Saggio di Storia Americana by the Abbé Gili, from which it will appear, that if the Indians of 
New Granada were ignorant of the Mosaic account of the creation of the first pair, and believed that they came out of a lake, their 
ruder brethren of the Oronoco,—who inhabited an adjoining province, and some of whom spoke the same language, that is to say the 
Muizca or Mozca, were well acquainted with it:—“ Viniendo pues ya 4 tratar de lo que sienten nuestros Yndios del Reyno de 
sus principios y origen, hemos hallado que conservando sus memorias de gente en gente tienen noticia de la creacion del mundo, y la 
declaran diciendo, que quando era de noche, esto es segun ellos interpretan, antes que huviera nada de este mundo, estaba la luz 
metida alla‘en una casa grande, que para significarla, le llamaban Chiminigagua, de donde despues salio; y que aquella cosa, 6 
Chiminigagua, en que estaba metida esta luz (que esto quieren decir, que es lo mismo que nosotros llamamos Dios) comenzo 4 
amanecer y mostrar la luz que en si tenia; y dando luego principio & criar cosas aquella primera luz, las primeras que crio, fueron 
unas aves negras grandes, & las quales mandé al punto que tuviesen ser, fuesen por todo el mundo echando aliento 6 ayre por los 
picos, el qual ayre todo era lucido y resplandeciente, con que haviendo hecho lo que les mandaron, qued6é todo el mundo claro 
é illaminado como est4 ahora: Sin advertir como no tienen fundamento en lo que dicen, que es el Sol él que da esta luz. A este dios 
reconocen por omnipotente, Sefior universal de todas las cosas, y siempre bueno, y que crio tambien todo lo demas que hay en este 
mundo, con que quedé tan lleno y hermoso. Pero como entre las demas criaturas veian la.mas hermosa al Sol, decian que 4 el se debia 
adorar, y 4 la luna como 4 su muger y compafiera ; de donde les vino, que aun en los idolos que adoran, jamas es uno solo, sino macho 
y hembra’; y no se persuaden 4 que entre las demas cosas crié Dios hombres y mugeres, sino que estando el mundo lleno de las demas, 
faltaban estas dos; y asi se remedio esta falta de esta manera. En el distrito de la ciudad de Tunja, 4 quatro leguas 4 la parte del 
Norte-Este, y una de un pueblo de Yndios que Ilaman Yguague, se hace una coronacion de empifiadas sierras, tierra muy fria, y tan 
cubierta de paramos y ordinarias nieblinas, que casi en todo el afio no se descubren sus cumbres, sino es 4 mediodia por el mes de 
Enero. Entre estas sierras y cumbres se hace una mui honda laguna; de donde dicen los Yndios, que 4 poco de como.amanecio, 6 
apareci la luz, y criadas las demas cosas, salio una muger, que llaman Bachue, y por otro nombre acomodado 4 las buenas obras que 
les hizo, Turachogue, que quiere decir muger buena, porque tura llaman 4 la muger, y chogue es cosa buena: Sacd consigo de la 
mano un nifio de entre las mismas aguas de edad hasta tres afios; y bajando ambos juntos de las sierras 4 lo llano, donde ahora esta el 
pueblo de Yguague, hicieron una casa donde vinieron, hasta que el muchacho tuvo edad para casarse con ella, porque luego que la 
tavo-se cas6. Y el casamiento fue tan importante, y la muger tan prolifica y fecunda, que de cada parto paria quatro, 6 seis hijos; con 

NOTES. Of 

could on that occasion have been speaking ; and whether, on the assumption that he spoke in Hebrew, the perma- 
nency of that dialect might not be ascribed to this cause,—since they maintain that the only language in the world 
which has not been changed and corrupted by time is Hebrew. The voice from the burning bush, as likewise the 
voice which the Jews pretend that they received when the spirit of prophecy ceased with the destruction of the first 
temple, might also have laid the foundation of many fanciful theories among them. It would not therefore be sur- 
prising if the Mexicans, who had imbibed so many other Hebrew superstitions, should have borrowed from the Jews 
their notion of the deluge having ceased at the sound of the voice proceeding from the heart of the mountain; and 
we shall only further remark, in reference to that curious opinion, that the signification of the proper name Votan 
is ‘a heart, and that tescaulutl, the other name which the Mexicans gave to the echo of the mountain, might lead 
one to infer that the voice proceeded from Tezcatepec, or the Mountain of the Mirror, which was the Mount 
Sinai of the New World. The passage in the Psalms which might have led the Jews to suppose that the immediate 
cause of the cessation of the waters of the deluge was a reverberating sound, proceeding from the heart or centre of 
the mountains, is the following :—*“ Bless the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, thou art very great; thou art 
clothed with honour and majesty. Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment: who stretchest out the 
heavens like a curtain: who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters*: who maketh the clouds his chariot: 
who walketh upon the wings of the wind: who maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire}: who laid 
the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for ever. Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment: 

* This passage, which assigns a mansion or palace to the Deity in the waters, reminds us of another analogous to it in the eighteenth 
Psalm, in which the term pavilion is substituted for chambers, in the sentence “ his pavilion round about him were dark waters.” The 
Mexicans believed that Xiuhtecutli, the god of years, resided in the waters, as has already been observed at page 364 of the sixth 
volume of this work; and it would be interesting to know whether they believed that the hair of Xiuhtecutli was white with age; 
and whether, finding it difficult to reconcile that belief with the idea of Tezcatlipoca being Telpuchtli, or the god whose years fade not, 
they worshiped him and Tezcatlipoca as distinct deities, who were originally one and the same. 

4+ Xiuhtecutli was the Mexican god of fire; and the Mexicans might, on that account, have metaphorically designated the noble 
persons, whom they believed to be ever ministering in his presence, a flaming fire. (Vide page 364 of the sixth volume of this work.) 

que se vino 4 llenar toda la tierra de gente ; porque andaban ambos por muchas partes, dejando hijos en todas; hasta que despues de 
muchos afios, estando la tierra llena de hombres y mugeres, y los dos ya mui viejos, se volvieron al mismo pueblo; y de el un dia 
lamando mucha gente, que los acompafiara 4 la laguna de donde salieron, junto 4 la qual les hizo la Bachue una platica, exhortando 
4 todos la paz, y conservacion entre si, la guarda de los preceptos y leyes, que les havia dado, que no eran pocos, en especial en orden 
al culto de los Dioses, y concluido se despidio de ellos con singulares clamores y llantos de ambas partes. Y convirtiendose ella, y su 
marido en dos mui grandes culebras, se metieron por las aguas de la laguna, y nunca mas parecieron por entonces. Si bien la Bachue 
despues se aparecia muchas veces en otras partes, por haver determinado desde alli los Yndios contarla entre sus dioses en gratificacion 
de los beneficios que les havia hecho.”—* Per molto bene che della creazione dell’ uomo parlino i Tamanachi, e con esso loro i Caribi, i 
Paréchi, ed altre nazioni loro simili, pit distintamente, e meglio ne discorronoi Maipuri. Io reco in testimonio il regolo Caravana, il 
quale non sapea punto né poco di Spagnuolo, onde potersi sospettare, che cid che dissemi, sentito prima I’ avesse da qualche Cristiano. 
Purrinaminari, dissegli, formd ’ uomo: non seppe dirmene il nome: fece dipoi, seguitd a dire, la donna. Questo non é gran fatto. 
Il sanno molt’ Indiani. Maé mirabile cid che siegue. Dormendo UV uomo, Purrtinamindari gli recise una costola, e ne formd la donna ; lo 
sveglid dipoi, e dissegli: pinava tiniochi, (guarda la donna). Un racconto come questo, che si trova parola per parola nel Genesi, si pud 
facilmente immaginare qual maraviglia recommi. Ne minore fu quella di sentirmi dire da un barbaro, che Iddio (egli disse Purrunaminari) 
creata avesse la luce innanzt di creare il Sole: il che é pure conformissimo a cid, che ne sappiamo dal sacro testo.” Gumilla asserts, as we 
have already observed at pages 272 and 275 of the sixth volume of this work, that the Salivas and other Indian tribes of the Orinoco were 
circumcised, and held the flesh of swine in extreme abhorrence : from whence he infers that those tribes were descended from the Jews. 
It may be interesting to know that so learned a writer as the Abate Gilli, whose work, dedicated to Pope Pius VI., received the express 
approbation of the Spanish monarch Charles III., although differing in opinion from Gumilla respecting the Hebrew origin of those 
tribes, still bears honourable testimony to the merits of that historian, and corroborates the truth of his relation in some of its most 
important particulars; and in those which favour him on the question mainly at issue between them, as the perusal of the following 
passage, taken from the sixth chapter of his work above referred to, will fully prove: “ Di Ebrea origine non gli credo in veruna maniera, 
chegche in contrario ne dica non meno distesamente, che pugnacemente il Gumilla. I loro bagni non sono un’ osservanza religiosa, ma 
unicamente fatti per rinfrescare le membra, e per torne la polvere: le incisioni assomighate alla circoncisione, sono suggerimenti crudeli 
de’ loro Piaci. Gl Indiani, che io conosco, non si chiaman cugini; eccetto 1 Tamanachi, che a distinzione dell’ altre nazioni si apellano 
tra s¢ parenti. Riti stabili di religione non gli ha veruno. In somma mi pare una chimera il volerli assomigliare agli Ebrei. Vero é, 
che alcuni piglian pit mogli, e che tocca al residuo fratello la moglie del morto: ma, come altrove dicemmo, queste cose possono anche 
dirsi di nazioni, che non vengon certo dagli Ebrei, e sembrano effetti non di sangue, ma d’ ignoranza, e di sfrenatezza.” 

VOL. VIII. (L) 

38 NOTES. 

the waters stood above the mountains. At thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away. They 
go up by the mountains ; they go down by the valleys unto the place which thou hast founded for them. Thou hast 
set a bound that they may not pass over; that they turn not again to cover the earth. He sendeth the springs-into 
the valleys, which run among the hills.” This passage of the Psalms has been inserted at some length, because the 
Mexicans appear to have founded their system of natural philosophy upon it: and might easily have supposed that 
Tlaloc was the voice of thunder which caused the waters of the deluge to haste away. The fifth verse of the Psalm 
immediately preceding,—in which David, after eulogizing the Deity for his other acts of mercy, exclaims, “who 
satisfieth thy mouth with good things, so that thy youth is renewed like the eagle’s,’—might have furnished the Mexicans 
with a pretext for affirming that their youth was renewed on the festival of Yzcalli; for that appears to be the meaning 
of the words “se volvian los hombres como nifios los cuerpos,” at page 134 of the fifth volume of this work, although 
otherwise translated at page 103 of the sixth volume. In reference to another opinion which the Mexicans: entertained 
about children,—an opinion which the interpreter of the Vatican Codex, at page 171 of the sixth volume of 
the Antiquities of Mexico, declares that the devil induced them to adopt,—namely, that the world, after its third 
destruction, would be re-peopled by the souls of children who would return to life,—it is scarcely possible, on recol- 
lecting the stress which the religion of the Mexicans laid on children being dear to Tezcatlipoca, and on the efficacy 
of their intercessions with God for men,—to refrain from the conjecture that the Jews might have made the Mexicans 
acquainted with the doctrine of the Millennium; since, if children who died in their infancy, became, as they 
supposed, saints in heaven, and the saints had to return to reign on earth, it would necessarily follow, that the world 
would have to be re-peopled by children, who would re-inhabit it after the final destruction of the wicked, whose 
return would constitute a new and important epoch in its existence. The prophet Esdras, whose writings, though 
apocryphal, are held in high estimation by the Jews, appears, in the following passage of the tenth chapter of his 
second book, to advocate the doctrine of children returning to life by the mercy of God :—“ Now therefore keep thy 
sorrow to thyself, and bear with a good courage that which hath befallen thee. For 7f thou shalt acknowledge the 
determination of God to be just, thou shalt both receive thy son in time, and shalt be commended among women.” Ii 
has already been observed at page 387 of the sixth volume of this work, that the same prophet believed that the world 
had been several times destroyed*, which cpinion he shared with the ancient Mexicans, who, in naming their supreme 
deity Tezcatlipoca, and in emphatically styling him Teiocoianitehimatini, which signifies the provider of all necessary 
things, as likewise in believing that the sun moved in a diurnal course round the earth, appear to have had an acquaint- 
ance with the hundred-and-fourth Psalm, in which the following singular passages occur :—“ He looketh on the 
earth, and it trembleth; he toucheth the hills, and they smoke.” ‘‘ He appointeth the moon for seasons}. The sun 
knoweth his going down.” ‘The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from God.” The incidental 
allusion in the fifteenth verse to oil, reminds us that the Mexicans, like the Jews, were accustomed to anoint their 
faces with oil, and to make use of paint. In confirmation of a previous observation, that the Mexicans appear to have 
borrowed some of their notions in natural philosophy from the above-mentioned Psalm, we shall here insert a passage 
from the tenth chapter of the eleventh book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, in which it is highly deserving of 
observation, that the opinion of the Mexicans,—that all rivers flowed from Tlalocan, or the terrestrial paradise; that 
the mountainous portion of the earth’s surface zs hollow and full of water; and that the sea runs beneath the earth in 
secret channels and pipes, which, straining away its saline particles, converted the salt into fresh water,—seems to be 

* Whence, it may be inquired, could Esdras have derived this heterodox—it might be said heretical—opinion? The canonical books 
of the Old Testament record only one destruction of the world by water; and if the ancient traditions of the Chaldeans, whose chronology 
went back myriads of ages, admitted several to have taken place, it still should be recollected that the Jews are generally understood to 
have, returned to Jerusalem under the auspices of Esdras, free from idolatry, and bringing back with them the pure faith of their 
ancestors. It would therefore be by many doubted, that Esdras himself, as well as numbers of his countrymen, might have returned to- 
Jerusalem infected with the superstitions of the Chaldeans,—an opinion which nevertheless the celebrated Volney is inclined to maintain. 
It deserves to be noticed, that some writers affirm that the Egyptians believed that the world had once been destroyed by fire, and that, 
in commemoration of that catastrophe, they annually dyed their trees and cattle red. “The Egyptians,” says Porphyry, “ employed 
every year a talisman in remembrance of the world; at the summer solstice they marked their houses, flocks and trees, with red, supposing 
that on that day the. whole world had been set on fire.” 

+ The Mexicans might hence have named their months meztli, after the moon, although they only consisted of twenty days each, 
actuated merely by superstition in the choice of the name. 

NOTES. 39 

derived from Scripture, and to have originated in what is said, in the tenth verse of the second chapter of Genesis, of 
the river that went out from Eden, which was parted into four heads, themselves the sources of the four most famous 
rivers of the globe; and in the inference apparently deducible from the eleventh verse of the seventh chapter of 
Genesis, in which it is said that the Deluge was caused by God’s opening the windows of heaven, and simultaneously 
breaking up all the fountains of the great deep ; which would seem to imply that the sea, which before that period had 
flowed in its allotted channels at a certain depth beneath the earth’s surface, on those channels being broken up, burst 
forth and caused the Deluge ;—heaven and earth, to which the Jews, like the Mexicans, were fond of appealing in their 
adjurations*, in this manner cooperating to fulfil the word of God. To these reasons may be added another, founded 
on the language of David in the twenty-fourth Psalm, ‘‘ The earth is the Lord’s, and the fullness thereof; the world, 
and they that dwell therein; for he hath founded it upon the seas, and established it wpon the floods ;” which passage 
deserves to be compared with the expressions of the Psalmist in the seventh verse of the forty-second Psalm, 

* “ O sun and earth (tlaltecutli)!” was a Mexican adjuration; and Moses, in the nineteenth verse of the thirtieth chapter of Deute- 
ronomy, exclaims, “I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing : 
therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live.” And he again appeals to heaven and earth in the first verse of the thirty- 
second chapter of the same book, “* Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the words of my mouth.” Isaiah 
likewise apostrophizes heaven and earth in the second verse of the first chapter of his Prophecies, “ Hear, O heavens, and give ear, 
O earth: for the Lord hath spoken, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.” The form and 
manner in which the Mexicans took a solemn oath is thus described by Sahagun in a concluding paragraph of the Appendix to the 
second book of his History of New Spain; and it deserves to be noticed that the Mexicans, in the nature, object; manner, and 
peculiarity of their vows, resembled the Jews, and likewise in the superstitious importance which they attached to them :—“ Tenian 
tambien costumbre de hacer juramento de cumplir alguna cosa 4 que se obligaban, y aquel 4 quien se obligaban les demandaba que 
hiciesen juramento para estar seguro de su palabra; y el juramento que hacian era en esta forma: ‘ Por vida del Sol y de nuestra sefiora 
la tierra que no falte en lo que tengo dicho, y para mayor seguridad como esta tierra;’ y luego tocaba con los dedos en la tierra, y 
llegabalos 4 la boca y lamialos; y asi comia tierra haciendo juramento.” ‘ They were likewise accustomed to take an oath to fulfil any 
thing to the performance of which they had pledged themselves; and the person to whom they bound themselves required that they 
should take an oath as a security for their word; and the oath which they took was in this form: ‘ By the life of the Sun and our lady 
the Earth, let'there be no falsehood in that which I have uttered, and for greater security I eat this earth,’ when immediately he touched 
the earth with his fingers, and lifting them to his mouth licked them; and in this manner he ate earth when taking an oath.” It wasa 
Jewish custom to eat earth as a sign of humility; and to cover the mouth with the hand was a very ancient Hebrew mark of respect, as 
we learn from the following passage of the twenty-ninth chapter of the Book of Job: “ When the Almighty was yet with me, when my 
children were about me; when I washed my steps with butter, and the rock poured me out rivers of oil; when I went out to the gate 
through the city, when I prepared my seat in the street! the young men saw me, and hid themselves: and the aged arose, and stood up. 
The princes refrained talking, and laid their hand on their mouth.” This usage is also mentioned in the fifth verse of the twenty-first 
chapter of Job, “ Mark me, and be astonished, and lay your hand upon your mouth ;” where it is spoken of as the effect of astonishment 
mingled with awe, which may serve to explain the signification of Isaiah’s prophecy respecting the Messiah, in the fifteenth verse of 
the fifty-second chapter of his Prophecies, “ The kings shall shu¢ their mouths at him,” which might better have been translated “ shall 
compress their mouths,” since cuvefouos (the term employed in the same passage in the Septuagint) might easily be understood to refer to 
the act of compressing the lips with the hand. — Jt is very deserving of notice, that to place the hand on the mouth, or to cover the mouth 
with the hand, after having previously touched the earth with it, was a Mexican ceremony indicative of extreme respect and reverence. 
This was the salutation with which Montezuma received Cortes on his first interview with him in Mexico, to the great: surprise of his 
own subjects, who could scarcely believe that a stranger would receive such a mark of condescension from their sovereign. ‘The ancient 
Hebrew custom of placing the hand upon the mouth may perhaps be alluded to by the figure of a hand covering the mouths of three of the 
figures contained in the upper compartment of the sixty-seventh page of the Borgian MS. Having already shown that the Jews and the 
Mexicans resembled each other in the outer act or ceremony with which they accompanied an oath, it is extremely deserving of observa- 
tion that “ By the life of our Lord,” or “ As our Lord liveth,” was an oath used by the Mexicans, the form of which they appear to 
have borrowed from the Old Testament, judging, perhaps, that it would be most agreeable to God that man should adopt the same form of 
oath as that which he employed to ratify solemn promises to the Jews; two examples of which it will be sufficient to adduce in this 
place from Scripture, the first of which is contained in the following passage taken from the forty-ninth chapter of Isaiah: « Lift up thine 
eyes round about, and behold: all these gather themselves together, and come to thee. As I live, saith the Lord, thou shalt surely clothe 
thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind them on thee, as a bride doeth.” The second occurs in the twentieth chapter of Ezekiel : 
‘t Wherefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God; Are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers? and commit ye 
whoredom after their abominations? For when ye offer your gifts, when ye make your sons to pass through the fire, ye pollute yourselves 
with all your idols, even unto this day: and shall I be inquired of by you, O house of Israel? As F live, saith the Lord God, I will not 
be inquired of by you. And that which cometh into your mind shall not be at all, that ye say, We will be as the heathen, as the families 
of the countries, to serve wood and stone. As I live, saith the Lord God, surely with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm, and 
with fury poured out, will I rule over you.” 

40 NOTES. 

“ Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy water-spouts ;” by which he appears to mean, that remote as one sea 
might be from the other, still the tumultuous roaring of the waves, striving to gain ingress into the channels which con- 
ducted their waters into the common reservoir in the centre of the earth, produced a common sympathy Bemcen them. 
“ One brook calleth another, because of the noise of the water-pipes,’ is an analogous expression which occurs in another 
Psalm. A surprising conformity is here exhibited between the theory of the Mexicans respecting the sea, and that which 
appears to be deducible from the Old Testament: but whether the ancient Jews believed, like the Mexicans, that the 
earth was encompassed by the sea,—an error into which they might have been led by putting a wrong construction 
upon the sixth verse of the hundred-and-fourth Psalm, where David says, in reference to the earth, “ Thou coveredst 
it with the deep as with a garment,’—or argued, like some of the ancient Fathers, that it was a vast plain im- 
moveably fixed upon pillars,—it is of little importance to know, although Scripture seems to authorize the adoption 
of both these theories, and the latter was maintained by more than one of the ancient Fathers, who pronounced 
the opinion opposed to it to be impious and heretical. The singular notion which the Mexicans entertained, 
that heaven was supported on walls of water, and formed a sort of roof to the earth, may also with great probability 
be traced to what is said in the sixth verse of the first chapter of Genesis, of the creation of the firmament: And an 
attentive perusal of the following extract from Sahagun’s History of New Spain will convince the most sceptical that 
the Mexicans borrowed largely from the natural philosophy of the Jews, to whose moral code they were so much 
indebted: “This first chapter treats of the water of the sea, and of the sea itself, which they name Teuatl, which 
word does not signify ‘God,’ ‘the God of water,’ or ‘divine water,’ but means simply, ‘ water of marvellous depth 
and magnitude’. It is likewise named Hiluicaatl, which signifies ‘water that joins the heaven’; for the ancient 
inhabitants of the earth imagined that the heaven and the sea joined, forming as it were a house, that the water was 
the walls, and that heaven was placed above them*; and for this reason they named the sea Hiluicaatl, or, in other 
words, ‘the water which joins heaven’. Now however, since the arrival of the faith amongst them, they know that 
heaven joins neither the sea nor the land; and accordingly they name the sea Veyatl, which signifies ‘a vast and 
dangerous sheet of water’, covered with foam, and with waves and billows resembling mountains, bitter, salt, and 
unfit to drink, in which many animals constantly in motion exist. They name large rivers Atoiatl, which name 
signifies ‘water that runs with great rapidity’, or, in other words, ‘ water which flows swiftly’. Zhe ancient inha- — 
hitants of this country affirm that all rivers proceed from a place called Tlalocan, that is to say, the terrestrial 
paradise, which place is under the dominion of a god named Chalchiuitlycue; and they likewise declare that. the 

* The creation of the firmament is thus recorded in the first chapter of the Book of Genesis: “‘ And God said, Let there be a firmament 
in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters. And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which 
were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was so. And God called the firmament heaven. And 
the evening and the morning were the second day.” There are strong grounds for presuming that the Mosaic account of the creation of 
the firmament gave rise to the Mexican fable of heaven being supported upon walls of water, and forming a roof over the earth, the 
solid nature of which seems to be intimated by the expression orepewue, the term employed in the Septuagint for the firmament; 
which, when we consider the force of its signification, in connection with its derivation, as likewise that of the Latin word jfirmamentum, 
and reflect at the same time that the command, “ and let it divide the waters from the waters,” would seem to refer to the creation of 
some solid body capable of supporting the weight of the waters which were above the firmament, or, in other words, of resisting the laws 
of gravity,—it really becomes difficult to understand oregewp.« in a sense that would not have favoured the growth of the Mexican fable. 
That the creation of space was not ambiguously signified by the formation of the firmament is evident, because space is admitted, in the 
second verse of the first chapter of Genesis, to have had a previous existence; nor the creation of the heavenly luminaries, because they are 
declared, in the fourteenth .verse of the same chapter, to have been created afterwards. ‘The firmament then, it is evident, was a distinct 
portion of the work of creation, formed for the sole purpose of dividing the waters, and mentioned along with them in the seventh verse 
of the first chapter of Genesis. And it is very deserving of remark, that Job and Esdras both describe it as a solid roof placed over the 
earth; the former in the eighteenth verse of his thirty-seventh chapter, where he emphatically alludes to its strength and solidity, «‘ Hast 
thou with him spread out the sky? which is strong and as a molten looking-glass,’—the latter in the following passage of the sixteenth 
chapter of his Second Book, where he positively declares that it was founded or supported upon the waters which were under it, which 
were the sea: “He hath shut the sea in the midst of the waters, and with his word hath he hanged the earth upon the waters. He 
spreadeth out the heavens like a vault; upon the waters hath he founded it. In the desert hath he made springs of water, and pools upon 
the tops of the mountains, that the floods might pour down from the high rocks to water the earth.” The Mexican theory of the sea 
forming walls of water round the earth is suggested by the interrogatory of Job in the eighth verse of his thirty-eighth chapter, “ Who shut 
up the sea with doors when it broke forth as if it had issued out of the womb?” since the mention of doors necessarily implies the 

existence of walls through which there was a door-way. 

NOTES. 4l- 

mountains whose bases are there situated are full of water, and covered externally with earth, being as it were large 
pitchers of water, or houses full of water ; and that, if need required, the mountains would burst, and the water within 
them would flow forth and deluge the earth. Hence they took occasion to apply the epithet of altepetl, which 
signifies ‘a mountain of water’, or ‘a mountain full of water’, to inhabited towns: they likewise said that rivers 
produced mountains, and that the god Chalchiuitlycue* caused them. But having become acquainted with the truth, 

they now say that it is by the will of God that the sea enters the earth by veins and channels; and wherever it can 
find an outlet oozes forth, whether from the roots of mountains or the level surface of the ground; and that afterwards 
many streams unite, and so form large rivers: and although the water of the sea is salt, and that of rivers sweet, it 
loses its salt or bitter taste by percolation through the earth or through stones and sand, and becomes sweet and 
potable; so that in this manner large rivers flow from the sea, through secret channels beneath the earth, which, forcing 
their passage through its surface, become fountains and rivers.”—Returning to the examination of the prophecies 
contained in the twenty-second Psalm, which by some extraordinary chance the people of two different hemispheres 
have applied to two different Messiahs,—since this will have to be conceded, except on the gu poer ton that Quecal- 
coatle was Christ,—we shall observe that the prediction + “ My tongue cleaveth to my jaws” appears to be literally 

* Tlaloc is probably here meant, who is represented in the fifty-seventh plate of the Codex Wadeanu’ by the symbol of a skull placed 
upon a mountain, from the base of which a stream of water appears to flow forth. Tlaloc was the Mexican god of water, and the skull 
might have been a hieroglyphic employed by the Mexicans to signify his spiritual nature, since a ghost or spirit can properly have no 
material type, and cannot therefore be represented by any appropriate symbol. 

+ If faith can be placed in Mexican tradition, the following remarkable prophecies respecting the Messiah would seem to have been 
verified in the person of Quecalcoatle, either in his character of king or high priest of the city of Tula; “Therefore the Lord himself shall 
give you a sign. Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. Butter and honey shall he eat, that 
he may know to refuse the evil and choose the good.” The remarkable accordance of the proper name Topiltzin with Immanuel has 
already been pointed out at page 507 of the sixth volume of this work; but it is equally deserving of notice, that the first name which 
was bestowed upon Topiltzin king of Tula shortly after his birth, on the famous sign of Ce Acatl or the Star, (and whilst yet an infant in 
the arms of his mother, the reputed virgin Xochitl,) was Meconetzin, which word signifies the child of the honey of the aloe. The extra- 
ordinary capacity which this prince is said to have displayed in his earliest years for governing a state, and his precocious talents, which 
disposed his parents, (who were of the royal race of the Tultecas,) to surrender up to him the administration of public affairs, who still 
remained, from motives of filial piety, subject to them, must likewise remind us of the language of Isaiah, in the sixth verse of the ninth 
chapter of his Prophecies, “ For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder; and his 
name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his govern- 
ment and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it ‘with judgment. and 
with justice from henceforth even for ever.” Since none of the high-sounding titles which are here given to the Messiah occur in the cor- 
responding. passage in the Septuagint, which merely invests the son of the virgin with the attributes of a great prince, and contains not 
an expression, with the exception perhaps of amo tov wy xas els roy aiwye, which deviates from strict propriety of language, were a mere 
mortal the subject treated of, it may easily be supposed that the Mexicans, if they had been acquainted with the prediction of Isaiah, 
might have persuaded themselves that they beheld the accomplishment of the ancient prophecy in the temporal power of Topiltzin, whose 
very misfortunes,—such as the destruction of the Tultecas and the city of Tulan, (which event occurred in the latter end of his reign, and 
was preceded by the rebellion of some neighbouring kings and rulers,) as also his own departure to the kingdom of Huetlapallan, with a 
promise that he would return thence with a mighty army to take vengeance upon his enemies, and the destitute state in which he 
left his sons and subjects, however at variance with one famous prophecy,—might have appeared to them the fulfilment of others relating 
to the Messiah ;—for instance, of that of David in the second and third verses of the second Psalm: “The kings of the earth set themselves, 
and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and’cast away 
their cords from us:” to which prophecy Isaiah appears obliquely to allude in the concluding sentence of the sixth verse of the ninth 
chapter of his Prophecies, which is translated in the Septuagint: “aw yae elonyyy ems Tous doyovras, xas Uyserey dutw,” “for I will pacify 
the rulers, and restore him to health.” It may be proper to observe, for the information of those who know little of the ancient history of 
the Mexicans, that three kings of the earth, that is to say native Tultec princes who were tributary to Topiltzin, and a multitude of 
inferior rulers, are said to have conspired against him, towards the end of his reign, who, as history declares, no longer possessed the mens 
sana in corpore sano, but trod closely in the footsteps of David’s son, having lost the judgment of his early years, which he afterwards reco- 
vered on confessing-his sins to Tezcatlipoca; although the divine decree’ having gone forth, he could not avert impending ruin from his 
state, or prevent the Tultecas becoming a dispersed people, and their land a dreary and waste wilderness. The expectation of the Mexicans 
that Topiltzin would return to them from the East, and that his advent would take place on the sign of the Thief, (for the sign Ce Acatl 
was considered by the Mexicans highly favourable to thieves,) was perhaps founded on the language of Isaiah in the twenty-fifth verse of 
the forty-first chapter of his prophecies, “TI have raised up one from the North, and he shall come; from the rising of the sun shall he 
call upon my name; and he shall come upon princes as upon mortar, and as the potter treadeth clay ;” and on the declaration in the New 
Testament, that the coming of the Son of Man would be like that of a thief in the night. 

VOL. VIII. (M) 

Isaiah, in the eleventh verse of the forty-sixth 

42 NOTES. 

fulfilled in the seventy-second page of the Borgian MS.,* in which painting, two women (mothers, as it is to be pre- 
sumed from the children which they carry behind them,) are represented with coffers, the inclined position of which 

chapter of his Prophecies again seems to insinuate that the Messiah would come from the East, since no other interpretation can be put 
upon the passage “ Calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man that executeth my counsel from a far country.” But if it be denied 
that the coming of the Messiah the prince of peace could possibly have been associated, even in the mind of the most fanatical observer 
of the laws of Moses, with ideas of blood and carnage,—those who make this futile objection had better peruse with attention the pro- 
phetical books of the Old Testament, and refer to the hundred-and-tenth Psalm, every verse of which is prophetical of the Messiah and 
his advent,—when they will find reason to change their opinion, and perhaps to come to the conclusion that the Mexicans would never 
have offered human sacrifices to Quecalcoatle, or applied the epithet of Topiltzin to the high priest who presided at those revolting rites, 
if they had not entertained the idea that his coming would be a day of retribution and vengeance, and that he could only be appeased by 
propitiatory sacrifices : and hence perhaps the reason why Montezuma’s ambassadors presented Cortes with cakes moistened with human 
blood, at the very time that they felt convinced that he was Quecalcoatle-—Before noticing those prophecies of Scripture which appear to 
have been verified by Quecalcoatle in his pontifical character, we must observe that the Mexicans, in recording that Topiltzin was 
the father of two sons, might have agreed with the Jews in supposing that the Messiah who was to be seated on the throne of David, 
would be a married man; and that the words of Isaiah, “he shall see has seed,” in the tenth verse of the fifty-third chapter of his Pro- 
phecies, required a literal fulfilment. Having briefly adverted to some prophecies in the Old Testament which are applicable to Quecal- 
coatle, in whose history we behold, as through a mirror darkly, the pretended accomplishment of some important prophecies relating to the 
advent of the Messiah in his regal character,—we come to the consideration of a still more mysterious, portion of his history, in which he 
is presented to our view as a priest zealous for the honour of his God, who came into the. world to preach a new law, and to ‘reform 
mankind by penance; teaching them the doctrine of repentance and the remission of sin, and exhorting them above all things to avoid 
pleasure, as a crime most odious in the eyes of the Deity, and the cause of a considerable portion of mankind having been once destroyed. 
He was the founder of innumerable temples, and the institutor of all sorts of religious rites, especially of baptism and the teoqualo or 
communion. He had many disciples, who religiously observed the rules laid down by the founder of their faith, and practised similar or 
greater austerities,—drawing blood from various parts of their body with thorns, perhaps from a tradition that their master had been pierced 
with thorns; and lacerating themselves with cruel voluntary scourgings, as an act of merit and supererogation. The Mexicans named the 
age of Quecalcoatle the age of roses; and believed that when he was king of Tula the earth spontaneously produced fruits and flowers of 
every description, and that both animate and inanimate nature displayed a miraculous sympathy with this new order of things, the stalks 
of maize attaining the stature of trees, and cotton budding forth of every dye; whilst the plumage of the birds became more beautiful, 
and their melodious songs filled the groves. Isaiah describes the blessings of the Messiah’s kingdom in a similar glowing strain in the 
eleventh chapter of his Prophecies: and it seems extremely probable that the Mexicans understood in a literal sense the allegory of the 
lion eating straw like the ox, and the child putting his hand on the cockatrice; whilst their fable of gourds a yard and a half in length, and 
trees producing pink, yellow, and scarlet cotton, seems to have been founded on the prediction of the same prophet in his fourth. chapter, 
where, alluding-to the coming of Christ’s kingdom, he exclaims, “In that day shall the branch of the Lord be beautiful «nd glorious, and 
the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely for them that are escaped of Israel.” The interpreter of the Vatican Codex declares, 
at page 178 of the sixth volume of this work, that Quecalcoatle was the inventor of temples, and built many places of prayer, which would 
well accord with the prediction of David in the ninth verse of the sixty-ninth Psalm, “ For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up ;” 
which prediction we learn from the. seventeenth verse of the second chapter of the Gospel of St. John was expressly uttered by. David of 
the Messiah, “ And his disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up.” Those who may wish to 
trace the apparent fulfilment of other prophecies of the Old Testament relating to the Messiah in the person of Quecalcoatle, can refer to 
the 108th and 166th pages of the sixth volume of this work, and to note xii of the same volume, of which the first note in the present 
volume is the continuation. re 

* The crucifixion of Quecalcoatle appears to be the subject of the seventy-second page of the Borgian MS., and there is possibly an 
allusion in it to the prophetical language of Isaiah in the nineteenth verse of the forty-second chapter of his Prophecies: ‘¢ Who is blind; 
but my servant? or deaf, as my messenger that I sent? Who is blind, as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lord’s servant?” It deserves 
to be remarked that this passage is translated very differently in the Septuagint, which precisely in those chapters and passages that: are 
allowed by comimon cansent to contain the most famous prophecies respecting the advent of the future Messiah, and the signs and:tokens 
by which he should be known, is most at variance with the Hebrew Bible ;—incredible as this fact may appear, a comparison of the. Greek 
and Hebrew texts of the ninth, fifty-second, and fifty-third chapters of Isaiah; of the twenty-second and hundred-and-tenth Psalms; of 
the forty-third verse of the thirty-second. chapter of Deuteronomy (to which St. Paul refers in the sixth verse of the first chapter of.his 
Epistle to the Hebrews); of the sixth verse of the fortieth Psalm (likewise referred to by St. Paul in the fifth verse of the tenth chapter 
of his Epistle to the Hebrews),—will clearly demonstrate its truth; although it will not explain the cause of variations which never 
could have been accidental. Even the famous passage of the nineteenth chapter of the Book of Job, which is introduced in the Burial 
Service, from its apparent connection with two vital articles of Christianity, wants the authority of the Septuagint Bible, as a comparison 
of the Greek text with the corresponding passage in the English translation of the Bible will clearly show ; since Job can only be understood 
to allude in the following passage to his strong conyiction that through the mercy of God he would recover from the infirmity under which 
he was then labouring, and that his skin would be healed of its many sores. Oida yup 61 devyaos eorw 6 exAvely jue LeAAwy em yng, avaoryo ces 

TO DeQUd [L0U TO aYAYTAUUY TAUTC* mole Yop Kupiou raure “01 cuyererco dn, ob tym euauTH cUvEMIoTTamal, & 6 OBIAAMS mov Ewpuxe, XAI vx dAANS, mevre. 

NOTES. | 43 

appears to indicate an offering ; which leads us to inquire whether the Mexicans might have had a tradition of the 
two women, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary, who bought sweet spices to anoint the body of Christ, as recorded 

de 406 cuvrerereoras éy xoAmw. “ For I know that he is everlasting who is about to liberate me upon the earth, (who is about) to restore my 
skin, which has endured these things; for these things have been accomplished upon me from the Lord, which I myself am conscious of, 
which my eye hath seen, and not another, for all these things have had their completion in my breast.” It deserves to be remarked, that 
the authority of the Septuagint was preferred by the Apostles to that of the Hebrew Bible, which even St. Matthew (the only evangelist 
who composed his Gospel in Hebrew for the express use of the Jews,) thought proper to reject, as is evident from the agreement of 
the names in his genealogy of Christ with those which occur in the Septuagint. Having noticed an important variation in the Septuagint 
reading of the nineteenth verse of the forty-second chapter of Isaiah, we may here observe, that all traces of the prediction contained in the 
original Hebrew are quite lost sight of in the Greek translation: Kos ris tuaos &AN 7 61 mraudes pov; xo xwgor BAN 4 bs xupieuoyTes AuToy 5 
xo eTugrwhyoovras 6s Sovaos tov Oeov. “¢ And who is blind but my children? and deaf but those who rule over them? and the servants 
of God shall become blind :” which resolves itself into an accusation and denunciation of blindness against the children of Israel and 
their rulers, and has no reference to the Messiah, the prediction of whose blindness, though here a mere allegory, might have been under- 
stood in a literal sense by the Jews; and it seems to have induced the translators of the English version of the Bible to put a wrong con- 
struction on the words *» 4) b's in the sixth verse of the fortieth Psalm, which they have interpreted “mine ears hast thou opened” ; 
apparently thinking that it was as reasonable to suppose that the Messiah would be deaf, as that he would be blind; and that opering 
his ears would refer to the removal of his deafness, whether understood in a spiritual or in a real sense. The proper signification, however, 
of the Hebrew passage is, “mine ears hast thou bored’: and when it is recollected that to bore the ears was an ancient mark of 
Hebrew servitude, ordained by God himself in the sixth verse of the twenty-first chapter of Exodus, and that the Messiah is habitually 
called by God in the Old Testament his servant,—little doubt can be entertained that Isaiah prophesied that the Messiah’s ears should 
be bored, in token of his perpetual servitude to God. From slavery being so common and slaves so numerous amongst the Jews, it may 
confidently be inferred that from the earliest times to the age of Christ a large portion of the Hebrew population had their ears bored ; 
which renders it probable that the Mexicans and the Peruvians might have derived that custom from the Jews, who ever manifested a 
strong disposition to propagate far and wide their native superstitions, employing, like St. Paul before he became a Christian convert, 
fire and sword to further the ends of the blindest religious zeal. That to bore the ears was a religious ceremony amongst the Mexicans is 
asserted by Sahagun in the thirty-seventh chapter of the second book of his History of New Spain, who describes towards the conclusion 
of that chapter the manner in which it was performed, and expressly says that it was a rite which was publicly celebrated every four 
years in Mexico on the festival of the month Yzcalli, when all the children who had been born within that space of time had their ears 
bored; being carried to the temple for that purpose by their parents, who provided them with godfathers and godmothers. Acosta 
notices the existence of the same custom amongst the Peruvians, without however comparing it with the analogous Mexican rite. 
Balboa likewise makes mention of it in the tenth chapter of the third part of his Miscellanea Antarctica, where, enumerating the cere- 
monies with which Mango Capac the founder of the Peruvian monarchy, and-his companions, celebrated so auspicious an event as 
that of the birth of a son to the former, he says; “ Y al nuevo infante Sinchiruca lo armaron cavallero, y en el se comenzé 4 los tres 
afios de su edad la fiesta Tocochicui, que es quando le horadaron las orejas, y 4 los quatro el Rutuchicui, que es la primera vez que 
se le corté el cabello, y 4 los quince el Huarachicui, que es quando le pusieron las primeras bragas, y se invento un infinito numero 
de ceremonias que se hiran poniendo en sus lugares y tiempos; dieronle en la mano en sefial de citro real, un baston de oro 4 quien 
llamaron Topayauri.” “ They knighted the new infant Sinchiruca, and in him began in the third year of his age the festival of Tocuchicui, 
which was when they bored his ears; and in his fourth year that of Rutuchicui, which was when they for the first time cut his hair; 
and in his fifth year that of Huarachicui, which was when he was first breeched ;—and invented an infinite number of ceremonies which 
shall be noticed in their proper place and time; they placed in his hand by way of a royal sceptre a mace of gold which they named 
Topayauri.” The ceremonies with which the Peruvians celebrated the most trifling incidents which marked the growth and increasing 
age of the infant Sinchiruca, were quite in accordance with the customs of the ancient Jews, who, as it has been elsewhere observed, 
appear to have been the instructors of the Mexicans in everything relating to the treatment and education of children.—To the testimony 
of Acosta and Balboa respecting the Peruvian rite of boring the ears of children when they attained their fourth year, may be added that 
of the Inga Titucusi Yupangui, whose written Instructions to the Licentiate Garcia de Castro, are preserved in MS. in the Escurial, and 
form a very important historical monument ;—in those instructions the following curious passage occurs :—“ Pasadas todas aquellas cosas 
dela prision segunda, y el dar de la Ynguill en lugar de la Coya 4 Gonzalo Pizarro; no pasaron muchos dias en que Gonzalo Pizarro dije 
que mi padre Mango Ynga hizo una fiesta muy principal, en la cual se oradaban las orejas; y en esta fiesta, nosotros los Yngas, solemos 
hacer la mayor fiesta que hacemos en todo el afio, porque entonces nos dan muchos nombres y nuevo nombre del que teniamos antes, que 
tira casi esta ceremonia & lo que los Cristianos hacen cuando se confirman: en la cual fiesta mi padre salio con toda la autoridad real con- 
forme 4 nuestro uso, llevando delante sus cetros reales, y el uno de ellos como mas principal era de oro mazizo, y con sus borlas de lo mismo, 
llevando todos los demas que con el iban juntamente cada uno el suyo, los cuales eran la mitad de plata, y la mitad de cobre, que serian 
mas de mil todos unos y otros los que iban & rebautizar, que en nuestro uso llamamos Vacaroz; y estando que estubieron todos nuestros 
Yndios y los Espafioles que estaban, en un llano de un cerro que se llama Anauarque, 4 donde se hacia la ceremonia, acabada de hacer, (el 
como se hace, se dira delante) al tiempo que se iban 4 lavar los que asi havian sido rebautizados en el bautismo, los trasquilar y horadar las 
orejas, los Espafioles, no sé si por codicia de la plata que iba en los cetros, 6 de algun recelo que de ver tanta gente les debio de caer, 
pusieronse en arma y comenzaron 4 alborotar 4 toda la gente, hechando mano 4 sus espadas con este apellido, los cuales decian:.O bel- 

44, NOTES. 

by St. Mark in the first verse of the sixteenth chapter of his Gospel: “And when the sabbath was past, Mary Mag- 
dalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might come and anoint him.” 
The exclamation which follows, “ And thou hast brought me into the dust of death,” seems to be alluded to by the 
prostrate figure of Death in the lower compartment of the same painting ; whilst the next ejaculation, “ For dogs have 

? 

compassed me,” may possibly be alluded to by the representation, in the preceding painting, of a man in a serpent. 

form exposed to the attacks of ravenous animals. The famous prophecy, “ they pierced my hands and my feet,” 
—which is so often appealed to, to prove that David (from whose root the Messiah was to spring) foresaw clearly the 
manner in which the Jews would put him to death,—is represented as literally accomplished in the seventy-second 
and seventy-fifth pages of the Borgian MS. The declaration which follows, “I may Trett all my bones,” appears 
to be symbolically alluded to by the figure of the crucified person, in the seventy-third page of the same MS., 
whose bones are bare, and exposed to view. “ They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture,” 
is another famous prophecy relating to the Messiah, the literal fulfilment of which is recorded by Saint John in 
the following passage of the nineteenth chapter of his Gospel: “ Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, 
took his garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also his coat: now the coat was without 
seam, woven from the top throughout. They said therefore among themselves, Let us not rend it, but cast lots for 
it, whose it shall be: that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which saith, They parted my raiment among them, and for 

lacos, vosotros levantaros quereis; pues no ha de ser asi, esperad, esperad; y asi de esta manera arremetieron 4 los cetros para los quitar 
a los cuales Ilevaban con deseo de llegar 4 quitar el de mi padre; y como tenia tanta guarda al derredor de si, por sus mangas no pudieron 
llegar, sino quitaron de los otros los que pudieron, que fueron muchos. Mi padre que asi oy6 tanto ruido y mormullo entre la gente, atendio 
A ver lo que pasaba, y desque supo que los Espafioles se habian desvergonzado de aquella manera, alz6 la voz diciendo: Que es esto? y los 
Yndios todos, como llorando, se le quexaron de esta suerte, los cuales digeron: Sepai Ynga, que gente es esta que tienes en tu tierra, que 
no se contenta con tanto oro y plata como les has dado, y por fuerza nos han quitado nuestros yaurzs de plata, que quiere decir cetros, nos 
han quitado con amenazas, de lo cual recibimos gran pena: diles que nos los vuelvan, y que les baste ya la plata y oro que les habemos 
dado.” From the above passage it would appear that boring the ears was the ceremony with which the Peruvians solemnized the second 
baptism of their children; and it might have been intended as a sign of the compact into which they then entered to be faithful servants to 
God. It deserves to be noticed, that Titucusi Yupangui had embraced Christianity at a period prior to his transmitting his Instructions 
to Spain; and it may further be pointed out as a most curious fact, that he should prefix to one of the chapters of his Instructions a de- 
claration that the deity adored under the name of Viracocha by the Peruvians and the God worshiped by the Christians were the same. 
The following is the passage in which this most remarkable declaration is contained. ‘Aqui comienza la manera y modo por‘la via 
que yo Don Diego de Castro Titucusi Yupangui vine 4 tener paz con los Espafioles, de la cual paz, por la bondad de Dios, 4 quien 
nosotros antiguamente Ulamabamos Viracocha, vine 4 ser Christiano, la qual es esta que sigue.” “ Here commences an account of the 
way and manner in which I Don Diego de Castro Titucusi Yupangui became at peace with the Spaniards, by which peace, through 
the goodness of the God whom we anciently named. Viracocha, 1 became a Christian, which was as follows.” We have here the testi- 
mony of a Peruvian Inga after his conversion to Christianity, and consequently not before he had been instructed in the principles of the 
Christian religion, in favour of the identity of the God of Christians and the deity adored in ancient times in Peru; and hence perhaps 
the tenacity with which the Peruvians clung to the faith of their ancestors; since if the preaching of the missionaries produced in their 
minds the conviction that the god of the Spaniards was the same as Viracocha, it would also have been likely:to inspire them with a 
feeling of unwillingness to relinquish the practice of those rites which they believed that he had commanded, which same feeling con- 
tinues to actuate the Jews of the present day, to whom the argument derived from the profession of a common faith as regards many vital 
articles of religion, is never found to be persuasive, religious extremes being more likely eventually to meet than religious approxima- 
tions, which are frequently looked upon as a collateral evidence of the truth of their own religious persuasion by each contending sect. 
Having referred to the nineteenth verse of the forty-second chapter of Isaiah as a text of Scripture likely to have induced the Jews to 
suppose that it was foretold that the Messiah should be blind, we shall conclude this note by citing a passage from the fourth volume 
of the Universal History, page 241, in which mention is made of a material difference of sentiment which prevails between Jews and 
Christians as to the right reading of the sixteenth verse of the twenty-second Psalm, in reference to the famous prophecy, “ they pierced 
my hands and my feet ;” the Jews contending that through an intentional alteration of the Hebrew text by Christians, the genuine pro- 
phecy respecting the Messiah, which they explain to be, “ My hands and feet like those of a lion were watched,” is quite lost sight of. 
“ Before we dismiss this noble Psalm we beg leave to answer an objection which the latter (the Jews) raise against our reading in the 
sixteenth verse, 93, caru, they pierced my hands, &c., instead of N82, caare, which they pretend is the true reading, and signifies /ike a 
lion, as if the meaning had been, My hands and feet like those of a lion (to which they were forced to add to make it sense) were watched 
or observed. And this exchange of the latter for the former they do not scruple to charge us with. . Vide inter alios auctorem libri Nit- 
zachon.” It is most singular that Quecalcoatle should be represented in the third, seventy-third, and seventy-fifth pages of the Borgian 
MS. with feet having claws like those of a lion, as well as with pierced human feet, which may perhaps refer to that old Jewish 
notion. 

NOTES. 45 

my vesture they did cast lots. These things therefore the soldiers did.” Ancient commentators on Scripture contend 
‘that the words of David, besides being prophetical of the Messiah, involved a type and great hidden mystery ; ‘for 
that the seamless mantle of Christ, which the soldiers refused to rend, signified the wity of the church; the truth 
of the type has, however, been less insisted upon since the period of the Reformation ; neither is the fact itself, of the 
coat or tunic of Christ having been without a seam, as remarkable as the ancient commentators on the prophecies affect 
to think; since it is not at all improbable that in the age of Christ such tunics were in general fashion amongst the 
Jews: and to this opinion we have been led by reading, either in the History of Torquemada or of Sahagun, that 
the Mexicans, who borrowed so many of their other usages from the Jews, were accustomed to weave their tunics of 
a single piece, beginning at the neck and weaving downwards, leaving apertures for the head and arms. The Ingas 
wore likewise a vest of the same description, if we may be permitted to judge from their portraits prefixed to the 
Decads of Herrera. Saint John affirms that the soldiers, at the Crucifixion, after dividing the other garments of 
Christ into four parts, cast lots for the tunic, to which he gives the Greek name of yirwv. It is scarcely necessary to 
observe, that to cast lots in order to determine chances was an ancient Hebrew custom, so frequently resorted to by 
the Jews, that it is only surprising that Moses should no where have forbidden gaming in the Pentateuch, to which 
habit that of casting lots would have been so likely to lead, and the existence of which amongst the Jews at a later 
period of their history may be inferred from what is recorded of Samson in the fourteenth chapter of the Book of 
Judges, who is there said to have laid a wager with the Philistines for thirty sheets and thirty changes of. garments ; 
affording by so doing grounds for supposing that his countrymen were extremely addicted to play, and justifying the 
observation that the Jews, from the age of Samson to that of Christ, were accustomed to lay wagers, and to cast 
lots upon garments, and that the Mexican game of patol, or of lots, was probably of Hebrew origin. We shall only 
further remark, in reference to the last-mentioned prophecy of David, that the garments of Quecalcoatle were 
esteemed by the Mexicans as holy relics, and were preserved for many ages in the city of Cholula, where was a 
famous shrine dedicated to Quecalcoatle, to which pilgrimages were performed from all parts of New Spain, and 
even from the kingdom of Guatemala; and it deserves to be noticed, that on certain solemn festivals a transfer of 
these garments from the citizens of Cholula to those of Tlaxcala and Huexocingo, constituted a solemn religious 
ceremony, of which a more particular account will be found in the note subjoined to page 343 of the sixth volume 
of the present work. The concluding supplication of David, “ Deliver my soul from the sword, my darling from the 
power of the dog. Save me from the lion’s mouth, for thou hast heard me from the horns of the untcorns*,” 
have led the Jews to suppose that the Messiah would be exposed to danger from the attacks of fierce and carnivorous 
animals; and to that absurd belief the figures of the tiger and the eagles in the seventy-first page of the Borgian MS. 
may perhaps allude. The seventy-fifth page of the Borgian MS. is very remarkable, from the representation which 
it contains of Quecalcoatle in the attitude of a crucified person, with the impressions of nails visible in his hands 
and feet; and the seventy-sixth page would be scarcely less so, supposing it to relate to the advent of the Messiah on 
the last day, when the dead are to be awoke by the sound of a trumpet,—on which supposition the twelve figures 
which stand on the azure border of the circle, which is intended perhaps to represent teotl-tlatlaucha, or ‘the red 
heaven’ of the Mexicans, may signify the twelve apostles who are to judge the twelve tribes of Israel. The former 
of these paintings is still more deserving of attention, on account of the suns that so conspicuously adorn the body 
of Quecalcoatle, which serve to remind us of the appellation of the Sun of righteousness, which the prophet Malachi 
bestows on the Messiah, in the second verse of the fourth chapter of his Prophecies: “ But unto you that fear my 
name shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth and grow up as calves of the 
stall.” This figurative language of Scripture explains to us the reason why the Sun, as well as the Morning-star, was 
an epithet applied to Christ, who is also named in Scripture ‘Light,’ a phrase which seems to have laid the foundation 
of a famous heresy which arose in the earliest ages of the church. The wounds on the body of Quecalcoatle in the 
same painting are also very remarkable: they are not five but nine; yet still they present an odd number, and may create 
a doubt whether the tradition of the five precious wounds of Christ,—which, like other primitive traditions, Protestants 
affect totally to disregard,—might not have passed over to the New World; Boturini at least so supposes at page 418 

might 

* The Mexican sign Cipactli was sometimes represented by the head of an animal with a single horn proceeding from its forehead, 
which. Valades in his treatise, entitled “ Christian Rhetoric,” names a sword-fish, but which was perhaps intended to represent the 
unicorn, a beast with which the Jews were so well acquainted. 

VOL. VIII. GNP) 

46 NOTES. 

of the sixth volume of the present work, where an account of his discovery of a blue cross of the form of the 
Greek letter T will also be found. The phrase of Malachi, “healing in his wings,” in reference to the Sun of 
righteousness,—presenting as it does, under one and the same image, the threefold idea of a man, a bird, and the sun, 
and exactly agreeing in metaphorical anomaly with the figure delineated in the eighth page of the Vatican MS., 
which perhaps represents Quecalcoatle personified as the sun and the green feathered serpent, holding a fan in 
his left hand, with what appears to be a sickle in his right, together with flints, the symbols of his penance, whom 
the Mexicans might have named Citlaltotonametle*, from their belief that he would appear 2m the clouds of heaven 
—affords grounds for supposing that the Jews of Mexico were acquainted with the prophecy of Malachi, and 
had applied. that, like many others contained in the Old Testament, to Quecalcoatle. It is not undeserving of 
notice that the bust of Quecalcoatle, (of which a description will be found at page 168 of the sixth volume of this 
work,) in addition to the ornament of the collar round the neck, composed of the solar disc, and the feathered serpent 
sculptured in a stone of a greenish hue, is represented with a fan and sickle, which suggests the possibility of the 
Mexicans having been acquainted with the following passage of the third chapter of Saint Luke, descriptive of the 
advent of the Messiah: ‘“ John answered, saying unto them all, I indeed baptize you with water; but one mightier 
than I cometh, the latchet of whose shoes Iam not worthy to unloose: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost 
and with fire: whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and will gather the wheat into his 
garner; but the chaff he will burn with fire unquenchable.” This passage nearly corresponds in phraseology 
with the words of Saint Matthew, in the third} chapter of his Gospel, “I indeed baptize you with water unto 
repentance: but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall 
baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire: whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, 
and gather his wheat into the garner; but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.” The signification of 
the fan in the hand of the Messiah is explained by the text; but it may be proper to observe, that the sickle is em- 
blematical of the harvest which he is to reap on the day of judgment. These analogies having been sufficiently 
pointed out, we shall notice the verification of an ancient prophecy in the person of Quecalcoatle, to which it is 
impossible not to attach the greatest importance, affording, as it does, a surprising corroboration of the curious fact, 
that the Jews had applied many of the types and the prophecies of the Old Testament relating to Christ, to Quecal- 
coatle. The remarkable prediction, “In his humniliation his judgment was taken away, and who shall declare his 
generation? for his life is taken from the earth,” occurs in the eighth verse of the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, and 
is quoted in the eighth chapter of the Acts, where Philip declares to the eunuch that this prediction was to be inter- 
preted of Christ. Since however the Gospels make no mention either of the manner or the time in which Christ lost 
his judgment, we may be permitted from the context, “He was led as asheep to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb 
before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth,” to suppose that the event took place at the Crucifixion. The prophecy 
that the Son of God should lose his judgment was in itself one of so extraordinary a nature, and apparently so at 

* The sun is named simply Totonametl in the address of the Mexican midwife to that luminary, which is inserted in-the thirty-seventh 
chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain. This epithet appears to be the same as Citlaltotonametle, the name which 
the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus gives to the symbolical representation of Quecalcoatle, in the eighth page of that MS., the latter 
being compounded of céélalin ‘a star’, and tototl ‘a bird’. Molina however, in his Mexican Dictionary, assigns to ¢ofonal the signifi- 
cation of ‘the sign on which any one was born, or the soul or spirit,’ “ el signo en que alguno nasce, o el alma y espiritu,” and amet! 
signifies ‘ paper’, or ‘a book’. The Mexicans entertained the belief already alluded to in the note subjoined to page 6 of the sixth 
volume of this work, that Topilcin, or Quecalcoatle, presided over destinies, and invented the tonalametl, or art of divination, by means 
of the sigus of the days of the year; which suggests a preferable etymology for the proper name Totonamietl, the resemblance of which 
to Citlaltotonametle almost. identifies the two proper names; whilst the insertion of the former in the prayer of the midwife at the 
Mexican baptismal ceremony, proves that the Mexicans worshiped Quecalcoatle as the sun, and named him the tiger, as the Jews 
called their Messiah the lion of the tribe of Judah.—In a note subjoined to page 176 of the sixth volume of this work, another probable 
signification has been assigned to the proper name Citlaltotonametle, which, if it may lead some persons too hastily to suppose that the 
Mexicans might) have entertained the belief that Quecalcoatle would appear in the clouds of heaven in the manner foretold of the 
Messiah, is still deserving of attention, from the fact of a name having been given to Cortes by the Indians of several provinces of New 
Spain fully indicative of that belief. 

‘+ It is useless to inquire why each of these two evangelists made choice of the third chapter of his Gospel for this description of the 
Messiah; but it deserves to be noticed, that many coincidences of this kind occur in the four Gospels, in which the order of the relation 
is frequently similar, when the events narrated have no connection with each other. 

NOTES. Aq 

variance with other predictions respecting him, and with the assumption of his being equal with the Father, that it 
is most surprising, Saint Luke referring to it in the Acts, one of the Evangelists should record its fulfilment in the 
Gospels; which is perhaps the reason why the old translators of the Bible into English, who preferred the authority 
of the Hebrew Bible to the Septuagint, have translated the same passage of Isaiah in their version, “ He was taken 
from prison and from judgment ; and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the 
living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken ;’—which passage is translated in the Septuagint, Ev zy 
TATELVWTEL 1] KPLOLG avTov npOn, THY ‘yeveav avTOU TIC Smynserat ; ort aiperat aro TNC yne 7 Con avrou, aro TwY avoptwy TOU 
Aaov pov 7xOn cig Oavarov. “In humiliation his judgment was taken away: who shall declare his generation? for his 
life is taken away from the earth: for the transgressions of my people he was led to death.” The:passage in the 
Acts which confirms the Septuagint reading of the prophecy of Isaiah, proving at the same time the corruption of the 
Hebrew text of Scripture, and with what truth Eusebius declared that the Apostles quoted from the Septuagint, 
rejecting the authority of the Hebrew Bible, is the following Ep +9 TaTewvwcer avTov 1} KPLouG avuTov p9n, anv oe yeveav 
adrov ri¢ Sinynoerar; Ort aiperar amo TG yng 7 Cwn avrov. It hence appears that it was prophesied by Isaiah that Christ 
should lose his judgment, and that this was to be one of the signs of the future Messiah ; but when and how this event 
came to pass, the Evangelists do not record. Torquemada, however, informs us that Quecalcoatle, on the occasion of 
his drinking the contents of the cup which Titlacaoa presented him to drink, lost his judgment. The words which that 
author employs to commemorate that event are the following: “ Despues de aver bebido este brevaje, quedé Quet- 
zalcohuatl fuera de si, y sim juicio;’ which have been translated with some degree of latitude at page 259 of the sixth 
volume of the present work, ‘ Quetzalcohuatl after having drunk this beverage Jost all self-possession ;” the more literal 
meaning of the concluding portion of the sentence being “ remained beside himself and without judgment.” Enough 
having been said to prove that the Jews of the New World applied many of the prophecies of the Old Testament to 
Quecalcoatle, we shall conclude by remarking that, as amongst Christians the institution of the sacrament of the com- 
munion was intended to record the crucifixion of Christ; and the offering up of the host at the solemnization of the 
mass is a sort of renewal of that sacrifice*,—so amongst the Mexicans the rite of Teoqualo, or of eating God, (a descrip- 
tion of which will be found at page 414 of the sixth volume of the present work, and a further account at page 105 
of the seventh volume, where Sahagun enumerates the austerities which were practised by the Mexicans previously to 
their receiving the body of Vitzilopuchtli,) appears to have been in commemoration of the crucifixion of Quecalcoatle. 
That the Mexican ceremony of Teoqualo was of two kinds, and was solemnized by drinking the blood, as well as by 
eating the flesh of Quecalcoatle, may be inferred from the fourth and seventy-fourth pages of the Borgian MS.; in 
the former of which paintings the four disciples of Quecalcoatle, mentioned by Torquemada at page 261 of the sixth 
volume of the present work, may perhaps be recognised in the act of drinking his blood: nor is it less surprising that - 
the Mexicans should have named the flesh of Quecalcoatle, eaten under the similitude of bread, toyoliatlaquatl, which 
name, compounded of to ‘ our,’ yolot/ ‘a heart,’ (metaphorically signifying Ui/e,) atl ‘ water, and ¢lagualli.‘ food, 
literally signifies the food of our lives; and wonderfully agrees with the appellation of bread of life, which Christ 
himself gives to his body received in the sacrament, in the following passage of the sixth chapter of the Gospel of 
Saint John: “ Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me hath everlasting life. I am that bread of life. 
Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead. This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, 

* This doctrine of the Roman Catholic church is severely reprobated in the Thirty-nine Articles, under the head of that which treats of 
the one oblation of Christ finished upon the cross, the entire of which article we shall here take the liberty of transcribing: “ The offering 
of Christ once made is that perfect redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both original and actual, 
and there is none other satisfaction for sin but that alone. Wherefore the sacrifices of masses, in the which it was commonly said that 
the priest did offer Christ for the quick and the dead to have remission of pain or guilt, were blasphemous fables and dangerous deceits.” 
When it is recollected that blasphemy is a sin which is never to be forgiven, and that there must be blasphemers where there are blas- 
phemous fables, the language of this article will appear to every unprejudiced person rather objectionable, and calculated to wound 
the consciences of weaker brethren : neither is it faultless in grammatical construction, since the substitution of were for are in the con- 
cluding paragraph would seem to imply that the celebration of masses was a thing over, and not still going on, if indeed we have not here 
a grammatical subterfuge rather than a grammatical error. At the same time, the entire tone of the thirty-first Article will create surprise 
in all who have perused the nineteenth and the twenty-first Articles, the former of which speaks so confidently of the errors of the 
Churches of Jerusalem, Alexandria, Antioch, and Rome, that any one of those Churches might, almost in self-defence, demand whether 

the Church of England was alone infallible. 

48 NOTES. 

that a man may eat thereof, and not die. Iam the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of 
this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the 
world. The Jews therefore strove among themselves, saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat? Then 
Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, 1 say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood*, 
ye have no life in you. Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up 
at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh 
iny blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him. ‘As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that 
eateth me, even he shall live by me. This is that bread which came down from heaven: not as your fathers did eat 
manna, and are dead: he that eateth of this bread shall live for ever.” . It is unnecessary to attempt to explain the 
causes which. might have led to the abuse of the sacrament amongst the Mexicans and the Peruvians; since it is 
sufficient to observe that Saint Paul reprobates the Corinthians for eating and drinking their own damnation, in 
allusion to their profanation of that solemn rite; and the early Christian authors accuse the Gnostics of the most 
shocking practices connected with the celebration of its mysteries,—even of killing infants for the sake of making a 
superstitious use of their blood. But if professed Christians in the apostolic age, and Christian heretics in the 
primitive ages of the church, living in the bosom of Christianity, and in fraternity with other orthodox Christians, 
could have been guilty of these abominations,—where is the difficulty in supposing that time and a train of conco- 
mitant causes might have induced the ignorant and superstitious Mexicans to run into excesses still more atrocious? 
or if that were impossible, to become the blind pupils of the Gnostics and the Jews, who are accused of every re- 
volting rite in the celebration both of the Passover and the Communion? Leaving however to others the investiga- 
tion of a mystery which time will perhaps reveal, we shall conclude by citing a passage from Balboa’s Miscellanea 
Antarctica, in which that learned author affirms that the traditions of the Peruvians recorded a great earthquake, an 
eclipse of the sun, and the graves to have been opened, at a period which would nearly correspond with that of the 
Crucifixion. This passage we transcribe at greater length, because the testimony of Balboa, (who was one of the 
earliest writers on the ancient history of Peru,) as to the probability of the Gospel having been preached in the 
earliest ages nearly throughout the continent of America, is highly important, and corroborates the account of many 
later historians: “ Creyeron casi todos los Indios la immortalidad de el anima, mas no alcanzaron ni pudieron 
imaginar que havia de haber wniversal resurreccion de la carne{; antes estavan persuadidos 4 que despues de muertos 
yvan 4 lugares de pena 6 de contento, segun las obras y vivir de cada uno: aunque tampoco en esto se puede dar 
regla general, por ser tantas y tan varias, 6 desvariadas, las opiniones que para cada cosa de estas havia en cada 
provincia, y aun en cada familia, y aun en cada casa: solo es de creer que la fuerza de los lazos y engahos mas 
empecibles y dafiosos 4 las animas de estos desventurados, devieron comenzar 4 tomar mas fuerza y violencia desde 
el felice tiempo de el nacimiento del unigenito Hijo de Dios, porque el Demonio viendo rebatido y destrozado su 
poder en el mundo conocido y frequentado, se vino 4 este oculto y desviado{ entendiendo el mal entendido, estar en 

* The reply which Christ made to the Jews who strove amongst themselves about eating his flesh must have astonished them, since 
they were absolutely forbidden by the Mosaic law to taste the blood of sacrifices of atonement, although they were commanded fo eat the 
Jlesh, as we have already remarked at page 308 of the sixth volume of this work. How incomprehensible does it appear, that a question 
which was disputed in the life-time of Christ should divide the Christian world still, and that the Apostles should not have foreseen the 
controversies which might arise amongst Christians of later ages from any equivocation in the words of Christ, and have remedied the 
evil arising from it by stating their true signification, instead of leaving the matter adhuc sub judice, to verify in an unlucky sense his 
famous prediction “ I am not come to bring peace into the world, bué the sword,” of which the river Boyne, blushing with the blood of 
Erin’s sons, alas! knows too well the fatal truth. 

+ To the testimony of Garcilasso de la Vega, and of Juan de Betancos (a portion of whose inedited History of Peru is preserved in the 
library of the Escurial), in favour of the belief of the Peruvians in the resurrection of the body, as well as the immortality of the soul, may 
be added that of two Spanish historians, contemporary with Betancos, whose unpublished manuscripts are preserved in the same library, 
and who profess to have received their information from the Peruvians themselves. Without recurring in this place to the authority of 
Herrera, it may be proper to observe that the celebrated Garcia was so fully persuaded of the belief of the Peruvians in this essential 
article of the Christian faith that in the eighth chapter of the sixth book of his rare treatise, entitled “ Predicacion del Evangelio en el 
Nuevo Mundo”, he employs it as a strong argument to prove that the Gospel had been preached in America at a period antecedent to 
the age of Columbus.—We shall reserve for a subsequent note extracts from the works of the Spanish historians above alluded to, in 
further corroboration of that important fact. 

{ The theory here maintained by Balboa and many other writers in the age in which he lived, has contributed more than any other 

NOTES. 4Q 

estas partes mas seguro y encastillado, y saliole vana su esperanza, segun lo que despues sucedio. Generalmente 
(entre las naciones de algun entendimiento en estas Yndias) se tiene noticia por tradicion de padres & hyos, que un dia 
subito y repentinamente temblé la tierra, y el Sol, fuera de la orden de sus cursos, se escurecio, y las piedras se quebraron 
hiriendose unas con otras, y muchos sepulcros de hombres muertos de mucho tiempo atras se vieron abiertos, y en todo 
genero de animales se conocid gran turbacion y espanto, y por congeturas y indicios se viene & sacar haver sido aquel, dia 
santisimo de la pasion y muerte de nuestro Redentor Christo: porque tambien dicen, que 4 pocos afos despues fueron 
vistos en las partes superiores de este Piru ciertos varones de aspecto y presencia venerable, barba larga*, vestido 
onesto, trato y conversacion santisima, informadores de nova manera de vivir, y predicadores de doctrina de que nada 
se acuerdan: de esto se tuvo y diene en la parte dicha muy clara y comun noticia, y se ven y muestran sus efigies y 
figuras en alounas piedras, esculpidas y entalladas de bulto {: y verdaderamente, no solo en este Piru se tiene noticia 
de lo tal, mas en muchas muy diferentes provincias se dize de generacion en generacion haverse visto hombres seme- 
jantes. Es muy comun en este Piru, que en la provincia de el Cuzco, en el pueblo de Cacha, vieron y conversaron 

cause to throw the veil of oblivion over the history of the New World; since, when once it became a received opinion that the Devil, 
from feelings of envy and rivalry towards God, felt a pleasure in counterfeiting in the New World and amongst the Indians the laws and 
ceremonies of the Jews, the Spanish clergy must have found it an easy task to persuade the laity to cooperate with them in destroying 
the most interesting monuments of antiquity; and if coercion had been necessary, the Inquisition would no doubt have lent its powerful 
aid to further the object of such mistaken zeal. 

* The copper complexion and smooth skins of the Indians have sometimes been appealed to in proof of the population of America 
having received little or no admixture of foreign blood until the Spaniards visited their shores. Oviedo however, in the twenty-eighth 
chapter of the twenty-ninth book of his General History of the Indies, denies that the Indians of Cueva and of many other provinces 
of the Indies were beardless, observing, in reference to a previous remark, “tienen tantos pelos como los cristianos 6 qualquiera otra 
nacion.” 

‘++ Garcia, in the tenth chapter of the fifth book of his treatise concerning the preaching of the Gospel in the New World, gives the fol- 
lowing account of the existence of similar sculptured monuments in New Spain. “Quando passando yo por Nueva-Espafia, yva inqui- 
riendo y preguntando 4 los religiosos que doctrinavan los Indios, si avian oydo 4 ellos dezir y contar algunas cosas que tocassen 4 la 
predicacion del evangelio en los siglos passados; si me referian algo que fuesse 4 mi proposito de lo que buscava para este ‘T'ratado, no 
me contentava con oyrlo, ni lo queria escrivir de mi mano: y assi les pedia lo escriviessen de la suya (que assi lo hize en la relacien que 
arriba escrivimos del vicario de la Vera Cruz) para que se entienda que no contamos patrafias inventadas de nuestro ingenio, sino lo que 
otros me contaron y refirieron, cuyos memoriales guardo y tengo en mi poder, ya que no son conocidos los autores, para quien dudare 
dello. Estando pues yo en un convento de mi orden, que esta en Nexapa, villa y pueblo pequefio de Espafioles, diez y ocho 6 veinte 
leguas de Tehuantepec, yendo de Mexico, me dio por escrito un religioso llamado Fr. Diego de Azebedo, que despues fue Provincial de 
aquella provincia, algunas cosas bien notables que ay en aquella tierra. Entre ellas refiere una que haze 4 nuestro proposito, tratando 
de la disposicion y temple de la tierra de Tehuantepec, en la forma siguiente. Alli hazia el Norte, ay una cosa mysteriosa, la qual he 
visto yo y otros muchos religiosos y seglares y los Indios todos: y es, que en una pefia grande, alta, que la bafia el sol en su nacimiento 
estA una imagen, que al vivo parece de frayle Dominico, hecha por la naturaleza, de tiempo immemorable, con su corona, y 4 sus pies 
esté una India con un pafio grande como mantellina, que se esta confessando; é el qual ofrecian los Indios sacrificios. Y quando los 
primeros religiosos persuadieron la confession, dixeron como aquella figura significava lo que les persuadian. Hasta aqui la relacion 
del Padre Azebedo.” Garcia proceeds to say, that other persons who had seen the same image informed him that it was commonly called 
by the people in the vicinity Fray Pefia, 1. e. ‘ the stone friar’; and that for his part he could not persuade himself that it was the work 
either of Nature or of the Devil, but that he believed it to be the figure of some ancient preacher of the Gospel, who had left behind him 
that sign to show that monks of the order of Saint Dominic were destined to receive the confessions of the Indians, as in due course of 
time had come to pass. He afterwards observes, that Father Azebedo bore testimony to another remarkable fact, declaring to him that on 
the summit of Cenpoaltepec, (a mountain situated in the neighbourhood of Tehuantepec, and the highest in all New Spain,) there were 
two stones lying opposite to each other, with the impression of a footstep visible upon each, which according to Indian tradition recorded 
a battle that took place between God and the Devil upon the summit of that mountain. This tradition wonderfully assimilates itself to 
what is said in the ninth verse of the General Epistle of Saint Jude, of the Devil and the archangel Michael contending about the body of 
Moses, the scene of whose contention must have been the summit of a mountain; since Moses is said in the thirty-fourth chapter of 
Deuteronomy to have died upon the top of Mount Pisgah, and to have been buried by God himself in a valley of Moab. The cause of 
the quarrel, which it must be confessed reminds one a little of the tales of the Genii, probably originated in the Devil’s wish to remove the 
body of Moses, notwithstanding the prohibition of the archangel, which mysterious piece of sacred history,—attested by Saint Jude, and 
no doubt current in his day among the traditions of his countrymen, although not noticed in the Old Testament,—might have induced the 
Jews who colonized America to place stones on the summit of Cenpoaltepec, as a memorial of the contest which the Devil waged for the 
body of Moses.—Garcia closes the above-mentioned chapter with the following brief notice of some curious buildings existing in his time 
in the vicinity of the town of Occocingo in the province of Chiapa: “ Conto me otro religioso en Nueva-Espafia, que en los Cendales, 
provincia de Chiapa, junto 4 un pueblo que se llama Occocingo, veynte y dos 6 veynte y tres leguas de Chiapa de los Espafioles, 

VOL. VIII. (0) 

50 NOTES. 

un hombre santo como los que aqui se tratan; y su figura se vio muchos ahos esculpida en una piedra; por la qual 
figura se colegia ser apostol 6 discipulo de ellos; y porque reprendia vicios lo quisieron matar los Yndios, y en su 
defensa bajé fuego de el cielo y quemé mucha gente, y las piedras oy dia se muestran quemadas; y él se desaparecio, 
y ha quedado entre los Yndios una opinion, que la tierra que este piso da mejor el fruto que la demas. Diré lo que 
me conto un soldado de los que con Lope de Aguirre sulcaron el Marafton, que haviendose apartado de las vegas de 
el rio, hallaron una poblazion no pequefia, y en medio de ella havia una casa estremada y diferenciada de las demas 
de el pueblo, dentro de la qual, en la pared frontera, vieron hecha de barro una manera de pulpito 6 catedra, y en é] 
se mostrava de el pecho para arriba la figura de un hombre asi mismo de barro 6 de piedra, con barba larga, y vestido 
estrangero, y en una mano un libro & manera de breviario, y no pudieron entender de los naturales de la tierra lo que 
tal espectaculo significava, porque ni el tiempo les dio lugar para ello, ni tampoco ponian en aquella coyuntura sus 
cuydados en inquirir curiosidades. En la provincia de Caucacoto termino de la ciudad de Quito, me fue asi 
mostrado por Yndios viejos y antiguos, cierto cerrillo donde en tiempo antiguo se recogio otro varon santo huyendo 
la furia popular de los barbaros contra el amotinados, y que de alli se desparecio, y nunca mas fué visto. Los natu- 
rales de las provincias de el Brasil (tierra firme y continuada con nuestras Yndias) dicen y afirman hayer visto en sus 
tierras hombres como los que havemos dicho, y muestran en unas vivas pefias las sefiales y estampas de sus pies. 
Pedro Martyr de Anglier en su Decada, dice que en la provincia de Yucatan, aparecio y vieron los naturales anti- 
guos un varon santo y muy hermoso, el qual les ensefio 4 adorar y reverenciar la santa vera cruz. Tienese por 
verdadera noticia que los de el Obispado de Chiapa en la Nueva-Espafia tuvieron rastro y noticia de el misterio de 
la Santisima Trinidad, y semejantes cosas se cuentan y tienen por verdaderas en otras muchas provincias de estas 
nuestras Yndias, asi en islas como en tierra firme de ellas: y verdaderamente (hablando con el mismo recato y salva 
que lo demas) diria yo (y no creo me engaiio) que hasta el tiempo de la predicacion evangelica, devio ser tierra con- 
tinuada esta de las Yndias nuestras con la Austral, y que despues de aquellos tiempos aca se prorumpio, y sucedio 
lo que dejamos tratado en el capitulo 15 de la Segunda Parte: y como tierra conjunta de la que no estava muy 
lejana de el reyno de Narsinga* devia ser frequentada y visitada algunas vezes de gentes que de alla venian, y de 
alli encendidos con fuego de el Espiritu Santo algunos discipulos de el glorioso Santo Tome, que en aquel reyno 
predicava la ley evangelica, devieron pasar de estas partes, y derramarse por ellas predicando y ensefando 4 las 
gentes saludable doctrina que de su sagrado maestro aprendieron, y como no estavan sus animas dispuestas para 
recibir tan admirable informacion, 6 nuestro Dios milagrosamente los redujo y volvio 4 la tierra donde mas aprove- 
chasen, 6 los recibio en su gloria con la corona aurea de el santo martirio: piadosamente se puede creer lo dicho, y 
las muestras y vestigios que en la tierra vemos, nos induzen 4 ello sin dar lugar la falta de escrituras 4 mas larga 
especulacion.” Miscellanea Antarctica, cap. 6.—We must here observe, in anticipating an objection which may 
perhaps be made to the foregoing account,—viz. that if the facts stated by Balboa were true, they would have 
been related by many other Spanish historians,—that they are not without the most respectable testimony; and that if 
their corroboration be not complete, it must be attributed to the causes which Garcilaso de la Vega complains of, 
and which he characterizes as ¢yrannous in the following passage of the first book of his History of Peru, in which 
he records the belief of the Peruvians in the resurrection of the body, of which it would appear the Jesuits Vazquez 
de Padilla and Geronimo de Prado were extremely tenacious: ‘‘ Tuvieron los Incas Amautas, que el hombre era 
compuesto de cuerpo, y anima, y que el anima era espiritu immortal, y que el cuerpo era hecho de tierra, porque le 

ay unos edificios antiguos, y en ellos figuras de hombres de grande estatura, armados de la misma piedra, otros con almaticas, y otros con 
mitras. No saben dar mas razon los Indios de que aquellas figuras eran de otra gente de diferente nacion que la suya.” 

* It may be proper to remark, that the kingdom of Narsinga was a name given by the Spaniards to Bengal and some of the adjoining 
provinces of Hindostan. Balboa intimates in the preceding passage his belief in the existence of a great southern continent, which 
Ortelius does not scruple to lay down in his map of the Pacific Ocean, naming it “Terra Australis sive Magellanica incognita,” and 
making it extend from the Straits of Magellan to the confines of the East Indies. On the assumption that such a continent existed in 
the age of St. Thomas, there would have been nothing absurd in Balboa’s supposition that the Apostle might have proceeded by that 
route to the East Indies, there to preach the Gospel,—a fact which it was a matter of religion in that age to believe; or that he might 
have returned homewards in the same direction. Balboa, in citing the fifteenth chapter of the second part of his Miscellanea 
Antarctica, would seem to allude to Indian traditions of a large island or continent which once adjoined America having been submerged 
in the ocean. It would have been a curious coincidence if the Indians of Peru, as well as the Egyptian priests of Sais, had retained a 
tradition of the Atlantic island. 

ww! 

NOTES. bt 

velan convertirse en ella, y assi le llamavan Allpacamasca, que quiere decir, tierra animada; y para diferenciarle de 
los brutos, le llaman runa, que es hombre de entendimiento y razon, y 4 los brutos en comun dicen J/ama, que 
quiere decir, bestia. Dieronles lo que Ilaman anima vegetativa y sensitiva; porque las veian crescer y sentir ; pero 
no la racional. Creian, que avia otra vida despues desta, con pena para los malos, y descanso para los buenos. 
Dividian el universo en tres mundos, Ilaman al Cielo, Hanan Pacha, que quiere decir, mundo alto; donde decian, 
que iban los buenos 4 ser premiados de sus virtudes: llamavan Hurin Pacha 4 este mundo de la generacion y cor- 
rupcion, que quiere decir, mundo bao: llamaran Vcu Pacha al centro de la tierra, que quiere decir, mundo inferior 
de alla abaj6, donde decian que iban 4 parar los malos; y para declararlo mas, le davan otro nombre, que es Zupaypa 
Huacin, que quiere decir, casa del Demonio. No entendian que la otra vida era espiritual, sino corporal, como esta 
misma. Decian, que el descanso del mundo alto, era vivir una vida quieta, libre de los trabajos, y pesadumbres, que 
en esta se pasan. Y por el contrario tenian, que la vida del mundo inferior, que llamamos infierno, era llena de todas 
las enfermedades y dolores, pesadumbres, y trabajos, que aca se padescen, sin descanso ni contento alguno. De 
manera, que esta misma vida presente dividian en dos partes: davan todo el regalo, descanso, y contento della, 4 los 
que avian sido buenos, y las penas, y trabajos 4 los que avian sido malos. No nombravan los deleytes carnales, ni 
otros vicios entre los gozos de la otra vida, sino la quietud del animo, sin cuydados, y el descanso del cuerpo, sin los 
trabajos corporales. Tuvieron assimismo los Incas /a resurreccion universal, no para gloria, ni pena, sino para la 
misma vida temporal, que no levantaron el entendimiento 4 mas que esta vida presente: tenian grandisimo cuidado 
de poner en cobro los cabellos y ufias, que se cortavan y tresquilavan 6 arraneavan con el peyne: ponianlos en los 
agujeros 6 resquicios de las paredes; y si por tiempo se caian, qualquiera otro Indio que los veia, los alcava, y ponia 
a recaudo. Muchas veces (por ver lo que decian) pregunté a diversos Indios, y en diversos tiempos, para que hacian 
aquello, y todos me respondian unas mismas palabras, diciendo: sabete que todos los que hemos nascidos hemos de 
volver 4 vivir en el mundo (no tuvieron verbo para decir resuscitar) y las animas se han de levantar de las sepulturas 
con todo lo que fue de sus cuerpos; y porque las nuestras no se detengan buscando sus cabellos y ufias (que ha de 
aver aquel dia gran bullicio y mucha priesa) se las ponemos aqui juntas, para que se levanten mas ayna; y aun si 
fuera posible, aviamos de escupir siempre en un lugar. Francisco Lopez de Gomara, capitulo ciento y veinte y 
cinco, hablando de los entierros, que 4 los reyes, y 4 los grandes sefiores hacian en el Peru, dice estas palabras, que 
son sacadas 4 la letra: Quando Espafioles abrian estas sepulturas, y desparcian los huesos, les rogavan los Indios, 
que no lo hiciesen, porque juntos estuviesen al resuscitar: ca bien creen la resurreccion de los cuerpos, y la immor- 
talidad de las almas, &c. Pruebase claro lo que vamos diciendo; pues este autor con escrivir en Espafia, sin aver 
ido 4 Indias, aleango la misma relacion. El Contador Agustin de Zarate, libro primero, capitulo doce, dice en esto 
casi las mismas palabras de Gomara; y Pedro de Ciega, capitulo sesenta y dos dice: que aquellos Indios tuvieron la 
immortalidad del anima y la resurreccion de los cuerpos. Estas autoridades, y la de Gomara hallé leyendo estos 
autores, despues de aver escrito yo lo que en este particular tuvieron mis parientes en su gentilidad; holgué muy 
mucho con ellas, porque cosa tan agena de gentiles como la resurreccion parescia invencion mia, no aviendola escrito 
algun Espafiol. Y certifico, que las hallé despues de averla yo escrito; porque se crea que en ninguna cosa destas 
sigo 4 los Espafioles, sino que quando las hallo huelgo de alegarlos en confirmacion de lo que vi 4 los mios de su 
antigua tradicion. Lo mismo me acaescio en la Jey que avia contra los sacrilegos, y adulteros con las mugeres del 
Inca 6 del Sol (que adelante veremos) que despues de averla yo escrito, la hallé acaso, leyendo la Historia del Con- 
tador General Agustin de Zarate, con que recibi mucho contento, por alegar 4 un caso tan grave un historiador 
Espafiol. Como, 6 por qual tradicion tuviesen los Incas la resurreccion de los cuerpos, siendo articulo de Fe no lo 
sé, ni es de un soldado como yo inguirirlo, ni creo que se pueda averiguar con certidumbre, hasta que el sumo Dios 
sea servido manifestarlo, solo puedo afirmar con verdad, que lo tenian. Toda este cuenta escrivi en nuestra Historia 
de la Florida, sacandola de su lugar, por obedecer & los VV. P P. MM. de la Santa Compaiiia de Jesus, Miguel 
Vasquez de Padilla natural de Sevilla, y Geronimo de Prado natural de Ubeda, que me lo mandaron assi, y de alli 
lo quité aunque tarde, por ciertas causas tyranicas, aora lo buelvo 4 poner en su puesto, porque no falte del edificio 
piedra tan principal; y assi vamos poniendo otras, como se fueron ofreciendo, que no es posible contar de una vez 
las ninerias 6 burlerias, que aquellos Indios tuvieron, que una dellas fue tener que el alma salia del cuerpo mientras 
el dormia ; porque decian, que ella no podia dormir, y que lo que veia por el mundo, eran las cosas que decimos aver 
sofiado. Por esta vana creencia miravan tanto en los suefios, y los interpretavan, diciendo que eran agitieros y pro- 

5Q NOTES. 

nosticos, para conforme 4 ellos temer mucho mal 6 esperar mucho bien.”-—Comentarios Reales de los Incas, lib. 1. 
cap. vil.* 

The following is an extract from the eighth chapter of the sixth book of Garcia’s treatise, entitled “Predicacion 
del Evangelio en el Nuevo Mundo viviendo los Apostolos,” which confirms the testimony of Garcilaso de la Vega 
respecting the belief of the Peruvians in the resurrection of the body and the immortality of the soul}, and renders 
more conclusive what is said on the same subject at page 413 of the sixth volume of the present work. “ Betancos 
en la enarracion que hizo de los Incas, por mandado de Don Antonio de Mendoza, virrey del Piru, refiriendo la 
victoria que avia tenido Pachacutec Inca con los Indios Collas, y el cuydado que tuvieron de depositar los cuerpos 
de los amigos muertos en aquella batalla, dize las palabras siguientes, poniendo en ellas las que los Indios le dixeron 
en su propia lengua, porque estos Indios dizen desta manera: Cay PACHA TUCUPTIN HATARISSUN LLAPALLANCHIC 
RUNACUNA CAUZARISPA AYCHANTIM IMANANCUNA CANCHIC: QUIERE DEZIR: ACABADO ESTE MUNDO, NOS AVEMOS 
DE LEVANTAR TODAS LAS GENTES CON VIDA NUEVA, ¥Y CON ESTA MISMA CARNE como 4oRA somos: “ Betancos, 
in the account which he wrote of the Incas, by the command of Don Antonio de Mendoza the viceroy of Peru, nar- 
rating the victory which Pachacutec Inga obtained over the Collas, and the care which they took to bury the bodies 
of their friends who were killed in that battle, employs the following terms, repeating the very words which the 
Indians addressed to him in their language; for those Indians said: ‘Cay pacha tucuptin hatarissun llapallanchic 
runacuna cauzarispa aychantim imanancuna canchic: quiere dezir: acabado este mundo, nos avemos de levantar 
todas las gentes con vida nueva, y con esta misma carne como aora somos ;” which signifies “at the end of the world 
we all of us have to rise again with new life, and with the self-same flesh as we now have.” 

Note XXXII. 

Tue following is a literal translation of the greater portion of the twenty-first chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s 
History of New Spain; and it would be very desirable if some one who had leisure for the task would translate the 
entire of that book, and illustrate it with parallel passages taken from the Old Testament, that is to say with such as 
would be calculated to prove the similarity in taste, manners, morals, and religious and philosophical opinions, which 
prevailed between the Jews and the Mexicans. 

“My dear Son, attend {to the admonitions which I address to you, and lay them up in your heart, for they have been 
bequeathed to us by our ancestors, the old of both sexes, wise and experienced persons who once lived in this world, 
who charged and exhorted us to keep them, like gold preserved within a coffer or wrapped up in a garment; for counsels 
directing us how to live, are indeed gems brilliant to behold and of polished lustre, perfect and without a flaw. Those 
who lived a life of perfection in this world uttered them, and those who conform to them are indeed like precious chal- 
chiutles and costly sapphires{ in the eyes of our Lord; they resemble broad and rich and waving plumes, and are 
rightly named the pure in heart. Reflect, my Son, on what the old have declared to us, that children and young men|| 
and maidens are highly pleasing unto God. The Lord our God, who is everywhere, delights in them and accounts 

* The History of the Discovery and Conquest of the Provinces of Peru, by Zarate, (to which Garcilaso here refers,) was first printed 
at Antwerp in the year 1551, and afterwards at Seville in 1577: in the latter edition no mention is made in the twelfth chapter of the 
first book of the belief of the Peruvians in the resurrection of the body ; but the intimation in the title page “aviendose visto y examinado 
por los Sefiores del Supremo Consejo de Castilla,” might lead one to suspect an intentional omission of the passage in question. 

++ The difference between the tenets of Christians and the disciples of Socrates, Plato and Pythagoras on this important point, consisted 
in the former teaching the immortality of the body as well as that of the soul; whilst the latter taught that of the soul alone, in which 
component part of man they believed all true personal identity to reside. 

{ < Attend’, “hearken’, ‘incline thine ear’, were words which the Hebrew orators frequently employed either when commencing their 
orations to the people, or in their exhortations to their children in their private dwellings. 

§ The chalchiutle was a sort of green jasper highly prized by the ancient Mexicans. It deserves to be remarked, that the jasper and 
the sapphire were stones on which the Jews set extreme value, and they are frequently recurred to in the Old Testament for a simile. 

|| That this was a Jewish notion is evident, as well from what is said in the New Testament of little children and their angels being 
ever present before God, as from the denunciation of Isaiah in the seventeenth verse of the ninth chapter of his Prophecies against the 
Jews, “ Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men,” which implies the previous affirmative of the proposition. 

NOTES. 53 

them his friends; and for this reason devout old men, who consider it a duty frequently to do penance and to fast, and 
who offer incense to the gods, esteem highly boys and girls who pray and get up at midnight from their early sleep, 
and stripping off their garments they sprinkle water upon them, and cause them to sweep and to offer incense before 
the gods, and to wash their mouths*, whose prayers, homage, tears, sorrow, and sighs, they say, are heard and accept- 
able to God, because their hearts are pure and undefiled by sin, pure and spotless like a precious chalchiutle or a 
sapphire. They say that it is for their sake that God preserves the world, and that they are our intercessors with God. 
There is another class of persons who are pleasing both to God and man7, and those are pious priests, who live a life 
of chastity, whose hearts are upright, pure and spotless, washed from every defilement and white as snow, whose lives 

* This was a refinement on the Hebrew custom of washing the feet of those to whom the Jews wished to show particular marks of vene- 
ration and respect. Thus, in the fourth verse of the eighteenth chapter of Genesis, the angels are entreated by Abraham to allow water to be 
fetched to wash their feet; and in the second verse of the nineteenth chapter of the same book Lot requests his angelic visitors to wash their 
feet. Mary, likewise, is recorded in the third verse of the twelfth chapter of Saint John to have anointed the feet of Christ, and to have 
afterwards wiped them with her hair; although from the reply of Jesus to Judas Iscariot, in the seventh verse of the same chapter, it 
would appear that while to wash the feet was a mark of honour which the Jews showed to the living, to anoint them was one which they 
paid to the dead. It has been observed, in the note subjoined to page 389 of the sixth volume of this work, that Javatorio de pies (the wash- 
ing of feet,) was the name which the Mexicans gave to one of their festivals: and from that name, as well as from other grounds of assump- 
tion no less strong, the existence of the above rite amongst them may be inferred. While the washing of hands before meals,—about which 
the Pharisees and all the Jews (as we are informed in the third verse of the seventh chapter of Saint Mark) were so scrupulous, that they 
were scandalized at seeing the Disciples eat bread with unwashed hands,—was customary among the ancient Mexicans, as we learn from 
the following passage of the twenty-second chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, in which a parent admonishing 
his son desires him neither to sit down to a meal nor to wash his hands before others, instilling in this manner into his mind precepts of 
humility : “Al principio de la comida lavar4s las manos y la boca, y donde te juntares con otro 4 comer no te sientes luego, mas antes 
tomards el agua y la wicara, paraque se laven (os otros, y echarles has agua 4 manos, y despues de haber comido haras lo mismo, y daras, 
agua 4 manos @ todos.” It appears from this passage that vessels of water were placed by the ancient Mexicans on their tables, for the 
express purpose of washing their hands before meals; and that custom is incidentally mentioned in the third chapter of the ninth book 
of the same author’s History. Ablutions among the ancient Jews were religiously observed from respect to traditions, although nowhere 
enjoined by Moses in the Pentateuch, except in the case of unclean persons and the priests, who were commanded in the nineteenth verse 
of the thirtieth chapter of Exodus to wash their hands and feet in the brazen laver, which stood between the tabernacle of the congre- 
gation and the altar, when they went into the tabernacle of the congregation’. As regards the Mexican and Hebrew custom of washing 
the feet of persons judged worthy of such a mark of respect, or of presenting them with water for that purpose, we must observe that 
Christ is recorded in the thirteenth chapter of the Gospel of Saint John to have washed his disciples’ feet; and the fourth verse of that 
chapter,—which in the original Greek is "Evyesgeras @x tou Seimvou, xas TiOos Tee imorice nets AnBwv Aevrioy, SseCwoev ExvToy, which is translated 
in English «* He riseth from supper, and laid aside his garments, and took a towel and girded himself,”—is very remarkable, no less on 
account of the strange signification which is there assigned to the word Azvrioy, which involves the necessity of supposing that Christ did 
a very unaccountable act, than because, regard being paid to the other and preferable sense in which Hesychius understands this same 
word, what is said, at page 298 of the sixth volume, of the resemblance which the apparel of the Mexicans bore to that of the Jews, re- 
ceives the fullest confirmation. Stephanus notices, in the following passage of his Greek Thesaurus, Hesychius’s definition of the word 
devrioy, which he rejects on grounds that many will judge insufficient ; since, admitting that Aevrioy is derived from the Latin lintewm, there 
is no reason why the Romans should not have given that name to the article of dress which the Jews girded round their loins, or that the 
Latin word linteum should not, like xyyoog and many others which occur in the New Testament, have been adopted into the Greek lan- 
guage by the Evangelists, who, although they possessed the gift of tongues, it cannot be denied, wrote Greek quite in a Latin idiom: 
<< Aeyrioy, Hesychius esse dicit mepifwpc ieparinov, cinctum sacerdotalem. Meminerunt hujus vocabuli Suidas quoque et Etymologicus ; 
sed neuter exponens: hic a verbo Asiiveiy derivat, quod sit xafasgew, ac per syncopen dictum vult quasi Asimvriov. Sed vana hac etymo- 
logia: nam vox est 4 Gracis recentioribus tantum usurpata, et mutuata ex Latino linteum. Joan. Evang. cap. 13. AxBaw Aevtioy, diefarev 
éavroy. Gregorius Naziansenus, Azvri@ Siafwyyuras, linteo preecingitur.” If we suppose with Hesychius that Aevrioy, in the passage of the 
thirteenth chapter of Saint John above referred to, means ‘a girdle,’ and that it exactly resembled in the manner in which it was fastened 
on the person the maatle worn by the Mexicans, the two ends of which hung down before rather lower than the knee,—not only do we 
perceive how easily such an article of dress might have been used as a towel by the person wearing it, rendering the description in the 
following verse, xas fpEaro vinrew tous modus twy polnruy, xar Exmaroey Tw revTin @ iv Sistwopevoc, very intelligible. But we avoid the 
inconvenience of being forced to believe that Christ stripped himself naked in order to wash the feet of his disciples, by supposing that he 
only made a change in his apparel, resuming the girdle which from motives of convenience he might have laid aside before sitting down 

to supper. 
+ To grow in favour with God and man’ was, perhaps, a phrase familiar to the Jews. 

1 Bathing, as well as ablutions, appears to have been enjoined to Aaron by God in the fourth verse of the sixteenth chapter of Levi- 
ticus ; and Gumilla, in his Orinoco Illustrado, supposes that the Indians borrowed that rite from the Jews. 

VOL. VIII. GPs) 

5A NOTES. 

are without stain, and whose acts are free from all sinful contamination; such being their character they are fit servants 
of God; and offer up prayers and incense to him, and entreat him for the people. The king says of them, These are fit 
servants of my gods, for their lives and their example are good; and the elders of the people, who are skilled and 
learned in the books of our religion, have by word of mouth declared, that the pure in heart who are far removed from 
all filthy and sensual lusts are highly worthy of being beloved, and that those whose lives are so spent being precious 
in the eyes of heaven, the gods desire them, and strive to possess them, and call them to themselves. Those who are 
pure from all defilement and who die in war, as the old affirm, go to the Sun, who invites them to himself, that they 
may live with him in heaven, to rejoice and to gladden him, and to sing before him: these enjoy perpetual happiness 
with the Sun; they live a life of continual delight, they sip and banquet upon the nectar and ambrosial dew of flowers, 
and never do they taste of sorrow, pain, or grief, for they dwell in the house of the Sun, where is the fullness of joy: 
those who risk their lives in battle are even in this world greatly esteemed, and many covet that kind of death, and 
many envy those who so die; and this is the reason why all long for such a death, for those who so die are highly 
extolled. It is yet recorded, that a noble youth of Huexocingo, whose name was Miscoatl, died in a war with the 
Mexicans, whom they killed in battle, in whose honour was composed the hymn ‘O happy Miscoatl! well dost thou 
deserve to be celebrated in hymns; well dost thou deserve an immortal reputation in this world, and that the dancers 
should resound thy praises amidst the trumpets and the drums of Huexocingo, to gladden thee, and induce thee to 
appear to thy friends and noble kinsmen.’ There is another hymn in honour of this same youth, in which they praise 
him for his chastity and the purity and integrity of his heart: ‘O glorious youth, worthy of all praise, who madest 
a tender of thine heart to the Sun, pure as the precious crystal of the sapphire—wilt thou again bud, wilt thou again 
bloom on earth? wilt thou return to the dances, and show thyself amidst the drums and the trumpets of Huexocingo? 
wilt thou appear to the noble and the brave? may thy friends again expect to see thee? There is another description 
of persons who are likewise beloved and desired by the gods; they are those who have been drowned by some animal 
inhabiting the water, such as the avitzotl or the teponaztli, and several others; as also those who have been struck dead 
by lightning ; for the old affirm that because the gods love all such, they take them to themselves to the terrestrial 
Paradise, that they may live with the god named Tlalocatecutli (who is the god of verdure), and serve him, with uli 
and yauhtli. These, after their death, live in glory with the god named Tlalocatecutli in a place of perpetual spring, 
where are green meads and every sort of shrub, fruit, and flower. Young men and maidens likewise who die 
without having committed any sin, who die in a state of innocence, simplicity, and virginity, the old declare that 
these partake largely of the graces of our Lord, because they resemble precious stones, and because they go pure and 
spotless to the presence of their God. Listen, while I recount to you another class of persons who are happy and 
dear, whom the gods take unto themselves ;—these are children who die in their tender infancy ; they are as it were 
gems; these go not to the dread mansions of hell, but they go to the habitation of the god named Tonacatecutli, who 
lives in the gardens named Tonacaquahtitlan, where grows every kind of tree, fruit, and flower; and there they wing 
their flight like tzintzones, which are small birds of varied plumage, which flutter about sipping the juices of flowers. 
They bury children who die at such an early age, not unadvisedly, beside the granaries where they store up their 
maize and other provisions, signifying by so doing that their souls are in a place of joy and abundance, because they 
died in a state of innocence and simplicity, resembling precious gems and rich sapphires. It is fit also that you 
should know that children who are good, beautiful, and amiable, as long as they remain in a state of innocence and 
simplicity, are gems precious as the turquoise or the sapphire. Another class of persons remains to be mentioned 
who are beloved and desired by the gods, and these are men and women of virtuous dispositions and of upright lives, 
in whom all confide, whom all honour, whose conduct is irreproachable, who live at peace with all, are esteemed 
by all, and are at variance with none. And now, my dear Son, give heed to the manner in which you should live, if 
God grants you life in this world: Guard against all carnal pleasures, and desire them not; avoid all filthy things which 
can defile either the soul or the body of man, producing diseases or bodily death. The ancients have left us this 
saying,—that childhood and youth is the time when God is wont to confer his graces and his gifts, and that then he 
marks out those who are to fill the stations of kings, lords, governors, and commanders. Childhood, youth, and the 
age of simplicity, are likewise the time for meriting a good death. Consider, my Son, the words which I address to 
you; know that this is the mode of increasing and multiplying in this world, and that God ordained, for the sake of 
progeny and increase, that one woman should be the wife of one man, and one man the husband of one woman.” 

NOTES. 55 

This latter passage implies an acquaintance on the part of the Mexicans with the Book of Genesis; a fact already 
noticed by the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus, who thence concluded that the Mexicans were descended from the 
Jews*; and the following sentence which occurs towards the conclusion of the same address, (the entire of which is 
not here translated,) unequivocally proves that the Mexicans believed that a husband and wife were one flesh, a notion 
suggested to Adam by the reflection that hzs wife had been formed out of his rib: “ Aunque es asi que es tu muger, 
y es tu cuerpo.” “ Although so it is that she is your wife, and is your body.” But if it be contended that the custom 
of polygamy amongst the Mexicans refutes the assertion here made, it will be necessary to prove that their alleged 
polygamy differed from the concubinage practised by the patriarchs: and when this has been done, it may be proper 
to inquire, whether the Mexicans might not have justified it on the precedent of the Jewish patriarchs, who married 
many wives, notwithstanding such was not the intention of God in the beginning. The apology pleaded by their 
advocates is, that they did so that the earth might be quickly peopled;—but why, if that was the case, did not 
those who lived before the Deluge, and after it until the time of Abraham, contract early marriages, instead of waiting 
till they had arrived at the extreme age which the Septuagint allots to each of them? It is true that the Hebrew 
copy of the Bible, which reckons only sixteen hundred and fifty-six years, according to Eusebius, from the fall of 
man to the Deluge, and makes Noah contemporary with Abraham,—while the Septuagint includes two thousand two 
hundred and forty-two years within the same period, prolonging the life of Noah three hundred and fifty years after 
the Deluge to the eighty-third year of Heber,—makes the marriages of all the patriarchs, with the exception of 
three, Jared, Methuselah, and Lamech, earlier by a century. But it is also true that Eusebius prefers the authority of 
the Septuagint to that of the Hebrew Bible, declaring in the following passage that the Hebrew Scriptures had been 
corrupted by the Jews, and that from the age of the Apostles to his own the Church throughout the whole world adhered 
to the Septuagint version alone. “Eovt Se kat adXwe tay “ATOTIIAN ovvndew rwv map. *Tovdatorc avtiypapwy, amo Tov 
T PlakovT aeT Ele avaypabat TOUG Tpo TOU “ABpaap TeTaLooTompevous’ OmoTE ol eta TOV “ABpaan istopovyrat mpeourepot TWV 
r erway emt thy maWorouay éAbew. Tlavrayobev rovyapow rng Twv o éppnverac éx madatac, we éouev, Kat adiactpoov “EBpawy 
ypapne peraBeBrAnoBa OUVLOTAMEVIC, ELKOTWG TavTy NmELG keyonucla Kata THY Tapovoay Xpovoypaduay® ore padwora Kat n Ka 
oAne TG olKoumEevyG NrAwpevn Xptiorov éxkAnowa TAUTY MOVY TPOTEXEL, TWY TOU ZLwTnpoG jewy amooroAwy TE Kal pabnrwv apynbev 
avry ypnoOa wapadedoxorwy. It must therefore have been Selden’s partiality for the Oriental languages and Hebrew 
literature, that induced him so often to introduce the phrase ‘ Hebraica veritas,’ as opposed to ‘Seniorum interpretatio,’ 
in his treatise De Diis Syris, and to speak with such contempt of the history of Bel and the Dragon; which if a 
fiction, as he supposes it to be, though forming in the Septuagint an integral portion of the Book of Daniel, will at 
least prove two things; first, that the philosopher Porphyry was not so impious as some of the early Fathers pre- 
tended, in feeling doubts about the authority of a book which had been so interpolated ; and, secondly, that if dragons 
had not a real, they had an ideal existence in the minds of the Jews, in the same manner as they had amongst the 
Mexicans, whose paintings place that matter beyond the reach of doubt. We shall observe, in conclusion to this note, 
that Eusebius supposes that the Jews corrupted the chronology of the Hebrew Scriptures, by cutting off a century 
from the ages of the patriarchs before they married, for the sake of encouraging early marriages amongst themselves 
(émrpory tayvyautac): but it is more probable that they did so, to make the inconsistency less apparent, of their 
defending the polygamy of the patriarchs on the sole plea that the earth required to be peopled, when they were 
obliged to confess at the same time that they waited centuries before they married for no possible assignable cause. 

* At page 204 of the sixth volume of this work will be found the reasons which induced the interpreter to come to this conclusion ; 
and he enumerates, among others, the offering which Mexican parents made when presenting their children shortly after their birth at the 
temple, which he likens to the purification of the mother and her son ordained in Leviticus. This curious fact, incidentally mentioned 
by the interpreter, may serve to throw some light on the subject of the forty-first plate of the third part of the Monuments of Dupaix, in 
which two figures are represented standing beside a cross; that on the left hand is probably the mother with her offering, and the more 
robust figure on the right the priest holding the child in his arms: both have something of a Jewish cast of countenance. 

56 NOTES. 

Nore XXXIII. 

Sauacun, recording in the first chapter of the eighth book of his History of New Spain the prodigies which por- 
tended the destruction of the empire of Montezuma, relates that a beam cried out of a wall. The following is the 
passage in which this curious occurrence is stated. “En su tiempo tambien acontecié una maravilla en Mexico, en 
una casa grande donde se juntaban 4 cantar y bailar ;—porque una viga grande que estaba atravesada encima de las 
paredes, canto como una persona este cantar: Veyanoquetztepole velzonutotia atlantivetztoce ; que quiere decir, Guay 
de ti mi anca, baila bien que estaras echada en el agua; lo cual acontecié cuando la fama de los Espafioles ya sonaba 
en esta tierra de Mexico.” “In Montezuma’s time, likewise, a marvellous thing occurred in Mexico, in a large 
edifice where they were accustomed to assemble in order to sing and dance ;—for a thick beam which lay across the 
walls above, sung as a man would have done, the following song: Veyanoquetztepole velzomitotia atlantivetztoce ; 
which signifies, ‘ Alas for thee, my prop, dance well, since you will be thrown into the lake’; which happened when the 
rumour of the Spaniards was noised through the land.” It is singular that Habakkuk, in the eleventh verse of the 
second chapter of his Prophecies, should have denounced this very judgment against the Jews: “ For the stone shall 
cry out of the wall*, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.” The prophecy of Habakkuk only required for 
its full accomplishment that a stone should cry out as well as a beam ; and Acosta, in the twenty-third chapter of 
the seventh book of his History of the Indies, in which he treats of the prodigies which foretold the destruction 
of the Mexican empire, informs us, that the latter prodigy also happened. “Viendose acossado destos anuncios, 
quiso aplacar la yra de sus dioses, y para esto dio en traer una piedra grandisima, para hazer sobre ella bravos 
sacrificios. Yendo @ traerla muchisima gente con sus maromas y recaudo, no pudieron moverla, aunque porfiando 
quebraron muchas maromas muy gruessas, mas como porfiassen todavia, oyeron una voz junto & la piedra, que no 
trabajassen en vano, que no podrian Ilevarla, porque ya el Seftor de lo criado no queria que se hiziessen aquellas 
cosas. Oyendo esto Motecuma, mando que alli hiziessen los sacrificios. Dizen que torné otra voz: Ya no he dicho, 
que no es la voluntad del Seftor de lo criado, que se haga esso? Paraque veays que es assi, yo me dexaré llevar un 
rato, y despues no podreys menearme. Fue assi, que un rato la movieron con facilidad, y despues no uvo remedio, 
hasta que con muchos ruegos se dex6 llevar hasta la entrada de la ciudad de Mexico donde subito se cayé en una 
acequiat, y buscandola no parecio mas, sino fue en el proprio lugar de adonde la avian traydo, que alli la tornaron 
4 hallar, de que quedaron muy confusos y espantados.” ' Another prodigy, that of the voice of a woman bewailing 
her children by night in the streets of Mexico, which is likewise mentioned by Sahagun, is thus recorded by Acosta 
in the chapter above referred to: “ A este tiempo dizen, se oyeron muchas vozes como de muger angustiada, que 
dezia unas vezes, O hijos mios que ya se ha llegado vuestra destruycion. Otras vezes dezia, O hijos mios, donde 
os llevaré, paraque no acabeys de perder.” “They say that about the same time the voice of a woman lamenting was 
frequently heard, who at times ejaculated, ‘O my children, the time of your destruction is drawing nigh’; and at others, 
‘O my children, whither shall I carry you to save you.” Sahagun affirms that this woman was the Devil: but in the 
thirty-eighth verse of the ninth chapter of the second book of Esdras, Sion, under the similitude of a woman, bewails 
the destruction of Jerusalem and the hapless lot of her children ; and the angel Uriel, in the forty-fourth verse of the 
next chapter, emphatically says to Esdras, “This woman whom thou sawest is Sion.” The Jews might have felt 
disposed to refer the prophecy of Jeremiah, appealed to by Saint Matthew in the eighteenth verse of the second 

* The prodigy of “stones crying out” is conditionally foretold in the New Testament: “TI tell you that if these should hold their 
peace, the stones would immediately cry out.” Luke, xix. 40. It is probable that the occurrence of such a prodigy was familiar, in 
expectation at least, to the minds of the Jews. 

‘++ Many lives are said to have been lost on that occasion, and the high-priest himself to have been drawn after the stone into the water. 
If this event had occurred in the idolatrous city of Jerusalem, how many persons would have been ready to ascribe to prophecy what was 
the effect of mere accident? The prophecy declared to be accomplished would probably have been that of Zechariah, contained in the 
third verse of the twelfth chapter of his Prophecies: And in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people; all that 
burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces.” ‘The other obvious signification of this passage they would have disregarded, as is 
too often the custom with modern commentators on the Prophecies. 

NOTES. 57 

chapter of his Gospel, to the threatened destruction of their State: “In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, 
and weeping, and great mourning; Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted because they were 
not.” Josephus, in the twelfth chapter of the seventh book of his History of the Jewish War, relates:many prodigies 
which preceded the destruction of Jerusalem, every one of which it may confidently be affirmed were pure fictions 
of the Jews; since, if it be true that Nature acts always in pursuance of some end, it is no less true that the Deity 
does not work miracles where there is no end to be attained; and all historians admit that no effect was produced 
either on the Jews themselves, or the Romans, by the many prodigies narrated by Josephus: on the contrary, the 
former remained hardened in their sins, and the latter continued to press the siege of the city. One of these prodi- 
gies appears even to have been adapted by the Hebrew historian to the Roman taste; since the story of a cow 
when about to be sacrificed on the altar giving birth to a lamb, would have come better from Livy than Josephus, 
prodigies of that description being more familiar to the Romans than the Jews. There is, however, another on 
which Josephus lays great stress, which is in some degree analogous to the prodigy of a woman uttering public 
lamentations in the streets of Mexico: he says that a young man of the name of Jesus, the son of Ananus, cried 
continually for seven years ‘‘ Woe to Jerusalem!” and that neither threats nor torture could make him desist from that 
ery, until towards the conclusion of the siege, mounting upon the ramparts of the city, and crying ‘“ Woe also to my- 
self!” he was killed by a stone thrown from an engine. We may here remark, that this latter prodigy seems to have 
been inserted by Josephus in his History with the view of gratifying the prejudices of his own countrymen;; since 
he appears not undesignedly to have put into the mouth of the young man a denunciation analogous to that which 
Isaiah pronounced against God’s enemies, in the following passage of the sixty-sixth chapter of his Prophecies: “A 
voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of the Lord that rendereth recompence to his enemies.” 
We may further remark, that the words dwvn am avatoAne, pwn aro dvcewc, Pwrn aro Twy Tecoapwy aveuwr, dwn em 
‘IepocoAvua,—* a voice from the East, a voice from the West, a voice from the four winds, a voice against Jerusalem,’— 
with which the anathema commenced, appear to manifest some regard on the part of the Jews for the cardinal points 
of the compass and the four winds, in which they would have resembled the Mexicans. The author of an extremely 
rare Spanish book, entitled ‘ Tratado unico y singular del Origen de los Indios Occidentales del Peru, Mexico, Santa 
Fé, y Chile, por el Doctor Don Diego Andres Rocha, Oydor de la Real Audiencia de Lima,’ draws an argument from 
the prodigies which the Mexicans declared preceded the downfall of their empire, to prove that they were descended 
from the Jews. The following is his style of reasoning upon this curious subject: “Tengo tambien observado para 
entender, que estos Americanos, principalmente los de Mexico, descienden de los diez Tribus, los prodigios que Dios 
obro con ellos, i las sefiales del cielo que tubieron, significandoles el fin de su monarchia, y que Dios los entregaba 4 

otras gentes i naciones. En Mexico, cuando entro el gran capitan Cortes, se observaron diez prodigios bien singulares, 
que les indicaba el fin de su monarchia, que podran verse en el P. Torquemada, en el lib. 2. de su Monarquia Mexi- 
cana, en el cap. 90. i entre los prodigios, uno era el oirse de noche una voz de una muger, que 4 grandes voces 
lloraba la destruccion de sus hijos Mexicanos: esto mismo sucedio con los diez Tribus antes de su destierro, como 
consta del lib. 4. de Esdras, cap. 9. al fin, donde dize, se le aparecio una muger llorando la destruccion de los Tribus, 
i luego explicando la vision en el cap. 10. num. 44. dize, que esta muger era Sion, madre de los Israelitas, ‘y de los 
Tribus que salieron luego desterrados en el cap. 13. Assi en los Hebreos como en los Americanos & su acabamiento 
llora Sion su madre: porque aunque unos i otros avian degenerado 4 idolatrias, como dize el cap. 4. del Deutero- 
nomio, num. 28. no por eso olvidaria Dios, que eran descendientes de Abraham, Isaac, y Jacob, como se da entender 
mas abajo, en el dicho cap. 4. num. 31. De los prodigios que Dios hizo con los Israelitas, como con estos Mexicanos, 
estan llenas las historias, y por agui se reconoscen ser de una estirpe, y atado lo que dize el P. Fr. Gregorio Garcia en 
el lib. 3. del Origen de los Indios, cap. 3. sec. 5. que en la jornada de los Mexicanos, quando vinieron de. tan lexas 
tierras, el Idolo, que los venia governando, hazia que del cielo lloviese pan, y que saliese agua de los pedernales, y 
otras maravillas que Dios permitia, imitando el Demonio con permiso de Dios, lo que avia hecho en el desierto con 
el pueblo Israelitico, todo lo qual prueva este autor con lo que escriven el P. Acosta y Fr. Augustin Davila.” Tratado 
del Origen de los Indios, cap. 3. sec. 1. num. 24.—Arriving at the same conclusion as the learned author just quoted, 
we may be permitted to state that we come to it bya different mode of reasoning: since he grounds his hypothesis of 
the Mexicans being descended from the Jews, on the assumption that amongst no other people did God work such 
prodigies as he did amongst the Israelites; while we, on the contrary, adopt the sentiments of that author, because 

VOL. VIII. 7 (Q) 

58 NOTES: 

never did there exist two such superstitious nations as the Jews and the Mexicans; and the same inclination for signs 
and wonders that actuated the Jews when Jerusalem was besieged by the Romans, seems to have existed amongst 
the Mexicans, and to have produced the same results, when their city was besieged by the Spaniards,—namely, 
a belief in numerous prodigies; nor did Josephus, in composing such fictitious narratives, do more than imitate the 
example of Esdras in the Apocrypha. As a further proof of the force of superstition over the minds of the Mexicans 
even when hope seemed to have abandoned them during the latter days of the siege of Mexico, we shall insert the 
following narrative, taken from the thirty-eighth chapter of the twelfth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain :— 
“The Mexicans, being pressed on every side by the enemy, resolved to divine by a sign or omen whether their 
fortune was now at an end, or whether there remained any means of escaping from the imminent peril to which they 
beheld themselves exposed. The king of Mexico accordingly, whose name was Quauhtemotzin, spoke, and addressed 
the following discourse to the principal persons of the city, who stood beside him; ‘Let us make trial of our chances 
of escaping from our present danger ; let one of the most valiant amongst us step forward, and let him attire himself 
in the arms and insignia which belonged to my father Auitzontzin.’ They immediately summoned before him a 
valiant youth named Tlapaltecatlopuchtzin, who was a native of a division of the city called Coatlan, which is now the 
parish of Saint Catharine of Tlatilulco, to whom king Quauhtemotzin thus addressed himself: ‘You see here the arms 
named Quetzalteculotl, which arms were worn by my father Auitzontzin ;—attire yourself in them, and fight against the 
enemy; perhaps you will slay some of them: let our enemies behold these arms; possibly the sight of them will 
terrify them.’ No sooner had he equipped himself in them, than he appeared something more than human to the 
beholders: they commanded four captains to march before him, two on each side of him who went forth to battle in 
the arms of Auitzontzin, in which they relied as a great omen, believing that when they beheld those arms the enemy 
would:immediately fly: they: placed in his hands also the bow and the arrow of Vitzilopuchtli, which they likewise 
carefully preserved as relics, feeling’ firmly persuaded’ that when that bow and arrow were brought forth they would 
be invincible; the barb of the arrow was of flint. When these five were ready, a Mexican lord named Cioacoatl- 
tlacotzin cried out ina loud voice; ‘O Mexicans! O Tlatiluleans! the rock and fortress of the Mexicans is Vitzilo- 
puchtli*, who shoots his arrow named Xiuhcoatl and Mamaloaztli against the foe; that very arrow you now carry 
with you, which is an omen for us all: take care that you direct it to the mark, against our enemies, and so as 
not to miss its aim. Should you by chance kill or take any prisoners with it, we shall consider it a sure prognostic 
that we shall not this time be destroyed, but that our God will vouchsafe to aid us. No sooner were these words 
pronounced, than he who wore the armour, together with the other four, advanced against the enemy. When the 
Spaniards as well as the Indians beheld them coming, a great panic seized them; it appeared to them something 
supernatural: and he who was armed with the armour named Quetzalteculotl ascended upon a terrace, and the enemy 
stopped to gaze upon him to see what he was; and when they were quite sure that he was a man and not the devil, 
they attacked him and made him retreat: Quetzalteculotl however and those who were with him rallied, and com- 
pelled them in their turn to fly, and climbed again upon the tlapanco{, where the Tlaxcaltecas had deposited their 
booty of quetzales and gold, and captured it; and then descended from the tlapanco to the ground : nor did he sustain 
any bodily injury, nor could the enemy take him prisoner. On the contrary, those who were with him took three of the 
enemy prisoners; and the contest, for that day, terminated, all returning to their respective stations: neither on the follow- 
ing day was the battle renewed.” If Jewish councils enabled the Mexicans to make the amazing resistance which they 
did to the Spaniards, and if either all or only a portion of the Mexican population were Jews, it is probable that those 
who suggested the drawing an omen from the arrow of Huitzilopuchtli bethought themselves of the following passage 
in the ninth chapter of Zechariah, and the prophecy which it contains of deliverance to the besieged Jews. “Turn 
you to the strong hold{, ye prisoners of hope: even today do I declare that I will render double unto thee; when I 
a 
* «El fundamento y fortaleza de los Mexicanos en Vitzilopuchtli esté puesta.” This passage strongly assimilates itself to the language 

of David in the second verse of the eighteenth. Psalm, whose ejaculation, “The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer,” 
would seem to refer to expressions made use of in Deut. xxxii. 4. 18. 30. 31. 

+ The Mexican name for the terrace of a house. It has elsewhere been observed that the Mexican houses had flat roofs with battle- 
ments. This style of architecture was enjoined by Moses to the Jews, indirectly, in the command which he gave them to build battlements 
to their houses, lest any one should fall from the roof and be killed, which implied that they should be built with flat terraces. 

{This is the exact meaning of ‘fundamento y fortaleza,’ which words constituted a title of the Mexican god Yao. 

NOTES. 59 

have bent Judah for me, filled the bow with Ephraim, and raised up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Greece, 
and made thee as the sword of a mighty man*. And the Lord shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth 
as the lightning: and the Lord God shall blow the trumpet, and shall go with whirlwinds of the south. The Lord 
of hosts shall defend them; and they shall devour}, and subdue with sling stones; and they shall drink, and make a 
noise as through wine; and they shall be filled like bowls, and as the corners of the altar. And the Lord their God 
shall save them in that day as the flock of his people: for they shall be as the stones of a crownt, lifted up as an ensign 
upon his land.” The arrow of the Lord is also frequently mentioned in the Old Testament: “I will make mine 
arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh,” is a threat which Moses puts in the mouth of God in the 
forty-second verse of the thirty-second chapter of Deuteronomy. And David, in the twelfth verse of the twenty-first Psalm, 
declares that the arrows of the Lord cause his enemies to retreat: “Therefore shalt thou make them turn their back when 
thou shalt make ready thine arrows upon thy strings against the face of them.” In the seventh Psalm the bow of God is 
mentioned as well as his arrows: “God judgeth the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every day: if he turn 
not, he will whet his sword ; he hath bent his bow and made it ready: he hath also prepared for him the instruments of 
death: he ordaineth his arrows against the persecutors.” It deserves to be remarked, that the Mexicans represented 
Tezcatlipoca with arrows in his right hand, and a bow and shield in his left; and they honoured him as the god of 
war, and praised him in his name Yao}, being perhaps not wholly ignorant of the injunction, “ Praise him in his name 
Yah,” which was given to the Jews in the Old Testament. The destruction of Mexico closely resembled, not only in 
the prodigies which are alleged to have then happened, but in the obstinacy of the besieged and the cruelties which 
the Spaniards exercised upon the people when the city was taken, that of Jerusalem. The sufferings likewise which 
the Mexicans underwent during the siege,—amongst which might be enumerated famine, intestine sedition, and the 
disease of the small-pox, (then for the first time known in New Spain,) were of the most dreadful description. And it 
would be very difficult to prove that the Jews endured greater calamities from the Romans, than the Mexicans from 
the Spaniards; although the latter did not eat the dead bodies of their countrymen, much less those of their children 
and their parents, as the former are accused of having done by the Prophets; some of their Rabbis not scrupling ¢o 
palhate such an atrocity by ascribing it to the judgments pronounced by God against their countrymen, rather than to 
the wilful depravity of a people whom sacrifices of animals had at last inured to human sacrifices :—as if it were not 
the worst description of blasphemy to maintain that cannibalism took place by God’s decree ; and to appeal to such 
passages in the Old Testament as the following, to prove the truth of a proposition which reason denies, and religion 
cannot but abhor: “And J will do in thee that which I have not done, and whereunto J will not do any more the like, 
because of all thine abominations. Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee, and the sons shall eat 
their fathers ; and I will execute jadgments in thee, and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter into all the winds. 
Wherefore, as I live, saith. the Lord God; surely, because thou hast defiled my sanctuary with all thy detestable 
things, and with all thine abominations, therefore will I also diminish thee; neither shall mine eye spare, neither will 

I have any pity.”—Ezekiel, chap. v. 

Norz XXXIII. Page 215. 

Sanacun affirms, in the thirty-seventh chapter of the second book of his History of New Spain, that boring the ears 
of their children was a religious custom amongst the Mexicans, as Acosta declares that it was likewise amongst 

* The Mexicans sent one of their most valiant men against the Spaniards when they resolved to draw an omen from bringing forth 
the bow and the arrow of Huitzilopuchtli. 

+ The Mexicans devoured the Spaniards whom they took prisoners. 
- { It is a singular coincidence, that the Mexican warrior, when he took with him the arrow of Huitzilopuchtli, should have worn the 
royal insignia, including perhaps the copilli or the Mexican crown, and that the first thing he did should have been to ascend the terrace 
of a house, with the intention as it were of being gazed at like an ensign by the people. 

§ Vide page 356 of the fifth volume of this work, where the epithet of Yautl is substituted for Yao, and annexed to Tezcatlipoca. 
The Mexicans frequently added, for the sake of euphony, the letters ¢/ to their words; thus forming from Tulteca the word Tultecatl. 

- 60 NOTES. 

the Peruvians. The Mexicans, according to the former author, performed that rite with much solemnity once every 
four years, on the festival of Yzcalli, appointing sponsors, whom they named Petla and Tecuy, which words signify 
uncle and aunt, who stood as godfathers and godmothers for the children; and it is to be presumed undertook some 
engagement for them, which they were not released from till the children had arrived at years of discretion; and which 
perhaps might have been, that they should be faithful servants to Tezcatlipoca. It may be remarked, that amongst the 
Jews, more than amongst any other people, the relative situations of uncle and parent approximated, from the duty 
which by the laws of the Pentateuch devolved upon the husband’s brother. It is singular that boring the ears of 
Hebrew servants as a sign of perpetual servitude should have been a religious custom amongst the Jews, enjoined in 
the twenty-first chapter of Exodus, and again in the fifteenth chapter of Deuteronomy, to which some learned men 
have supposed, that the passage ) M12 ONN in the sixth verse of the fortieth Psalm, which signifies, mine ears hast 
thou bored, although otherwise translated in the Septuagint, alludes. That passage confessedly relates to the 
Messiah; and it deserves to be remarked that, taken in the sense here assigned to it, it would seem to refer to the 
epithet of servant, by which Christ is designated in the famous prophecy of Zechariah, “ Behold, I will bring forth 
my servant the BRANCH.” The objection that David lived before Zechariah, and therefore could not have alluded to a 
prediction of the latter prophet, is of no weight here, since it cannot be denied that inspiration reveals the future as 
well as the past. It may be interesting to subjoin a note by the authors of the Universal History, in which some critical 
remarks are introduced upon the passage in the fortieth Psalm, which is the subject of these observations: “ But with 
respect to the Jews’ expectation of a glorious Messiah, it is so strongly riveted in them, that they have even gone so 
far as to acknowledge two Messiahs;—namely, one suffering and obscure, despised and persecuted, whom they believed 
to have appeared at the time foretold by the prophets; and the other a glorious one of the seed of David, whose 
kingdom is to reach unto the end of the world, and is still expected by them; though they own themselves altogether 
in the dark concerning the time of his coming. But this notion of a twofold Messiah is plainly opposite to that pro- 
phecy of Isaiah which appropriates both those characters to one and the same person. However, as to this first 
character, it is plain the ancient Jews were not fond of publishing it, whatever notion they might have of it. This is 
plain from the Septuagint’s paraphrase of that verse of the Psalmist in which the Messiah is represented as voluntarily 
taking upon him the form of a servant, by an expression alluding to the law of boring those servants’ ears that refused 
to be released, spoken of under this article. The words in the original are, %) m7 Ox", Oznaim carita li, ‘ Mine ears 
hast thou bored’. These interpreters fearing, in all probability, lest such a servile mark should be thought too dero- 
gatory to his character, have rendered it cwya de xatnpriow pot, ‘a body hast thou prepared me,’ or ‘adapted for me,’ 
which in the main comes near to the same purpose, and only softens very much in the expression ; the first implying 
by the boring of the ears that Christ freely submitted himself to become God’s perpetual servant, and the other that 
God had given him a body fit for the service he had voluntarily undertaken at his coming into the world. — This is 
therefore the reason of the difference between the words in the original and in the quotation from it by the Apostle to 
the Hebrews, and is a further confirmation of the writers of the New Testament making use of the Septuagint version; 
and this will, we hope, apologize for this digression, if it may be deemed such.” 

Nott XXXIV. 

Ir is impossible, on reading the following ordinance contained in the twenty-second chapter of Deuteronomy, not to 
feel convinced that this was one of those statutes of which God, speaking in a later book of Scripture of the code of 
laws which he had given to the Jews, says: “Wherefore also I gave them statutes that were not good, and judg- 
ments by which they should not live.” ’Eay Se v1¢ evpy tv mada tyv raplevor, nriG ov peunorevTal, Kar Pracapevoc 
KounOy per avurne, Kat evpeOy, Owoet 6 avOpw7oc ° KouunBerg per avrns Tw TAT pl THC veaviooG TEVTNKOVTA ddpay pa apyuptou, 
Kal avrov éorat yurn; avf wy érarewwoev auTny. ov duynoerat éEaroore\ar auTny Tov amavra xXpovov.” Justice is subject to 
no changes from time; and being founded on immutable principles of right, is the same to-day as it was three thou- 
sand years ago. It resembles the Deity in being everlasting, and in knowing not the vicissitudes of youth or age. 

NOTES. 61 

Note XXXV. Page 113. 

Tuz Mexicans were accustomed to draw blood from their tongues in the manner represented in the third page of 
the Codex Telleriano-Remensis; and the ancient Jews might perhaps have been acquainted with the practice, since 
Madden in the recent account of his travels in the Holy Land says that “the Arabs of Mount Lebanon are very 
expert at bleeding under the tongue: Lady H. Stanhope first pointed out to me the advantage of abstracting blood 
in this way in cases of determination to the head.”—JJadden’s Travels in Turkey in 1824 & 1825. 

Nore XXXVI. Page 390. 

From the following passage of the thirty-seventh chapter of the second book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain it 
would appear that the ornaments or memorials which the Mexicans wore on their faces were not made of gold but of 
blue paper,—which assimilates them still more to the Hebrew phylacteries, which were pieces of paper containing 
written portions of the Law, which the Jews bound to their foreheads: “ Llevaban todos en la cabeza unas coronas de 
papel como medias mitras, solamente Ilevaban las puntas de adelante sin la de atras; llevaban en las narices un 
ornamento de papel azul, hecho como media mitra pequefiita, que envestia la nariz y colgaba hasta la boca; era como 
corona de la boca.” “They all wore on their heads paper crowns resembling half mitres, which terminated in a 
single point before, without any behind: to their noses were fastened ornaments of blue paper, somewhat in the 
shape of a small half mitre, which hung down to the mouth, forming as it were a crown to it.” The real nature and 
shape of these ornaments will immediately be perceived by referring to the representation of them in the thirtieth 
and thirty-first pages of the lesser Vatican Codex; and they seem to be alluded to in the following passage of the 
twenty-first chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History: “ Quierote dar otro ejemplo, y notale muy bien, paraque 
te sea todo como mochila, paraque vivas castamente en este mundo.” “J will furnish you with another example, 
which fail not to remember, that it may be a constant appendage to you, so that you may live chastely in this world.” 
A Mexican parent addresses this language to his son; and it deserves to be remarked, that although mochila cannot 
be translated a frontlet, still it signifies something that was carried about on the person, and suggests the recollection 
of the Mosaic ordinance contained in the sixteenth verse of the thirteenth chapter of Exodus: “And it shall be for 
a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes.”—Since writing the above, further inquiry into the 
manners of the Jews, and the reflection that it was an ancient Hebrew custom to cover the upper lip as a sign of 
grief, have led us to suppose that the Mexicans might, in compliance with the Hebrew fashion, have covered their 
upper lip at some of their solemn festivals, either as a visible sign that they had not forgotten the command delivered 
by Moses to the Jews, that at stated festivals they should gffiict their souls; or in commemoration of some national 
misfortune, such as was the destruction of their temple: and it has already been observed, at page 390 of the sixth 
volume of this work, that some of these ornaments were worn so as to imitate a reversed temple. Whether the Jews 
covered their upper lip with cloth or paper in their mournings, and what might have been the shape of these badges 
of their grief, it would be vain to inquire; since all that we can infer from the passages in the Old Testament wherein 
they are mentioned is, that they were in general use amongst the Jews from the age of Moses till the Babylonian 
captivity, and perhaps till that of Christ. We read in the forty-fifth verse of the thirteenth chapter of Leviticus, that 
Moses ordained that the person afflicted with the leprosy should “ put a covering upon his upper lip, and ery Unclean, 
unclean.” And Ezekiel, in the following passage of the twenty-fourth chapter of his Prophecies, declares to the Jews 
that he was ordered by God to dispense with all the usual ceremonies of mourning on the death of his wife, amongst 
which covering the lip is enumerated : “ Also the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, behold, I take 
away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a stroke; yet neither shalt thou mourn nor weep, neither shall thy tears 
run down. Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of thine head upon thee, and put on thy shoes 
upon thy feet, and cover not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men. So I spake unto the people in the morning: 

VOL. VIII. ( R ) 

62 NOTES. 

and at even my wife died; and I did in the morning as I was commanded. And the people said unto me, Wilt 
thou not tell us what these things are to us, that thou doest so? Then I answered them, The word of the Lord 
eame unto me, saying, Speak unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord God; Behold, I will profane my sane- 
tuary, the excellency of your strength, the desire of your eyes, and that which your soul pitieth; and your sons 
and your daughters whom ye have left shall fall by the sword. And ye shall do as I have done: ye shall noé 
cover your lips, nor eat the bread of men. And your tives shall be upon your heads, and your shoes upon your feet: 
ye shall not mourn nor weep; but ye shall pine away for your iniquities, and mourn one toward another. Thus 
Ezekiel is unto you a sign: according to all that he hath done shall ye do: and when this cometh, ye shall know that I 
am the Lord God.” It deserves to be remarked, that the Septuagint translation of this passage varies exceedingly from 
the text of the Hebrew Scriptures, and that in the latter it is “cover not thy upper lip”, instead of simply “ cover not thy 
lips”. The injunction to Ezekiel to refrain from eating the bread of men is curious, as it would seem to. imply that 
funeral feasts were celebrated by the Jews as they were by the Mexicans. The prophet Micah predicts likewise, in 
the third chapter of his Prophecies, that the Jewish diviners should, from grief and shame at God’s vouchsafing 
no visions to them, cover their lips: “Thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets that make my people err, that 
bite with their teeth, and cry Peace; and he that putteth not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him: 
therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not 
divine; and the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over them. Then shall the seers be 
ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea, they shall all cover their lips; for there is no answer of God.” We are 
hence inclined to think that the Mexicans covered their upper lips on certain solemn festivals as a sign of mourning, 
and to pertetuate the remembrance of some great national calamity, such as, had they been descended from the Jews, 
would have been the recollection of the destruction of their temple and state, an event which that people have ever 
considered it a religious duty to deplore. Traces of reminiscences such as these appear likewise to occur in some of 
the prayers which the ancient Mexicans addressed to the Gods, as has already been observed at page 385 of the sixth 
volume of this work, where we have remarked that a Jewish tone of complaint seems to pervade many parts of them: and 
to the example there adduced we shall add another, taken from the twentieth chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s 
History of New Spain, wherein it is very deserving of notice that the Mexicans affirmed that their ancestors, sotwith- 
standing that they were powerful and great, esteemed themselves poor, and pilgrims on the earth (como pobres y 
peregrinos); which mode of speaking was entirely Jewish, and accorded well with the style of Jacob’s reply to 
Pharaoh in the forty-seventh chapter of Genesis, when he was brought before him; and that monarch questioned 
him as to his age, when he answered, “The days of the years of my pilgrumage are an hundred and. thirty years: 
few and evil have the days of the years of my life been; and I have not attained unto the days of the years of the life 
of. my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage: which humble way of speaking of himself was not inconsistent, it 
seems, with the saying “‘ great as our father Abraham,” which was used by the Jews of later ages: whence it would 
appear that the Jews, like the Mexicans, considered their ancestors both great and at the same time pilgrims upon 
the earth.—The following is the passage in which the latter example is contained :. “I wish to admonish you, my son, 
of that which it is very fit that you should know and practise, and which is a thing worthy to be esteemed, and to be 
preserved like gold in a napkin, and jewels within a coffer. For the old of both sexes, hoary-headed and aged persons, 
our ancestors who lived in this kingdom and state, and dwelt amongst this people, and obtained dignities and prin- 
cipalities, bequeathed it as such tous. They who were powerful lords, and possessed regal and senatorial dignity, 
did not on that account grow proud or elated, but on the contrary they humbled themselves, and walked with their 
bodies bent and inclined to the ground, with tears, groans, and sighs. They did not account themselves as lords, 
but as poor pilgrims. ‘Those ancestors, from whom we descend, lived with great humility in this world: they were 
neither presumptuous, proud, nor haughty; nor did they desire honours. But although they lived with great 
humility, as we have observed, they were reverenced and highly esteemed, and enjoyed the dignities of the kingdom. 
They were lords and captains, and possessed authority to kill and to make war; and they fed the sun and the earth 
with blood and the flesh of men: and although by the grace of God they were great, and reigned over the earth, and 
governed the kingdom which our Lord, who is everywhere, has entrusted to us, and judged and superintended affairs 
of state, and consoled and favoured the multitude,—they did not on that account cease to be humble; nor did they 
grow haughty, or act in a manner unworthy of their station: and although they were rich and powerful, and had 

NOTES. : 63 

many possessions which our Lord bestowed upon them; and had flowers and perfumes, and all sorts of costly vest= 
ments, and spacious houses, and meat and drink of every description, and possessed arms, and very sumptuous and 
glorious apparel ; for example, rich sandals*, rich tassels for the head, and precious ear-ringst; so that all who beheld 
them trembled at their majesty :—did they on that account despise their inferiors, or look down upon them? Was _ 
that a reason for pride intoxicating their minds, and their judgment forsaking them? No, truly; they were on the 
contrary very courteous, and very humble, and very affable, and paid respect to all, and bowed themselves to the 
earth, and accounted themselves as nothing ; and the more they were honoured and esteemed the more they wept, 
the more they afflicted themselves, and sighed, and inclined and bowed their bodies to the ground}. In this manner, 
my son, the old men from whom we descend, your ancestors in the third and fourth degree, who left us here, from 
whom you also descend, lived in this world: fix your eyes upon them; behold their virtues, contemplate their fame, 
and the lustre and renown which they have bequeathed to us: consider the example and pattern which they set: 
take care that you make your life to resemble theirs: take care that you place their life before your eyes, and you 
will immediately know the faults and defects which may belong to you.—I wish to address another word to you, my 
much beloved son ;—mark it most attentively. Know, then, that you have been born ata period of much affliction, 
and at a season of great poverty; for 1, who am your father, feel the pressure of distress, and suffer extreme want. 
Although our ancestors were great and rich, we are not the inheritors of their wealth and riches, but on the contrary 
are in great want of everything. Poverty is that which sways and exercises dominion over us. We are your parents ; 
old men, full of years, and in great distress. My son, if you wish to be convinced whether this is the case, turn your 
eyes on the hearth of this house; look at the place where they kindle the fire: and you will discover nothing but 
poverty and extreme wretchedness, which renders it difficult for us to provide ourselves with the necessary supply of 
meat and drink: we are likewise in want of clothing, and suffer on every side from the cold, and have not where- 
withal to cover ourselves. Behold us, and you will perceive that our bones appear through our skin, from starvation 
and want of proper sustenance ;—and this happens by the will of our Lord, and on account of our sins. Behold your 
cousins of both sexes: inquire whether they possess abundance: inquire whether they are stout and strong; and 
whether they have the necessaries of life, and enjoy a superfluity of food and clothing. Do you not perceive the abject 
state of poverty into which they are all fallen?—all are a prey to absolute misery. In such a state of suffering, in so 
much poverty, there is no opportunity to lift up the head, or to grow elated; for it would be acting like drunkards, 
or the meanest amongst the rabble, to encourage feelings of haughtiness and pride amidst so much poverty and 
misery as abide within this house, and are the lot of those who dwell within it. That you have been born at such a 
time is a sufficient cause for you to feel humility and sorrow, and to hang down the head. Hearken until I finish my 
exhortation to you. You see your first-cousin, who is older than you; do not point out him as an example of the low 
state to which God has reduced us, since he now possesses rule over the people, occupies now a post of dignity, and 
is now invested with authority to determine the causes of the multitude, and to sentence and punish criminals, and 
to adjudge the guilty to death. He can now admonish and chastise, for he now possesses dignity and the seat of 
judicature: to him belongs the principal seat, where our Lord placed him. They now address him by the titles of 
Tecutlato Tlacatecutli ; by these names all the people salute him. He is raised to this dignity in the absence of persons 
better qualified by their prudence and their wisdom to govern this people and state. There exist no longer illustrious 
persons of great wealth and famous lineage amongst us: the race of all these is now extinct. If there had been only one 
of these, our Lord would have made choice of him, and he would have been elected king and lord of this state. I know 
not how the youth who is now weeping on account of his elevation will conduct himself: perhaps he will bring down 
destruction upon himself; or perhaps our Lord has only promoted him to his present dignity until another may appear 
who will discharge his office better. Our Lord certainly stands in no need of friends§, and persons who are known 
to him. You well know the manner in which your cousin lived before he attained this dignity. Was he accustomed 
to jest, or to play the buffoon? Did he lead a dissolute or shameless life? Was he very elated’—No: he was very 
humble, he was very obsequious, he truly was possessed with sentiments of propriety; he displayed no marks of 
pride or vanity, he prayed to the Lord our God with great devotion, he watched by night, and he prostrated himself 

* See Song of Solomon, vii. 1; and Judith, xvi. 9. “ Her sandals ravished his eyes.” + See Exod. xxxii.2 3 and Job xiii. 11. 
{ See Genesis xxiii. 7 & 12. xxxili.3 & 7. “ Jacob bowed himself seven times to Esau.” and Ruth ii. 10. 
§ Abraham was called the friend of God. 

64, NOTES. 

on his knees at midnight, to pray and to sigh before God :—and this still continues to be his practice. No sooner did 
morning dawn than he arose, and swept with a broom, and cleansed the dust with a brush from the holy places. 
And what think yov. of his style of life at present? how does he behave? Is he proud or capricious? does he seem 
to recollect that he is king?—He is now the same humble and submissive person as before; and he therefore weeps 
and sighs and prays with great devotion to our Lord. You never hear him now exclaim, I am lord! I am king! He 
still watches in the same manner by night; he sweeps in the same manner, and he offers incense in the same 
manner. Although you are his elder first-cousin, your younger first-cousin excels you, my son, in all good customs. 
Remember the words which I now address to you, my son; let them be a thorn in your heart, and a cold blast to 
afflict you, that you may humble yourself and betake you to inward meditation. Consider, my son, that it has been 
your lot to be born in a time of trouble and sorrow, and that God has sent you into the world at a period of extreme 
poverty. Behold me, who am your father; see what a life I and your mother lead, and how we are accounted as 
nothing, and the memory of us has passed away. Although our ancestors were powerful and great,—have they 
bequeathed to us their power and greatness? No, truly. Cast your eyes upon your relations and kindred, who fill no. 
public offices, but who live in poverty and as outcasts. Wherefore, although you yourself are noble and illustrious, 
and of famous origin, it becomes you to have ever present before your eyes how you ought to live. Remember, my 
son, that humility and lowliness of body and of soul, and lamentation, and weeping, and sighing, are true nobility, 
and worth, and honour. Reflect that no one accounted proud, or haughty, or arrogant, or presumptuous, has ever 
been elected king: no one who wanted courtesy, or was ill-bred, or who gave himself free licence of speech, and had 
no command over his tongue,—no one who gave utterance to whatever came into his mouth, has ever been elevated to 
the throne and regal dignity: and if there chanced to be any lord prone to indulge in buffooneries and silly jests, 
they immediately gave him the nickname of Tecucucuechtli, which signifies ‘a buffoon’. Never was any important 
office in the state confided to any one who was forward, and wanted discretion in speaking and in jesting. They 
named persons of that description Quaquachtin, which is an appellation they bestow upon those who want common 
sense but are brave in war; they likewise named such persons Ototinotlaotonxinti, which signifies shorn and insen- 
sate Otomies,—these dealt great slaughter amongst the foe, but were not esteemed fit to be entrusted with the affairs 
of state. Those who in past times ruled over republics and commanded armies were all of them persons greatly 
addicted to praying and religious devotion, and weeping, and sighing; very humble and submissive, neither 
disdainful nor presumptuous, very discreet and prudent, very peaceable and sedate.—You are already informed, 
my son, and you must well recollect that the king is, as it were, the heart of the people; he is assisted by two 
senators in whatever concerns the civil government of the people. One of these is a Pilli, and the other a person 
experienced in war; the one is named Tlacatecutli, and the other Tlacochtecutli. Two other officers assist the king 
in the military department of the state: one of whom is a Pilli, and experienced in war; and the other is not a Pilli ;— 
one is named Tlacatecatl, and the other is named Tlacochealcatl. In this manner, my son, the government of the 
state is constituted; and the four above-mentioned persons, styled Tlacatecutli and Tlacochtecutli, and Tlacatecatl 
and Tlacochcalcatl, possess not those titles and offices by inheritance or by right, but only because they are Slesiad 
to them by the inspiration of our Lord, on account of their being the fittest persons for them. Mark well the advice 
which I give you, my dearly beloved, my much esteemed son,—grow not proud, nor become elated if by chance 
you should be made choice of for any of the above-mentioned offices. Perhaps God will call upon you to fill one of 
them; or perhaps you will remain without any, and will live as a private person and one of the multitude. But 
should you be called and elected to any of these dignities, I charge you again and again not to presume upon your 
own merits, not to esteem yourself great, and valiant, and eminent,—for that is a thing highly displeasing to God. 
Should you by chance deserve any dignity, and by chance deserve to be a person of some account, or should you by 
chance deserve to be elected to fill any of the offices already mentioned,—humble yourself, and be very lowly and 
submissive; hang down your head, and fold your arms, and give yourself up to tears and devotion, and sorrow, and sighs, 
and be submissive unto all; be under subjection to all, and humble yourself to all. And remember, my son, that the 
admonition which I have given to you concerning humility and submission and being lowly in your own esteem, will 
render you in the eyes of the Lord our God a person after his own heart. Take care that your humility be not feigned, 
for in that case you would be called Titoloxochton, which means ‘a hypocrite’: you would likewise be called Titla- 
nixiquipile, which signifies ‘a dissembler.’ Remember that the Lord our God sees hearts, and sees all secret things, 

NOTES. 65 

however hidden they be, and. hears whatsoever we determine in our hearts, as many of us as live in this world. 
Take care that your humility be pure and unadulterated with pride: take care that your humility before God be pure 
as a precious gem: take care that you be not a hypocrite.” It has been remarked at page 515 of the sixth volume 
of this work, in reference to an instance there cited of the Jewish tone of complaint in which the Mexicans were ac- - 
customed to indulge,—that the Mexican empire was at the height of its greatness in the reign of Montezuma; and it 
cannot for a moment be'supposed.that his subjects were poorer, more destitute of apparel, or more exposed to sufferings 
from famine and cold, than their ancestors had been in any of the preceding reigns: or, finally, that the citizens of 
Mexico were worse off in any of these respects than the native population of the other Indian states. On the contrary, 
there is every reason to believe that from the reign of Ahuitzotl,—when the Mexican merchants succeeded in opening a 
new communication with the provinces and states situated to the south-east of Mexico, on which they bestowed the 
general appellation of Anaoac, which included modern Guatemala,—the Mexicans enjoyed comparative abundance 
both: of the necessaries and the luxuries of life. It would have been impossible therefore for them,—if descended. 
from the Chichimecas, the aboriginal inhabitants of New Spain, (who led a very rude and uncivilized life, according 
to the testimony of Sahagun in the second section of the twenty-ninth chapter of the tenth book of his History of New 
Spain,)—to have complained of their food and clothing, or to have contrasted their situation under the reign of Mon- 
tezuma with a period of greater national prosperity. But if they had been of a mixed race, and of Jewish as well as 
Indian descent, the Mexicans might have had some reasonable cause for complaining of their reverse of fortune; and 
for repining, on comparing their own situation in Mexico with that of their ancestors in Jerusalem, and the ‘territory 
of New Spain with the land of Palestine. It may readily be conceived, from a cursory examination of the Mexican 
paintings,—which present a true picture of the manners of the Mexicans,—that a colony of Jews, or a mixed race, the 
offspring of the first Jewish settlers who intermarried with the native Indians, and so became naturalized in America, 
retaining any tradition of the refined state at which civilization had arrived in Europe, Asia, or Africa, would some- 
times have reverted in terms of regret to the more happy lot of their ancestors, and bid their children recollect that 
they had not always been a poor and an outcast race. Many passages in the speeches contained in the sixth book of 
Sahagun’s History of New Spain become on this supposition alone intelligible. That the Mexicans were of mixed 
blood, and not of pure Indian descent, may be inferred from a certain portion of the male population having beards. 
This fact, which has been denied by many writers, may be proved,—first, from the Mexican paintings, in which the 
representation of Indians with beards frequently occurs :—secondly, from the concurrent testimony of several Spanish 
historians, who, in describing the person of Montezuma, agree that he had a beard, though very thin; which account 
corresponds with the portrait* of that king, inserted by Gemelli in the Italian edition of his Travels; although Boturini 
believes it to be that of Nezahualpilli king of Tezcuco, observing that the original picture from which the engraving 
was taken was in his possession :—thirdly, from the following passage, which occurs in the twenty-fifth chapter of the 
sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain; from which it might be inferred that the Mexicans who chanced to have 
beards did not all of them choose, for the sake of resembling the rest of the Indian population, to eradicate them ; but 
on the contrary, that some of them set a high value upon them, which would have been more agreeable to the Mosaic 
law: ‘You have now concluded your oration, which we have assembled together in this place to hear, at the znsti- 
gation} of our Lord; and from the affection which we bear to this young woman, who is still of tender years, whom 
* This portrait, with four others, representing two of Montezuma’s brothers, his immediate predecessors on the throne, and his suc- 
cessor Quauhtemoctzin, will be found in the fourth volume of this work. The testimony of Boturini as to their authenticity attaches 
some interest to them, and they show the proficiency which the Mexicans had attained in the art of portrait painting, the style of which 
was so different from that which they employed in their mythological paintings. Hernandez the celebrated Spanish naturalist, who 
visited New Spain by the command of Philip the Second shortly after the conquest, says that he saw in a hall of the palace at Tezcuco 
the portraits of many kings, ancestors of Nezahualcoyatl,—which reminds us that the Jews were accustomed to ornament the walls of their 
palaces with portraits of the human person; the mischievous consequence of which, as regarded the morals of the people, are described 
by Ezekiel in the twenty-third chapter of his Prophecies with extreme natveté ; the plain phraseology of the prophet, in the twentieth 
verse of that chapter, has been so modified by the English translators of the Bible that the real sense is not apparent. : 
++ The most common acts of life, when recorded in the Old Testament by the Hebrew prophets, are imputed to the instigation of God, 
and to being in the spirit, or acting under the influence of the spirit: the phrase employed in Scripture is svevza Ozov, which seems 
sometimes to signify, the action of the air, or at least to be associated with it, and which might have induced the Mexicans to bestow the 
other epithet of Yoalliehecatl upon Tezcatlipoca. The following passage, taken from the second chapter of the. Acts, affords an example 
‘of the Apostles being brought together in the manner in which the Mexican orator pretends that his audience was assembled: ‘ And 
VOL. VIII. (Ss) 

66 NOTES: 

you prize as a gem or a rich feather, or as your own beards and nails, or as a rose-bud of our ancestors who are no 
more, to whom our Lord has assigned their allotted place, hiding and removing them from this world :”—and lastly, from - 
the high authority and undoubted information of Peter Martyr, who, in the second chapter of his seventh Ocean 
Decad, professing ignorance as to whether the Chicorani were beardless by nature or by art, asserts that the Mexicans 
eradicated their beards: “ Chicoranos aiunt semifuscos esse, uti nostri sunt agricolz sole adusti zstivo: capillos nigros 
cingulo tenus viri nutriunt, foemine longiores in giros: uterque sexus nectit comam. Sunt imberbes: sit ne id a 
natura, vel ab arte, medicamenti aliquo genere adhibito, vel pilos evellant more Tenustitane gentis, est in ambiguo.” 
That the aboriginal inhabitants of Mexico and Peru were naturally, with the exception of some tribes, a beardless 
race, is unanimously admitted by the Spanish historians who have treated of America; and notwithstanding the 
laboured arguments by which Garcia, in the fifth chapter of the second book of his Treatise concerning the Origin 
of the Indians, endeavours to prove that the dryness of the soil of America, with other concurring causes, had ren- 
dered the descendants of Noah in that quarter of the globe beardless, in the same manner as the dryness of the soil 
of Africa had caused his posterity, comprising the negro population, to be black,—we cannot but think that the 
features of the negro, as well as the smooth and copper-coloured skins of the Indians, bespeak two distinct races of 
mankind. Having already pointed out the mysterious allusions to their ancestors which frequently occur in the 
exhortations which the ancient Mexicans addressed to their children, and thence deduced an argument in favour of 
the supposition of the Mexicans being descended from the Jews, we may further observe, that the’ language which 
their orators employed in the congratulations which it was usual for them to offer on the part of the relations and near 
kinsmen to the parents of a new-born infant, and even to the infant itself, so nearly resembles that made use of by the 
Jews in alluding to the birth of the hoped-for Messiah, that many may reasonably entertain a doubt whether the 
Mexicans did not indulge in an expectation similar to that of the Jews of Morocco, whose silly anticipation of the 
coming of the Messiah, and the absurd custom to which it gave rise, have been noticed at page 351 of the sixth 
volume of this work. Ifthe Mexicans were descended from the Jews, and conscious of their origin, and that they 
were God’s people,—a fact which, like the ancient Jews, they frequently took occasion to remind him of, as if eternal 
Justice could be moved by such an idle plea,-—nothing would have been more: probable than that, when suffering 
hardships, and in extreme difficulty, they should have expected the quick coming of the Messiah; and to that ex- 
pectation might be referred the solemn ejaculation; “ Come quickly, since we expect you,’ which both the interpreter of 
the Codex Telleriano-Remensis and the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus affirm that the Mexicans were accustomed 
to utter from the terraces of their houses* on the festival of Hueymiccaylhuitl, the latter observing that they repeated 
that ejaculation during three successive nights. Nothing can be inferred from the silence of Sahagun on this point, 
except, perhaps, that being acquainted with the antipathy which was manifested by the learned of his age, who were 
the clergy, to the theory that the Mexicans were descended from the Jews, he did not choose to state anything 
unguardedly which might lend a strong corroboration to that opinion; and hence it is not improbable that, well 
knowing that the Mexicans did expect a Messiah, and even alluded, in the set speeches of congratulation which they 
addressed to each other on the births of their children, to the possibility of his being born in their days and being of 
their race, he dissimulated his knowledge, from a fear that the eloquent orations of the ancient Mexicans, in 
which traces of that expectation seem to occur, should be consigned to oblivion; and hence he might have wished 
the readers of his History to suppose that none of the passages+ in those orations had any other reference than to 

when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly there came.a sound from heaven 
as of a rushing mighty wind, and if filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as 
of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the 
Spirit gave them utterance.” 1 2p 
_ * The Mexican custom of mourning on the terraces of their houses accorded with the ancient Hebrew practice, as appears from the 
following passage of the Universal History, in which the existence of that usage among the Jews is sufficiently proved from the words of 
Isaiah in the twenty-second and fifteenth chapters of his Book of Prophecies: ‘ In public mournings the people were wont to get up to 
the top of their houses, there to give the greater vent to their grief; at least it seems probable that there was some such custom, by what 
the prophet says, speaking to Jerusalem, ¢ What aileth thee, that thou art gone up wholly to the house-tops?? and so on: and speaking 
elsewhere of the Moabites, he says, ‘On the tops of their houses and in their streets every one shall howl and weep abundantly.’”— 
Universal History, vol. i. p. 696. 

+ It must not be forgotten that the History of Sahagun, as now published, is a recompilation by the author when an old man, of 

NOTES. 67 

the ordinary births of Mexican children. In order to show the probability of such a supposition, we shall here insert 
some extracts from the above-mentioned orations, the style and language of which is not unlike that employed in the 
Old and New Testament when the birth of the Messiah is the subject treated of. The difficulty which the allusion 
to the husband in the following passage may create, will vanish as soon as it is recollected that although the pro- 
phecies of the Old Testament predicted that the Messiah should be born of a virgin, they did not declare that that 
virgin should not be a married woman* :—Oid pues, Sefiores, que estais presentes y todos los demas que aqui estais, 
viejos y viejas, y canos y canas; sabed, que nuestro Sefior ha hecho misericordia por la Sefiora N., moza y recien 
casada; quiere nuestro Seftor hacerla misericordia y poner dentro de ella una piedra preciosa y wna pluma rica, porque 
ya esta prefiada la mozuela; parece que nuestro Sefior ha puesto dentro de ella una criatura ;——pues que serd ahora 
la voluntad de nuestro Sefior! si merecera este mancebo gozar de la merced de nuestro Sefior, y vuestra hija N., si 
sera merecedora por ventura, de que venga 4 luz lo que ha concebido? y los viejos de adonde ellos vienen, que ya 
son difuntos que vivieron en este mundo algunos pocos dias, los viejos y viejas que ya estan en su recogimiento en 
la cueva-y en el agua, en el infierno donde estan descansando y no se acuerdan de lo que aca pasa, porque fueron 
para nunca mas volver; ni tarde ni temprano nunca mas los veremos; pluguiera 4 Dios que esto aconteciera en su 
presencia, paraque oyerades las palabras de vuestra salutacion de su boca. Ahora no hay viejos que autoricen, ni 
canas que resplandezcanf.” ‘‘Hearken unto me, Lords who are present, and all else who are here assembled, old 
men and women, and hoary-headed persons of both sexes ; know that our Lord hath dealt mercifully with the Lady N., 
who is young and recently married; our Lord hath vouchsafed to deal mercifully with her, and to put’a precious 
jewel and a rich feather within her, since it is now plain that she is pregnant; it is plain that our Lord has bestowed 
an infant upon her. What then will be the future will of our Lord? Will the youth who is now present deserve to 
enjoy the bounty of our Lord? and your daughter N., will she peradventure be deemed worthy of bringing to light 
that which she has conceived? And the patriarchs from whom they descend, who are now deceased, who lived a Sew 
short days in this world,—the patriarchs who have been gathered to their allotted place in the pit and in the water, 

what he had written on the same subject in his youth; and that the circumstances under which he commenced his later task render it 
very probable that whatever was likely to give offence to his superiors in the first copy, was in the second omitted. 

* The Virgin Mary was a married woman, and so was the mother of Huitzilopuchtli, whose children (no mention is made of her 
husband), suspecting that she had been guilty of adultery, were about to kill her, when she miraculously gave birth to the above-named 
deity. The tradition of the ball of feathers falling through the air, by which she became pregnant,—which is noticed at page 103 of the 
sixth volume of this work,—might have originated in some misconception of the true meaning of the metaphor of Tezcatlipoca placing a 
rich feather within those women on whom he bestowed the gift of children; which had no other signification than that “ children and the 
fruit of the womb” were the gift of that supreme God of the Mexicans. Thus God is said, in the first verse of the twenty-first chapter 
of Genesis, to have visited Sarah and caused her to conceive; and in the concluding verse of the preceding chapter of Genesis he is de- 
clared “ to have closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah, Abraham’s wife.” . In the thirteenth verse of the 
fourth chapter of the Book of Ruth we likewise read, “So Boaz took Ruth, and she was his wife; and when. he went in unto her the 
Lord gave her conception, and she bare a son.” ‘Whence it is plain how exactly the Jews and the Mexicans resembled each other in 
believing that their supreme deity bestowed children upon them by a special act of grace, which, however late accorded, was decreed 
before the creation of the world, as must be inferred from the language of Saint Paul in the fourth and fifth verses of the first chapter of 
his Epistle to the Ephesians, “ According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and 
without blame before him in love, having predestinated us into the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good 
pleasure of his will;” and from the words antes del principio del mundo in the speech of the Mexican orator quoted at page'515 of 
the sixth volume of this work, which, it deserves to be remarked, nearly correspond in signification with the words apo xaraBoays xocpou, 
employed by Saint Paul in the passage cited from his Epistle to the Ephesians.—We shall conclude this note by observing that the Jews 
entertained very odd notions about the time and the manner in which the Deity was supposed to fashion children in their mothers’ wombs. 
An article upon this subject appeared about two years ago in a foreign Review, many passages of which were in Latin, because the 
writer judged them unfit for translation into French. The Jews however, we are told, are the only people whose minds could rise to 
the contemplation of the pure nature of the Deity. 

_ + This passage is taken from the twenty-fourth chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain. 

{ It is difficult to find an English phrase exactly expressive of the signification of “ en su recogimiento:” that which is here employed 
appears to be the most proper, and will convey an idea of the torpid sort of immortality which the Mexicans and the Jews, as several 
passages of the latter books of the Old Testament obscurely hint, believed would be the lot of their deceased ancestors, until the period of 
the day of judgment. The same vague definition of the place allotted to departed spirits, —the same confused notion that it was in the centre 
of the earth,—the same metaphorical expressions of ‘‘ going down into the pit (cweva),” and “ descending into mictlan, or hell (énfierno),” for 
dying,—the same belief in a purgatory of four years duration, or at least of a year, during which space of time the dead suffered all kinds 

63 NOTES. 

and in hell, where they now repose, and no longer recollect* what passes on the earth,—for they have gone never 
more to return; neither late nor early shall we behold them more ;—would that it had: pleased God that this had 
happened in their days, that you might have heard the words of your salutation pronounced from their lips; but now 
there no longer remain amongst us the old to lend authority, or white hairs to glisten.” It is evident from the above 
passage that the Mexicans believed, like the Jews, that children and the fruit of the womb were the gift of Tezcatli- 
poca; and the phrase of the Lord’s dealing mercifully with the lady N., denoting that she had conceived, was quite in 
accordance with the Hebrew idiom, as we learn from the following verses of the first chapter of Saint Luke: “ Now 
Elisabeth’s full time came that she should be delivered; and she brought forth ason. And her neighbours and her cousins 
heard how the Lord had shown great mercy upon her, and they rejoiced with her.” Like the Jews also they made a great 
boast of the patriarchs who went before them; and the repetition of the feminine of the adjective wejos would seem to 
imply that the Aztec tribes had retained some tradition of Sarah the wife of Abraham, and of Rachel the mother of the 
house of Israel, the latter of whom they might have worshiped under the name of Tonantzin; this at least is probable 
from the superstitious reverence which the Mexicans paid to women who died in childbirth, and their burying the 
bodies of such, instead of burning them according to their usual rites of sepulture, as well as their belief that they 
went after their death to enjoy happiness in the region of the west, named Cioatlanpan,—Scripture informing us, in the 
following passage of the thirty-fifth chapter of Genesis, that Rachel, who zs canonized by the writers of the Talmud, 
died in child-birth and was buried in Bethlehem, where Jacob set a pillar over her grave: “ And they journeyed from 
Beth-el; and there was but alittle way to come to Ephrath: and Rachel travailed, and she had hard labour. And it 
came to pass, when she was in hard labour, that the midwife said unto her, Fear not}; thou shalt have this son 
also. And it came to pass, as her soul was in departing (for she died), that she called his name Ben-oni: but his 
father called him Benjamin. And Rachel died, and was buried { in the way to Ephrath, which is Beth-lehem. And 

of hardships in prosecuting a long and painful journey to the place destined for their last retreat, —were common to the Jews and Mexicans; 
and afford strong proofs that the Mexicans derived their doctrine of the immortality of the soul, of the day of judgment, and of a future 
state of rewards and punishments, from the Jews. c 

* «Man dieth and all his thoughts perish” is a passage in Scripture which might have suggested to the Mexican orator this moral 
reflection. 

+- “ Esfuerzate,” ‘Be courageous,’ was the exhortation with which the Mexican midwife sought to revive the exhausted energies of a 
woman dying in childbirth —Vide Sahagun’s History of New Spain, cap. xxviii. lib. 6. ‘The prayers which she also addressed to Eve, 
and, as Sahagun rather oddly observes, “ 4 otras no sé que diosas,” remind us of the concluding passage of the second chapter of Paul’s 
First Epistle to Timothy, “And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression; notwithstanding she 
shall be saved in child-bearing, if they continue in faith and charity, and live with sobriety.” 
. { The Mexicans were accustomed, as the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus informs us at page 226 of the sixth volume of this work, 
to burn the bodies of the dead, with the exception of those who had died of the leprosy and other contagious diseases, and the bodies of 
boys who had died under fourteen years of age; to which list of exceptions Sahagun adds those of women who died in childbirth, whose 
souls they believed went to the region in the west, named after them Cioatlanpan.—It is singular that the custom of burying, instead of 
burning, the bodies of the Jewish kings who died afflicted with leprosy, should be recorded by the author of the Second Book of the 
Chronicles, in the account which he gives of the reign of Uzziah, which we have transcribed at greater length on account of the notice 
which it contains of the vast standing armies which the petty state of Judea was able to maintain, even after the secession of the ten tribes 
of Israel; of the military character of the Jewish priests of that period, which assimilates them so strongly to the Mexican priests; and 
of the bulwarks from which stones were cast, of the nature it may be presumed of the fortification of Mictlan, described by M. Dupaix 
at page 455 of the sixth volume of this work: “ Moreover Uzziah had an host of fighting men, that went out to war by bands, according 
to the number of their account, by the hand of Jeiel the scribe, and Maaseiah the ruler, under the hand of Hananiah, one of the king’s 
captains. The whole number of the chief of the fathers of the mighty men of valour were two thousand and six hundred. . And under 
their hand was an army, three hundred thousand and seven thousand and five hundred, that made war with mighty power, to help the king 
against the enemy. And Uzziah prepared for them throughout all the host shields, and spears, and helmets, and habergeons, and bows, 
and slings to cast stones. And he made in Jerusalem engines, invented by cunning men, to be on the towers and upon the bulwarks, to 
shoot arrows and great stones withal. And his name spread far abroad; for he was marvellously helped, till he was strong. But when 
he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction: for he transgressed against the Lord his God, and went into the temple of the 
Lord to burn incense upon the altar of incense. And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore priests of the Lord, 
that were valiant men: And they withstood Uzziah the king, and said unto him, It appertaineth not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn incense 
unto the Lord, but to the priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense: go out of the sanctuary; for thou hast 
trespassed; neither shall it be for thine honour from the Lord God. Then Uzziah was wroth, and had a censer in his hand to burn: 
inicense : and while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy even rose up in his forehead before the priests in the house of the Lord, 

NOTES. 69 

Jacob set a pillar upon her grave; that is the pillar of Rachel’s grave unto this day.” Sahagun, in the twenty-ninth 
chapter of the sixth book of his History of New Spain, relates many curious opinions of the ancient Mexicans 
respecting women who died in child-birth :—they assimilated them to soldiers who died in battle, and allotted to them 
the same place in the house of the Sun, there to enjoy eternal life, and to intercede with him for other mortals. The 
concluding invocation of the chapter referred to is so explicit upon that article of the Mexican creed, that we shall 
here insert it, remarking at the same time that the person who pronounced it was the midwife who had attended the 
deceased in her confinement. ‘Hija mia muy amada, ruegote que nos visites desde alla, pues que soys muger 
valerosa y sefiora, pues que ya estais para siempre en el lugar del gozo y de Ja bienaventuranza, donde para siempre 
habeis de vivir y estais con nuestro Sefior. Ya le veis con vuestros ojos, y le hablais con vuestra lengua, rogadle por 
nosotros, habladle paraque nos favorezca, y con esto quedamos descansados.” “My much loved daughter, I entreat 
you to visit us from thence, since you are a woman of courage and a lady, since you are now for ever in a place of 
joy and felicity, where it will be thine ever to live and to abide with our Lord. Now you behold him with your 
eyes, and speak to him with your lips, intreat him for us, beseech him to favour us, and we shall rest at once 
from our toils.” It has already been remarked that the Mexicans typified Quecalcoatle, as the ancient Jews did the 
Messiah, under the image of the sun; and they appear likewise to have assigned to him the sun as a distinct 
dwelling place apart from Homeyocan, or the ninth heaven, the residence of Tezcatlipoca, and from Tlalocan, or 
paradise, the habitation of the god Tlaloc, whither the souls of children went after death ; which might lead to the 
inference that they were not wholly unacquainted with the Evangelical doctrine, “In my Father’s house are many 
mansions,” and that they even reckoned in the number ‘ the mansion of the Sun’ (casa del Sol), which according to their 
notion was the solar orb itself inhabited by the deity named the Sun, supposed by some to be the brother of Tlaloc, 
who in that case it is probable would have had his residence in the moon, and presided over the conception of chil- 
dren,—an office which the Mexicans ascribed to Meztli, or the Moon*; which conjecture acquires increased probability 
from attention to the etymological derivation of the proper name Ylhuicatl-tlalocaypanmeztli, which signifies ‘ the 
heaven of Tlaloc and the Moon,’ and was the name which the Mexicans gave to Paradise. The Peruvians, like the 
Mexicans, associated the persons of their Trinity with the sun and the moon; but whether as typical images or 
mansions in which they believed them to reside, it would be difficult to determine. The triumphant career of the sun 
personified t, and in the guise of a warrior pursuing his course round the whole earth, is described by Sahagun in 
language such as the Mexicans themselves employed, which, although far more poetical than that of David in the 
nineteenth Psalm, conveys in substance precisely the same image to the mind, as a comparison of that description 
with the following passage of the nineteenth Psalm will show: “ Their line is gone out through all the earth, and 
their words to the end of the world. In them hath he set a tabernacle for the Sun, which is as a bridegroom coming out 
of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race. His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his 
circuit unto the ends of it: and there is nothing { hid from the heat thereof.” The coincidence here pointed out is 

from beside the incense altar. And Azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon him, and, behold, he was leprous in his 
forehead, and they thrust him out from thence; yea, himself hasted also to go out, because the Lord had smitten him. And Uzziah the 
king was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house, being a leper; for he was cut off from the house of the Lord : 
and Jotham his son was over the king’s house, judging the people of the land. Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, did 
Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, write. So Uzziah slept with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers in the field of the 
burial which belonged to the kings; for they said, He is a leper: and Jotham his son reigned in his stead.” 

* Vide page 203 of the sixth volume of this work. The Mexicans, in believing that the moon presided over generation, and bestowing 
_ on it the appellation of Tecuiztecatl, would seem to have retained some recollection of the blessing pronounced by Jacob upon Joseph, 
in the fourteenth verse of the thirty-third chapter of Deuteronomy, where there is express mention of “the precious things put forth by 
the moon.” The term Tecuiztecatl reminds us of the simile of the snail in the eighth verse of the fifty-eighth Psalm. 

+ A highly poetical description of the sun personified as the God of light, will be found in the twenty-ninth chapter of the sixth book 
of Sahagun’s History of New Spain. The Mexicans believed that their favourite deity, reclining in a golden litter ornamented with 
green plumes, and preceded and escorted by the souls of the blessed, performed his journey through the heavens amidst tumultuous accla- 
mations and the loud notes of vocal and instrumental music. From the eleventh verse of the twenty-third chapter of the Second Book 
of Kings,—wherein it is said that Josiah “ took away the horses which. the kings of Judah had given to the sun,” and “burnt the 
chariots of the sun with fire,’—it would appear that the Jews believed with Ovid in the poetical car of Phoebus, and the sun’s diurnal 
course round the earth. 

¢{ The Mexicans believed that the rays of the sun penetrated even to the regions of the dead. 

VOL. VIII. Gils) 

70 NOTES. 

extremely singular, especially when it is considered that Christ is named a bridegroom in the New Testament. It 
may be proper to observe that the words “ their line,” in the beginning of this passage, refers to the heavens, round 
which and the earth both the Jews and the Mexicans believed that the sun revolved: in reference to which notion, 
and the doctrine once deemed heretical opposed to it, we shall take the liberty of remarking that the Rabbinical 
philosophy is extremely detrimental to the cause of knowledge, chiefly because it forbids inquiry, and itself decides 
upon the greatest questions, as well in natural as in moral science.—To revert once more to the singular belief of the 
Mexicans, that women who died in child-birth went to the house of the Sun,—we may observe, that that belief was 
grounded on the doctrine that the souls of those who died in war went thither; and proceeded on the supposition 
that giving birth to children was a sort of battle which women waged with Death, and a trial bequeathed to them by 
the goddess Cioacoatl or Quilaztli, who is declared, at page 536 of the sixth volume of this work, to have been the 
Mexican Eve. The words of Rachel, in the eighth verse of the thirteenth chapter of Genesis, on being informed that 
her maid Bilhah had borne a second son to Jacob, would almost imply that the Jews occasionally employed a warlike 
metaphor to designate the act of giving birth to children; since the words, “with great wrestlings have’ I wrestled 
with my sister, and I have prevailed,” can only allude to her having obtained a son by the device which she deter- 
mined to resort to in the third verse of the above chapter*; and they remind us of the phrase “ cazdivado un nifio,” 
“ captured a child,” used by the Mexican midwife on similar occasions. The firm belief of the Mexicans that the 
souls of those who died in war went to the Sun or Quecalcoatle, is further illustrated in the following pathetic prayer, 
which the Mexicans addressed to the Sun when they perceived that the utmost efforts of valour were unavailing to 
defend their city from the Spaniards: “OSun, that canst encircle the earth in so short a space of time as a single day 
and one night, kill us at once and relieve us from such great and protracted sufferings, since we desire death in order 
to go and rest with Quecalcoatle, who is expecting us.” This was the last ejaculation which, according to Gomara, 
they uttered when they beheld their whole city a prey to fire and the sword. Another superstitious custom of the 
Mexicans connected with the celebration of the funeral rites of women who died in child-birth deserves to be 
noticed, which is thus described by Sahagun in the twenty-ninth chapter of the sixth book of his History of New 
Spain: “The body of the deceased was carried forth with dishevelled hair, when the aged midwives assembled 
and accompanied it, all armed with swords and shields, and uttering cries as when soldiers shout at the com- 
mencement of an engagement; upon which the youths named Telpupuchtin sallied forth to attack them, in order to 
take from them the body of the woman, and fought with them not in jest but in earnest. The time which they made 
choice of for the burial of the deceased was at sun-set, or, as we should express ourselves, at the hour of evening 
vespers. They buried her inthe court of the temple of certain goddesses, whom they styled the celestial women, 
or Cioapipilti, to whom that temple was dedicated; and on entering the court they performed the ceremony 
of inhumation; when the husband of the deceased, with some other friends, watched for fou successive nights, lest 
any one should steal away the body; and the young soldiers sought an opportunity for stealing away the body, for 
they considered it as something sacred or divine: and if these soldiers conquered when they fought with the midwives, 
and got possession of the body, they immediately cut off the middle finger of the left hand, and the hair from 
the head of the deceased ; and they did this in the presence of the midwives themselves: and if they found means to 
steal away the body by night, they cut off the same finger and the hair from the head of the deceased, and kept them 
as relics. The reason for the soldiers being so desirous of obtaining the finger and the hair of the deceased woman 
was, that when they marched to battle they might put them within their shields, which they said made them so 
valiant and courageous that none would dare to resist them, and caused them to lose all sense of fear, and enabled 
them to put many to flight, and to make prisoners of the enemy; they declared that the finger and the hair of the 
dead woman, whom they named Mociocuezqui, enabled them to perform these exploits, and also to blind the eyes of 
their enemies. A set of enchanters named Temamacpalitotique were also anxious to steal the body of the dead woman, 
in order to cut off the left arm together with the hand; for they affirmed that through their magical art they were 

* The mandrakes mentioned in the fourteenth and fifteenth verses of the thirtieth chapter of Genesis, might have suggested to the 
Mexicans the curious virtues which they ascribed to eating the mazacoatl—The end of science being the attainment of truth, it would 
certainly be desirable to know to what species these plants belonged, which had the happy effect of producing a partial reconciliation 
between the jealous sisters Leah and Rachel, of conciliating the affections of Jacob to the former, and of conducing to the birth of 
Joseph, an event which gave so much satisfaction to the latter. 

NOTES. ol 

enabled by means of them to deprive the inmates of houses where they assembled of all presence of mind, terrifying 
them in such a manner as to render them incapable of stirring or speaking, notwithstanding that they witnessed all 
that was going on. Although the deaths of these women, whom they named Cioaquezque, caused affliction and 
grief at the moment to the midwives, their relations nevertheless rejoiced ; for they said that instead of going to hell 
they went to the house of the Sun, and that the’ Sun in recompense for their valour had taken them to himself.” 
The fact of its being customary for the Mexicans to watch a body reputed to be holy for four successive nights, 
lest it should be stolen from the grave by soldiers or by thieves, suggests doubts as to the possibility of a vague 
tradition of the watch which Pilate set over the sepulchre of Christ, as related in the sixty-fifth verse of the 
twenty-seventh chapter of Saint Matthew, and of some of the soldiers who composed that watch confederating with 
the chief priests and receiving money from them to circulate the report that the disciples came by night and stole 
the body while they slept,—a report, which we learn from the fifteenth verse of the twenty-eighth chapter of Saint 
Matthew continued long and generally current among the Jews,—having led in the first instance to the establish- 
ment of a rite among the Mexicans intended to perpetuate the memory of so extraordinary an event, which in process 
of time degenerated into a mass of superstition. When it is recollected that Saint Luke records, in the forty-third 
verse of the twenty-third chapter of his Gospel, that Christ, addressing one of the thieves who was crucified along 
with him, declared to him, “ Verily, I say unto thee, to-day shalt thow be with me in Paradise,” it must appear ex- 
tremely singular that the Mexican thieves, named Temacpalitotique, should ‘have considered Quecalcoatle as their 
patron god, and have carried his image before them, together with the arm of a woman who had died in child-birth, 
when they went cn a predatory expedition to rob houses, as stated by Sahagun, and likewise by Torquemada in the 
twenty-second chapter of the fourteenth book of his Indian Monarchy, whose accounts exhibit little discrepancy, except 
that the former writer says, (in the thirty-first chapter of the fourth book of his History of New Spain, in which he 
gives a more detailed account of the proceedings of the Temacpalitotique,) that it was the image of the sign Ceecatl, 
i.e. “One Wind,’ which they carried before them; without noticing in that place that it was the custom of those 
robbers to enter the houses which they proposed to plunder by digging through the walls; although he alludes, 
in the eleventh chapter of the tenth book of his History, to robberies committed by Mexican thieves by boring 
holes through the walls of houses: whilst Torquemada asserts, in the passage cited from his Indian Monarchy, 
at page 166 of the sixth volume of this work, that it was the image of the sign Ceacatl, i. e. ‘One Cane,’ which the 
robbers carried before them. Since, however, the signs of the Cane and of the Wind were both dedicated to Quecal- 
coatle, who was the god of the latter element, (and the name for which in the Mexican language was ehecatl, by 
syncope ‘ecatl,’) the apparent contradictions in the accounts of Sahagun and Torquemada may be easily reconciled : 
and it becomes more important to remark, that to dig through the walls of houses in the night, in order to rob them, 
was a custom so early resorted to by the Jews, that it is mentioned in the sixteenth verse of the twenty-fourth 
chapter of the Book of Job: “ In the dark they dig through houses which they had marked for themselves in the day- 
time; they know not the light.” It would appear, from Sahagun’s account of the Mexican midwives guarding sword 
in hand the bodies which they were conveying to the grave from the attack of the soldiers, that these women re- 
sembled Amazons: and from other passages of the same author, it is evident that Mexican women not unfrequently 
emulated the military ardour of their husbands; which reminds us that Josephus declares the same thing in his 
History of the Jewish War, of the Jewish women, who took care to convince their enemies of later ages that they 
were of the race of those who had cut off the head of Holofernes*, and driven a nail through the temples of Sisera 
while he slept; which latter exploit, performed by Jael the wife of Heber, is recorded in the fifth chapter of the Book 
of Judges in the following poem, which was intended perhaps to inspire similar feelings of patriotism into the breasts 

of the Jewish women of later times: “‘ Blessed above women shall Jael} the wife of Heber the Kenite be; blessed 

* Judith was the heroine who achieved this deed, but the artifice which enabled her to kill Holofernes proves that she did not aspire 
to the fame of Lucretia. 

++ The verse which immediately precedes that in which Jael receives this emphatic benediction is, “ Curse ye Meroz, said the angel 
of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the 
mighty.” It would hence appear that the blessing bestowed upon Jael, which immediately follows, proceeded from the mouth of the 
angel, who perhaps was Gabriel, since it exactly resembles in form the salutation which that angel is recorded, in the twenty-eighth verse 
of the first chapter of St. Luke, to have addressed to the Virgin Mary, and that which Elizabeth the mother of John the Baptist is 
declared in the forty-first verse of the same chapter to have also addressed to her by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. It is a singular 

72 NOTES. 

shall she be above women in the tent. He asked water, and she gave him milk; she brought forth butter in a lordly 
dish. She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen’s hammer; and with the hammer she smote 
Sisera, she smote off his head, when she had pierced and stricken through his temples. At her feet he bowed, he fell; 
he lay down: at her feet he bowed, he fell: where he bowed, there he fell down dead. The mother of Sisera looked 
out at a window, and cried through the lattice, Why is his chariot so long in coming? why tarry the wheels of his 
chariots? Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to herself, Have they not sped? have they not 
divided the prey; to every man a damsel or two; to Sisera a prey of divers colours, a prey of divers colours of 
needlework, of divers colours of needlework on both sides, meet for the necks of them that take the spoil? So let all 
thine enemies perish, O Lord: but let them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might.” The 
song of the prophetess Deborah, and that of Miriam, the sister of Moses and Aaron, who celebrated the destruction of 
Pharaoh and the Egyptians in the Red Sea with timbrels and dances, in which the women joined,—might have led to the 
analogous usage in Peru of women celebrating in hymns and dances signal victories obtained over the foe; a remark- 
able example of which is furnished by Balboa in the third part of his Miscellanea Antarctica, where he describes the 
solemn entry of the Ynga Yupangui and his army into Cuzco after the great victory obtained over the Chalcas, when 
women went forth to meet him with songs and dances™, and the ceremony of trampling upon the prisoners} taken in 
battle was publicly performed in the principal square of that city. Having so frequently referred to the Old Testa- 
ment in the course of these observations, we may here remark that various superstitious notions of the Mexicans argue 
a confused acquaintance’on their part with some traditions recorded in the New. Such, for instance, as their asso- 
ciating ideas of sin and of temptation with the crowing of a cock, as stated by the interpreter of the Vatican Codex, 
at page 209 of the sixth volume of this work; which must remind us of what is said in the twenty-sixth chapter of 
the Gospel of Saint Matthew, of Saint Peter being overcome by Satan, and denying Christ thrice before the cock 
crew once: “ Now Peter sat without in the palace: and a damsel came unto him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus 
of Galilee. But he denied before them all, saying, 1 know not what thou sayest. .And when he was gone out into 
the porch, another maid saw him, and said unto them that were there, This fellow was also with Jesus of Nazareth. 
And again he denied with an oath, 1 do not know the man. And after a while came unto him they that stood by, and 
said to Peter, Surely thou also art one of them; for thy speech bewrayeth thee. Then began he to curse and to 
swear, saying, I know not the man. And immediately the cock crew. And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, 
which said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. And he went out, and wept bitterly.” What 
an argument in favour of religious toleration is inculcated by the moral contained in this chapter of the Gospel of 
Saint Matthew! which it must be confessed is one of the most instructive of any in the New Testament. And how, 
it may be demanded, can the successors of Saint Peter, much less the pastors of fallible Churches, having this 
almost staggering example of human peccability before their eyes, in the person of the chiefest of the apostles,—ever 
permit themselves to persecute others on account of their religious opinions, be they what they may? or how, we 
may ask, can it be permitted, that the Society for the Prosecution of Blasphemy should consign even the humblest 
individuals to a dungeon, for a conscientious avowal of the reasons that induce them to dissent from a national or 
a provincial creed? It is the spirit, however, which dictates such persecutions that is chiefly condemnable; and there 
can be little doubt, that many of those who at the present day show themselves anxious to fine and imprison some 
wretched vender of blasphemy, would, if they had lived in the days of Queen Mary, have themselves been too happy 
to light the faggots and to tie the hapless victim to the stake. Let those who entertain a doubt of this fact peruse 
the page of history, remembering that although individuals die, and generations pass away, human nature is always the 
same ; —let them turn to the bloody leaf that records the death of the unfortunate schoolmaster who ventured to dispute 
upon matters of theology with the tyrannical Henry, the purity of whose faith, but not the brutality of his lust, or his inex- 

coincidence that the only two women in Scripture upon whom the benediction “ blessed above women” is bestowed, should be Jael and 
the Virgin Mary. 

* The existence of the same custom amongst the Jews is further proved from the following passage of the eighteenth chapter of the 
First Book of Samuel: “ And it came to pass as they came, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, that the 
women came out of all the cities of Israel singing and dancing, to meet King Saul with tabrets, with joy, and with instruments of music ; 
and the women answered one another as they played, and said, Saul hath slain his thousands and David his ten thousands.” 

‘+ Reasons for supposing that the ancient Jews trampled upon the bodies of their living prisoners, as well as upon those left dead on 
the field of battle, as a mark of triumph, will be found in a subsequent note. 

NOTES. 73 

orable cruelty, was typified by the white canopy under which he sat as judge and disputant in the same cause. Let 
them revert likewise to the fate of the accomplished Miss Askew, and of many other victims who perished in the 
course of the same sanguinary reign ;—and when they come to the name of Sir Thomas More, there let them pause 
and cease to doubt. These examples of religious persecution pursuing its victims even to the grave are selected 
from the annals of our own country. But if we turn our eyes to the page of Spanish history, to the records of a 
people eminently noble-minded and brave, humanity must shudder at the bare recital of the crimes which the In- 
quisition has perpetrated in the name of Religion; whilst Reason deduces the important truth, that the opinion of a 
whole people upon matters of faith, or even of morality, when their minds are preoccupied and their judgements biassed 
by religious prejudices, should weigh nothing in the scale of philosophy or of humanity, and that in such a case to 
maintain that vox populi is vor Dei,—approaches as near as possible to blasphemy. Terminating however ‘this 
digression, we may observe that the following extracts from the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain will 
furnish abundant proofs that the Mexicans were acquainted with the language which the Jews were accustomed to 
employ when ‘alluding to the birth of the Messiah; whilst the corollary involved in that supposition opens to the 
historian a wide field of research. The following passage is taken from the twenty-fourth chapter of Sahagun’s 
History of New Spain: it contains the answer of the parent to the salutations of the Mexican orator, presented to 
him on the occasion of his daughter's pregnancy being publicly announced: “ Be happy and prosperous, you who 
have come, sent* by our Lord who is everywhere. I may perhaps discourse to you of some things which will 
impart to you neither joy nor mirth, of some things which will cause you to weep, in this place where our Lord, who 
is everywhere, has assembled us}. We have just heard rare and precious things, worthy of being highly esteemed, 
and which we are unworthy{ to see or hear. How meet indeed would it have been for the old of both sexes, our 
gray-headed sires§, to have heard them! But they,—how can we bring them back], since they are dead, since they 
are already gone to the cave§] of water? Our Lord has taken them to himself. These were our ancestors, who were 
a shade and a protection; they resembled those stately trees named the puchotl and avevetl**, beneath whose shade 
those who then lived sheltered themselves, who not only did not hide their hands and their feet beneath their mantles}, 
but spread their wings{{ carefully to protect their subjects and vassals, and their friends and kindred :—such were 

* The notion of men coming in the name of the Lord, and sent by the Lord, is quite Scriptural. In the sixth verse of the first chapter 
of the Gospel of St. John we read, “ There was a man sent from God, whose name was John:” and it says in the twenty-sixth verse of 
the hundred and eighteenth Psalm, * Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord ;—we have blessed you out of the house of the Lord.” 

+ The notion of people being assembled together in particular places with one accord, by the impulse of the Spirit, was very prevalent 
amongst the ancient Jews, from whom it passed to the primitive Christians, and from them:in: process of time to the Methodists and 
Quakers of our days. The idea has however never been encouraged to any great extent by the established Church of any country; and 
for the simple reason, that it,furnishes too plausiblé an excuse for persons forsaking the Church and forming religious conventicles, under 
the pretext of being*called by the Holy Spirit to assemble themselves elsewhere. 

+ This affectation of humility savours very strongly of Judaism. The value which the Mexicans attached to eloquent moral precepts, 
which they compared to chalchiutles and other precious stones, reminds us of the language of Solomon in the first chapter of the 
Proverbs: ‘¢ My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother; for they shall be an ornament of grace 
unto thy head, and chains about thy neck.” 

. § The Jews were enjoined “to rise up before the hoary head:” and we may infer from the reproof of Elephaz to Job,—* What 

knowest thou that we know not? What understandest thou which is not in us? With us are both the gray-headed and very aged men, 
much older than thy father,”—that the Jews attached as much importance to the presence of the.cld amongst them as the Mexicans did. 

|| David expresses himself, in the twenty-third verse of the twelfth chapter of the Second Book of Samuel, in similar terms of grief for 
the death of Be son: “ But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not 
return to me,’ - 

q A pit may cae Papboneale be denominated ‘a cave of water’; and ‘to descend into the pit’ was a Hebrew phrase expressive of, to die. 

*% Nebuchadnezzar is compared to a tree of spreading foliage in the following passage of Daniel’s interpretation of that monarch’s 
dream : “ The tree that thou sawest, which grew, and was strong, whose height reached unto the heaven, and the sight thereof to all the 
earth; whose leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for all; under which the beasts of the field dwelt, and upon 
whose branches the fowls of the heaven had their habitation. Itis thou, O king, that art grown and become strong; for thy greatness 
is grown, and reacheth unto heaven, and thy dominion to the end of the earth.” 

++ A similar allusion to these habitual signs of sloth occurs in the following passage of the mihecenit chapter of the Proverbs of 
Solomon, “ A slothful man hideth his hand in his bosom, and will not so much as bring it to his mouth again.” 

tt This metaphor frequently occurs in the Old Testament: vide Ruth, chap. ii. ver. 12.; Ps. xvii. ver. 8.; Ps. xxxvi. ver. 7.; Ps. lvii. 
ver. i.; Ps, Ixi..ver. 4.; Ps. lsiii. ver. 7.; Ps, xci. ver. 4.: and Christ employs it, apostrophizing Jerusalem, in the thirty-seventh verse of the 

VOL. VIII. ( U ) 

74 NOTES, 

the Lord N: and the Lady N. Would to God that this event had occurred in their presence and in their lifetime! would 
that they had heard and known this marvellous work*, which we hear and understand, and which our Lord is pleased 
to perform in our presence, who vouchsafes to confer upon us a jewel and a rich feather, which is the infant that our 
Lord has begun to place within the womb of this young and recently married woman. If they had seen and heard 
this, doubtless they would have wept with joy{, and would have returned many thanks for so great a favour: but our 
Lord, who is everywhere, has so forsaken us in this our poverty, that there are neither old men amongst us, nor 
persons who are equal to such an emergency. Who can weep? who can lament? who can worthily admire that 
which is occurring? There are none but us who now rule and hold public offices, who are as it were boys of little 
experience and of little worth, who do nothing right, who mar everything, who mismanage everything. Who can 
reply to you? Who would venture to reply to that which you have uttered, if it were in the presence of your fathers, 
whom you have named? And do we recall to memory their wisdom and venerable years? They indeed would have 
returned a fit answer to your speech, and would have marvelled with no small shedding of tears} at your discourse. 
But in the absence of these, we poor persons of inferior understanding must reply to it in a few rude and faltering 
sentences pronounced without order or regularity §. That which first occurs to me to say is,—that our Lord, who is 

twenty-third chapter of the Gospel of St. Matthew: ‘¢O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which 
are sent unto thee! how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, 
and ye would not!” ; 

* Tn the forty-second verse of the twenty-first chapter of the Gospel of St. Matthew, Christ refers to the following ‘passage of the 
hundred and eighteenth Psalm, as being prophetical of the advent of the Messiah: « ‘The stone which the builders refused is become the 
head-stone of the corner. This is the Lord’s doing, it ts marvellous in our eyes. This is the day which the Lord hath made; we will 
rejoice and be glad init.” It must be confessed that the language of the Mexican orator wonderfully assimilates itself here to that em- 
ployed by the Jews when alluding to the birth of the Messiah: and the regret which he expresses at their aged forefathers being unable 
to be eye-witnesses of an event which would have given them so much joy, reminds us of some analogous expressions in the Song of 
Simeon, who is recorded, in the second chapter of St. Luke, to have lived to behold the day of the Lord; which Abraham is also said, in 
the fifty-sixth verse of the eighth chapter of St. J ohn, but in a different sense, to have seen, and to have rejoiced at seeing; whilst many 
kings and prophets are declared, in the seventeenth verse of the thirteenth chapter of St. Matthew, and the twenty-fourth verse of the 
tenth chapter of St. Luke, to have vainly desired to behold it. 

+ From this passage, aid the interrogation, “¢ Who can weep?” which shortly follows it, it might be inferred that the Mexicans con- 
sidered it a fit and becoming thing to shed tears on occasions of great joy; which, on the supposition that they were Jews, and acquainted 
with the history of the Pentateuch, would have been extremely natural; since we read, in the following passage of the forty-fifth chapter 
of Genesis, that Joseph wept on making himself known to his brethren: “ And he fell upon his brother Benjamin’s neck and wepf, and 
Benjamin wept upon his neck; moreover he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them; and after that his brethren talked with him.” 
The same patriarch is said, in the twenty-ninth verse of the forty-sixth chapter of Genesis, to have wept on his first interview with his 
father Jacob: “And Joseph made ready his chariot and went up to meet Israel his father to Goshen, and presented himself unto him ; 
and he fell on his neck and wept on his neck a good while.” Had Joseph merely risen up and kissed his brethren and his father, there 
would have been no peculiar manifestation of affection in his mode of. receiving them; since to rise wp and to greet a visitor with a kiss 
on the cheek was a common mode of salutation amongst the Jews, and a ceremonious one amongst the Peruvians, practised by the Ingas 
on state occasions, ee ae rade in 

+ Having already recurred to the early history of the Jews, to show that the custom of shedding tears on occasions of great joy was 
sanctioned by the example of the patriarch Joseph, we may observe that the same custom prevailed in later times: amongst them, ‘an 
example of which we find in the ninth and fourteenth verses of the eleventh chapter of the Book of Tobit; from which book we also 
learn the latitude of application given to the terms ‘brother’ and ‘sister’ in Hebrew, since Tobias the son of Tobit names his wife 
Sister in the fourth and seventh verses of the eighth chapter of that book; and Raguel, the father-in-law of Tobias, names his wife Sister 
in the sixteenth yerse of the preceding chapter; whilst Edna styles Tobias, her son-in-law, Brother in the twelfth verse of the tenth 
chapter; and, to sum up all, the angel Raphael calls Tobias Brother in the second verse of the ninth chapter. This fact is deserving 
of notice, since it is. not likely that mere accident induced the Mexicans to give the same latitude of signification to the terms ‘ brother’ 
and ¢ sister’ as the Jews did. ; 

§ Moses, in the following passage of the fourth chapter of the Book of Exodus, excuses himself at great length to God:for his want of 
eloquence, urging that as a reason for his not delivering the message which he had commanded him to give to Pharaoh: “ And Moses 
said unto the Lord, O my Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto: thy servant: but I am slow of 
speech, and of a slow tongue. And the Lord said unto him, Who hath made man’s mouth? or who maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the 
seeing, or the blind? have not I the Lord? Now therefore go, and'I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say. And 
he said, O my Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou wilt send. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against 
Moses, and he said, Isnot Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well. And also, behold, he cometh forth to meet 
thee: and when he seeth thee,:he will be glad in his heart. And thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and I will be 

NO TE‘S. ‘15 

everywhere, has opened the ark and the coffer of his mercies*, which he alone possesses. Has this happened, perad- 
venture, through our own deserts {, or those of our fathers who have already passed away from the earth, whom our 
Lord has removed from the face of the earth and put in the place of darkness, which is without windows, and 
without:a crevice for the admission of light? Shall that which they planted, peradventure, bud and bloom like as it 
were unto an aloe § set deep in the earth, which is the desire which they felt that their seed should ge |? We 

with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do. And he shall be thy spokesman unto the nebilee and he 
shall be, even he shall be to thee ippeead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of God. And thou shalt take this rod in thine 
_ hand, wherewith thou shalt do signs.” Jeremiah likewise, in the sixth verse of the first chapter of his Prophecies, apologizes, on the 
score of childhood, for his inability to speak: “ Then said I, Ah, Lord God! behold I cannot speak, for I am a child.” Hence it 
appears that the Mexicans only followed Hebrew precedent, in laying the stress which they were inclined to do even in their most 
eloquent orations on their want of eloquence; and it is very deserving of notice that they pretended that this natural defect was remedied 
in their king by Tezcatlipoca speaking through his mouth and inspiring his utterance,—a favour which was no doubt frequently conferred 
on the high priest, whose only other alternative, if that had failed him, would have been to address the people in an unknown tongue. 

' * We may here exclaim with the venerable Bishop of Chiapa, Las Casas, “ Loquela tua manifestum te fecit.” That learned prelate, 
in thus emphatically declaring his conviction that the Mexicans were descended from the Jews, might have formed his judgement from 
their language, considered under an oratorical and poetical rather than a grammatical and etymological point of view. 

++, The Scripture declares that if we suppose we have any deserts, we are mistaken; and the Calvinists, who wish to reduce all man- 
kind to their own level, go so far as to affirm that the best of human actions are in tet own nature sinful and displeasing to the Deity, 
till rendered acceptable by his preventing grace; the most generous sacrifice of life for a fellow creature would in their opinion be an act 
less meritorious in a Roman, than a Jewish priest’s slaying alamb. If learned men have been found at all times ready to advocate and 
defend such paradoxes, why should they feel surprised at the ignorant Anabaptists pushing their doctrine somewhat further, and maintaining 
that’actions in themselves, whether good or evil, are indifferent in the sight of God,—that faith is everything,—that’faith comes by election, 
grace, and predestination,—and that a man may commit the greatest crimes, and yet be secure of ultimate salvation? It isin vain to argue 
with persons professing such opinions, because it being a primary article of their creed that reason is useless, if not pernicious, where the 
agency of faith is required,—there can be no point from which to set out. Locke, however, in his famous argument against syllogisms, 
wherein he contends with a show of plausibility, thatif that mode of reasoning was efficacious princes would have employed them in matters 
that concerned their crowns and dignity, does not seem to perceive that since no usurper has ever issued an edict commanding a province 
or city to believe the validity of his title,—by parity of reasoning, the doctrine that faith is an act of volition, might equally be’ set aside. 

{ We learn from the following passage of the tenth chapter of the Book of Job, that the Jews in the earliest ages bestowed the appella- 
tion of ‘the land of darkness’ upon Hades, or the place of departed spirits, which they also, like the Mexicans, named ‘the land of forget- 
fulness’; not quite agreeing with the Greeks, who believed that in order to forget the events of life it was first necessary to drink of the 
stream of Lethe: “ Are not my days few? Cease then, and let me alone, that I may take comfort a little, before I go whence I shall not 
return, even to the land of darkness and the shadow of death; a land of darkness, as darkness itself; and of the shadow of death, without 
any order, and where the light is as darkness.” It might not at first be imagined that Job is here apostrophizing God, whose exclama- 
tion, “ Cease then, and let me alone,” would appear a little disrespectful to the Deity, except on the supposition that he imputed his 
sufferings and temptation to God rather than to the devil, which he seems plainly to do in the following passage of his seventh chapter: 
« What is man, that thou shouldest magnify him? and that thou shouldest set thine heart upon him? and that thou shouldest visit him 
every morning, and try him every moment? © How long wilt thou not depart from me, nor let me alone till I swallow down my spittle? 
I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men? why hast thow se¢ me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden 
to myself?” It has already been observed at page 99 of the sixth volume of this work, that the Mexicans entertained the belief that their 
supreme deity Tezcatlipoca, who punished them for their sins, nevertheless occasionally tempted them to sin: and when we read in 
Scripture of the children of Israel being proved in the wilderness,—and punished by God for their murmuring and disobedience,— 
a reason may be assigned for the Mexicans investing Tezcatlipoca with two attributes apparently so irreconcilable as that of punishing 
for, and yet tempting to, sin. 

§ The passage “ That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth, that our daughters may be as corner-stones polished after the 
similitude of a palace,” occurs in the hundred and forty-fourth Psalm; and children are compared to olive plants in the third verse of the 
hundred and twenty-eighth Psalm, from which tree the Jews were decusinmed to extract oil, as the Mexicans were wine from the aloe. 
The phrase, “I will make the horn of David to bud,” in the seventeenth verse of the hundred and thirty-second Psalm,—which from the 
sentence immediately following, “ I have ordained a lamp for mine anointed,” would seem to allude to the Messiah being of the posterity 
of David,—reminds us that the Mexicans were accustomed to designate posterity by the appellation of “the nails of him from whom 
they were descended,” and that, nails being a substance which grows from the flesh, the Mexican and Hebrew metaphors were somewhat 
analogous. 

|| It would really appear that the Jews entertained the idle hope that the posterity of Abraham would, like the dust of the earth for 
number, and the stars of the heaven for multitude, fill the whole earth, and that other nations would be swept away to make room for 
the chosen seed. Hence the presumptuous boast of the prophet Esdras, who thus addresses the Deity, in the sixth chapter of the Third Book 
of his Prophecies: ‘ All this have I spoken before thee, O Lord, because thou madest the world for our sakes. As for the other people 
which also come of Adam, Thou hast said that they are nothing, but be like unto spittle, and hast likened the abundance of them unto a 
drop that falleth from a vessel.” The Mexicans, like the Jews, hada tradition that God had created man ‘in his own image, and that 

76 | NOTES. 

know not the jewel or garland of flowers with which our Lord has adorned this young woman, because the kindness which 
our Lord has conferred upon us is hidden inher as it were in a coffer. Perhaps.we shall not deserve or be worthy 
to behold or enjoy it; perhaps it will be like a dream which passes away ; or perhaps our Lord will vouchsafe to bring 
this day of gladness, this marvel to light; perhaps that will come to light with which this young woman is adorned,— 
the gift which has been conferred upon her, whatever it may be, whether a boy or a girl. Will it, peradventure, be in 
our power to behold it, or will it pass away like a dream*? Since, however, I think that my prolixity may weary your 
heads and stomachs, causing you pain, I judge it most advisable to be silent, and that we should pray to God and trust 
in his mercy. Perhaps we may be accounted worthy that this infant should come to light, or perhaps we shall lose it 
in the tender bud, should it perchance not come to light or be born in this world. I shall only add that I pray God, 
who is everywhere, to grant rest to your bones} and your body with all: content.” The passage which follows is 
taken from the twenty-fifth chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain ; it contains the speech of the 
Mexican orator to the parents of the newly-married pair: “You are here present, lords and ladies, whose jewels and 
rich feathers this newly-married couple are, who have been cut from your bowels t, and from your loins and throats, 
who are here present, N. and N., who have sprung from your bodies like nails and hair. We have received from our 
Lord God§ a treasure and a Hah gift; for we have learned what is in the coffer and what is shut up in the chest, 
which ‘is the infant in its mother’s womb, which it is not permitted us to see or to behold: perhaps we deserve not that 
our Lord should declare || this matter to us; for those who were worthy of this, our Lord has already removed from the 
face of the earth, who were the aged and discreet, who have already passed away; and we who are now living, act and 
speak in a childish manner in his presence, for it is impossible for us to bring them back to this world, for they are 
not in a place from whence they can return: never more can we expect to see them; we know that they are never 
again to return; never will they again perform the part of fathers and mothers amongst us, for they have gone for 
ever,—never will they more return; and we who now live, we enjoy in their stead and in their absence, that which 
they J ought to have enjoyed and heard. But what at this present time may it be our Lord’s pleasure to do, since 
there is no desert in us? Will he, peradventure, realize to us the kindness of which we now dream? We are speaking 
of a matter very obscure and very doubtful, and we know not what the Kindness i is which has been vouchsafed to your 

his first command to him was to tncrease and multiply, which perhaps might have Seles one of their tribes to give the name of Azca- 
putzalco to a city which they founded in New Spain, which proper name signifies ‘ the ant-hill’, in allusion to the promise of God to 
Abraham, in the sixteenth verse of the thirteenth chapter of Genesis: “ And I will make thy seed like as the dust of the earth; ; so that if 
man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered.” Some Spanish historians, unwilling to admit that this 
prophecy has not been literally accomplished, find grounds in it for asserting that all the islands and the whole of the continent of 
America were peopled by the ten tribes who were carried into captivity by Salmanasar, king of Assyria. 
- * A similar comparison occurs in the fifth verse of the ninetieth Psalm; “ Thou carriest them away as with a flood, they are as a 
ship.” The interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus informs us, at page 200 of the sixth volume of this work, that the Mexicans actually, 
painted a stream carrying men away, intending thereby to convey the same idea to the mind, 

+ A tone of Jewish feeling 1 is here exhibited, the Patriarchs being all extremely solicitous about rest for their bones. 

~ The peculiarity of this figure of speech renders it probable that the Mexicans borrowed it from the Jews, who felt a decided pre- 
dilection for it, from its being the identical figure made use of by God to signify to Abraham that he should have an heir: : “ And behold 
the word of the Lord came unto him, saying, This shall not be thine heir; but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall 
be thine heir.” (Gen. chap. xv. ver. 4.) Isaiah likewise employs it in the nineteenth verse of the forty-eighth chapter of his Prophecies : 
“ Oh that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! Then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the 
sea. Thy seed also had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof.” The probability of the above supposi- 
tion is increased from ‘bowels’ being associated in the same sentence with ‘loins’, which was another Hebrew phrase ee of the 
same signification. 

§ It may be presumed that Teoyaotlato was the title of Tezcatlipoca, which Sahagun here and elsewhere nancies ‘our Lord God’. 

|| The Lord’s publishing and the Lord’s declaring hidden things to a few chosen persons, was a doctrine strongly insisted upon by the 
Jews; which, if it did not, might certainly have led to great disorders in the state. Few will feel disposed to deny that if such revelations 
were tolerated in the present day there would be any want of them, especially if the persons professing to receive them were allowed by 
their means to acquire reputation, honour, emolument, or even notoriety ; or if they opened a path to spiritual ambition, which too many 
persons are always ready to tread, caring frequently as little about the means as they are over-anxious to attain the end. To the reckless 
indifference of this class of persons, whom affected zeal for religion has often elevated to high stations, from whence, like Cranmer, they 
have been hurried to an ignominious end, Shakspeare perhaps intended to allude in the lines— 

<< To this I witness call the fools of time, 
Which die for goodness who have liv’d for crime. 

a . he anxiety of the patriarchs to behold the day of the Lord is alluded to by Christ in the New Testament. 

NOTES. V7. 

precious jewel, to your rich feather, who is our grand-daughter and your daughter. Would to God that in our time, 
and in our presence*, it may be permitted us to enjoy the light and the morning of that day + which our Lord will create 
when she shall bring forth ! God grant that we may see and know what thing { it is that our Lord will bestow upon. 
1” The following passage is taken from the thirty-fourth chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New 
Spain: it contains the congratulations which the Mexican lords and rich merchants were accustomed to address to 

uS 

each other on the birth of an eldest son, the occasion of which is thus described by Sahagun: “ As soon as it became 
known that the lady N. had been safely delivered, her friends and kindred residing in the neighbouring towns imme- 
diately proceeded to pay a visit to the infant, the mother, and her relations; and the first thing which they did on 
such an occasion was to speak to the new-born infant, whom the mother uncovered § to receive the salutation, that it 
might be seen by him who saluted it. Should it be the son of a person of great distinction, the descendant of 
some illustrious house, and of noble birth, the speaker, if he were a man, and an old man of authority, thus addressed 
him: ‘O my grandson and lord, highly esteemed, very dear and much-valued personage! O precious gem, emerald, 
sapphire, rich feather, hair and nail of lofty sires! welcome hast thou come, welcome hast thou arrived ; thou hast 
been formed in the highest place, where reside the two supreme gods, which is above the nine heavens; they have 
fashioned thee like a golden bead||; they have pierced thee like a rich and highly polished jewel, the Great Lord 
and the Great Lady, and together with them our son 4 Quetzalcoatl. Alas! that thou shouldest have been sent into 

* Simeon, in the thirtieth verse of the second chapter of Saint Luke, returns thanks to God, for having seen the day of the Lord. 

+ “The coming of the day of the Lord” is an expression made use of in the Old Testament, to signify the birth of the Messiah, in which 
sense it is obviously to be understood in the twenty-fourth verse of the hundred and eighteenth Psalm, where David exclaims, “ This is 
the day which the Lord hath made.” The same event is signified in the New Testament by the words “The day-spring from on high 
hath visited us.” Whoever will take the trouble of comparing the language of Zacharias, in the seventy-eighth verse of the first chapter 
of Saint Luke, with the terms employed by the Mexican orator in the salutation which it was customary for the Mexican princes and 
nobles to receive from their relations on the birth of their children, (referring at the same time to analogous terms and phrases which 
occur in the Old Testament where the coming of the Messiah is the subject alluded to,) will perceive what strong réasons there are for 
supposing that the speeches which Sahagun has preserved to us merely as specimens of Mexican eloquence, related (at least in some 
of their most remarkable passages,) to the expectation in which the Mexicans indulged of the coming of a future Messiah,—some account 
of which will be found at page 413 of the sixth volume of this work. 

{ “A holy thing” was the term which the angel Gabriel applied to the Messiah whilst still in his mother’s womb, as we learn from 
the thirty-fifth verse of the first chapter of St. Luke: “ Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son 
of God.” 

§ Itis plain that the same custom prevailed amongst the Jews, since both ancient and modern paintings of the Madonna and her son 
represent her uncovering the infant in the manner described by Sahagun. ‘The evidence of this fact is of the same kind as that required 
by the Church to establish the authenticity of the miracles alleged to have been performed by particular saints previous to their receiving 
the honours of canonization,—which is constant and unvarying tradition, from the age in which the miracles were supposed to have 
happened, to that in which the question of enrolling the deceased in the order of the saints occurred. 

|| The Mexicans sometimes made necklaces and bracelets of clay beads gilt, which had all the appearance of real gold. It deserves to 
be noticed that the Hebrew prophets were extremely fond of borrowing a simile from earthen vessels and potter’s clay: the former they 
employed as types of the judgments which they denounced in the name of God against the Jews; and the latter they recurred to, to prove 
that man is fashioned by the hands of the Deity, as clay by those of the potter. The representations of potters’ vessels in the Codex 
Borgianus might possibly have alluded to the parable of the pot in the twenty-fourth chapter of the Prophecies of Ezekiel, and to the 
denunciation of “ Woe to the bloody city,” in the sixth verse of the same chapter. 

@ Some obscure traces of the doctrine of the Trinity seem here to occur; which, however, the introduction of the name of the Great 
Lady immediately after that of the Great Lord serves only to render more doubtful. In the absence of certainty we may be per- 
mitted to suppose that the Mexicans might have considered the sex of Tlaloc not so decidedly masculine as that of Tezcatlipoca, 
_ from the many physical causes which are engendered in the clouds and atmospheric air which encompass the earth, over which that 
deity was imagined to preside. When, therefore, Tezcatlipoca and Tlaloc were mentioned together, the Mexicans might have named 
the one ‘the great lady’ in contradistinction to the other, whom they believed to be the First Cause who ruled over the heavens. It is 
however by no means clear that the epithet of * great lord and great lady’ was not an appellation bestowed by the Mexicans upon 'Tezcat- 
lipoca, in order to denote that he was the sole cause of all created things; which after all involves no more real contradiction in its 
meaning than the verse, 

“ Zeus doony yevero, Zeus cuBooros émasro vuypdns” 
in the Orphic Hymn to Jupiter. The Mexicans styled Tezcatlipoca, Ometecutli; which word, compounded of ome ‘two, and tecutli 
‘lord,’ signifies * the two lords ;’ or, if ome be understood adverbially, like ress in reiopeyiords, (a title given to the Egyptian Hermes,) it 
means simply ‘ the Most High,’ by which appellation the Deity is frequently designated in Scripture. In the former sense it may be supposed 

VOL. VIII. ( x ) 

78 NOTES. 

this world, a place of trouble, anguish, and tribulation; aiplace of extreme hardship and extreme affliction, where 
misery and sorrow bear the rule and triumph! . Alas! that thou hast come into this world not to enjoy thyself and 
to be content, but to be: tormented and afflicted in bone * and. in flesh! Thou wilt have to labour and to toil, and to 
suffer weariness ;—for this thou hast been sent into the world}. Well we know that thou hast been adorned and 
fashioned with gifts before the creation{, to the intent that thou shouldest be esteemed, and honoured, and loved. 
Many are the days, my lord, that thou hast been desired, and not only days but years, during which length of time 
thy vassals and servants, and those of thy kingdom, have wept and sighed ‘for thee. Perhaps, my lord, the’ city 
and state will deserve to enjoy thee for some space of time; perhaps they will behold and reverence thy face 
for some days or years, and will. possess thee as it were lent; perhaps thou hast been sent to bear the republic 
in thine arms§, and to guard and knit. together the kingdom of Him who is everywhere; perhaps thou, lord, 
wilt take upon thyself the office which our lords, princes, senators, and kings, who ruled, and’ governed, and 
conquered this kingdom for our Lord||,. have relinquished. Thou, lord, hast to prepare thyself for the task of 
bearing upon thy shoulders and back. the city and state, and thou hast to endure the labour and fatigue of the 
burthen, and to be he who has to sustain it; thou wilt have to be a shade and a protection, and the whole kingdom 
and state will be under thy rule and shade 4. O most serene lord and highly esteemed personage! shall we 
perhaps be worthy, shall we perhaps deserve to possess thee as lent for the period of a day? will the city, state, and 
kingdom, deserve to enjoy thee, or will it perhaps not? Peradventure, little as you are, your Father**, He who created 
you, will come for you :—will this peradventure be his will? will the kingdom peradventure remain solitary ? will it 
peradventure remain in darkness? will it peradventure remain adesert }{? Although our Lord so ordain it, O my most 
precious lord and highly esteemed personage! welcome hast thou come, welcome hast thou arrived ; repose and rest 
thyself, since thou hast come so desired. —The orator next directed his discourse to the lady lately delivered, and 
spoke to her in the following terms: ‘O lady, who art dear to me as my daughter or grand-daughter, I am solicitous to 
be informed of your health; you have endured a long and severe trial; you have rivalled, you have imitated your 
mother the goddess Cioacatlquilahtli {}. Many thanks have we now to return to our Lord because he has vouchsafed 

to allude to his standing in the double relation of father and mother to all mankind; which notion was familiar to the ancients, as we learn 
from the derivation of the proper name Jupiter. Topiltzin was an epithet which the Mexicans bestowed upon Quecalcoatle, the literal 
translation of which is, ‘ our son’. 

* «To be tormented in bone and in flesh” was a Hebrew phrase, as we learn from the devil’s speech to God in the second chapter of 
the Book of Job, “ And Satan answered the Lord, and said, Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath will he give for his life. But put forth 
thine hand now and fouch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face.” 

+ Vide the 17th, 18th, and 19th verses of the third chapter of the Book of Genesis, where God declares to Adam that man was to live 
by the sweat of his brow until he returned to the earth from which he was taken. 

{ The Mexicans resembled the Jews in believing i in an ideal creation of the human species before their material creation. ‘The former 
they supposed took place before the creation of the world, the latter in their mother’s womb. Their doctrine of predestination and of 
original sin probably laid the foundation of all the abuses of the Tonalametl, or Mexican Calendar. 

§ This figure of speech occurs in the following passage of the eleventh chapter of the Book of Numbers, where Moses upbraids God 
for having committed the Jews to his charge: “ And Moses said unto the Lord, Wherefore hast thou afflicted thy servant? and wherefore 
have | not found favour in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of all this people upon me? Have I conceived all this people? have I 
begotten them? that thou shouldest say unto ine, Coy) them in thy bosom (as a nursing-father beareth a sucking child) unto the land which 
thou swearest unto their fathers.” 

|| The Mexicans styled themselves emphatically God’s peculiar people, and arrogated to themselves a superiority over all other nations. 
They resembled the Jews, likewise, in pleading a divine commission to exterminate those who were so impious as to resist their, arms ; and 
this they called conquering the kingdom for the Lord. Acosta declares that the Ingas availed themselves of the same plea, and pretended 
that other nations ought to obey them because they were of a peculiar fumily, and theirs was a religion which God himself had revealed. 
The words which that author employs will be found in the note subjoined to page 128 of the sixth volume of this work. 

{ This was a favourite Jewish simile: 

** ¢ Abba,” which signifies “ Father,” was a name which the Jews frequently gave to God, although it certainly was not the perusal of 
the Hebrew annals that called forth from a philosopher of antiquity the reflection, that when men cease to look upon the Deity in the 
light of a father, they begin to consider him as a tyrant. 

++ This comparison frequently occurs in the Old Testament. 

+t The Mexicans named Eve, Cioacatlquilahtli: and the meaning of this passage is, that in the same manner as Eve, (by whose 
transgression women became liable to death in childbirth,) herself bore children in safety, so the lady whom the orator is congratulating 
had been safely delivered of a.son. 

NOTES. 79 

to:send us:this precious gem, this rich quetzatl which has come to light, the image, hair and nail, of our lords who 
are dead, who haye long since been no more. The stock and scion of our lords, consuls, and kings, has budded, has 
bloomed.; the thorn of the aloe* and the odoriferous cane, which our lords and departed kings, who were valiant 
and renowned, planted, deep in the earth, has sprung up, has appeared ;—from you, lady, our son} Quetzalcoatl has 
received a. precious gem, from you he has obtained a rich feather. May our Lord be praised, since he has 
happily preserved you from danger, and from the battle which you fought with death at the time of delivery! 
Perhaps the days of the infant to which you have just given birth will outnumber yours; perhaps it will be the 
will of our Lord that he shall live, or perhaps he will die the first: perhaps, tender as he is, the Lord of the universe 
will break into atoms this precious gem, this chain of costly jewels; perhaps He who made him will come and 
take him from us unto himself; perhaps He will pass him’ momentarily before the eyes of his kingdom and state, 
and deprive us of him, turning us into mockery on account of our sins{, because we are unworthy of enjoying him. 
O let the will of our Lord be done! let him do what seemeth good unto him; in him let us place all our hope. I 
am apprehensive, lady, lest I should fatigue and weary you; I should be sorry to cause you any indisposition, pain, 
or uneasiness, since you are still an invalid: I wish you long life and prosperity, smce you are a lady highly to be 
esteemed. I have ventured to pronounce in your presence this brief address, consisting of a few rude and broken 
sentences, uttered with hesitation and in faltering accents, in order to salute you and wish you joy. Be happy 
and prosperous, highly esteemed lady!’—On this the orator addressed himself to the old men and women who 
had taken charge of the infant, expressing himself in the following terms: ‘Lords and ladies who are here present, 
and have consented to take charge of our grandson, who is our-precious stone and our rich feather, which has lately 
displayed itself and come to light, who is a jewel and a chain of golden beads, the hair and nail of his departed sires ; 
the child will for some days stand in need of your care and attention; use your utmost endeavours to serve him ; 
remember that it is an important duty which has devolved upon you. Who, think you, has confided this task to you ? 
None other, certainly, but our Lord, who is everywhere: you he permits to see, and to’‘touch, and to enjoy him, as it 
were a great festival and a great marvel§, whom with tears and sighs those who have departed from this world 
desired to behold, and our Lord took them to himself, so that they could neither see nor enjoy him,—and he is 

* «There will I make the horn of David to bud” is a metaphor which, occurring in the seventeenth verse of the hundred and thirty- 
second Psalm, might have led to the adoption, in the Mexican language, of the phrase “the thorn of the aloe shall spring up,” to denote 
the birth of a desired son. 

+ The epithet which the Mexicans bestowed upon Quecalcoatle, which signified ‘our son,’ was Topiltzin. From the words of the 
interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus, at page 177 of the sixth volume of this work, it would appear that they placed it sometimes before and 
at other times after that proper name. 

t The notion of God mocking men on account of their sins was familiar to the Jews, as many passages of Scripture might be adduced 
toshow. It is not however the less surprising that Job, in the twenty-third verse of his ninth chapter, should accuse God of mocking at 
the misfortunes of the innocent,—for that is the only interpretation which can be put upon the words “ If the scourge slay suddenly, he will 
laugh at the trial of the innocent.” It must be confessed that David spoke more advisedly with his lips, where he says (in the fourth verse 
of the second Psalm), in allusion to the heathen, “ He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh; the Lord shall have them in derision :” and in 
the thirteenth verse of the thirty-seventh Psalm, in allusion to the wicked, “The Lord shall laugh at him; for he seeth that his day is 
coming :” and in the eighth verse of the fifty-ninth Psalm, again in allusion to the heathen, “ But thou, O Lord, shalt laugh at them ; thou 
shalt have all the heathen in derision.” The satisfaction, however, which David appears to express at the calamities of the heathen, can 
only be satisfactorily explained by supposing that he shared the feelings so finely described by Lucretius in the opening passage of his 

second Book. 
« Suave, mari magno turbantibus «quora ventis, 

E terra magnum alterius spectare laborem,” &c. 

§ The advent of the Messiah is thus alluded to in the hundred and eighteenth Psalm : “‘ The stone which the builders refused is become 
the head-stone of the corner. This is the Lord’s doing; it is marvellous in our eyes. This is the day which the Lord hath made; we will 
rejoice and be glad in it.” When we couple the words of this Psalm with what is said in another passage of Scripture, of many kings 
who would have rejoiced to see the day of the Messiah, but who could not; and compare the language of David with that of the Mexican 
orator,—it is impossible to refrain from thinking that the birth of the Messiah might be here alluded to by the latter as a thing within the 
compass of probability. The Jews have long accustomed themselves to expect the birth of the Messiah; and that expectation has given rise, 
in some parts of Africa, to the absurd practice of presenting a virgin to the Lord as a fit person to become the mother of the Messiah. It 
may easily be supposed that the Mexicans might have carried Jewish absurdity to its highest pitch ; but we are not sufficiently acquainted 
with the history of the former, to know what peculiar notions they might have entertained respecting the coming of the Messiah. 

30 NOTES. 

the hair and the nail of his said forefathers *; and we now behold him, and our Lord accomplishes in our presence 
this miracle+, and the day of rejoicing { which they desired but did not behold: you enjoy the precious stone and 
the rich feather which the ancients desired, which is your happiness and your renown, and the costly ornament 
and the chain § of large and round sapphires and of fine chalchiutles, smooth as pebbles, and of gems of other 
descriptions, very green and of polished lustre: you enjoy likewise a handful of feathers || admirably sorted and of 
faultless hue : you are accounted the parents of this child ] ; enjoy him, then, and be this precious stone your wealth, 
this handful of rich feathers, which is as it were a gem cut from its most noble sires, whose nails and hair he is; 
account yourselves the parents of such a son; take care to watch and to pray by night for his growth; importune** 
our Lord with your tears; call devoutly upon our Lord God, who is everywhere, who does whatsoever seemeth good 
unto him, and turns us into jest. What if our Lord should send upon us eclipses {f{ and thunder? what if he 
should come to take us {{? What if our Lord by whom we live should visit us with sorrow and with tribulations? 
Although we are unworthy, let us hope for that of which we now dream; which is, that our grandson may live: let 
us expect that which may happen tomorrow or the next day; and what may be the will of Him who created him, 
whose he is: we shall know shortly, and before the lapse of any great length of time, what may be his pleasure concern- 
ing him. Our highly esteemed and dearly beloved lady and daughter is likewise here present, who endured great 
suffering and a severe battle with death, and obtained a victory over death, although she is still very weak ; take care 
that her health receives no shock, since this is the particular duty of your office. O my lords and sons, I desire your 
happiness, and that you may live long!—After this, the orator directed his discourse to the father of the infant, and 
thus addressed him: ‘O my lord and grandson {{, excellent and esteemed personage! perhaps I shall be troublesome 

* The Messiah was to be of the tribe of Judah and of the seed of David. 

+ ‘El milagro’ is the term employed by Sahagun; which is only applicable to a miraculous conception; and, occurring where it 
does, is very deserving of notice. 

+ ¢ Fiesta’ is here translated ¢ day of rejoicing,’ because festivals may in a peculiar sense be considered holidays. It is metaphorically 
introduced in this passage, and seems to have been borrowed from the Psalms, where such a metaphor is of frequent occurrence. 

§ Children are likened in the Old Testament to chains and ornaments of jewels worn round their parents’ necks; and a virtuous wife is 
compared to rubies. Jeremiah likewise, in the fourth chapter of his Lamentations, sums up his description of the Jewish Nazarites by 
likening their body to rubies, and the smoothness of their skin to sapphires. This description of persons appears to have been highly in 
request at Jerusalem, and their avocations in all probability nearly resembled those of the Eastern Faquirs. 

\| If we were not acquainted with the historical fact, that the Pheenicians made costly manufactures of feathers, that mode of imitating 
the rich hues of natural objects would appear to have been an art peculiar to the New World. It was carried to such perfection amongst 
the Mexicans, that Spanish authors when describing it seem at a loss for words to express their admiration of their skill and ingenuity. 

q Joseph was the reputed father of Christ, as we learn from the forty-first verse of the second chapter of St. Luke; and the Virgin 
Mary, in the forty-eighth verse of the same chapter, styles Joseph his father: “ And his mother said unto him, Son, why hast thou thus 
dealt with us? behold thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing.” 

#* The New Testament enjoins importunity in prayer, and its utility is enforced by a parable. 1 

4+ The prophet Joel and several of the other Hebrew prophets caused the Jews to entertain the most absurd apprehensions of eclipses 
by declaring that that sign would precede the destruction of the world. The Mexicans and Peruvians likewise considered eclipses 
yery ominous, which is the reason why they are so frequently represented in the Mexican paintings. 

tt The declaration in the New Testament, « Two women shall be grinding at the mill; the one shall be taken and the other left,” may 
throw some light on this obscure passage. It is not undeserving of notice, that to grind meal appears to have been a task which devolved 
upon the women both among the Jews and the Mexicans. : 

§§ The argument which is employed in the New Testament to prove that the Messiah could not be David’s son, because he calls him 
Lord in the following passage of the hundred and tenth Psalm, “The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand until [ make thine 
enemies thy footstool,” would not have been as conclusive with the Mexicans as with the Jews; since amongst the former people the 
phrase “my son and lord” was so common, that it would naturally have appeared to them—if pronounced by one of their ancient 
kings in reference to a distant descendant, whom ancient oracles had foretold should sit upon his throne, whose advent had been long 
expected, and whose reign was to realize the greatest advantages to his subjects, combined with the most dazzling glory,—a very suitable 
expression. Christ’s reply to the Pharisees, in the forty-fifth verse of the twenty-second chapter of St. Matthew, must however be con- 
sidered conclusive against the Unitarians; whilst the answer of the Pharisees to him proves that the Jews understood the prophecy of 
David to refer to the coming of a temporal Messiah, and furnishes a strong argument against the reading of the Hebrew Bible, where it 
differs from the Septuagint, in the sixth verse of the ninth chapter of Isaiah; since if the true reading of Isaiah’s prophecy had 
been, (as translated in our English version of the Bible,) “ For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the government shall 
be upon his shoulders; and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of 
Peace,”—it would be absurd to suppose that the Pharisees would have made the reply which they did to Christ, especially in the 
presence of so great a multitude, some of whom must have recollected that prophecy of Isaiah; nor would Christ have failed to confute 

N OTTESS: Sl 

to you, and interrupt your occupations with these few words with which I wish to salute you. I am aware, Sir, that 
you are the throne and the chair back *, and that you are the flute of our Lord who is everywhere, who is named 

them by quoting the words of the same prophecy, instead of referring to the obscure language of David, in the hundred and tenth Psalm, 
the true meaning of which it is clear that the Jews had till then never rightly comprehended, as Basnage himself is obliged to admit in 
the following passage of the Introduction to his History of the Jews: “ We have afterwards examined the different means which the 
Jewish Church had to know the Messiah, either by tradition or the explaining of divers types which were received by the doctors at the 
time that Christ appeared, and which the Jews have since forgot. ‘These means had been more effectual if the divinity of the Messiah 
had been a constant tenet among the Jews, as some learned men have endeavoured to prove. As their arguments have a great show of 
reason, we have thought them worth mentioning; but, notwithstanding it is our interest to be of their opinion, which besides strongly 
concludes against the Antitrinitarians, yet we could not be induced to father upon the Jews a tenet which they never received, and thereby 
make their incredulity, which is but too deplorable, more criminal than really it is.” The words of David in the hundred and tenth 
Psalm are further remarkable, from the indication which they afford that the ceremony of trampling on their enemies, (by which act the 
Ingas recognised during their lifetime the heir apparent to their throne,) was either borrowed from the usages of the ancient Jews, or 
founded on the address of God to the Messiah, who bade him sit upon. his throne until the act of making his enemies his footstool should 
complete his investiture in the kingdom, as is more fully explained by Saint Paul in the following passage of the tenth chapter of his 
Epistle to the Hebrews: “ But this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God; from 
henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool.” It is very deserving of notice that the fifth verse of the hundred and tenth 
Psalm, “ The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath,”’—connected as it is with the verse immediately 
preceding, “The Lord hath sworn and will not repent, T’how art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek,” and alluding, as it might 
be supposed to do from the words of St. Paul, to the Lord’s slaying the enemies of the. Messiah,—might have led the Jews to maintain 
that the left hand of Ged would be the place of the Messiah, which they would have been the more inclined to do, since, not believing in 
the Trinity, they would have had no middle place, as Christians have, for God the Father ; and the left hand of their temporal Messiah, 
the son of David, might have appeared to them not a sufficiently honourable place forhim. The Mexicans, as we have already observed, 
had a tradition that Huitzilopuchtli was seated on the left hand of Tezcatlipoca; the meaning of which, from the explanation given by 
Sahagun, in the forty-second chapter of his History of New Spain, of the Mexican proverb, “A mi siniestra y debajo de mi sobaco te 
pondré”—would appear to be, that Tezcatlipoca had assigned the place of honour next to himself to Huitzilopuchtli, who, there are some 
grounds for supposing, was the deity worshiped in Cholula under the name of Quecalcoatle, and who on this supposition would have 
been the son of the above supreme god of the Mexicans. Our reasons for supposing that the Ingas might have borrowed the ceremony 
of trampling their enemy under foot from the Jews, are, First, that the Mexicans appear to have borrowed from the Hebrews the 
more barbarous custom of hanging up the heads of their enemies in the sun, in the manner described at page 312 of the sixth volume of 
this work, which is there supposed to have originated in the Lord’s command to Moses in the fourth verse of the twenty-fifth chapter 
of Numbers, “ And the Lord said unto Moses, Take all the heads of the people and hang them up before the Lord against the sun, that 
the fierce anger of the Lord may be turned away from Israel,”’ and which, from what is related of Judas Maccabeus, in the following 
passage of the fifteenth chapter of the Second Book of Maccabees, appears to have been practised by the Jews of later ages: “ Now 
when the battle was done, returning again with joy, they knew that Nicanor lay dead in his harness. Then they made a great shout 
and a noise, praising the Almighty in their own language. And Judas, who was ever the chief defender of the citizens both in body and 
mind, and who continued his love toward his countrymen all his life, commanded to strike off Nicanor’s head, and his hand with his 
shoulder, and bring them to Jerusalem. So when he was there, and had called them of his nation together, and set the priests before 
the altar, he sent for them that were of the tower. And showed them vile Nicanor’s head, and the hand of that blasphemer, which with 
proud brags he had stretched out against the holy temple of the Almighty. And when he had cut out the tongue of that ungodly Nicanor, 
he commanded that they should give it by pieces unto the fowls, and hang up the reward of his madness before the temple. So every man 
praised toward the heaven the glorious Lord, saying, Blessed be he that kept his own place undefiled. He hanged also Nicanor’s head 
upon the tower, an evident and manifest sign unto all of the help of the Lord.” Secondly, because that custom would have been likely 
to have been instituted, by the Jews of later ages, as a sign of the fulfilment of the prophecy contained in the third verse of the forty- 
seventh Psalm, “He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet.” And thirdly, because we read in the following 
passage of the tenth chapter of the Book of Joshua, that that ancient leader caused his captains to trample on the necks of his principal 
prisoners in the presence of the rest of the troops, with the intention, as it would appear, of infusing into the minds of the Hebrew soldiers 
courage to enable them to massacre the women and children of those nations which refused to become their voluntary slaves,—a deed which 
would have daunted the fiercest soldier of Pyrrhus’ camp: “ And it came to pass, when Joshua and the children of Israel had made an 
end of slaying them with a very great slaughter, till they were consumed, that the rest which remained of them entered into fenced cities. 
And all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in peace: none moved his tongue against any of the children of Israel. 
Then said Joshua, Open the mouth of the cave, and bring out those five kings unto me out of the cave. And they did so, and brought 
forth those five kings unto him out of the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and 
the king of Eglon. And it came to pass, when they brought out those kings unto Joshua, that Joshua called for all the men of Israel, 

* Tt appears from the portraits of the Mexican kings, which Diego Duran has inserted in his History of Mexico, that their throne 
was a chair with a very high back covered with finely woven mats, upon which a tiger’s skin was sometimes spread for a cushion, 

VOL. VIII. ( Mi ) 

82 NOTES. 

Night and Wind *. Your occupation, my lord, which is most grave and important, is the seat of judicature and the 
government of the state, in which your ancestors,—whose load, after they had relinquished it, you took upon your 

and said unto the captains of the men of war which went with him, Come near, put your feet upon the necks of these kings. And they came 
near, and put their feet upon the necks of them. And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be dismayed ; be strong and of good courage: for 
thus shall the Lord do to all your enemies against whom ye fight. And afterward Joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them on 
five trees: and they were hanging upon the trees until the evening. And it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun, that Joshua 
commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast them into the cave wherein they had been hid, and laid great stones in the 
cave’s mouth, which remain watz this very day.” The Peruvian ceremony of trampling upon the enemy in token of triumph is noticed in the 
following passage of the sixteenth chapter of Balboa’s Miscellanea Antarctica; and the account there given receives corroboration from 
a valuable History of Peru preserved in MS. in the library of the Escurial, which further proves that it was a mark of honour permitted 
to him who was destined to succeed the reigning Inga: ‘‘ Con mucha guarda y seguridad dejava este rey Ynga Yupangui las provincias y 
naciones que con sus victoriosas hazafias avia sujetado 4 su ymperio, y tan bien ordenado todo que podemos compararlo con qualquiera 
capitan de los antiguos que mas nombre tienen entre Griegos y Romanos; y dejando las espaldas seguras, muy cargados de reputacion, 
despojos y prisioneros se yolvieron 4 el Cuzco, porque ya el invierno les era impedimento para pasar adelante con sus acostumbradas vic- 
torias, y-fue recibido en su imperial ciudad con mucha fiesta y aparato hasta alli no visto igual; porque antes que Ynga Yupangui llegase 
4 el Cuzco did el mismo la orden que se avia de guardar en su entrada y triunfo, y por aquella se fueron guiando sin exceder un punto de 
ella: entraron lo primero, los mas valientes capitanes en Curicaucha, haciendo con sus armas y libreas una vistosa resefia : tras ellos entraron 
muchos de los soldados de menos nombre, que llevavan atados inumerable numero de prisioneros: tras estos entraron las mugeres y hijas 
de aquellos, endechando a su modo su calamidad y desventura, porque asi les era mandado lo hiciesen: entravan luego la gente comun, 
cargados todos con una no vista cantidad de despojos, con las armas de los enemigos arrastrando por tierra: & estos seguia un esquadron de 
lanzeros con las lanzas en alto, y en la punta de cada lanza una cabeza de un enemigo hincada con sus cabellos sueltos y desmelenados : 
luego entrava otro esquadron de la nobleza de el ymperio, asi de los que avian ydo a Ja guerra, como de los que avian quedado gobernando 
la republica, y entre ellos traian en unas andas de oro al Emperador Ynga Yupangui, con aquel rostro austero y ojos de tigre cruel con que 
matava y espantava el mundo: trahia para el tal espectaculo puestas las actuales insinias de Emperador: seguiase luego la retaguardia en 
que venian hombres de cuenta ‘en algunas quadrillas de gente suelta, haciendo un millon de moviiientos con los cuerpos y piernas, repre- 
sentando en aquello el ardor y coraje con que peleaban con sus enemigos. Con la orden dicha dieron una vuelta 41a ancha y desocupada 
plaza, y luego mandaron 4 todos los prisioneros que se pusiesen tendidos sobre la tierra, los rostros en el suelo, y siendo Ynga Yupangui el 

* The Mexicans bestowed the epithet of Yoalliehecatl, which signifies ‘night and wind’, upon Tezcatlipoca, thereby to denote the 
subtlety and obscurity of the divine essence: they believed likewise that their kings were more immediately under his controul and in- 
fluence; that he prompted their actions and inspired their councils; that they were his vicegerents upon earth; and that he elevated them 
to the regal dignity from the lowest station’, if he judged them worthy of ranking above their fellow men, and again displaced them if they 
acted in a manner to forfeit his favour. ‘The Mexican monarchs were consecrated to the regal office by crowning and anointing, as was 
customary amongst the Jews; and, like David and Solomon, they addressed public admonitory discourses to the people soon after their 
coronation: nor is it less deserving of notice, that if they failed in their duties, they were themselves anathematized by the high priest, as 
were Saul and David by Samuel and the prophet Nathan. It was usual also for their subjects to offer them presents,—a custom that 
existed amongst the J ews, as we learn from the following passage of the tenth chapter of the First Book of Samuel: “ But the children 
of Belial said, How shall this man serve us? and they despised him and brought him no presents.” It may be proper to observe, that 
Saul is the king here alluded to. When the Mexican kings appeared in public they leaned, for greater state, upon the arm of # principal 
noble of their court; and on solemn occasions, such as was the reception of Cortes by Montezuma, feudatory princes were required to 
attend for that express purpose. The existence of a similar custom amongst the Jews may be inferred from the mention which is made, 
in the seventh chapter of the Second Book of Kings, of the king’s appointing the lord on whose hand he leaned to have charge of the 
gate. Montezuma was on such occasions preceded by officers bearing short gilt rods, who held them up as a sign to the people to 
prostrate themselves on the approach of their sovereign. To a like custom Ezekiel may allude, in the eleventh verse of the nineteenth 
chapter of his Prophecies, where he speaks of “rods for the sceptres of them that bare rule ;” whilst the words of David, in the fourth 
verse of the sixtieth Psalm, “Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth,” render 
it not improbable that the Mexican festival of Panquetzaliztli (or the holding up of banners,) might have originated in the superstitious 
practices of the ancient Jews. In addition to this list of analogies we must observe that the Mexican kings were accustomed, as if 
in imitation of Solomon, to celebrate the dedication of temples and new altars with the sacrifice of an infinite number of victims, 
smearing them with their blood. The Indian historian Tezozomoc further remarks, that they took that opportunity of making a display 
of their riches to strangers, whom they invited for the special purpose to their Court, and afterwards dismissed with rich presents. This 
latter trait of policy reminds us of the above-mentioned monarch’s gallantry towards the Queen of Sheba. Other analogies might doubt- 
less be pointed out in addition to those here enumerated; and if Samuel’s book on the Constitution of the Jewish Monarchy, of which 

he makes express mention in the twenty-fifth verse of the tenth chapter of his First Book, had been preserved, it is impossible to say where 
they would have ended. 

1 The Old Testament declares that Saul was originally a keeper of asses, and that David was elected king over Israel from the sheep-cot. 

NOTES: 83 

shoulders *,—suffered intolerable labour: they have left it in your hands; you are now he on whom has devolved the 
duty of ruling this city, state, and kingdom, in the name of our Lord}. You, O lord, are at present he who rules and 

primero, pasaron por encima de ellos, poniendoles el pie sobre los pescuezos, sin que el prisionero osase alzar ni menear la cabeza, y al tempo 
que asi ivan pasando, cantavan un verso que en nuestra lengua quiere decir Mis enemigos piso: todo esto se hazia delante de la estatua y 
ymage de el Sol, rogandole se tuviese por servido de tal echo, y les diese siempre semejantes victorias: con estas oraciones y ceremonias 
concluian las fiestas triumfales, y el dia siguiente se comenzavan grandes bailes y borracheras, en prosecucion de lo qual yva cada uno 
decantando las proezas que su rey avia hecho, y luego las de sus capitanes y caudillos, y ultimamente las suyas propias, aftidiendo en las 
unas y las otras, infinitas mentiras y fabulas.” “ Volveremos 4 hablar de Ynga Yupangue que estaba victorioso, el cual despues de haber 
muerto 4 Usco Vilca, mandé tomar sus vestiduras é insignias que en la guerra trahia, asi de oro y plata y joyas que sobre él trahia, como 
de ropas de plumas, plumages y armas y arreos de su persona, y metiendose en unos andas se partid para do su padre Viracocha Ynga 
estaba, llevando consigo 4 sus amigos, los tres que con él habian quedado, como ya la historia os lo ha contado, Vicaguizao, Apomaita y 
Quiliccachiurco Guaranga, y dos mil hombres de guerra que guardaban su persona, donde Ilegado que fué adonde su padre estaba, le 
hizo el acatamiento que 4 su Sefior y padre debia, y asi mismo le puso delante las ynsignias armas y vestidos del Changa Usco Vilca que 
él habia ya vencido y muerto, y rogole que se las pisase aquellas ynsignias del enemigo que habia vencido, y asi mismo-le rogé que le 
pisase ciertos capitanes de Uscu Vilca que presos él alli Ulevaba con sigo, haciendose los echar por tierra, porque es de saber que tenian una 
usanza estos Sefiores, que cuando algun capitan y capitanes venian victoriosos de la guerra, trabian las ynsignias y ornamentos de los tales 
Sefiores que en la guerra mataban y prendian ; y como entrasen los tales capitanes por la ciudad del Cuzco victoriosos, trahian delante de 
si las insignias y prisioneros, é poniendolas delante de sus Sefiores, y los Sefiores viendo el tal despojo é ynsignias y prisioneros delante de 
si, levantase el tal Senor é pisavalo, é daba un paso por encima de los tales prisioneros ; y esto hacian los tales Sefiores en sefial de que 
recibian los tales que lo trahian triunfo y favor del Sefior, y era aceptado en servicio el trabajo que asi habian pasado en sujetar y vencer 
los tales enemigos : y asi mismo el Sefior 4 quien era pedido que pisase las tales cosas y prisioneros, recibia y habia haciendo aquella 
posesion y sefiorio de las tales tierras que asi eran ganadas y vasallos que en ellas vivian. Y al fin de aquesto queriendo tener Ynga 
Yupangui todo respeto 4 su padre, aunque no le habia querido dar favor, le trujo delante todas las cosas que haveis oido, para que su 
padre de él reciviese aquel servicio y aprendiese la posesion de los tales enemigos para sus vasallos sujetados por capitan suyo, el cual 
como viese las tales ynsignias delante de si, y los capitanes que asi le trahia presos en sefial de su victoria, y que le pedia que se los pisase 
como tal su Sefior y padre; en esta sazon tenia consigo el Viracocha Ynga un principal del Usco Vilca paraque con él concertase de la 
manera que se le habia de dar y las condiciones que con él queria poner, y como hasta aquella ora no hubiese dado orden, teniase él consigo, 
y no haviendo él sabido lo que le habia pasado con el Usco Vilca, Ynga Yupangue no tubo por cierto ser aquello que el Ynga Yupangue 
trahia delante del de Usco Vilca, y que él le hubiese muerto y desbaratado, y como él no estubiese satisfecho de lo que veia, mandé que 
pareciese alli delante de él aquel principal que con él estaba, el cual se llamaba Guaman Guaraca, que es el que Usco Vilca embiaba para 
hacer los conciertos como ya habeis oido, y como cosa que tenia por suefio pregunto ¢l Viracocha Ynga al Guaman Guaraca, dime tu 
conoces estos vestidos y ynsignias que sean de tu Sefior Usco Vilca? y como los viese el Guaman Guaraca y conociese y viese los 
capitanes de su Seftor echados por tierra, puso los ojos en el suelo, y comenzé 4 llorar, y echose alli en tierra con ellos, y como esto viese 
Viracocha Ynga que era verdad que hubiese havido vitoria de sus enemigos Ynga Yupangue su hijo, tomé gran pesar y embidia de ello 
por gran odio que le tenia, como ya os hé contado; todo lo cual conocio en él Ynga Yupangue su hijo : tomd gran pesar, y no teniendo 
respeto 4 aquello sino 4 que era su padre y Sefior, tornole 4 rogar Ynga Yupangue que se lo pisase como su Sefior y padre, a lo cual 
respondié Viracocha Ynga que lo mandase meter en cierto aposento, y que lo pisase primero su hijo Ynga Urco, que era el hijo que él mas 
queria, en quien él pensaba dejar despues de sus dias su estado, y lugar de su persona, como ya hemos contado: 4 lo cual respondié Ynga 
Yupangue que 4 él como 4 su padre rogaba que se lo pisase, que él no habia ganado vitoria para que se lo pisasen semejantes mugeres 
como eran Ynga Urco y los demas sus hermanos; que se lo pisase él como persona, 4 quien él tenia por Sefior é su padre, sino que se 
iria: y estando en esto, hizo llamar Viracocha Ynga un Sefior de los que consigo tenia, y hablandole 4 solas dijo que sacase secretamente 
la gente de guerra que consigo tenia, é que la llevase 4 cierta quebrada de monte y paja alta donde estubiese secretamente, y que 
tan de mientras que él iba, que entretendria con palabras 4 Ynga Yupangue en cierto aposento, mientras él emboscase alli la gente, y que 
dentro de elaposento si él pudiese, 4 manos le mataria, y que side allise escapase que le matase é1 en la quebrada del monte por do havia 
de tornar 4 bolver el Ynga Yupangue; y esto concertado saliose aquel Sefior 4 hacer lo que le mandaba Viracocha Ynga. Viracocha 
Ynga bolviose 4 Ynga Yupangue, é comenzole 4 hablar por buenas palabras y 4 mostrarle rostro alegre, ya que le parecié que habria 
hecho aquel capitan suyo lo que le habia mandado. Levantose el Viracocha Ynga y rogé 4 Ynga Yupangue que metiese aquellas cosas 
que llevaba de Usco Vilca dentro del aposento do antes le havia rogado que las mandase meter, para que las pisase-su hijo Ynga Urco y 
que luego se las pisase él. Tornole 4 responder Ynga Yupangue que las pisase él si quisiere, y sino que seiria como ya le havia dicho: y 
viendo Viracocha Ynga que no podia acabar con él que las pisase Ynga Urco, pensando de le matar dentro del aposento, dijo que lo 
mandase meter dentro del aposento, y que estando ellos solos lo pisaria delante de el: y estando en esta porfia llegaronse 4 Ynga - 
Yupangue sus tres buenos amigos, y sospechando la traicion que Viracocha Ynga queria hacer, no consentieron que Ynga Yupangue 

* This metaphor is frequently employed in the Old Testament ; but it may be sufficient in this place to quote the famous prophecy of 
Isaiah, “ For unto us a son is born, unto us a child is given; and the government shall be upon his shoulders,” &c. &c. 

+ All the Jewish kings, from the age of Saul and David to the Babylonian captivity, ruled in the name of the Lord, or atleast pro- 
fessed to their subjects to do so: they were however mere tools in the hands of the priests, who ruled both king and people with the iron 
rod of a theocratic despotism. 

84. NOTES. 

governs and occupies the throne and the cushion where God is honoured *. With faltering language and a few ill- 
pronounced words, I come to salute you; or rather I come to trip and to stumble and to fall down in your presence, 

entrase en el aposento.” The latter extract, which is here inserted in corroboration of Balboa’s account of the Peruvian ceremony of 
trampling upon the bodies of their captive enemies, is taken from the ninth chapter of the inedited History of the Ingas of Peru by 
Juan de Betanzos, who dedicated his work to Don Antonio de Mendoza, the first Viceroy of Peru——We shall in a future note 
cite a passage from the Psalms, which affords some indication that the ancient Jews were accustomed to scalp as well as to circumcise 
the dead bodies of their enemies; an example of which is recorded in the twenty-seventh verse of the eighteenth chapter of the First Book 
of Samuel, where, strange to say, a princess’s dowry is the matter treated uf. The Peruvians therefore, in insulting and trampling upon 
the bodies of their fallen foes, only imitated the manners of the ancient Jews. ‘The Greeks on the contrary honoured those who fell in 
battle, and did not deny them the rites of sepulture; nor is there an action in the life of Alexander which more justly entitles that hero 
to praise, than his treatment of the wife and daughters of Darius,—who in Joshua’s camp, and under the enactments of the Old Law, would, 
in all probability, have had to lament servitude and captivity amongst the least of the misfortunes to which greatness could have been 
reduced by the sudden stroke of adversity. 

* Ezekiel, in the twenty-eighth chapter of his Prophecies, upbraids the prince of Tyre for boasting that he sat in the seat of God; and 
contrasts the idolatrous state into which that city had fallen with its former righteous state, when it was as it were the cherub of God. 
It would really appear from this chapter of Ezekiel that the Jews and the Tyrians were originally of the same religion, and worshiped the 
same deity; or that the Tyrians, when they received the rite of circumcision from the Jews, entered into a covenant with God, which they 
for a long time kept, until in process of time their sacrifices of animals and devoted victims to the Deity, steeling their hearts both against 
religion and humanity, terminated in results such as those described at page 489 of the sixth volume of this work. The following passage 
from Bryant’s Observations, which though long will be found extremely interesting, contains an admission highly favourable to the origin 
which we are inclined to assign to the human sacrifices customary among the Phoenicians: “ These nations had certainly a notion of a 
federal and an expiatory sacrifice. It was derived to them by tradition; and, though originally founded in truth, yet being by degrees 
darkened and misapplied, it gave rise to the worst of profanations, and was the source of the basest and most unnatural cruelty. I have 
shown at large, that human victims were very common among the Phoenicians: and Philo-Byblius tells us from Sanchoniatho, that in 
some of these sacrifices there was a particular mystery : xarerg¢arrovro de of Siomevos puetixws * they, who were devoted for this purpose, 
were offered mystically;’ that is, under a mystical representation. And he proceeds to inform us, that it was in consequence of an example 
which had been set this people by the god Kronus, who in a time of distress offered up bis only son to his father Ouranus. ‘There is 
something in the account very extraordinary, which, [ think, deserves our particular notice. Part of the passage I have mentioned before. 
“1 Eos fy ross marcos ev Tes meyarcus cupGopes Twv xivdvYmV, aves TYS mavTwY Ologas, TO HYamyLEVOY TwY TExVOY TOUS NpoTOUYTES MOAEWS H 

evous, eg Thayny emiBiOovat, AuTpoY Tos THweos Sasmort. Karerdarroyro de of Gidomevos puoTixws. Kpovos roiwuv, ov of Dosines IA meoreyogevoucs, 
Bacirsumy Tyg xweds, xo boregoy mere THY Tou Biov TeAEUTYY Els Tov TOV Koovou doregu xabiegubers, EF Eminmeias vugys, Avwbeer Asyomevys, viov 
exov provoryevy, dv Oice Touro Ieovd ExceAouy (Tou Movoyevous oUTws ers Kas yUY XXAOUMEVOU mAQEL TOIS Dowiks) nsyduvay 2x moAcmov peyiorwy xarErrnporoy 
THY xwoav, Bacirkinw xoouyras oxNuaTs Tov viov, Bapov re xaraoxevaremevos, xarebvoey.” It is told with some variation in another place. 
“ Aosmou de yevenevon, nor Bbopas, Tov Eavrov povoryevy vioy Koovos Oupav mares dAoxapmos.” 1 have shown, that the most approved sacrifices 
among the Phoenicians, were those of men: yet even among these they made a difference; and some were in greater repute than others. 
Many times they offered human victims indiscriminately, and without choice. At other times they selected their own children, and the 
most beloved of their children; which was supposed to be a most acceptable offering. But the greatest refinement in these cruel 
rites was, when the prince of the country, or a chief person in any city, brought an only son to the altar; and there slaughtered him by 
way of atonement, to avert any evil from the people. This last was properly the mystical sacrifice. We are informed by the same 
author, that this custom was instituted in consequence of an example exhibited by Kronus, who is said to have been a god, and likewise 
a king of the country. It appears that this deity was by the Phoenicians called I1*: and in other places he is spoken of as a principal 
god; though in this passage he is mentioned only as a king, who after his death was deified, and instated in the planet which afterwards 
bore his name. He had by the nymph Anobret an only son, who for that reason was called leoud, which in the Phcenician language 
expresses that circumstance. This son in a time of great danger, either from war or pestilence, Kronus is said to have arrayed in a royal 
vesture, and to have led him thus habited to an altar which he had constructed, and there sacrificed him for'the public weal. Such is 
the history, as we receive it through the hands of the Greek historian®; in which, as it here stands, I cannot see anything mysterious. 

1 Euseb. Prep. Evang. lib. i. cap. x. pag. 40; lib. iv. cap. xvi. pag. 142; lib. i. cap. x. pag. 30. 

*In Eusebius, instead of Il, the reading is Israel: the name Il by some copyist having been taken for an abbreviation of the 
former word, which is often in MSS. written with a circumflex, 1a.‘ Utrobique in Eusebii editis, pro IA legitur IogayA; quasi vox illa 
esset hujus compendium. Vertm IAoy, tov xas Kpovov, Ilum, qui Saturnus dictus est, Cceli filium fuisse ex Sanchoniathone non semel 
docuit Philo.” Marsham. Can. Chron. pag, 79. 

° Sanchoniatho cannot possibly be so ancient a writer as he is represented, if his translator has transmitted to us the real and genuine 
sentiments of his author. He has a remark upon the Grecian writers which, though very just, if applied to later times, yet was by no 
means true in the age when he is supposed to have lived: Oi 8 “EAAnves sdguig mavras UmepGadromevor Ta pey mewra mAcioTa eEidimcavro, 
HOI TOS MPOKOTUNMAT! moIKIAwWS eLerpaywdyoay, Tass Te TwV prude Hooves Serryely EmivoouyTes mayroiws émoixiAAoy. Evbev “Hasod0s x. 7. A. Euseb. 

i NOTES. 85 

wishing to cheer and to gladden your heart and your countenance *, and your feet and hands: since it hath 
seemed good unto Him, since our compassionate God, who is everywhere and by whom we live, has been so merciful 

If there be no more meant, than that a king of the country sacrificed his son, and that the people afterwards copied his example, it is an 
instance of a cruel precedent too blindly followed :—but it contains in it nothing of a mystery. When a fact is supposed to have a my- 
stical reference, there should be something more than a bare imitation. Whatever may have been alluded to under this typical repre- 
sentation, it was I believe but imperfectly understood by the Phcenicians, and is derived to us still more obscurely, by being transmitted 
through a secondary channel. The story is not uniformly told, and is besides deeply enveloped in fable. Indeed, the whole of what is 
left us from Sanchoniatho is a mixture of Egyptian and Canaanitish mythology, together with that of Arabia, Chaldea, and other Oriental 
nations: all which is blended together in a very confused and inconsistent manner, and embarrassed with a contradictory theogony. There 
may be observed in it some faint traces of the dispersion of mankind, and of the first peopling the countries above mentioned: to which 
are annexed the names of the first founders of the families who made settlements in these parts. But the whole is so mixed, that it is diffi- 
cult to sift out the truth. Kronus is said to be the same as Il, or Ilus; and is represented as above Adodus', the king of the gods, and 
Demaroos, who was interpreted Jupiter: nay, he was superior even to Astarte, the great empress of heaven : yet is afterwards degraded 
to a petty prince of Canaan, who reigned at Byblus; and who is said to have built him an house, and to have walled it round for his 
security. These circumstances are inconsistent. Kronus was originally esteemed the supreme deity, as is manifest from his being called 
IJ and Ilus. Il was the same name as the El of the Hebrews ; and, according to St. Jerome, was one of the ten names of God. ‘ Phceni- 
cibus I], qui Hebreis El, quod est unum de decem nominibus Dei’. Damascius in the life of [sidorus, as it occurs in Photius, mentions 
that Kronus was worshiped by people of those parts wnder the name of El. oivines xo Svpos tov Kpovov Ha, xas Bya, xas Borabyy 
emovop.atours. Now El was the name of the supreme deity; and was admitted as such originally among all the nations of the East. They 
who applied this name to the suns, still looked up to that object of their adoration, as the chief being and lord of all things. Kronus I 
have before shown to have been a transposition from Con-orus, ‘ the prince of light’; which was properly a title of the Deity. El was 
the same as Elioun, the ‘Hasos of the Greeks, who is termed by Sanchoniatho ‘ the most high’: EAsvy, 6 xaAousevos bores. He had no 
one superior nor antecedent to himself; as may be proved from the same author: adypuy be yevomevwv, Tas yeIpas dpevely 25 odpevous moos 
tov “HAsov? rourov yep, Oyo, Yeov evounstov povoy, Odpavov Kupiov, Becdcapyy xadovyres. Kronus, therefore, could not, according to the prin- 
ciples of the very people appealed to, have sacrificed his son to his father: for he was the chief and original deity, and had no one above 
him to whom he could make such offering. Ouranus, to whom he is erroneously thought to have exhibited this sacrifice, is the same as 
El and Elioun; being another title of the same person. [It is a transposition of Ain Aur, or Our, ‘the fountain of light’; which the 
Greeks rendered Our-ain, and thence constituted Ouranus and Ouranie. Ouranus was taken by them for the vast expanse of the 
heavens ; but was originally no other than the orb of day, from whence all light is derived: under which symbol God was worshiped 
in the first dawning of idolatry; till the reality became obscured by the semblance, and was in the end totally lost under repeated repre- 
sentations: every attribute and every title being personated. Anobret, by whom Kronus is said to have had a son, and who is introduced 
as a feminine, is by Bochart supposed to signify ‘one conceived by grace’. It may be so: yet I cannot help thinking, that it is the same 
as Ouranus; and however it may have been by the Greeks differently construed, and represented as the name of a woman, yet it is 
reducible to the same elements as the former; and is from the same radix, though differently inodified. I take it to have been originally 
Ain Ober; and as Melech Ober* signifies ‘the prince of light’, Ouc Ober ‘the lord of light’, I imagine Ain Ober to be ‘ the fountain of 
light’, framed by a like analogy, and made an emblem of the divine emanation. [ have been obliged to take these pains, in order to deter- 
mine who the deity was whom the Pheenicians are supposed to have copied in this particular : and at the same time to show, that nothing 
could have preceded for them to imitate; but that what they did was a type and representation of something to come. It is the only 
instance of any sacrifice in the Gentile world which is said to bermystical, and it is attended with circumstances which are very extra- 
ordinary. Kronus, we find, was the same as El and Elioun: and he is termed “‘tyioros and ‘Ypoupevios.. He is moreover said to have 
had the Elohim for his coadjutors ; Suypoyos’Iaov rou Kpovov EAweip, éxexaydyoav®. He had no father to make any offering to: for he 
was the father of ali, and termed Kupios Odgavov by the confession of the author by whom the accountis given. These sacrifices therefore 
had no reference to any thing past, as I have before mentioned; but alluded to a great event, to be accomplished afterwards. They were 

lib. 1, cap. x. pag. 39. Could these be the observations of a writer contemporary with Semiramis, and prior to the war of Troy, as 
Sanchoniatho is supposed to have been? or rather, has the character here given of the Grecians the least resemblance to that people at 
‘so early a season? ‘The strictures are certainly the remarks of a much later historian. 

1 Aorapry i meyiory, xo Zeus Anuucepoos, xo Adweos Bacsrcus Oewy, “Gucirevoy trys xwpus Kpovov yywpne 

2 Hieron. Epist 136. ad Marcellum. 

8 Servius in Virg. Aineid. lib. i. de Belo Pheenice: “‘Omnes in istis partibus Solem colunt, qui istorum lingua Hel dicitur.”—See 

Vossius de Idolat. vol. 1. lib. ii. cap. iv. 
* Many instances occur of the word 118 being rendered at different times and by different authors, Aur, Aver, Aber, Ober. Hence 

Melech Ober of Hesychius, of which I have before treated. 
5 Euseb. Preep. Evang. pag. 37. 

* «To gladden the countenance” was a Hebrew expression, as many passages of Scripture might be adduced to show. 

VOL, VIII. (Z) 

86 NOTES: 

as to send into this world a precious stone and a rich feather, which is your image, your blood, your hair, and your 
nails, and a fragment cut from yourself. O my lord, your image and your likeness has indeed been born; you have 
budded, you have bloomed. May our Lord be praised for this! He has been born and has come into existence in this 
world ;—he has descended, and he has been sent from the place of the supreme Gods, whose habitation is above the nine 
heavens, to bear in his arms the blameless people of our Lord, whose deserts entitle them to this*. Perhaps he will 
live and grow up; perhaps he will enjoy long life t, and will serve our Lord for a length of time, and will be known 
by his whole people, kingdom, and state ; perhaps the state will deserve to enjoy him, and will shelter itself beneath 
his shade, and beneath his protection. O most compassionate lord and dearly beloved son, highly esteemed 
personage, I shall, perhaps, if I address you at greater length, occasion weariness to your head and stomach, and shall 
interrupt and divert you from your labours, for the good of the state. I desire that you may live many years in the 
exercise of the duties of your royal station. With these few words I have saluted and offered my congratulations to 
your royal person, O my grandson, who art a person highly to be esteemed.”—The following passage is taken from the 
fifteenth chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain: it contains the address of some Mexican noble 
to the Mexican people, exhorting them to attend to the admonitions which the king of Mexico had given to them in 
his public oration, delivered immediately after his coronation. (The oration of the king will be found in the preceding 
chapter of the same book, which throws much light on the manners, customs, and laws of the Mexicans.) ‘“ Hearken 
attentively, ye who are present, both men and women; your lord and king has addressed you in person; he has pro- 
mulgated in your presence doctrines which are profitable and highly to be prized; he has scattered chalchuitles and 
sapphires before you {, rare gems and highly worthy of being esteemed, which lords and persons of great authority are 
wont to treasure up in their breasts, who maintain nations by their counsels and their laws: he has uncovered in your 
presence his chests and coffers in which he keeps his riches, wherein are stored up the treasures of great princes 
destined for the correction and instruction of their subjects. And since you have heard and witnessed what he has said 
and done, there can be no excuse for any of you, as many as are here present, failing to retain a sense of the obligation 
which your king has conferred upon you in personally addressing you, and you will accordingly be bound to keep the 
precepts which you have heard. Although it so happens that there are many senators and wise and eloquent persons 
present who might have addressed you on his behalf,—for they possess the privilege of speaking to the people and pro- 

instituted probably in consequence of a prophetic tradition, which, I imagine, had been preserved in the family of Esau, and transmitted 
through his posterity to the people of Canaan. The account is, to be sure, mixed with much extraneous matter ; and has been dressed up, 
and adapted to the Grecian taste. But let us make some allowance for the colouring, and divest it, as far as we can, of fable; and we 
may possibly arrive at the truth, which is concealed beneath. The mystical sacrifice of the Phoenicians had these requisites, that a prince 
was to offer it, and his only son was to be the victim: and as I have shown that this could not relate to any thing prior, let us consider 
what is said upon the subject as future, and attend to the consequence. or if the sacrifice of the Phoenicians was a type of another to 
come, the nature of this last will be known from the representation by which it was prefigured. According to this, El, the supreme 
Deity, whose associates were the Elohim, was in process of time to have a son, éyamyrov ‘well beloved’, povoyevy “his only begotten’: who 
was to be conceived, as some render it, of ‘grace’, but according to my interpretation, of ‘the fountain of light’. He was to be called 
Jeoud', whatever that name may relate to; and to be offered'up as a sacrifice to his father, Avrpov,; by way of satisfaction and redemp- 
tion, riugors Seoos, to atone for the sins of others, and avert the just vengeance of God; dri ryg mavrav dbogas®, to prevent universal 
corruption, and at the same time general ruin, And it is further remarkable, he was to make this grand sacrifice, BacsAimm onypors xexo~ 
oyuevos, invested with the emblems of royalty. These surely are very strong expressions, and the whole is an aggregate of circumstances 
highly significant, which cannot be the result of chance. All that I have requested to be allowed me in the process of this recital, is this 
simple supposition, that this mystical sacrifice was a type of something to come: how truly it corresponds to that, which I imagine it 
alludes to, I submit to the reader’s judgement. I think, it must necessarily be esteemed a most wonderful piece of history *.” 

* Well might the reader here exclaim with Las Casas, Loquela tua manifestum te fecit. 

+ Isaiah, in the tenth verse of the fifty-third chapter of his Prophecies, says of the Messiah, “ He shall see his seed, he shall prolong his 
days :” to which predictions the Jews refer to prove that the Messiah was to be a temporal prince, who would leave behind him heirs to 
a throne which he himself would long triumphantly and gloriously fill. 

{ To “cast pearls before swine” was a Hebrew proverb, which implied a mode of expression similar to that employed by the Mexicans. 

1 Supposed by some to be the same as Jehid. Gen. xxii. 1. 

Aovvas tyy buxyy Avtpoy dvr woAAwy. Unum pro multis dabitur caput. 

See Porph, de Abstinen. lib. ii. pag. 225.—Vossius de Idol. vol. i. lib. i. cap. xviii. pag. 142,143. Vol. i. lib. ii. cap. ii. 
pag. 322, 325. 

2 

3 

NOTES... 87 

mulgating to them the laws made by the king,—your lord and king has on the present occasion himself addressed you, 
on account of the lively concern which his heart feels at your customs and your manner of living. And be assured and 
doubt not that he is our true father and our true mother; the mother who bore you and the father who begot you is 
not so truly your father and mother as he, doubtless: he who gives you a light *, and instructions how to live and how 
to conduct yourself, is your true father; and not he who never conferred such a benefit upon you. You have at length 
become acquainted with your true father and your true mother +, whom you must in future obey and love }, and 
whom you must account your riches and your prosperity: here you behold him; he himself has addressed you, 
although you are a poor vassal and a person of mean consideration in the state, and he is your king and lord; before 
you he has uncovered and poured forth the treasures of his doctrine, which is more to be prized than golden beads and 
rich feathers, or than chalchiutles and rare and costly sapphires: And thou, who hast a father and a mother, who art 
noble and illustrious, or who art the descendant of a race distinguished in arms, or art the son of some rich man, and 
hast been born and bred up in luxuries,—dost thou reject the advice and admonition which thy father and thy mother 
give thee? Behold the king himself present, whose words thou shouldst receive and store up in thine heart §, and 
whose instructions thou art bound to keep by thee as a mirror, whom it is thy duty to obey: but if thou wilt not obey 
him, whom then wilt thou obey ? who must appear ? for whose coming dost thou reserve thy obedience? But shouldst 
thou peradventure reject his instructions,—act as it seemeth good unto thee, since thou wilt certainly meet with thy 
deserts ; it is quite evident that thou art a lost and ruined character; thou hast an evil destiny, and wilt not go 
unpunished ; since the wrath of God is upon thee||, it is impossible that some great calamity should not speedily 
overtake thee or be now on the way; perhaps some shocking fate, or some hardship or severe chastisement from our 
Lord God is coming upon thee; perhaps thou hast deserved to become blind or lame { before the time, or that thy 
flesh should rot away ** with some disease; or perhaps thou wilt wander about poor and miserable, in a state of filth 
and destitution, and wilt behold thyself and envy thy former state |}. Let me know now, therefore, what it is that thy 
heart desires. Dost thou wish that the Lord our God should come and speak to thee in a human form {{, and with the 

* This was a Hebrew phrase, as we learn from the sixteenth verse of the eighth chapter of the Book of Esther; “The Jews had light, 
and gladness, and joy, and honour.” 

++ The king of Mexico is here recognised in the twofold character of father and mother of his people, in which sense the Mexicans 
might have bestowed the epithet of father and mother upon Tezcatlipoca. 

+ Garcia says that the Mexicans were acquainted with the Decalogue, and obeyed most of its precepts. There certainly appears to be 
an allusion here to the fifth commandment. 

§ The Virgin Mary is said in the fifty-first verse of the second chapter of St. Luke, to have kept the sayings of her son in her heart. 

|| The notion of the wrath of God falling upon the wicked, and a speedy divine judgement overtaking them on account of their sins, was 
very common amongst the ancient Jews, and would have been extremely salutary if they had known what constztuled crime, and how to 
distinguish it from a mere breach of the ceremonial law, such as was the act of healing on the sabbath-day. 

q These are the identical judgements denounced against the Jews, in case of disobedience, in the twenty-eighth chapter of iorereeay. 

#%* The fifth chapter of Numbers denounces a similar judgement against the woman who was convicted of adultery, by drinking the 
bitter water in the trial of jealousy. It is extremely singular that the Indians of New Granada, when suspicious of the chastity of their 
wives, should have resorted to the expedient of determining their innocence by compelling them to take a considerable dose of tomate or 
Indian pepper, under the full persuasion that if they were innocent they would escape unhurt; but that if they were guilty, effects 
similar to those described in the twenty-seventh verse of the fifth chapter of Numbers would inevitably follow. Simon records this cruel 
Indian superstition in the following passage of the eighth chapter of the fourth book of his inedited Noticias Historiales: “ No reparaban 
mucho algunos Yndios, quando se casaban, en hallar 4 sus esposas donzellas, no obstante da ley que havia acerca de esto; antes algunos 
quando conocian no havia llegadv hombre 4 ellas, las tenian por disgraciadas y sin ventura, pues no la havian tenido en que hombres se 
les aficionasen. Y con este pensamiento las abhorrecian como 4 mugeres desdichadas. Si bien es verdad, que sentian mucho despues el 

adulterio; y asi 4 la que sentian sospechosa de esto, le hacian comer 4 priesa mucho agi, con que se abrasaban las entraifias, y con la 

misma le decian que confessara sw delito; lo que hacian muchas veces con la fuerza del tormento, y aun lo que no havian hecho. 
Dabanles en confessando agua, con que mitigaban el ardor del pimiento, y sentenciabanlas 4 muerte, como lo disponia la ley, y 4 el 
adultero. Otras no confesaban, y quedaban purgadas con el tormento del indicio, y les hacian grandes fiestas.” Another custom, no léss 
cruel than the preceding, prevailed among the Indians of New Granada: women who gave birth to twins put one of them immediately to 
death, from a notion that their birth could only have been in consequence of a violation of that Mosaic law to which Clemens Alexan- 
drinus alludes in the passage, 6 Muons dmouyer tov eyxuwy Tous avOgac. 

4+ This appears the only sense in which the words y te desearas can be understood. 

tt The Mexicans believed that Tezcatlipoca was a spirit, and that when he appeared to mortals they only saw and conversed with ‘his 
shade... The Jews reconciled in the same manner the passage in the Old Testament “ No man hath seen God,” with the many other 

88 NOTES. 

‘words of a man *? would thy heart peradventure be then content? O most presumptuous man, what wouldst thou? 
whom dost thou account thyself? whom dost thou take thyself to be? who art thou? We here display, we here bring 
forth to public view, as it were from a chest or a coffer, we here throw and scatter before thee golden beads, rich 
feathers, and fine and very rare jewels, such as it is not customary to give nor even to name, which are stored up 
amongst the treasures of great princes, and which they alone keep and possess. O hapless man! has thy lord and 
king, that great and cherished lord and much-loved prince, been elected and sent for thee alone? and do we scatter 
and pour forth for thee alone the treasures which he keeps stored up in his breast? dost thou think, wretch! that the 
affairs in which he occupies himself are few? dost thou know how weighty a task it is to rule? dost thou know how 
great is the labour of governing a state? Doubtless thou knowest not, and dost not consider. There is not a day nor a 
night of this world that he omits to weep and to sigh for thee, and for other worthless persons like thee; this lord and 
king, whom thou here beholdest, night and day falls on his knees and arms, praying and groaning for thee before 
God f, in order to know how he shall conduct himself in ruling over thee, and bearing thee in his arms { during the 
days of his life, and to learn the number of the years which may remain to him of life §, that he may bear thee in his 
arms, and guide thee zn the straight way, and to know what God purposes to do with thee, and what has been deter- 
mined in heaven and in hell concerning thee; or whether peradventure thou art forsaken and an outcast ||: dost thou 
peradventure feel apprehension on account of the calamitous and fearful things that are to come 4], which the ancients 

passages in Scripture in which persons are declared to have seen him: for example, with the assertion of Amos, in the seventh chapter 
of his Prophecies, “ And behold the Lord stood upon a wall made by a plumb-line, with a plumb-line in his hand.” 

* This was considered a mark of extreme condescension by the Hebrew prophets, who did not scruple to put words to that effect into 
the mouth of God, when he showed himself weary of their complaints. 

+ The Mexican kings appear to have recollected the words of David in the seventeenth verse of the fifty-first Psalm, “ The sacrifices of 
God are a broken spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise ;”” and to have imitated the example of the same king, in 
getting up at midnight to pray ; who thus commemorates his midnight vigils in the sixty-second verse of the hundred and nineteenth Psalm, 
«« At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee because of thy righteous judgements.” The reverential posture in which they prayed 
appears likewise to have been borrowed from the Jews, whose ancestor Abraham is twice declared to have fallen upon his face before God, 
in the seventeenth chapter of Genesis; and whose leader Joshua lay so long in that position, as to receive a sharp rebuke from the Lord, 
as he himself informs us in the tenth verse of the seventh chapter of his Book: “ And the Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee wp, wherefore liest 
thou thus upon thy face?” Moses and Aaron are also recorded in the twenty-second verse of the sixteenth chapter of Numbers to have 
fallen upon their faces before the Lord, and prayed: “ And they fell upon their faces and said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall 
one man sin and wilt thou be wroth with all the congregation?” The name here applied to God corresponds exactly in signification with 
the epithets Tonacatecutli, Ypalnemchualoni, and Pachacamac, which the Mexicans and Peruvians bestowed upon their supreme deity. 

{ This metaphorical expression occurs in the following passage of the first chapter of Deuteronomy : “‘ The Lord your God which goeth 
before you, -he shall fight for you, according to all that he did for you in Egypt before your eyes, and in the wilderness, where thou hast 
seen that the Lord thy God bore thee as a man doth bear his son, in all the way that ye went, until ye came unto this place.” 

§ It is evident from the language of David in the ninth verse of the seventy-fourth Psalm, that the Jews believed that God revealed 
to his elect the knowledge of times and periods: the Psalmist complaining there that God had forsaken his people, exclaims, “‘ We see 
not our signs; there is no more any prophet, neither is there among us any that knoweth how long.” In the preceding verse of the same 
Psalm, he notices in the following terms the profaneness of the heathen : “ They said in their, hearts, Let us destroy them (the Jews) together; 
they have burnt up ad the synagogues of God in the land.” We may be permitted to observe, that the Septuagint translation of the last 
passage, Eimay év ry xapdie abrow 4 cuyyeven adrov eas roauto, Aevre xaramavowpey tes Eopras Kupiou amo rg ys, which substitutes, ‘let 
us put an end to their festivals’ for the words ‘they have burnt up the synagogues’, exhibits a preferable reading,—for the simple reason 
that the Jews in the age of David had no synagogues to burn. ‘This, Basnage himself admits in the following passage of the preface to 
his History. of the Jews: “The institution of synagogues is not older than the Maccabees; for we read nowhere that they were burnt, 
or demolished, or. profaned, during the persecution under Antiochus. I confess that it is very wonderful that God, who had enjoined the 
religious observation. of the Sabbaths, had not likewise provided means to have them celebrated, by ordering in every city some places of 
public worship, and Levites, at the head of every congregation, to read and explain the Law; but if all that we have said of the novelty of 
synagogues is seriously examined, it will easily appear that those who maintain it are not mistaken.” 

|| This passage is very remarkable, because a principal threat which God held out to the Jews was, that they should be forsaken and 
outcasts, if they disregarded the covenant which he had made with Abraham, and disobeyed the precepts of the Mosaic law. It deserves 
to be noticed, that not a syllable is said in the Old Testament about the future repeal of the Mosaic law, or the possible abrogation of 
God’s covenant with Abraham; nor is there anywhere an allusion to dispersion becoming the punishment of the Jews, on account of their 
puttmg to death the Messiah: the stress, therefore, which Christians lay upon the standing miracle of the Jewish dispersion, must to a 
Mahometan or Jew appear quite idle. 

_ 4 The coming of tribulations caused the same alarm to the ancient Jews, as we are given to understand in the New Testament. 

NOTES. 89 

and those who have gone before us beheld not, but feared? dost thou heed or take account of eclipses of the sun, of 
earthquakes, tempests at sea, or the bursting asunder of mountains *? hast thou peradventure any foreboding of the 
distress which will be felt when the various tribulations come with commotion on every side; so that looking on every side 
for help, no favour will be found? wilt thou peradventure foresee, and is it thy duty to calculate, when war shall arise, 
and the enemy shall come to conquer this kingdom, state, and city, in which thou livest? is it thy duty to think with 
fear and with trembling, whether peradventure the city shall be destroyed and levelled with the ground, and of the great 
trouble and afiliction that shall befall us when the ruin and destruction which overtakes cities, states, and kingdoms, shall 
be beheld, and all shall suddenly de left in darkness, and all shall be destroyed? or shall peradventure the time arrive 
when they will make us all slaves, and we shall be employed in the meanest services, which are to draw stones and 
timber }, or to attend upon the sick ; famine will perhaps afflict us, which causes such mortality amongst the common 
people as to destroy a city and turn it into a wilderness. Grave cares belong likewise to the military department of 
the state, in devising the means to repell the foe, and to ensure the safety of the city and state; for wars and battles in 
which much blood is shed, and many lives lost, are things which never come to an end. These are the cares in which 
those who rule and govern, occupy, toil, and afflict themselves, by night and by day: and thou who art here present, 
hast no other care than for thyself alone; and thy rulers bear thee on their shoulders and in their arms. Great, certainly, 
are the toils of kings, princes, and commanders ; take heed therefore, now that our lord addresses thee and exhorts 
thee to thy duties and to a right course of life, that thou dost not secretly despise nor undervalue him; thou shouldest 
on the contrary esteem him the more for deigning to speak to thee in person, and to look upon thee; and our Lord 
God inspires words into him, and thou shouldest prize what he has said, and account thyself unworthy to hear his 
words, and thou oughtest to preserve them within thee like gold within a garment, keep them as a knapsack { (por 
mochila), as long as thou livest in this world, and take care not to lose them; put them within thine heart, for they 
will be life and consolation to thee as long as thou livest: thou hast received a great favour,—never perhaps didst 
thou receive one like unto it; neither thy father nor thy mother has conferred so great a favour upon thee, and 

* These were the very signs of which the Jews entertained so much irrational dread, and which the Mexicans noted down in their 
paintings. It is a good sign of the present times, that the prejudices which sheltered themselves under this head of the Gorgon, are 
fast wearing away, and that Truth has already half unsheathed her scymitar. 

+ Itis evident that the Jews considered this the most degrading kind of servitude, since it was that which fell to the lot of their 
Nethinims or hereditary bondsmen, who, from the manner in which they are mentioned in the second verse of the ninth chapter of the First 
Book of Chronicles, appear to have occupied the same place in the Jewish state, as the Helots among the Spartans: and yet we are told 
by Mr. Wilberforce that the slave-trade is unlawful, because it is forbidden in Scripture. How much better it would be to have recurred 
to the Rights of Man, whether written by Payne or Volney, for arguments against the slave-trade, than to employ casuistry to puta stop 
to it, when the meaning of Scripture is as plain as in the following passage of the ninth chapter of Joshua! “And Joshua called for 
them, and he spake unto them, saying, Wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying, We are very far from you, when ye dwell among us? Now 
therefore ye are cursed, and there shall none of you be freed from being bondsmen, and hewers of wood and drawers of water, for the house 
of my God.” It appears from the twenty-first chapter of the Second Book of Samuel that the Hebrew Nethinims, who were otherwise 
named the Gibeonites, were treated with extreme cruelty by Saul, and the Jewish nobility in his reign. This chapter (the Septuagint 
reading of which varies very much from the Hebrew) is further remarkable from the example which it affords of men being hung wp in 
the sun before the Lord, as devoted victims to him: these men were seven grandsons of Saul, nephews by marriage to David; if indeed 
five of them were not his own stepsons. The expressions 2xAexrous Kupiov, and 2kyaiaoay adrous ev rp dpes évayts Kupiov, leave no doubt 
of the nature of the human sacrifice permitted and sanctioned by David. 

{ It was usual for the Mexicans to fasten cargoes to their backs by a bandage which passed round their foreheads, and which thus 
allowed them to have their hands at full liberty. Many representations occur in the Mexican paintings, of merchants carrying their goods 
in this manner: we shall however only refer to one in the sixtieth page of the Borgian MS., observing at the same time that the ancient 
Jewish phylacteries were fastened bya bandage round the forehead, and that there does appear to be an allusion in the admonition, ‘ Keep 
them as a knapsack, to the manner in which these phylacteries (doubtless the most precious burthen that a Jew could bear, since they 
contained some portion of the written word of God,) were worn and bound to their foreheads. We may here observe, that three kinds of 
phylacteries were in use among the Jews, one of which was fastened to the head, the second to the arm, and the third was fixed in the 
door-posts of their houses. Their primitive use was as memorials; but the secondary purpose for which they were worn, was as an 
amulet to drive away devils, and as an outward and visible sign of inward and spiritual grace, denoting to all that the Jews were God’s 
chosen people. The early Christians imitated the Jews in wearing phylacteries ; but the custom having been denounced by several of 
the Fathers, and condemned by more than one Council of the Church, they abandoned them for beads, which served equally well to 
remind them of the proper season for prayer,—the principal use, according to the Rabbis, of the unjustly lauded, and, in process of time, 

unduly vituperated phylacteries. 
VOL. VIII. (2A) 

90 NOTES. 

never mayest thou expect to receive such another. To conclude what I have to say,—I wish all who are here present 
happiness and prosperity, which is my principal reason for having addressed these few words to you for your benefit, 
and for the service of our king and lord. God grant you, my sons, abundant tranquillity!” Amongst the many 
judgments with which God threatened to visit the Jews on account of their sins, the destruction of their city and 
temple, and their own subjugation to a foreign yoke, were always considered by them the most terrible; which, having 
for ages been the theme of the denunciation of their prophets, twice actually took place; first by the Babylonians, and 
lastly by the Romans. It cannot however be denied that even if they had not been foretold by prophetic inspiration, 
these events might not easily have been foreseen ; since it was quite improbable that the Jews,—whose state, so small 
‘in extent, so incapable from its own resources of maintaining large armies, and situated so exactly in an angle between 
the vast monarchies of Assyria and Egypt, whose laws'and institutions the Hebrew populace were perpetually reviling, — 
should have ever remained unmolested by their formidable neighbours, whose mutual jealousies, and the policy of Tyre, 
(which naturally looked to the adjoining land of Canaan for supplies independent of Egypt and Assyria,) were its best 
safeguard ; although not likely to be a perpetual cause of Jewish independence, since those states were not exempt, nor 
could ever have been supposed to be exempt, from the common fate of empires, which are not doomed to be eternal. We 
have had therefore events foretold by the Hebrew prophets, which in themselves were extremely probable, and which 
accordingly afterwards came to pass. The destruction of the city of Jerusalem and the Temple, it need scarcely be ob- 
served, forms a memorable epoch in Jewish history; and, although it might not at first appear probable, that if a Jewish 
colony had founded, at a subsequent period, a city and temple in any other part of the globe, they would have been likely 
to believe, on the strength of ancient prophecies, that that city was likewise devoted by God to destruction,—still, when 
we consider the excess of Jewish fanaticism, this supposition is by no means inadmissible: and indeed the signs* which 
the Mexicans pretend preceded the conquest of their city by the Spaniards, so nearly resembling those declared by 
Josephus to have occurred at the destruction of Jerusalem, render it extremely probable that this was the case: whilst 
it is difficult to avoid assimilating the famous prophecy of Quecalcoatle concerning the destruction of the temple of 
Cholula, (which was speedily to follow his departure from that city,) and the mention of the coming cf tribulations in 
the passage referred to in the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain,—to the prophetic denunciations of Christ 
against the city of Jerusalem and the Temple, as recorded in the following passage of the twenty-first chapter of the 
Gospel of Saint Luke: “ And as some spake of the temple, how it was adorned with goodly stones and gifts, he said, 
As for these things which ye behold, the days will come in the which there shall not be left one stone upon another, 
that shall not be thrown down. And they asked him, saying, Master, but when shall these things be? and what sign 
will there be when these things come to pass? And he said, Take heed that ye be not deceived: for many shall come 
in my name, saying, | am Christ; and the time draweth near: go ye not therefore after them. But when ye shall hear 
of wars and commotions, be not terrified: for these things must first come to pass; but the end is not by and by. Then 
said he unto them, Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and great earthquakes shall be in 
divers places, and famznes, and pestilences; and fearful sights and great signs shall there be from heaven.’—“ And 
when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that the desolation thereof is nigh. Then let them 
which are in Judea flee to the mountains; and let them which are in the médst of it depart out ; and let not them that 
are in the countries enter thereinto. For these be the days of vengeance, that al/ things which are written may be ful- 
filled}. But woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck, in those days! for there shall be great 
distress in the land, and wrath upon this people. And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away 
captive into a// nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be ful- 

* The Mexicans resembled the Jews in believing that every great event must necessarily be preceded by its particular sign. This notion, 
which. even the disciples seem to have imbibed, probably originated in the Hebrew doctrine of types. 

+ ‘This advice of Christ, supposing it to have been acted upon by the Jews when they beheld Jerusalem devastated by the Roman 
arms, would itself have led to an immediate abandonment of their native soil, and to a voluntary national dispersion. This supposition, 
however, involves too great an improbability to be even for a moment admissible. It is however exceedingly deserving of remark, that there 
is no necessity for supposing that Christ’s recommendation might not have been quite in accordance with the feelings and prejudices of the 
Jews of that age, who, in acting agreeably to it, would still have only followed the impulse of their own blind superstition. They are 
indeed the most likely people in the world to have been suddenly led away by a divine panic, and, yielding to the artifices of two such 
priests as Quecalcoatle and ‘Totec, to have plunged into a real, to avoid an imaginary evil. 

{ The Tultecas seem to have had a tradition of this denunciation, and to have adopted in consequence the singular precautionary measure 
of separating themselves from their wives during the long period which their flight lasted. 

NOTES. QO} 

filled. And there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars* ; and upon the earth distress of nations, 
with perplexity ; the sea and the waves roaring ; men’s hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after} those things 
which are coming on the earth: for the powers of heaven shall be shaken. And then shall they see the Son of man 
coming in a cloud with power and great glory. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift 
up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh. And he spake to them a parable; Behold the fig-tree, and all 
the trees; when they now shoot forth, ye see and know of your own selves that summer is now nigh at hand. So 
likewise ye, when ye see these things come to pass, know ye that the kingdom ofGod is igh at hand. Verily I 
say unto you, This generation shall not pass away, till all be fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my 
words shall not pass away.” The calamities which the Jews suffered, as well during the siege of their city as after it 
was taken by the Romans, were undoubtedly great; yet Josephus is forced to admit that their own obstinacy, and the 
hatred which they manifested on all occasions for the religion of the Romans, had converted a generous foe into an 
implacable enemy. It does not, however, follow that history can present no parallel to the picture drawn by Jo- 
sephus of Jewish suffering: since, without reverting to the fate of Tyre, Carthage, or of other cities, which, after 
sustaining long and memorable sieges, have been taken by storm and devoted by the conquerors to fire and the 
sword,—the following description, by Peter Martyr, of the final overthrow of the city of Mexico by the Spaniards, 
after a sanguinary and protracted siege of seventy days duration, carried on by water as well as by land, renders it 
extremely questionable whether the destruction of that city was not accompanied with as many evils calculated to 
afflict humanity, as that of Jerusalem. This description is contained in the eighth chapter of the above-mentioned 
author's fifth Ocean Decade, to which we have prefixed the English translation of the most material portion of it 
from the third volume of Hakluyt’s Collection of Voyages: 

“ Of the casting our men out of the Laky City, Tenustitan, or by what means, after so great an overthrow, through 
the aid of the bordering enemies of the Tenustitans, they began to gather strength again, hath been sufficiently 
spoken: let us now therefore at one cast pass over to the neighbourhood of the lake, omitting mean actions. In a city 
of 8000 houses (but consisting of immeasurable suburbs, reaching eight leagues from Tascalteca,) called Tazcuco, 
Cortes with a mighty army settled his abode. The Tazcucane citizens, taught by the example of their neighbours, 
durst not deny him, lest they should be made a prey. Cortes had left shipwrights in Tascalteca, to make thirteen 
brigantines (as we mentioned before), while he by warring subdued the bordering enemies round about. As soon as 
he first settled his army in Tazcuco he commanded the joints of the brigantines to be brought, which were carried 
board by board, or piece by piece, upon the shoulders of the Tascaltecas and Guazuzingi; neither did they unwill- 
ingly undertake that labour and pains, so cruel is their hatred against the Tenustitans, that they account all travail 
and pains whatsoever delightful directed to the destruction of the Tenustitans. Behold a thing not easy for the people 
of Rome to have done when their estate most flourished. From Tazcuco to the lake runneth a small river, each bank 
whereof is fenced with houses standing together in a row, with orchards lying between them. In the mean season, 
while the joints of the brigantines were set together, and while the oars and all the flags were making, he commanded 
a trench to be cut from Tazcuco to the lake, for the space of three Italian miles, and four fathoms deep somewhere, 
most strongly fortified with their bulwarks, which might receive a river to carry the brigantines to the lake. And 
within the space of fifty days, with eight thousand continual pioneers of the men of that province, he finished the 
work. But when the trenches were ended, and the brigantines framed and set together, he burned and destroyed 
many cities. both on the land and standing upon the lakes, whereby he was molested when he fled away: so that the 
Tenustitans durst not now peep out, nor join battle with our men in open field. The thirteen brigantines being 
launched in the lake by that admirable work of cutting of a trench, the Tenustitans saw their present ruin and de- 
struction ; yet forced by necessity they took courage. Understanding of the coming of the brigantines into the lake, 

* The interpreter of the Codex Telleriano-Remensis informs us, (at page 150 of the sixth volume of this work,) that the Mexicans 
believed that the star Sitlal-choloha smoked some few years before the arrival of the Spaniards amongst them. So singular a belief pro- 
bably originated in that prophecy of Joel to which Christ himself refers in the twenty-fifth verse of the twenty-first chapter of St. Luke. 

+ The Mexicans were extremely superstitious about all celestial phenomena; they were apprehensive of eclipses, and feared lest the 
moon should he darkened and the sun should be turned into blood, It deserves to be remarked that the same unreasonable fears pre- 
vailed amongst the Jews, whom they closely resembled, both in expecting the coming of great tribulations, and in believing that they 
would be preceded by signs in the heavens above and in the earth beneath. The typical ordinances of the Mosaic law appear to have 
led the Jews into the amazing absurdity of supposing that every great event must have its preceding sign. 

02 IN O18, Sy 

a huge multitude of boats in an instant of time, with armed warriors, came speedily rowing to the brigantines; they 
say, that in a trice there were five thousand present, which also the citizens reported after. the victory obtained. The 
boats coming towards them, by force of the ordnance planted in the prows and sides of the brigantines, were dispersed 
even as little clouds by fierce winds; so wandering and rowing in the open sea of the lake, they shrewdly molested 
and vexed the city with the brigantines. . In a few days’ space Cortes took away from the city their fresh river water, 
their conduits being torn asunder by Christopher Olit: and that no provision of victual might be brought from any 
place to them that were besieged, he compassed the city with three armies; with one from Tazcuco, by Astapalappa, 
which he destroyed utterly, because it was more mighty than the rest, and at that time the ancient seat of Mutec- 
zuma’s brother. Cortes himself had the command thereof, with more than threescore thousand warriors, as they say; 
far many more than he desired, both for the hope of booty and liberty, came now flocking to him from all the pro- 
vinces; so that Cortes himself kept the bridge which came from Astapalappa to the princely city, whereof mention 
was made before, and fighting by little and little, the enemy withdrawing themselves, by strong hand, and by force of 
the ordnance, and the horse before, and by the help and favour of the brigantines on the sides, he got the bridge as 
far as the castle, whereof we speak in the meeting of the king Muteczuma with our men, where we described that 
castle to be fortified with two towers, abutting wpon two bridges which are joined upon the arches thereof. In that 
place Cortes pitched his camp, and by that means possessed the entrance of either bridge. On the contrary he 
commanded other camps to be placed for defence of another great bridge on the north, over which he gave the charge 
to Gonsalus Sandovalus, a soldier to execute justice, which the Spaniard called Alguazil: and over the third army, 
encamped on another side of the city, he committed the charge to Petrus Alvaradus. They say that those three 
armies consisted of one hundred and twenty thousand soldiers. So the miserable city, compassed on every side with 
enemies, endured extreme want of all things; and was no less wasted and consumed through the ambition of a few 
(whose greedy desire of sovereignty drew the unhappy people to that misery), than it was afilicted by the enemy. 
The people might easily have been persuaded to subject their neck unto our yoke, but that the king’s sister's son, 
who usurped the kingdom, and the pride of his nobles withstood it. For seventy days together, both before and 
behind, it was continually vexed and molested with incursions and assaults. Within the streets of the city itself 
our men returning to the camp toward the evening, they write, that five hundred and sometimes a thousand were 
slain at every. encounter: the more cruel the slaughter was, so much the more plentifully and daintily the Guazuzingi, 
Tascaltecanes, and the rest of the auxiliary provincials supped, who used to bury their enemies which fell in battle 
in their bellies; neither durst Cortes forbid it. They say but few of our men always were slain. Therefore both by 
the sword and famine the greater part of the citizens was consumed: our men, for the most part entering the city 
fighting, found heaps of dead men in the streets, who, as they said, died of hunger and thirst. They destroyed many 
of those excellent buildings when they thrust the enemies out. Cortes was once circumvented and surprised by the 
enemy upon one of the bridges, but was preserved by a certain familiar friend of his, called Franciscus Olea, who 
brandishing his sword against the enemy, cut off both his hands at one blow who pressed upon his master Cortes, 
having taken him; but with the unhappy destiny of the preserver, who (after he had given him his horse) was slain.” 

“De disjectis ex lacunari Tenustitana civitate nostris, quove pacto cum finitimorum Tenustitanis inimicorum 
auxiliis incceperint coalescere & tanta strage, dictum satis. Uno jactu ad lacunz viciniam, mediis actibus preter- 
missis, transiliamus. In civitate millium domorum octo, sed que suburbiis constat immensis, ad lacunam usque 
protentis 4 Tascalteca leucas octodecim, nomine Tazcuco, cum exercitu numeroso pedem fixit Cortesius. Non ausi 
sunt cives Tazcucani detrectare, ne darentur in pradam exemplo vicinorum edocti. In Tascalteca construendarum 
navium magistros reliquerat Cortesius, qui dum ipse belligerendo circumvicina hostilia premeret, bergantinos, uti 
mentionem fecimus, componeret terdecim. Ubi primum in Tazcuco sedem exercitui dedit, afferri jussit bergantinorum 
composituras, que Tascaltecanorum et Guazuzingorum humeris tabulatim allatee sunt, neque laborem illum inviti 
sumpserunt: atrox adeo est in Tenustitanos.odium, ut pro deliciis habeant quoscunque labores ad Tenustitanorum 
perniciem directos. En rem Romano popule, quando illustrius res illoruam vigebant, non facilem. Ex Tazcuco 
labitur in lacunam fluvius non ingens, cujus utraque ripa domibus, hortis interjacentibus, perpetuis fulta est. In- 
terea dum bergantinorum construeretur compago, dum et remi et amplustre universum componerentur, fossam duci 
jussit ex Tazcuco ad lacunam spacio milliarium Italorum trium, staturarumque virilium quatuor profundam alicubi, 
suis lateralibus aggeribus munitissimam, in qua stagnare fluvius posset, ad bergantinorum devectum ad lacunam: 

quinquaginta dierum intervallo cum fossoribus perpetuis octo millibus provincialibus perfecit opus. Sed dum 

NOTES. 93 

utrumque una et naves et fossa formarentur, plerasque civitates, tum terrestres, tum lacunares, 4 quibus fuerat aufu- 
giens infestatus, delevit, et combussit: neque jam Tenustitani audebant prodire, ut aperto marte contenderent cum 
nostris. Terdecim bergantinis per admirandum opus illud deducte fosse in lacunam projectis, Tenustitani suam 
videre prasentaneam perniciem, ex necessitate tamen animos sumpserunt. Intellecto bergantinorum in lacunam 
accessu, parvo temporis intervallo convolavit ad bergantinos cum armatis bellatoribus ingens multitudo cymbarum, 
aiunt affuisse illico quinque millia, ex relatu civium, post habitam victoriam: accedentes cymbe vi tormentorum que 
in proris et spondis bergantinorum erant locata, dispergebantur, veluti ab atrocibus ventis nubecule. Ita jam 
vagantibus, aperto lacune campo, bergantinis civitatem acriter infestarunt. Paucorum dierum spacio abstulit illi 
civitati Cortesius dulces aquas fluviales, aque ductibus discerptis per Christophorum de Olit, et ne ab ulla parte 
comeatus ullus ad obsessos duci quiret, tribus exercitibus. civitatem circumsepsit: 4 Tazcuco uno, per Astapa- 
lappam, quam labefactavit ad unguem, eo quod esset ceteris potentior, et Muteczume fratris eo tempore regis 
antiqua sedes: huie ipse Cortesius preefuit cum sexaginta millibus bellatorum amplius, ut ipsi aiunt: ex omnibus 
namque jam provinciis multo plures quam ipse peteret, tum spe preedz, tum libertatis, confluebant: pontem illum, de 
quo supra facta est mentio, ex Astapalappa directum ad civitatem regiam, occupavit Cortesius. Et paulatim pugnando 
retractis hostibus, tum lacertorum viribus, tum equorum ac tormentorum impetu & fronte, et & lateribus cum berganti- 
norum favore pontem adeptus est ad castellum usque, de quo diximus in occursu Muteczume regis cum nostris, ubi 
castellum illud descripsimus turribus duabus fultum, duos pontes amplectens, qui sub illius fornicibus junguntur. In 
co loco castra posuit Cortesius et utriusque pontis fauces ea via possidebat. E contra locari jussit alia castra in tutelam 
alterius magni pontis & septentrione, cui prefecit Gonsalum Sandovalum justitize exequende militem, quem dicit 
Hispanus alguazilum. Exercitui tertio ad latus aliud civitatis posito prefecit Petrum Alvaradum. Aiunt tres illos 
exercitus centum viginti millium constare bellatoribus. Ita undique vallata hostibus misera civitas, laborat extrema 
egestate rerum omnium: nec minus paucorum ambitione conteritur (quorum aviditas imperii traxitad eam calamitatem 
infelicem populum) quam ab hostibus torqueatur. Subjiceret nostro jugo colla populus facili suasu, ni regis nepos ex 
sorore usurpator imperii et ipsius procerum elatio animorum obstaret. Septuaginta continuis diebus est ab omnibus 
lateribus & tergo et & fronte infestata. Intra civitatis ipsius vias, redeuntibus nostris ad vesperam in castra, quin- 
gentos, mille interdum, et eo amplius, scribunt quoque congressu fuisse interemptos : quo strages erat crudelior, eo magis 
copiose ac opipare ccenabant Guazuzingi et Tascaltecani ceterique provinciales auxiliarii, qui soliti sunt hostes in 
preelio cadentes intra suos ventres sepelire: nec vetare ausus fuisset Cortesius. E nostris paucos aiunt semper 
periisse. Ergo tum gladio, tum rerum penuria consumpta est civium pars major: mortuorum acervos plerumque in 
viis nostri civitatem pugnando ingredientes, reperiebant, quos fame sitique dicebant exhalasse animas. Ex egregiis 
domibus multas diruerunt passim, quando hostes detrudebant. Fuit semel Cortesius in uno pontium ab hostibus 
circumventus et captus, 4 familiare quodam suo, nomine Francisco Olea, qui ense vibrato in hostes ambas abscidit 
uno ictu gladii ejus manus, qui herum Cortesium preehensum premebat, servatus est: sed iniquo servatoris fato, qui 
occubuit equo prebito. Renunciatum est jam tandem nostris, quanam in parte cum necessariis et principibus lateret 
rex. Re cognita, Cortesius cum bergantinis, cymbarum classiculam ab exploratoribus patefactam, qua rex vagabatur 
in quibusdam abditis lacunz angulis, adoritur capitque omnes. In Cortesii potestatem adductus rex, pugione, quo 
erat Cortesius accinctus, contacto ait, en ferrum quo me potes et debes jugulare, quod in me fuit peregi, exosum et 
molestum mihi jam erit vivere. Solatus est eum Cortesius, quod magnanimo regi conveniat, ipsum fecisse, dixit. 
Secum tamen eum duxit in continentem, subque fida custodia servandum suis tradidit. His actis debellata civitate 
tanta, fereque discerpto illius populo, nationes omnes illas Czesareo subdidit jugo. Ad me venerunt duo viri ex his 
quos fidalgos dicit Hispania, qui fuerunt rerum onmium non exigua pars, tum in percurrendis provinciarum arcanis, 
tum in omnibus certaminibus, nomine Diecus Ordasius unus, Benevides alter. Aiunt ad suum arbitrium creasse 
Cortesium in Tenustitana regem, & regio sanguine ortum, jussisseque ibi pedem figere, quo civitas populi frequentia 
denudata sub regis umbra resarciatur, aliter enim deserta penitus et inculta tanta moles permansisset. Ipse vero statuit 
per nuncios novas alias terras perquirere, impatiens ocii. rant in prospectu ad austrum alti montes, quid trans illos 
jaceat vestigari jubet : mare aliud ad eorum montium australia jacere latera, renunciatum est, uti scripsi in decadibus 
de mari australi ex Dariene & Vasco Nufiez patefacto. Sex illic esse civitates, quarum minorem aiunt esse Valledoleto 
nostro celebri municipio multo majorem: quarum una dicitur Teph, Mechuacan alia, Guaxaca tertia, quarta Fuesco, 
Tequantepech quinta, sextee non dant nomen: scribitur in epistola particulari extra volumen rerum Tenustitanarum, 
VOL. VIII. G2758) 

OA. NOTES. 

in mari:australi intellexisse non distare ab illo littore insulas aromatum et auri ac gemmarum altrices. Que vero in 
lacunis et lacunarum marginibus urbes jacent, his nominibus nuncupantur: Saltucar, Tenauica, Tenustitan, Scapuzalco, 
Tacuba, Chapultepech, Culuacan duplex, Guichilobusco, Suchimilco, Quitagua, Astapalappa, Mesechiche, Coluacan, 
Tezcuco. E duobus iis Benevides de recentirediit ¢ sociis duarum navium a Cortesio missarum unus. In illis vehunt 
3 Cortesio missa dona que preciosiora elegantioraque multo esse aiunt, quam advecta et & sua Caesarea Majestate 
asportata, quo anno ex Hispania profecta est ad Belgas, a twa Beatitudine conspecta: circiter ducentum millium duca- 
torum precio ‘estimant opes illas, sed nondum ad nos venerunt illze naves. In insulis Cassiteridibus, dictis & Por- 
tugalensibus earum dominis, de los Azores, fixere pedem, ne ad Gallorum pyratarum manus deveniant, uti anno supe- 
riore altera ex: Hispaniola et Cuba veniens cum auri pondere duorum et septuaginta millium ducatorum, librarum 
autem octuncialium unionum preciosorum sexcentarum, et cum duobus millibus rubis saccari, est rubus ab Hispanis 
dictus arroba, quinque ac viginti librarum sextuncialium. Multa preeterea particulariter multi ferebant: que omnia 
in predam pyraticam ierunt. Missa est armata classis que duas illas ex Cassiteridibus tuto adducat., Quo tempore 
hoc scribo nondum sunt advecte. Trahebani ille naves, uti Benevides inquit, tres tygres a parvulis educatas in 
singulis caveis, proceribus tignis compactis, in una navium duas, in altera tertiam: in ea qua due ferebantur ex concussu 
navis & tempestatibus, é cavearum una parumper discussa est, ita ut tygridi iter fecerit ad. exitum. Non minus 
rabida transilivit per navim noctu evadens tygris, ac si nunquam hominem quemquam conspexisset: furit utrobique, 
septem viros labefecit, raptavit uni lacertum, crus alteri, alii humeros, duos peremit, ex navis malo unum fugientem 
insiliens preechendit: semimortuus a sociis adjutus non periit: cum hastis, ensibus, et omnis generis telorum quicunque 
inerant accurrunt, multis vulneribus confectam in mare desilire coegerunt: sociam, ne idem accideret, in ipsa cavea 
trucidarunt. Alterius navis tertiam ait Benevides adduci. Est in illorum montium’ nemoribus tygrium et leonum 
ferorumque animalium aliorum multitudo. Quibus alantur cibis interrogatus, cervis ait, caprevlis, damis, leporibusque 
ac cuniculis, multisque aliis mitibus animalibus, que ibi nutriuntur. Navium illarum permansere custodes duo viri 
é ducibus bellorum in illis terris: Alfonsus Avila et Antonius Quignonus: hi partem regi donatam a populo ferunt 
prebendam: Cortesii vero partem curat loannes Ribera, ipsius Cortesii secretarius, et laborum omnium comes ab 
initio :. ex nostri regii senatus Indici consilio Cesar Cortesio Nove Hispaniz ab eo ita nuncupate gubernationem 
comprobavit. Diecus vero Velazquez 4 magistratu Cube aut est abdicatus aut circiter, quia non rite fecisse in mit- 
tendis contra Cortesium copiis, prohibente Hispaniole senatu, decretum est. De recenti allatum est Gallorum pyra- 
tarum visas fuisse in oceano pererrantes naves quindecim, sub spe habendarum et istarum navium, uti aliam appre- 
henderunt. Sed in Affricam fuisse tempestatibus transportatas, summersasque plerasque. 

Nore XXXVIL- Page 351. 

Amoncst the most remarkable passages of Scripture which admit of a double interpretation, and which may be 
understood either in an historical or prophetical..sense, may be reckoned the famous prediction of Isaiah, referred to 
by Saint Matthew in the twenty-third verse of the first chapter of his Gospel, as precisely that upon which hangs all 
the law and the prophgts : “Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign: Behold, a virgin shall conceive and 
bear a son, and shall call his name Emmanuel :. butter and honey shall be eat, that he may know to refuse the evil 
and choose the good; for before the child shall know to refuse the evil, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken 
of both her kings.” It is scarcely necessary to remark that this passage is understood prophetically to allude to the 
coming of the Messiah, to his being born of a virgin, and to the sceptre’s not departing from Judah till Shiloh came*. 

* Christ’s speech to the Pharisees, “‘ Render unto Cesar the things that are Cesar’s,” might induce some persons to doubt whether he 
acknowledged Cesar or Herod to be king of the Jews, were it not that the prophecy of Jacob, “The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, 
nor a lawgwer from between his feet, until Shiloh come,” required that Herod (who was not of the tribe of Judah, nor even descended from 
Jacob) should be a king, at least in name,—although it may at the same time be asked, What attributes of sovereignty belonged to the 
Jews in the age of Christ, whose state was styled a tetrarchy, and not a monarchy, by the Romans, whose ruler was not even allowed to 
have his own image and superscription inscribed on the coin of the realm, and whose tribunals of justice did not possess the power of life 
and death, as we learn from the reply of the Jews to Pontius Pilate, the Roman governor, in the thirty-first verse of the eighteenth chapter 
of the Gospel of St. John: “Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him and judge him according to your law: the J ews therefore said 
unto him, It is:not lawful for ws to put any man to death.” 

NOTES. 95 

Its historical signification is however so obvious, that the Jews maintain that it caz only be interpreted in an historical 
sense, contending, with much show of fair reasoning, that since Ahaz king of Judah had been commanded by God to 
ask a sign from him of his speedy deliverance from the invading armies of the two kings, Rezin king of Syria, and 
Pekah king of Israel, it would be absurd to suppose that the sign given would be posterior by seven hundred and 
forty years to the event which it was intended to fureshow, and therefore that the birth of Maher-shalal-hash-baz, 
whom the prophetess bore to the prophet Isaiah, must have been the sign promised by the Lord to Ahaz, and so 
declared to be in the following passage of the eighth chapter of Isaiah, whose apology, except on this supposition, 
it would be difficult to plead, for so ostentatiously recording that a virgin prophetess had borne hima son. “ More- 
over, the Lord said unto me, Take thee a great roll, and write in it with a man’s pen concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz. 
And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record; Uriah the priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah. And I 
went unto the prophetess; and she conceived, and bareason. Then said the Lord to me, Call his name Maher-shalal- 
hash-baz. For defore the child shall have knowledge to ery, My father, and My mother, the riches of Damascus 
and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away before the king of Assyria.” The Jeading event of this prophecy was 
accordingly fulfilled to the letter. But if more were required to prove that the prophecy of Isaiah related to the 
birth of Maher-shalal-hash-baz, it would be found in the /zteral accomplishment of all the other events included in the 
same prediction ; since, before it was possible for the child to know good from evil, Rezin king of Syria had raised 
the siege of Jerusalem, ‘Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria had carried off the riches of Damascus, and Pekah king of 
Israel, after having been stripped of a considerable portion of his territory of Samaria by the Assyrians, was assas- 
sinated by Hoshea his successor on the throne, in the fourth year of the reign of Ahaz king of Judah, exactly twenty 
years after the commencement of the reign of Jotham, the father of Ahaz, whom the latter succeeded on the throne. 
These important historical facts are recorded in the following passages of the fifteenth and sixteenth chapters of the 
Second Book of Kings, in the latter of which we recognise the Mexican style of salutation employed by kings towards 
each other when the inferior in dignity solicited the favour or deprecated the displeasure of him who filled the more 
powerful throne. “In the two-and-fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekah the son of Remaliah began to reign 
over Israel in Samaria, and reigned twenty years. And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord: he 
departed not from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. In the days of Pekah king of Israel 
came Tiglath-Pileser king of Assyria, and took Ijon, and Abel-beth-maachah, and Janoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, 
and Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtal, and carried them captive to Assyria. And Hoshea the son of Elah 
made a conspiracy against Pekah the son of Remaliah, and smote him, and slew him, and reigned in his stead, in the 
twentieth year of Jotham the son of Uzziah.” “ Then Rezin king of Syria and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel 
came up to Jerusalem to war: and they besieged Ahaz, but could not overcome him. At that time Rezin king of 
Syria recovered Elath to Syria, and drave the Jews from Elath: and the Syrians came to Elath, and dwelt there 
unto this day. So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, saying, J am thy servant and thy son: come 
up, and save me out of the hand of the king of Syria, and out of the hand of the king of Israel, which rise up against 
me. And Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the house of the Lord, and in the treasures of the king’s 
house, and sent it for a present to the king of Assyria. And the king of Assyria hearkened unto him: for the king 
of Assyria went up against Damascus, and took it, and carried the people of it captive to Kir, and slew Rezin.”— 
Having noticed the direct evidence in favour of what may be termed the historical accomplishment of Isaiah’s pro- 
phecy, we come to the collateral proofs that that prophecy ought to be understood in an historical sense, than which 
none could possibly be more conclusive; since God having declared to Ahaz, in the fourteenth verse of the 
seventh chapter of Isaiah, that he would give hima sign, and that the sign should be a virgin’s conceiving a son, 
who was to be named Emmanuel, we are informed by Isaiah himself, in the very next chapter, that he and his 
children were for signs and wonders in Israel: “ Behold, I and the children whom the Lord hath given me are for 
signs and wonders in Israel from the Lord of Hosts, which dwelleth in Mount Zion.” The youngest of his children, 
it should be remarked, was Maher-shalal-hash-baz, whom the prophetess had borne to him, and whose name, signifying 
in Hebrew, ‘in making speed to the spoil he hasteneth the prey,’ plainly alluded to the fulfilment of the prediction, 
that before he should be able to pronounce the word Father or Mother the riches of Damascus and Samaria would 
become the spoil of the king of Assyria. The name of the other child was Shear-jashub, whose name, meaning ‘ the 
remnant shall return,’ was likewise typical, and intended to show that he would be a sign of the return of the remnant 

96 NOTES. 

of the Jews from the Babylonian captivity, as foretold in the thirteenth verse of the sixth chapter of Isaiah. The 
Septuagint translation of the prophecy of Isaiah, which materially differs from the corresponding passage in the 
Hebrew Bible, increases also the difficulty of understanding that prediction in its usual acceptation, or otherwise 
than as referring to the birth of Maher-shalal-hash-baz ; since immediately after the declaration, ‘“ idov, » mapQevoc év 
yaorpr Anerar Kat TeEeTaL viov,” “behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son,” comes the injunction of God, “ xa 
kaXeoetg ro dvona avtov Eppavound,” “and you shall call his name Emmanuel ;” which could neither have referred to 
the Virgin Mary nor to the Jews in the age of Christ, but was evidently an intimation from Isaiah to Ahaz (who here 
speaks in the name of God, as was usual with the Jewish prophets,) concerning his son Mahar-shalal-hash-baz, who, 
if he be not named in Scripture Emmanuel,—except perhaps in a solitary instance in the eighth verse of the eighth 
chapter of Isaiah, where the prophet may be supposed prospectively to address his son, when pronouncing against the 
Jews the evils which they would suffer from the Assyrian invasion,—might still have been commonly so named by his 
countrymen, although it is not so recorded in the Old Testament. Those, at least, who may choose to object to this 
supposition, as not having the perfect warrant of Scripture, will do well to recollect that Christ is nowhere named 
Emmanuel in the New Testament, although St. Matthew declares, in the twenty-third verse of the first chapter of his 
Gospel, that that appellation was to be one of the signs of the future Messiah ; and it is therefore absolutely necessary 
for Christians to believe that he was commonly so named by the Jews, although it is not so recorded in the Gospels, 
since otherwise the prophecies would not appear to have been fulfilled. A most important variation in the Greek 
and Hebrew reading of Isaiah’s celebrated prophecy occurs in that portion of it which is translated in the English 
version of the Bible, “ For before the child shall know to refuse the evil and choose the good, the land that thou 
abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings,” but which is rendered in the Septuagint, “ Avore mpin yrwvar ro rawdioy 
ayalov 7 ranean, Crates wovnpia, ekAeEacOat to ayalor’ Kar KataderPOnoerar 7 yn nv ov poBy, aro mpocwrou twy vo Bactrcwr.” 
This variation has greatly perplexed many learned men; but without inquiring into the reasons of it, we shall merely 
observe, that if the advent of the Messiah was here foretold, and the child alluded to was Christ, the prediction that he 
should remain, at least for some short period after his birth, ignorant of moral good and evil, appears very strange, and 
scarcely reconcileable with the notion of his being the Son of God and coequal with the Deity. We shall only further 
remark, that the substitution of abhorrest for the corresponding Greek term oy, ‘ fearest,’ and the insertion of the 
pronoun possessive her before the word “kings,” make a great change in the meaning and the application of this pro- 
phecy, which simply signified that before Maher-shalal-hash-baz should be old enough to know right from wrong, or to 
pronounce the word Father or Mother, the land of Judah, for which Ahaz its king feared, should be forsaken by Pekah 
and Rezin, the two invading kings of Syria and Israel. Upon the grammatical construction of the sentence 7 yn ty 
cv of3y, which supposes an ellipsis of the preposition da before my, it is unnecessary to offer any remarks; but it 
may be proper to observe, that the motive which appears to have actuated those who so completely changed the 
obviously correct reading of the Greek text of the Septuagint, was, that the prophecy of Jacob, “ The sceptre shall 
not depart from Judah until Shiloh come,” should seem to have been present to the mind of Isaiah when he uttered 
his later prediction, since the land which God is said in Scripture to have abhorred for its iniquities, was that which, 
by an onomatopesia of the nature of ducus a non lucendo, was named the Holy Land; and that the words “both her 
kings” might seem to allude to the two royal houses of Judah and Samaria, whose kings forsook their dominions 
and followed in the train of a compulsory captivity the wretched bands of their own countrymen ages before the 
Christian «ra: but even if it be admitted that in the two last-cited instances of variation between the Greek and 
Hebrew reading of the concluding portion of Isaiah’s prophecy, “Behold a virgin shall conceive,” &c., the 
Hebrew exhibits the correct reading, other difficulties will have to he encountered, other apparent contradictions 
to be reconciled, before either the Greek or Hebrew reading of this famous prophecy will harmonize with ax the 
events presupposed to be comprised in its declared accomplishment in the age of Christ. The magnitude of the 
" difficulties alluded to being duly considered, the further remark,—that the prophecy, “ Butter and honey shall he eat, 
that he may know to refuse the evil and choose the good,” can scarcely be supposed to refer to the Messiah, because 
inapplicable to the second person.of the Trinity,—will appear needless, it being obvious that that prediction must refer 
to Maher-shalal-hash-baz; and consequently that its accomplishment is nowhere mentioned in the New Testament. But 
still it might be argued, even on other grounds, that this obscure prediction is more likely to have related to Maher- 
shalal-hash-baz than to the Messiah, and to the age of Isaiah than the Christian era; for if we ascribe no greater 

NOTES. 97 

efficacy to butter and honey than that of being a very nutritious diet, and one calculated to promote the growth of 
an infant, and so to hasten the development of its reasoning faculties, which every physician admits depends in a 
great measure on the health and constitution of the child,—it may be presumed that to feed the infant with butter and 
honey was the means resorted to by the parents of Maher-shalal-hash-baz to attain that desirable end, and therefore that 
it was foretold that he, whilst a child, should eat butter and honey; but that the accomplishment of the prophecy 
was not of sufficient importance to be particularly recorded in Scripture, which it certainly would have been if to 
eat butter and honey during infancy had been one of the signs prophesied by Isaiah of the future Messiah, who, 
on the supposition that he was born without the use of reason, would have wanted that sign of an incarnate deity, 
which the Mexicans claim for Quecalcoatle, and the people of Thibet for the Grand Lama. The Septuagint 
version of this remarkable passage,—the text of which, where the prophecies relating to the Messiah are concerned, 
is declared by Eusebius to be so much less corrupt than that of the Hebrew Bible, for the simple reason that the 
Jews and schismatic Christians of the early ages found it easier to interpolate* the Hebrew than the Greek copies of 
Scripture, because the former language was so little known,—admits another very probable explanation, rendering much 
more intelligible the application of the prophecy, “ Butter and honey shall he eat,” which proceeds on the supposition, 
that in the same manner as Isaiah is recorded, in the second verse of the twentieth chapter of his Prophecies, to have 
loosed the sackcloth from off his loins and walked naked, as a sign upon Egypt and Ethiopia,—indicating that the 
people of those two states would be stripped by the Assyrians, not only of their wealth, but even of those garments which 
decency absolutely required they should wear,—so he might have caused his infant son Maher-shalal-hash-baz to eat 
butter and honey as a sign of the great depopulation which before he should attain the age of reason would befall the 
land of Syria and Samaria, in consequence of a considerable portion of their respective territories being spoiled by 
Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, and of the abundance of butter and milk which would be found in the waste pastures. 
The passage of Isaiah which, reasoning by analogy, favours this conclusion, is the following: “In the same day 
shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired, namely, by them beyond the river, by the king of Assyria, the 
head, and the hair of the feet ; and it shall also consume the beard. And it shall come to pass in that day, that 
aman shall nourish a young cow and two sheep; and it shall come to pass, for the abundance of milk that they 
shall give, that he shall eat butter; for butter and honey shall every one eat that is left in the land. And it shall 
come to pass in that day, that every place shall be, where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, 
it shall even be for briars and thorns. With arrows and with bows shall men come thither; because all the land 
shall become briars and thorns. And on all hills that shall be digged with the mattock + there shall not come thither 

* ‘The variations in the reading of the Greek and Hebrew Bible occur in the most important passages of Scripture; and whilst the 
testimony of Eusebius, the authority of the primitive church, and the passages quoted literally in the New Testament from the Septuagint 
which are nowhere to be found in the Hebrew Bible, are quite conclusive in favour of the authenticity of the former version, our surprise 
is produced in no small degree by finding that it is in the Hebrew Bible chiefly that any passages occur which invest the Messiah with 
a divine character, or allude to his being the Son of God; and that Protestant writers, such as Basnage, who set up the Hebrew Bible 
against the version of the Scriptures authorized, until the period of the Reformation, by the Church of Rome, should still maintain that the 
Jews at no period of their history expected the coming of a Divine Messiah; as if that fact alone would not make those passages 
extremely suspicious, and serve fully to confirm what Eusebius says of the Hebrew Bible being extremely corrupt in his age,—for that 
is the meaning of the phrase éromiay employed by that author,—although he does not explain what motive could have induced the Jews, 
who he supposes corrupted the Hebrew text from hatred to Christianity, to insert in it whole passages favourable to the particular tenets 
of Christians which nowhere occur in the Septuagint; one example of which out of many we shall quote here, from the twelfth verse 
of the second Psalm, where, for the Septuagint reading deakacbe maideias, which signifies simply ‘grasp instruction, is substituted in the 
Hebrew Bible ‘kiss the Son,’ in allusion to the doctrine of the Trinity. We have already observed that the Hebrew Bible and the 
Septuagint are in open collision in the ninth chapter of Isaiah, which chapter, if the events narrated in the preceding one be duly consi- 
dered, would in the latter version seem solely to refer to the evils which God averted from Ahaz and brought upon the Israelites, and to 
the birth of Hezekiah, who succeeded Ahaz on the throne of Judah. : 

+ The Mexicans were accustomed to use a wooden hand-spade or mattock in the cultivation of their fields, which instrament was 
sometimes pointed with flint or an extremely hard stone of the colour of jet. Yxtlilxochitl says their ancestors were acquainted with 
iron ; and Oviedo in quoting in the second part of his unpublished History of America a passage of Don Antonio de Mendoza’s narrative, 
published at Venice, leaves it doubtful whether that first viceroy of Mexico did not believe that the ancestors of the Mexicans wore iron 
as well as gold armour. If the latter part of the assertion should give a colouring of improbability to the whole story, it will be proper 
to recollect that gilt copper would exactly resemble gold, and that the viceroy of Mexico only relates the traditions of the people of some 
of the provinces of New Spain respecting the origin of the Mexicans. It cannot be doubted, that the manufacture of copper had been 

VOL. VIII. (AG ) 

98 NOTES. 

the fears of briars and. thorns; but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen and for the treading of lesser cattle?’ We 
must here remark, that the Septuagint reading of the fifteenth. verse of the seventh chapter of Isaiah substitutes the 
particle zpwn for the word denoting in the corresponding Hebrew passage the final cause, which is usually expressed 
in Greek by the particle wa,.so that “Bovrupoy Ka pedihayerar mp yrwvar avroy n mpoedcoOar wavnpa, exrckacba ro ayabov” 
may be translated, “ Butter and honey shall he eat before he knows. how to exercise his judgment about evil things so 
as to choose the good.” although some persons may entertain doubts whether there is not an omission of 7 rather than an 

carried to great perfection both in Peru and Mexico, where it perhaps might have superseded the use of iron, on account of its greater 
ductility, and the difficulty of separating the former metal from its ore. The Peruvians were accustomed to gild copper, and had likewise the 
art of giving it an extremely hard temper. A gilt copper axe is in my possession which was discovered not long ago in a tomb in Peru, the 
gilding of which can scarcely be said to be at all injured by time. The Indians of New Spain were likewise acquainted with tin, as we 
are informed by Yxtlilxochitl, who says that tin money in the form of a cross was current in some of the provinces, although the general 
currency consisted of the nuts of the cacao, a shrub which grew only in a few provinces, and the culture of which required extreme care. 
They also employed gold dust in tubes, and cotton mantles, as a medium of exchange; and Ulloa informs us, at page 380 of his Noticias 
Americanas, that. the ancient Peruvians used scales to weigh gold and silver, which was a Hebrew custom, as we learn from the twelfth 
verse of the eleventh chapter of Zechariah, and from other passages of Scripture. He adds, that these scales are still occasionally found 
in the Peruvian tombs, and gives the following description of them. “En las piezas de antiguedad se encuentran balanzas pequefias, 
cuyos platos son de plata, y lo mismo la barretilla por donde se suspende ; € aquellos no son Ilanos, sino rematando en punta al modo de 
conos al reves. Estas por el tamafio parece que les servian para pesar cosa de oro 6 plata, porque para las de otro volumen no son 
suficientes.”——Having made mention of the skill of the Peruvians in improving the qualities of native copper, and giving it an ex- 
tremely hard temper by a process which a celebrated French chemist, who analysed a copper axe that had been brought from Peru, 
considers a great secret, we may observe that from the mention which is made, in the twenty-seventh verse of the eighth chapter of Ezra, 
of vessels of fine copper precious as gold, it would appear that the Jews at a very early period of their history were acquainted with 
various kinds of copper, and perhaps excelled in the manufacture of that metal; since it is probable that from the age of Bezaleel and 
Aholiab to that of the destruction of Jerusalem, they never wanted cunning men “to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, and 7 
cutting of stones,” or, as the Mexicans would have expressed themselves, were never without some great Tultecas. It has been observed 
with truth, that in those arts which the Greeks termed Bavaueo:, (or vile,) the Jews excelled, but science they ever disregarded ; to which 
cause may be ascribed the loss of the philosophical works of Solomon, of which the Bible makes express mention. ‘The proficiency 
which the Mexicans, Peruvians, and other Indian tribes had attained in the art of working in metals, cutting and setting of gems, 
as well as in fabricating all kinds of cloth, does appear to furnish a strong argument in favour of the Jews having colonized America, 
and transplanted thither the arts which they held in the greatest esteem. A passage in one of the apocryphal books of the Old 
Testament warrants the supposition that a furnace and tube or blow-pipe applied to the mouth were used by the Hebrew as well as 
the Mexican goldsmiths in the operations of their art. We subjoin the following extract from Parkhurst’s Hebrew Lexicon, 
because it contains a curious disquisition upon the nature of the metal to which the Jews gave the name of pwn, which is translated 
in the Septuagint 4Azxrgov, which has been supposed by some to be Corinthian brass, but which is generally thought to have been 
copper alloyed with silver or gold, such as was once common amongst the Peruvians :— pwn occurs Ezek. i. 4, 27, and fem. mbnwn 
occurs Ezek. viii. 2. The LXX rendered it throughout jAexrpov, as Theodotion also does in Ezek. viii. 2. Now #Aexrpoy signifies, 
1. amber. 2. a mixed metal of gold and silver, whether natural or factitious. 3. crystal. From the LX X version of Ezek. 1. 4; Ke ev 
TH mer cdrou ws dgaos HAExTpov ey mew TOV mUpOS, And in the midst of it (the whirlwind) as the appearance of electrum in the midst of 
the fire, it appears that those translators by #Asxrpov could not mean either amber or crystal; the former of which grows dim as soon as 
it feels the fire, and shortly dissolves into a resinous or pitchy substance ; the latter is scarcely ever put into a fire, and if it were, could 
hardly contract anything from it but soot and dimness: it remains then that by jAexrgoy in Ezekiel, the LX X meant the mixed metal 
above mentioned, which is much celebrated by the ancients for its beautiful lustre, and which, when exposed to the fire, does, like other 
metals, grow more bright and shining. And by rendering Down jasxrpov, the LXX appear to have come very near its true meaning ; 
for as Ezekiel prophesied among the Chaldeans ', after King Jehoiachin’s captivity, so here, as in other instances, he seems to have used a 
Chaldee word ; and considered as such, bpm may be derived from tyn3 ‘copper’ (dropping the initial 1), and Chald. 59m ‘gold, as it comes 
from the mine,’ and so denote either a metal mixed of copper and gold, such as the zs pyropum mentioned in the ancient Greek and 
Roman writers, and thus called from its fiery colour, and the noted es corinthium ‘corinthian brass’; or else own may signify xeAxos 
apuooeidng ‘a fine kind of copper’, such as Aristotle in Mirab. says was in colour and appearance not distinguishable from gold, and of 
which it is probable the cups of Darius, mentioned by the same author, and the two vessels of fine copper, (‘ yellow or shining brass’, in the 
margin,) precious as gold, of which we read Ezra viii. 27, were made. See more on this subject in the learned Bochart, vol. ii. 871, &c. 
to whom I am indebted for the explanation of this word. Scheuchzer, who of the various interpretations of sown prefers that last men- 
tioned, adds, that this kind of fine copper is still known in the East Indies by the name of Suassa, that it is used for making rings and 
cups for great men, and composed of equal parts of gold and of the reddest copper. Comp. Harmer’s Observations, vol. il. p. 490.” 

' See Ezek. i. 2. Prideaux Connect. vol. i. anno 594, p. 74, and anno 484, p. 89, Ist edit. 8yo. 

NOTES. 99 

ellipsis of wore before the verb écAeacOa, The sixth verse of the eighth chapter of Isaiah,—where that prophet, speaking 
of the Jews, declares, “‘ Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice in Rezin 
and Remaliah’s son,’—has induced some of the Rabbis to contend, in opposition to the sentiments of Christian writers, 
that by “ the refusal of the waters of Shiloah” is meant the refusal of Shiloh by the Jews: they pretend that the Messiah 
is here typically alluded to, and endeavour to gloss over the absurdity of the supposition, by referring to the metaphor 
of the “waters of the river,”.an expression used in the next verse, by which is signified the king of Assyria; and 
they quote various passages from the New Testament, where Christ is named “a river of water,” in confirmation of 
their opinion. It is an old and equally true remark, that the Rabbis never scruple, when it suits their purpose, to attempt 
to find proofs of the inspiration of the Old in the New Testament, to appeal to the authority of the latter book; and they 
cunningly pretend that from it may be collected the vulgar notions which their countrymen entertained in early ages 
respecting the coming of the Messiah,» whilst they blasphemously assert that the evangelists incorporated those 
notions into the four Gospels, and bestowed upon them the common appellation of The History of Christ.—Having 
pointed out at sufficient length the discrepancies between the Greek and Hebrew reading of Isaiah’s prophecy, 
“‘ Behold a virgin shall conceive,” &c., we may be permitted to observe, in reference to the sign itself, that it was the 
very reverse of that given to king Hezekiah, which from its nature ‘must have been known to all mankind, since all 
mankind must have been conscious of the sun having gone ten degrees backward on the dial of Ahaz; and none 
could have-known that a virgin had conceived, except indeed the virgin herself, which, if faith be the evidence of 
things not seen, cannot be said to have been an outward and visible sign; although this does not render it less sur- 
prising that the sign itself of a virgin having conceived should have been known throughout the continent of 
America, and have’been interwoven with as many legendary fables as the imagination of the Polynesian islanders 
would be likely to invent if the missionaries should relax their exertions for the short period of half a century. It 
may be. proper however to adduce proof of a fact which to some will appear almost incredible, or even unworthy of 
serious attention : Oviedo, in the eleventh chapter of the fourth book of an inedited portion of his History of the Indies, 
thus notices the existence of a tradition amongst the people of Nicaragua, of a virgin having conceived, which, if the 
probable derivation of the proper name Bilahe from Bacab be taken into consideration, would seem to be allied to 
the famous tradition current in Yucatan, and noticed at page 161 of the sixth volume of this work. “Como he dicho 
en aquestas diversidades de lenguas que ay en esta governacion, de necesidad demas de diferir en los vocablos, asi 
en los ritos ay diferencias. En Matriaca llaman a Dios Tipotan, y dicen que ubo un hombre e una muger del qual 
todos los mortales ubieron principio, que al hombre llaman Nembrita, e 4 la muger Nenguitamali: @ Dios llaman los de 
Nicaragua Thomathoyo que quiere decir gran Dios, e dicen que aquel tubo un hijo que estubo aca abajo, e le \laman 
Teot Bilahe:4 los angeles pequefios, quiere decir, que se llaman Tamachaz e Tarazcazcati, e Tamacaztobal son los 
principales’angeles del cielo: ansi lo dicen estos Indios, e dicen que el angel es criatura del cielo, e que vuelan e 
tienen alas, e otras muchas vanidades dicen, gue nunca se acavarian de escrivir, si del todo se dijese lo que ellos platican, 
e por lo menos son conformes. Que esta gente barbarisima e indocta sea idolatra, no me maravillo, pues que los Tudios 
hizieron aquel bezerro de oro en memoria de Apis dios de los Egipcios: que tengan los Indios idolos e ymagines de 
piedra, ede palo, e de barro; las quales yo he visto, tampoco me maravillo, pues se escrive, que Pedro Motheo fue 
el primero que hizo ymagines de hombres de barro. Los Hebreos tomaron é Baal por su dios, eé hizieron con el 
pleytesia de lo tener siempre ‘por dios, e olvidaron 4 Dios verdadero su Sefior, que los havia librado de sus enemigos, 
como ingratos desconocidos. Asi mismo sabemos que los Iudios adoraron el sol, e la luna, e estrellas como la Sa- 
grada Escriptura mas largamente lo acuerda con otros sus errores; e pues aquellos, 4 quien tantos favores, e tan 
sefialadas mercedes hizo, tales fueron, no me parece que estotros Indios bestiales son tan dignos de culpa, ni dejo de 
creer, gue los unos e los otros dejan de ser dignos de la eterna condenacion.” ‘The learned Abbe Gilii declares in the 
following passage of the second chapter of the third volume of his Saggio di Storia Americana, that the Maipuris, 
an Indian tribe dwelling on the banks of the Oronoco, believed that the virgin Tapanimarru had borne a son to their 
god Purrunaminari; and he also asserts that the Salivas, another tribe, believed that their god Purru had had a son, 
and affirmed that that son descended from heaven to overcome the devil, who in the form of a serpent perse- 
cuted the Indians of the Oronoco. “Dicono i Maipuri, che Purrunaminari facesse l’uomo, e ne raccontano la 
maniera, come dipoi soggiugneremo. Gli attribuiscono un figlio nomato Sisiri; e sentendo da me nominare Gesu- 
cristo figliuolo vero di Dio, per la similitudine del nome pareva loro quel desso. Sisirl, dicon essi, fu figlio di una 
donna immortale chiamata Tapanimarru, la qual era bellissima, e vergine. Invogliossene Purrunaminari ; e questo 

100 NOTES. 

solo desiderio senza che neppur la toccasse, fu bastevole a fare che divenisse madre di Sisiri. In questo racconto vi 
si-veggono delle verita, che non han bisogno a chiosarsi della mia penna. I Salivi sono un’ antica nazione, e stette - 
fra loro il Gumilla. Or questi conobbero ! Esser supremo sotto il nome di Puru. II figlio di lui (ecco cid, che ne 
dicono) infestando le Orinochesi contrade un serpente, venne git dal cielo per amazzarlo. L’ uccise in fatti; e allora, 
contenti gia gli Orinochesi, disse Puru al demonio: vanne maledetto all’ inferno: tu non rientrerai mai pit nella 
mia casa. Qui pure appariscono tracce pit che chiare della Cristiana religione.” The above account of the imma- 
culate conception of Sisiri by the virgin Tapanimarru deserves to be compared with the Mexican tradition of the 
Virgin of Tula having conceived a son by the breath of the god Tonacatecutli: whilst the story of his triumph over 
the serpent would seem to refer to God’s malediction against the serpent, in the fifteenth verse of the third chapter 
of Genesis ; or to the Jewish expectation that the Messiah would slay the dragon of the sea; either of which events 
may be alluded to in the ninety-sixth page of the Lesser Vatican MS., as we have already observed in the note sub- 
joined to page 108 of the sixth volume of this work. The belief of the Salivas, that the son of their supreme deity 
had descended from heaven to rid the earth of a serpent, is noticed by Gumilla in the following passage of the sixth 
chapter of his Orinoco Illustrado. “Pero ya que ellos no saben de su origen, la nacion Saliva y Achagua se le ha 
buscado y averiguado 4 su necio modo y no sin propriedad. Dicen los Salivas, que el Puru (de quien despues 
hablaremos).embid & su hijo desde el cielo a matar una serpiente horrible, que destruia y devoraba las gentes del 
Orinoco y que realmente el hijo del Puru vencid y mato a la serpiente con gran jubilo y alegria de todas aquellas 
naciones, y que entonces Puru dixo al demonio: vete al infierno, maldito, que no entraras en mz casa jamas : note 
el curioso en esta tradicion una confusa idea de la redempcion del genero humano. Y anaden que aquel consuelo les 
durd poco, porque luego que se pudrio la serpiente, se formaron en sus entrafas unos gusanos tremendos, y que de 
cada gusano salio finalmente un Indio Caribe con su muger; y que como la culebra © serpiente fué tan sangrienta 
enemiga de todas aquellas naciones, por esso los Caribes, hijos de ella eran bravos, inhumanos, y crueles.” We 
shall merely observe in reference to the passage last quoted, that the speech of the son of Puru to the devil, ‘vete al 
infierno, &c. resembles that which the natives of Quauhtemallan believed that their incarnate god Exbalanquen 
addressed to the king of hell, after having descended thither and vanquished him; and that the latter fable seems to 
be connected with the tradition contained in one of the Apocryphal Gospels, of the Messiah having descended into 
hell and compelled the devil to do him homage ; which event, there is every reason to suppose, forms the subject of the 
painting contained in the seventy-third page of the Codex Borgianus. Gumilla again notices, in the first chapter of 
the second volume of his History, the Indian tradition of the son of Puru having killed a formidable serpent; “ Los 
Salivas dicen que el Puru hizo todo lo bueno: que Puru vive en el cielo: que el hijo de Puru mato aquella serpiente 
que destruia las gentes:” and he immediately afterwards adds, “estas son sombras y vestigios borrados de la verdad.” 
Simon, in the third chapter of his inedited History of the Discovery and Conquest of the Kingdom of New Granada, 
to which the Spaniards gave the name of El Dorado*, from the reported riches of the Cacique of Bogota, states 
the remarkable fact, that Indians who died from the bite of a serpent were buried with crosses over their graves. 
This highly esteemed historian expresses himself in the following terms: “Tambien hallamos, como dejo escrito el 
Adelantado Don Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada en un quaderno de su propria mano, que ponian cruces sobre los 
sepulcros de los que havian muerto picados de vivoras U otras culebras y serpientes; aunque no saben decir el prin- 
cipio que tuvo el poner esta sefial 4 los difuntos mas que @ los de otras muertes, para diferenciar los unos de los 
otros. Hallandose tambien esta misma figura de la santa cruz bien hecha} y formada con un almagre tan fuerte que 
la antiguedad ni las aguas lo han podido borrar, en algunas pefias altas, que las hallaron hechas quando entraron los 
Espafioles, de que yo he visto algunas cerca de los pueblos de Boza y Suacha. Los Yndios Pijaos y algunos del 
distrito de Tunja, han tenido figuras en sus santuarios con tres cabezas humanas, 6 con tres rostros en solo un 
cuerpo, que dicen ser tres personas con solo un corazon: de todo lo qual, aunque enbuelto y deslustrado con mit 
fabulas y obscuridades, parece salen las centellas dichas.” Since we learn from Echevarria that the Mexicans be- 
stowed the epithet of ¢lahueliloc, or the devil, upon the serpent, and Moses declares, in the twenty-first chapter of 
the Book of Numbers, that the Israelites who were bitten by the fiery serpents recovered when they looked upon the 

* The kingdom of El Dorado, like that of Prester John, has been erased from all modern maps of geography as a fabulous region; yet 
there can be no doubt that the former was a province of New Granada, and that the latter was the ancient kingdom of Abyssinia. 

4 That is to say, not decorated with the fantastical ornaments which M. Dupaix complains of as disfiguring the cross which he disco- 
vered in the temple of Palenque; nor on the other hand a cross of the Greek form. Vide p. 481 of the sixth volume of this work. 

N:-O: 2° 8. 10] 

image of the brazen serpent, which was typical of the Messiah, whose sign was the cross,—there is some reason for 
supposing that Simon was right, in conjecturing that amongst the other proofs of the Gospel having been preached in 
ancient times in New Granada, might be reckoned the custom of placing crosses upon the graves of persons who had 
died from the bite of serpents. That learned author explains himself more fully upon this subject in the following 
passage of the eleventh chapter of the same History, where, after giving a particular description of the person of the 
saint to whom the Indians gave the three names Sadiguia-sonada, Moxe, and Sugunzua, he proceeds to notice his 
doctrines: ‘“ Dioles tambien 4 entender que las almas eran immortales, y que iban 4 recibir premio 6 pena segun 
habian vivido en esta vida, quando salian de los cuerpos, los quales habian de resucitar y tener otra vida, aunque 
entendian habian de tener necesidad en ella de comidas* como en esta, y 4 esto atinaba el ponerselas en los 
sepulcros. Estas y otras muchas cosas en orden 4 los articulos de la fé, y sus preceptos, hallamos en rastros, fue decla- 
rando este predicador por todos los pueblos que pasaba ; de los quales unos se fueron acordando y conservando unas 
cosas y otros otras, que no ha sido poco despues de tantos alos y comunicacion tan larga y ordinaria que con ellos 
tenia el demonio, no se les acabasen de desarraygar estas luces, sino que se hayan conservado algunas, para que 
por ellas se haya facilitado mas el crecimiento que han tenido con la predicacion del evangelio, que amanecio entre 
ellos con la venida de los Espafioles, los quales entre otras centellas y rastros que hallaron de esto en esta provincia, 
fue, cabezas humanas tres en un cuerpo en una estatua de un idolo en un pueblo de Boyaca, que declaraban los Indios 
tenerle figurado asi, porque representaba una cosa que eran tres personas con un corazon y una voluntad, como se lo 
habia dicho 4 sus mayores el Sugunzua, que paso por estas tierras.” The fact of the Indians of the populous district 
of Tunja placing in the sanctuaries of their temples a human figure with three heads upon one body, as an emblem 
of the Trinity, is in itself extremely curious, and, resting upon the testimony of so respectable a historian as Simon, is 
so entitled to credit, that to attempt to account for it becomes a much more reasonable task than to question its truth: 
we may therefore observe, that in the same manner as St. Patrick is declared to have converted the Irish by a sham- 
rock, the three leaves of which upon the same stalk explained to them the doctrine of the Trinity, so Sugunzua, the holy 
preacher, who instructed the Indians of New Granada in many articles of the Christian faith, and taught them that 
the figure with three heads was three persons with one heart and one will, might have intended that to be but a type 
which in the course of ages became an object of idolatry. It must be confessed that this conjecture presupposes an 
admission which Protestants have never found any difficulty in making, when transubstantiation was the doctrine 
which they called in the aid of reason to impugn. Were it necessary, however, that the testimony of Simon should 
be received with distrust, the following extract from the third chapter of Calancha’s Chronicle of the Order of St. 
Augustin in Peru, in which mention is made of the image named Tangatanga, would serve fully to corroborate his 
relation, because the similarity of the facts related tend mutually to confirm each other. “ En toda la comarca de 
Potosi i Chuquisaca, ciudad de la Plata donde yo naci, ni en su provincia de los Charcas, no é allado huella ai 
sefial, si bien ay tradicion que predicaron estos dos la ley de Cristo, i la unidad de la esencia divina en trinidad de 
personas, como por informaciones autenticas, se provd en Chuquisaca, averiguando el principio de aquella gran 
estatua, que de sus contornos venian 4 adorar llamada Tangatanga, que decian sus antiguos quipos itradiciones, era 
un Dios i tres Personas, i que adoravan tres en uno, i uno en tres. Esto entre muchos lo alega el'maestro Maluenda 
i el Padre Acosta, i dice, que en ofros territorios tenian tres estatuas del Sol, que se intitulavan Apuinti, Churiinti, 
Intihuaoque, que quiere decir el Padre i Sefor Sol, el Hijo Sol, el ayre 6 espiritu Hermano Sol. Y de la mesma 
manera nombravan las tres estatuas del Chuquiilla, dios que decian era el que governava en la region del ayre; 
i aunque en los Indios vino. 4 ser idolatria atribuir al Sol esta trinidad de personas, confesandole una sola naturaleza, 
su principio fue predicarles estos santos la Trinidad que en nuestro Dios confesamos: i el demonio les persuadié 
que avia Padre Sol, Hijo Sol, i ayre 6 Espiritu Sol; con que dejando el misterio que muchos creian, les mudo la 
adoracion, bajando 4 una criatura la immensidad del Criador, 7 @ fuerca de tres Soles les abraso el anima, 2 los cego con 
tanta luz, pero predicoseles esta verdad por estos santos, i lo contenido en los demas misterios i ley; i que la predi- 
casen alli fue forcoso, pues para pasar 4 Sicasica i 4 Chuquiago, viniendo de los Chiriguanaes, era el paso por la pro- 

% This curious notion might have originated in the tradition of Christ having eaten broiled fish and honeycomb after the resurrection, 
as recorded by Saint Luke in the forty-second verse of the twenty-fourth chapter of his Gospel; and of what he likewise said of not tasting 
wine till he should drink it new in his Father’s kingdom. 

VOL. VIII. (2D) 

102 INGOP RES: 

vincia de los Charcas, i no avian de dejar aquellas provincias intermedias, los que no dejaron quebrada, montafia ni 
aspereca, que no pretendiesen convertir.” 

The last author whose testimony we shall adduce in proof of the fact that the tradition of a virgin conceiving a 
son was general throughout the continent of America, is Clavigero, who, in the twenty-fourth chapter of the first 
volume of his valuable History of California, gives the following account of the religious opinions of the people of 
that peninsula. ‘“ Quanto alla religione, la quale é uno de’ pit. essenziali articoli nella Storia delle nazioni, poco ne 
possiamo dire, perché quasi niente ve n’era presso i Californiesi. Siccome essi non avevano tempj, né altari, né 
simulacri, né sacerdoti, né sacrifizi, cos} non vi s’é ritrovata veruna traccia d’ idolatria, o di culto esterno della Divinita. 
Avevano pure qualche idea d’ un essere supremo, Creator del Mondo, ma oscurata, e confusa, come avviene ad altri 
popoli rozzi con mille spropositi, scioccherie, e fanciullaggini. Noi diremo qui dei loro Dogmi, e della loro super- 
stizione cid, che dopo fatte diligenti ricerche ne deposero alcuni gravi e dotti missionarj. I Pericui dicevano, che 
nel Cielo abitava un gran Signore, appellato nella lor lingua Niparaja: ch’ egli avea fatto il Cielo, la Terra, ed il 
Mare, e poteva fare tutto quanto volesse. Questo Signore, dicevano, ha moglie chiamata Anajicojondi, e sebbene 
non abbia mai usato d’ essa, perché non ha corpo, tuttavia ne ha avuti tre figliuoli. Un di questi detto Quajaip fu 
fatto da Anajicojondi ne’ monti d’ Acaragui, 2/ gual era vero uomo, e visse gran tempo tra i nostri Antenati per addottri- 
narli. Egli era poderoso, ed avea gran gente sotto di se; perché ogni volta che voleva, andava sotterra, e ne cavava 
degli uomini; ma questi ingrati, non curando tanti benefiz) da lui ricevuti, congiurarono contra di lui, e T uccisero, e nel 
dargl la morte gh traffissero il capo con un cerchio di spine. Cosi esponevano que’ barbari la loro credenza. Vi 
aggiugnevano, che nel Cielo, il quale era assai pid popolato della Terra, vi fu gid una guerra stupenda; perché un 
gran personaggio di quel paese appellato Tuparan da alcuni, e da altri Bac, congiurd con tutti 1 suot contro al 
Supremo Signore Niparqja; ma restando costui vincitore nella guerra, dopo d’ aver tolte a Tuparan le pitaje, e tutte 
quelle altre frutta deliziose, che aveva, lo caccid del Cielo con tutti i suoi seguaci, e lo racchiuse in una spelonca 
vicina al mare: e che allora creo Niparqa le balene*, per farvi la guardia, e non lasciar giammai uscire Tuparan della 
spelonca. Dicevano inoltre, che Niparaja non voleva la guerra, e per lo contrario Tuparan la voleva; imperocché 
quegli uomini, ch’ erano uccisi a frecciate non andavano in cielo, ma erano confinati nella spelonca di Tuparan. {Da 
tal dottrina nacquero nel paese de’ Pericui due sette, o fazioni opposte non meno ne lor sentimenti, che ne’ loro costumi. 
I seguaci di Niparaja erano per lo pid uomini gravi, circospetti, e docili alla ragione: onde non fu malagevole a’ Mis- 
sionarj di persuader loro le verita evangeliche, prevalendosi anche de’ loro stessi dogmi. Coloro poi, che aderivano a 
Tuparan, erano bugiardi, ingannatori, inquieti, e ostinati ne’ loro errori. ssi predicavano, che le stelle, le quali al 
dir loro sono di metallo, erano state create da un Nume appellato Purutabui, e la Luna da un altro detto Cucunumic. 
I Guaicuri, nazione, come abbiamo gia detto, divisa in varie branche di dialetto diverso, dicevano, che verso 
settentrione v’ era uno Spirito principale appellato Guamongo, il quale mandava alla Terra le malattie, e che antica- 
mente vi avea spedito un altro Spirito appellato Gujiaqui a@ visitar la terra a nome d’esso lui: che nel suo viaggio per 
quella penisola vi ando seminando delle pitaje, e accomodando i luoghi da far la pesca sino ad un gran sasso, che 
avvi nella costa orientale presso ad un porto, appellato dagli Spaguoli Puerto escondido, o sia Porto nascosto, ove si 
fermo per qualche tempo : che esso era servito da altri Spiriti inferiori, i quali ogni di gli portavano buone pitaje, e 
pesce da mangiare, intanto ch’ egli s’ occupava nel fare con que’ capelli, che gli presentavano i divoti di lui, le cappe, 
di cui in appresso ragioneremo, per uso de’ Dottori, o Ciarlatani Californiesi: che da quel luogo parti Gujiaqui con- 
tinuando la visita della penisola, la quale finita ritornd nel paese settentrionale, ond’ era uscito. Asserivano anche i 
Dottori Guaicuri, che il sole, la luna, ed altri astri apparentemente pit grandi, erano veri uomini, e donne, le quali 
ogni giorno nel tramontare cadevano nel mare, e che ne uscivano a nuoto nel levarsi: che le stelle erano foconi fatti 
nel Cielo dallo Spirito Visitatore, e riaccesi dopo d’ essere stati spenti nelle acque del Maret. 1 Cechimi dicevano, 
che nel Cielo abitava un gran Signore, il cui nome nella lor lingua vuol dire, Colui che vive: ch egli senza concorso 
di veruna femmina ebbe un fighuolo, che aveva due nomi, uno de’ quali significa, il Veloce, e |’ altro vale, La per- 

* The rabbis declare that the whale is a fish extremely docile to the commands of the Deity. 

+ Questo dogma de’ Pericui era diametralmente opposto a quello de’ Messicani, di cui abbiamo fatta menzione nel lib. vi. della Storia 
del Messico ; poiché costoro dicevano, che tutti quelli, ch’ erano uccisi nella guerra, andavano alla‘ casa del Sole. 

¢ I Guaicuri perché non aveano voce propria nella lor lingua per significare il Cielo, si servivano di questa Notu, che vuol dire, Su, o 
nell’ alto. 

NOTES. 103 

fezione, o termine dell’ argilla: che oltre ad essi v’ era un altro personaggio appellato, Colui che fa de’ Signori. A: tutti 
e tre davano wl titolo de Signore ; ma interrogati quanti Signori vi erano, rispondevano, che un solo, il quale creo il cielo, 
la terra, le piante, gli animali, Cuomo, e la donna. Dicevano di pit, che Colui che vive, avendo creati certi esseri, 
che non si vedono, costoro congiurarono contro a lui, e si dichiararono anche nemici degli uomini: che questi Spiriti da 
loro detti Bugiardi, e Ingannatori, pigliavano gli uomini quando morivano, e gli mettevano sotto terra, acciocche non 
vedessero il Signore che vive.* Que’ Cochimi, che vi sono di 1a da’gr. 30, facevano menzione d’un womo, che ne’ tempi 
antichi era venuto dal Cielo per far bene agli uomini, e perd Vappellavano Tama ambei ucambi tevivichi, cioe P Uomo 
venuto dal Cielo; ma non sapevano dire in qual maniera fosse stato benemerito degli uomini; né gli davano verun 
culto. Celebravano bensi una festa, che appellavano dell’ Uomo venuto dal Cielo; ma essa in vece di contenere aleun 
atto religioso, tutta riducevasi a prender diletto pranzando, e ballando. Alcuni giorni prima della festa, erano pre- 
murosamente incaricate le donne di cercar per tutto quelle cose, che servivano loro per cibo, per regalarne, come essi 
dicevano quel Nume, che dovea venire a visitarli, e tutta questa provvisione si guardava in un frascato a tal fine 
costrutto. Venuto il giorno prefisso alla festa sceglievano un giovane, che dovesse fare il personaggio di quel Nume, 
e segretamente lo vestivano di pelli dopo d’ averlo tinto tutto di varj colori, acciocché non fosse conosciuto. Costui si 
nascondeva dietro a qualche monte vicino al sopraccennato frascato, nel qual entravano gli uomini ad aspettarlo, tenen- 
dosene intanto le donne, e i ragazzi lontano, benché a vista del frascato, e del monte. I] giovane travestito, quando 
era ormai tempo di farsi vedere, compariva su la cima del monte, e quindi scendeva correndo velocissimamente sino 
al frascato, nel quale era ricevuto con gran giubilo da tutti. Quivi mangiavano allegramente a spese delle povere 
donne, le quali non essendo mai consapevoli del segreto, restavano fermamente persuase, ch’era vero cid, che finge- 
vano i furbi loro mariti. Finito il pranzo ritornava per la medesima via, e spariva il Nume preteso. Di s} fatta 
furberia, e per lo stesso fine, si prevalevano que’ Cochimi nell’ Anniversario de’ loro Morti. Fingevano essi, che i loro 
Morti, i quali risedevano ne’ paesi settentrionali, venivano ogni anno a far loro una visita. Convenutisi gli uomini 
quanto al giorno di tal visita, obbligavano le donne, anche con minacce di malattie, a cercare nel bosco, e nella cam- 
pagna una gran copia di viveri, da poter regalarne i loro morti. Nel giorno prefisso per Auniversario gli uomini 
radunati in un frascato si mangiavano tutta quella provvisione, mentreché le donne, e i ragazzi tenutisi in un luogo 
da essi lontano piagnevano dirottamente la morte de’ loro parenti, pel cui pranzo aveano tanto stentato. Erano gli 
uomini si gelosi di tenere occulto alle donne quel misterio, che avendolo un giovane rivelato a sua madre, fu imme- 
diatamente dallo stesso suo padre messo a morte. Non pud fare a meno di non recar maraviglia a chi legge questi 
racconti, il ritrovare ne’ dogmi de’ barbari Californiesi ¢ante tracce, guantunque alterate, delle verita cristiane. Potrebbe 
pur sospettarsi, ch’ essi avessero avuta gia qualche istruzione da alcuni Cristiani ivi capitati; mentre in que’cinquant’ 
anni, che precedettero l’entrata de’ Gesuiti nella California, vi erano approdati moltissimi bastimenti del Messico, ed 
alcuni d’altri paesi; ma nessuno mai, per quanto si sa, vi si fermd tanto tempo, quanto bisognava per imparare alcuna 
di quelle difficilissime lingue, e gli stessi Californiesi interrogati su I’ origine della loro dottrina affermavano costante- 
mente d’averla avuta da loro antenati. Oltraccid se qualche Cristiano avesse loro insegnati i misterj della Trinita, e 
dell’ Incarnazione, non avrebbe senz’ altro trascurato d’ istruirgli della necessita del battesimo ; ma d’esso non si trovo 
né traccia, né notizia alcuna in tutta quella penisola. Yo come Storico mi contento di raccontare i fatti certi, lasciando 
ad altri la liberta di far delle congetture.” 

Nore XXXVIII. Page 243. 

Ir has been supposed that the figure of the tree, in the third page of the MS. of Boturini, has some connexion with 
the unmeaning tradition, preserved by Torquemada, of the Aztecas having been terrified at the commencement of 
their migration by a tree, under which they were eating, suddenly cracking in the middle. Due attention, however, 
being paid to all the circumstances recorded of that migration, and its wonderful similarity to the pilgrimage of the 
children of Israel from Egypt, we cannot but associate the figure of that tree in the Mexican painting with the history 
of the first miracle which God is said to have wrought in favour of the Israelites zmmediately after their passage through 

* The name of the ‘living God’ is frequently bestowed upon the Deity in Scripture. 

104 NOTES. 

the Red Sea, which consisted in Moses throwing a tree into the bitter waters of Marah, by which they became 
sweet. Itis thus described in the fifteenth chapter of Exodus: “And when they came to Marah, they could not 
drink of the waters of Marah, for they were bitter: therefore the name of it was called Marah. And the people 
murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink? And he cried unto the Lord; and.the Lord shewed him a 
tree, which when he had cast into the waters, the waters were made sweet: there he made for them a statute and an 
ordinance, and there he proved them, and said, If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, and 
wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, 1 will put - 
none of these diseases upon thee, which I have brought upon the Egyptians: for 1 am the Lord that healeth thee.” 
The hands grasping the trunk of the tree, and the falling position of the upper portion of its branches, symbolical 
perhaps of the act of throwing or casting, are very remarkable in the above-mentioned painting; as also, the ark 
resting upon the ground, as if to denote that the Aztecas halted at the place of the tree, as the Israelites did at the 
waters of Marah; the penitence of the Aztecas, which is well expressed by the attitude of humiliation in which they 
are represented as weeping before Huitzilopuchtli, may be merely a Mexican tradition of the children of Israel 
having sinned at the waters of Marah, which event became famous in Scripture ; while the two figures apart from 
the rest may signify the covenant which God then made with Moses and the children of Israel, which doubtless 
rendered that place very memorable in the recollection of their posterity.. An obscure tradition, in the sixth verse of 
the eighty-fourth Psalm, of God overflowing the valley of Baca,—which event appears again to be alluded to by David 
in the thirty-fifth verse of the hundred and seventh Psalm, and to which Isaiah may also refer in the eighteenth verse 
of the forty-first chapter of his Prophecies,—might have induced the Mexicans to feign the history of Huitzilopuchtli 
overflowing the valley of Cohuatepec, that it might serve as a temporary habitation to their ancestors, when proceeding 
on their pilgrimage from Aztlan. 

Nore XXXIX. Page 531. 

Tue Spanish clergy who first proceeded to the New World were extremely desirous to discover the fulfilment of 
prophecy in the history of the Mexicans; nor did some of them scruple to affirm that they had discovered the beast 
mentioned in the Revelations, in that remote quarter of the globe. Although the nwmber of the beast is that which, in 
the present day, is chiefly regarded, still its figure, in the sixteenth century, claimed public attention; and pious 
enthusiasts, like the Rev. Edward Irving, easily persuaded themselves, from the shape of the Mexican lake, that 
Mexico must be the beast spoken of in the Prophecies, since nothing in their opinion could be more clear than that a 
beast must mean a state or city, and Mexico being situated on the shores of two lakes, viz. the Lake of Mexico pro- 
perly so designated, and the sweet water lake, or the Lake of Chalco; and these two lakes forming, by their close ap- 
proximation, one, and presenting in their shape @ mysterious combination of the seven component parts of an animal, 
viz. a head, a body, a tail, with four legs caused by tributary streams which flowed into the lake, whilst the sign of 
the beast was sufficiently indicated by the /icentious manners of the Mexicans,—nothing appeared wanting to the fulfil- 
ment of Prophecy and to the perfect manifestation of the type, except that the Church should have the honour of 
crushing this sanguinary monster, whose head was adorned with a triple crown*, and out of whose mouth proceeded 
blasphemies. There is something so novel in the idea of Mexico being the beast mentioned in the Revelations, that 
the engraving of the Mexican lake, at the conclusion of the fourth volume of the present work, has been inserted for 
the gratification of the inquisitive reader: it is taken from the Giro del Mondo of the Italian author Gemelli Carreri, 
who, it may be proper to add, introduced that map of the Mexican lake into the volume of his travels, less with a 
view of promoting the science of geography than of illustrating the signs of the beast. 

* The cities of Mexico, Tezcuco, and Tacuba, formed the triple crown; they were built on the shores of the Mexican lake, and were 
the capitals of the confederate states of Mexico, Acolhuacan, and Tlacopan, Cortes, who was the conqueror of these cities, introduced 
three crowns, surmounting the effigy of a city intended to represent Mexico, in the quarterings of his arms. Gomara has prefixed to his 
History of the Conquest of Mexico, which he dedicated to Don Martin Cortes (the son of the General), a plate containing the representa- 
tion of his father’s arms. 

NOTES. 105 

Note XL. Page 29]. 

THE discovery of negroes by the first Spaniards who visited America is a clear proof that that continent had been 
colonized from Africa: and if the editor of the folio edition of the Bibliotheca of Pinelo, published at Madrid in the 
year 1737, is not alluding to the language of the imported African slaves, where he says that the Galabine language 
common in Guinea is spoken by the Caribs of the West Indies, that fact would be very deserving of attention. 

Note XLI. Page 402. 

Tur Mexicans named Eve, Cikuacohuatl, which proper name is compounded of ciua ‘a woman,’ and cohuatl, or 
coatl, ‘a serpent,’ and signifies, according to Sahagun, ‘the serpent woman,’ in allusion to the famous history of her 
temptation by the serpent. It is singular that Clemens Alexandrinus should assign the same signification to the 
proper name Eve; and since the passage in which his definition of the Hebrew term occurs is curious, and proves 
that the Mexican custom of braiding the hair with serpents on their religious festivals might have originated in 
Asia Minor or the bordering region of Palestine, where the votaries of Bacchus were very numerous, we shall here 
insert it from the second chapter of his Exhortation to the Gentiles. “ Acovyoov Mawodny opytafover Bax yor, omopayie 
THY lepomavav ayovrec, Kat TEALGKOVOL TAG Kpewvomtag TWY ovwY averrEeupEvOL TOLG oes, émorodArzovrec Evav' Evay éxewny, 
ou qv Hh TAayn mapnkoAovOyae. Kat onjctov opyuoy Baryikwy opts éort TETEAEGpEVOG’ AUTIKA your KaTa THY akpiBn Twy “EBpawy 
Qurny, ro ovoua To Eira Sacvvopevov, épunveverar odie 1 Onde.” “The Bacchantes celebrate the orgies of Bacchus 
Menoles, by devouring raw flesh when they act the sacred madness; and they go through the ceremony of distributing 
the flesh of the victims, crowned with serpents, and reiterating shouts of Eua, that Hua by whom came transgression : 
the symbol of the orgies of Bacchus is a consecrated* serpent, and indeed, if we pay attention to the strict sense of 
the Hebrew, the name Euia aspirated, signifies a female serpent.” It hence appears that the two proper names Cihua- 
cohuatl and Eve have exactly the same meaning; and Suchiquecal, or Xochiquetzal (the other epithet which the 
Mexicans bestowed on Cihuacohuatl), compounded of wochitl ‘a flower, and quetzalli, ‘a handful of green feathers,’ 
and signifying a handful of flowers, or the act of gathering flowers, was an equally applicable name for her who sinned 
by plucking the forbidden fruit or flowers, according to the tradition of the Mexicans, who named her, after ‘she 
became repentant, Yxnextli, which signifies ‘ eyes blind with ashes,’ in allusion to the abundance of tears which she 
shed, and likewise Totzin, or ‘our mother,’ from her being the common mother of mankind. The reasons that induced 
Plutarch to believe that the ancient Jews worshiped Bacchus under the name of Jehovah, will be found in the fourth 
book of his Convivial Dialogues, wherein he philosophizes in the style of Lord Bacon; and although but a fragment 
has been preserved of the discourse which he entitled “Tic 6 rapa “IovSatore Bec,” we may rest assured that that en- 
lightened philosopher, who lived in an age when the Jews were a people well known to the Romans, had some grounds 
for maintaining such an opinion: let us assume, for the sake of argument, that he might have beheld the Jews immo- 
derately addicted in his day to the celebration of the orgies of Bacchus; which, if it had been the fact, there would 
have been certainly nothing strange in their borrowing one superstitious rite from the Romans, who had sunk into all 
the grossest idolatries of the land of Canaan. Another reason has forcibly struck us for thinking it very probable that 
the Mexicans borrowed the custom of twining their hair with serpents, and of introducing the representation of the 
feathered serpent so frequently into their mythological paintings, from the Jews; and that is, that the Seraphim, which 
are constantly associated in Scripture with the Cherubim, were believed by some of the rabbis to be angelical beings 
with bodies resembling bright and shining serpents; and it deserves to be remarked, that the Hebrew term seraph 
signifies a shining serpent. The authors of the Universal History t have not scrupled to suppose that the devil coun- 

* This is not the exact meaning of rereAecwevos, nor will the phrase ‘initiated’, which, referring to a person, would be very suitable, 

express it. 
+ Universal History, vol. i. p. 62. 

VOL. VIII. G2) Es) 

106 NOTES. 

terfeited the shechinah, or divine presence, by assuming the form of a Seraph or radiant serpent, and so tempted Eve; 
and they even venture to defend that rather odd opinion, by referring to a passage in Tertullian, where that ancient. 
Father declares that Eve gave attention to the serpent as ¢o the Son of God. It is a fact also deserving of observation, 
that a ruler or governor of the people is named in the Hebrew Scriptures a serpent, and is compared to a poisonous 
asp, whence perhaps the derivation of the Greek term Paoidtckog for a serpent; and the Mexicans might have placed 
the figure of a serpent on the heads of their principal priests in their paintings, merely as an appropriate symbol of 
sacerdotal dignity and authority. To this opinion we are the rather inclined, because Josephus, describing, in the 
eleventh chapter of the third book of his Jewish Antiquities, the dress of the Hebrew priests, says that they wore 
a girdle “varid ita contexta, ut videatur pellis esse viperea.” The testimony of Josephus, who was a Levite, may be here 
relied upon; and it is reasonable to suppose that the viper girdle might have led in process of time to the fashion of 
wearing viper locks. 

Nore XLII. Page 208. 

Tue following passage occurs in the eighteenth verse of the thirteenth chapter of Exodus: “But God led the people 
about through the way of the wilderness of the Red Sea; and the children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land 
of Egypt.” The metaphorical expression harnessed, which is that which is found in the Hebrew text, is very 
descriptive of the manner in which the children of Israel fled from Egypt, when, after having found favour in the 
eyes of the Egyptians, they borrowed from them their jewels of gold and jewels of silver, and secretly set out on 
their pilgrimage, carrying all their goods with them in their knapsacks, harnessed as it were to their backs. We have 
already had occasion to observe that the Tultecas recorded in their paintings the traditions which they had preserved 
of their ancestors’ flight from Egypt; nor is it unlikely that the subject of the valuable painting preserved in the Royal 
library at Dresden is a legendary history of the flight of the children of Israel from Egypt, since we there behold a 
nation with Jewish features proceeding on a migration with their knapsacks literally harnessed to their backs, their apparel 
fringed like that of the ancient Jews, and human bones and skeletons forming an extraordinary addition to their 
baggage, which must remind us of what is said, in the thirtieth verse of the forty-seventh chapter of Genesis, of Jacob 
desiring his bones to be carried out of Egypt when the Jews should emigrate from thence; and of Joseph binding the 
children of Israel by an oath to take his bones along with them, as recorded in the twenty-fifth verse of the fiftieth chapter 
of Genesis: “And Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry 
up my bones from hence.” It is to be supposed that the example of Jacob and of Joseph would have been likely to 
have been imitated by many more of their countrymen; and although Scripture is silent on the subject, the Jews might 
have had a tradition, that when their ancestors fled from Egypt, they carried the bones of many of their patriarchs 
along with them. It is further remarkable, that most of the female figures in that painting are ornamented with rich 
Jewels, such as it may be supposed were worn by the Jewish women when they quitted Egypt, and which might 
possibly allude to the tradition of the Israelites having spoiled the Egyptians in the manner recorded in: the thirty- 
fifth and thirty-sixth verses of the twelfth chapter of Exodus :—“ And the children of Israel did according to the word 
of Moses, and they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment; and the Lord gave 
the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they /ent unto them such things as they required. And they 
spoiled the Egyptians.” Some of the prohibitions contained in Leviticus seem also to be alluded to in various paintings 
of the Dresden Codex; and in the twenty-seventh and twenty-eighth pages of the same MS., there occurs a figure 
very much resembling that of the brazen serpent whose history is given in the Pentateuch; to which the offering of 
a bird, killed according to the prescription of the Hebrew law, by twisting the head from the body, so as not'to cause 
death by strangulation, appears to be made. It has already been observed, that the Dresden MS., although com- 
prising many paintings, may still contain but a small portion of the original series descriptive of the events of the 
migration of the Tultecas. We shall here subjoin an extract from the first chapter of the second part of Juarros’s 
History of the Kingdom of Guatemala, translated into English by Lieutenant Baily, which, when it is recollected that 
the painting preserved in the Royal library at Dresden belongs to a province which either actually formed a part of 
the kingdom of Guatemala, or immediately bordered on it, will add increased probability to the conjecture, that the flight 
of the Jews from Egypt is the subject of the above painting, by showing that the Indians of that part of the American 

NOTES. 107 

continent believed that they were descended from the Jews, and retained a tradition of the bondage which their 
ancestors suffered in Egypt, and their miraculous passage through the Red Sea. “ It is not intended to undertake, in this 
place, the discussion of a subject that has already exhausted abilities of the first order, viz. the original population of 
America; from a conviction, that when the Tultecan Indians, from whom the Quiché and Kachiquel kings descended, 
first came into this region, they found it already inhabited by people of different nations ; and when these same Tul- 
tecas entered into the kingdom of Mexico, they discovered that the Chichimecas had previously got possession of it. 
This conviction is founded upon the assumption, that if all the inhabitants of this kingdom did derive their origin from 
the Tultecas, they would doubtless have spoken the same language; but as there are so many different tongues used 
by the natives of it, the opinion in favour of a common origin is untenable. Coming therefore to the subject of the 
present chapter, it appears from the manuscripts of Don Juan Torres, the son, and Don Juan Macario, the grandson 
of the king Chignaviucelut, and of Don Francisco Gomez, the first Ahzib Kiche, that the Tultecas were descended 
from the house of Israel, and were released by Moses from the captivity in which Pharaoh held them. Having passed 
the Red Sea, they resigned themselves to the practice of idolatry, and persisted therein in spite of the admonition of 
Moses ; but, to avoid his reproofs, or from the fear of his inflicting some chastisement, they chose to separate from him 
and his brethren, and to retire from that part of the country to a place which they called the Seven Caverns ; that is, 
from the borders of the Red Sea to what is now a part of the kingdom of Mexico, where they founded the celebrated 
city of Tula. The chief who commanded and conducted this multitude from one continent to the other was Tanub, 
the stock from which sprung the families of the kings of Tula and Quiché, and the first monarch of the Tultecas. The 
second was Capichoch; the third Calel Ahus; the fourth Ahpop; and the fifth Nimaquiché, who being more be- 
loved than any of his predecessors, was directed by an oracle to leave Tula with the people, who had by this time mul- 
tiplied greatly, and conduct them from the kingdom of Mexico to that of Guatemala. In performing this journey they 
expended many years, suffered extraordinary hardships, and wandered over an immense tract of country, until they dis- 
covered a large lake (the lake of Atitan); and resolved to fix their habitations in a convenient place at a short distance 
from it, which they called Quiché, in commemoration of their king Nimaquiché, who died during their peregrination. 
Nimaquiché was accompanied by his three brothers, and it was agreed that they should divide the country 
between them; one was to have for his share the province of the Quelenes and Chapanecos; another, Tezulutlan or 
Verapaz; the third, to become chief of the Mames and Pocomanes; and Nimaquiché, of the Quichés, Kachiquels, 
and Zutugiles: the latter dying, was succeeded by his son Acxopil, who was at the head of his nation when they 
settled in Quiché, and the first monarch who reigned in Utatlan. This prince seeing that the monarchy soon rose to 
a high degree of splendour,—for its better government, and to relieve himself from some of the fatigues of admini- 
stration, appointed thirteen captains or governors. The manuscripts before mentioned add, that Acxopil, having 
attained a very advanced age, determined upon dividing the empire into three kingdoms; namely, the Quiché, the 
Kachiquel, and the Zutugil: the first he retained for himself; the second he gave to his eldest son, Jiutemal ; and the 
third to his youngest son, Acxiquat: this division was made on a day marked by the extraordinary circumstance of 
three suns being visible at the same time, an incident that has induced some persons to think the partition was effected 
on the day of our Saviour’s birth, as it is commonly asserted such a phenomenon then occurred; but as a parhelion 
is a meteor which has been so frequently observed, this does not appear to be sufficient authority for fixing the divi- 
sion to that particular day. The Tultecan emperors who reigned in Utatlan, the capital of Quiché, whose names 
have reached posterity, were the following seventeen: 1. Acxopil, 2. Jiutemal, 3. Hunahpu, 4. Balam Kiché, 5. Ba- 
lam Acan, 6. Maucotah, 7. Iquibalam, 8. Kicab I., 9. Cacubraxechein, 10. Kicab I., 11. Iximche, 12. Kicab III. 
13. Kicab IV., 14. Kicab Tanub, 15. Tecum Umam, 16. Chignaviucelut, 17. Sequechul, or Sequechil. Of these the 
most distinguished was Acxopil, who led his nation into this country, established in it the empire of Quiché, and 
divided it into three domains. Jiutemal, who, before he succeeded his father on the throne of Utatlan, was first 
king of the Kachiquels, by which he was rendered next in dignity to the monarch of Quiché*. Hunahpu rendered 
himself celebrated by discovering the use of cocoa and cotton. Nothing remarkable was performed by any of the 

* These Indians distinguished the degrees of sovereignty among their kings, by the throne itself. That of Utatlan, which was the first in 
rank, was placed under four canopies formed of feathers, each of different colours and of different sizes, fixed one within the other; the 
throne of Kachiquel or Guatemala had three canopies, and that of Atitan or Zutugil had but two. 

108 NOTES. 

others until the time of Tecum Umam, who occupied the throne when tle Spaniards arrived, and bravely resisted 
their progress, until he fell by the hand of Pedro de Alvarado. After the death of this prince, Alvarado placed his 
eldest son Chignaviucelut on the throne of Utatlan ; but having cause to suspect him of treason, he ordered him to 
be hanged a very short time after he had placed the crown upon his head. Sequechul succeeded him, and reigned 
two years; but unable to brook the disgrace of seeing himself reduced to a mere vassal of the Spaniards, he revolted 
in the year 1526; his success was of short duration, and being vanquished, he remained a prisoner during the 
remainder of his life.” 

“The manuscript of Juan Torres before noticed, and another of Francisco Garcia Calel Tzumpan Xavila, a descend- 
ant from the kings of Quiché, written in 1544, relate that thirteen armies left the Old Continent, headed by as 
many principal families, who were all related to each other, but five of them much more illustrious than the rest ; 
these were the families of Capichoch, Cochohlam, Mahquinalé, Ahcanail, and Belehebeam. From Capichoch, the 
trunk of the genealogical tree of the family of Nimaquiché, all the royal progeny of the Indians of this kingdom 
derive their origin; and these princes of the blood royal are called Caciques. ‘The Ahaos are the heads of noble 
lineages, descendants of the grandees who were the immediate attendants upon the kings. From the Ahaos are 
derived the Calpules, who compose the nobility of the villages Quezaltenango, Totonicapan, Iztaguacan, Ostuncalco, 
Zapotitlan, and others. As the princes or heads of families were very nearly related to each other, it is clear that as 
the emperors of Mexico were descendants of Belehebcan, a relative of Capichoch, the original stock from whom the 
monarchs of Quiché sprung, the kings of both countries are of the same race. It appears, too, that these princes 
acknowledged the relationship, and maintained a communication with each other ; for it is related, in a manuscript of 
sixteen quarto folios, in page 4, which is preserved by the Indians of the village of St. Andres Xecul, that when 
Moctezuma was made prisoner, he sent a private ambassador to Kicab Tanub, king of Quiché, to inform him 
some white men had arrived in his states, and made war upon him with such impetuosity, that the whole strength of 
his people was unable to resist them; that he was himself a prisoner surrounded by guards; and hearing it was the 
intention of his invaders to pass on to the kingdom of Quiché and subdue it, he resolved to send notice of the design, 
in order that Kicab Tanub might be prepared to oppose them. This is a strong proof of a good understanding having 
subsisted between the two kings; for if Moctezuma, watched as he was by his keepers, could contrive to dispatch 
this messenger secretly to Kicab, there is no doubt but frequent intercourse took place between them in the time of 
peace and tranquillity. In pages 5 and 6 of the manuscript, it is said, that as soon as the king of Quiché received 
this intelligence, he sent for four young diviners, whom he ordered to tell him what would be the result of the inva- 
sion :—these persons requested time to give their answer, and taking their bows, they discharged some arrows against 
a rock ; but seeing that no impression was left upon it, they returned very sorrowfully, and told the king there was no 
means of avoiding the disaster, for the white men would certainly conquer them. Kicab, not well satisfied with the 
reply, sent for the priests, and desired to have their opinions on this eventful subject. With great lamentations, they 
delivered a similar prognostic of disaster to their monarch, founding their conclusion upon the ominous circumstance of 
a certain stone, which had been brought by their forefathers from Egypt and which was worshiped as a god, having 
suddenly split in two; an incident that portended the inevitable ruin of their empire. Kicab, however, still incre- 
dulous, and not intimidated, immediately began to make the best military dispositions in his power for a resolute 
defence of his dominions; but in the midst of his preparations death put an end to his career. The principal Indians 
who came with the Spaniards from Mexico and Tlascala, persuaded of the identity of their own origin and that of the 
people of this country, declared themselves relations and friends, formed more intimate connexions by intermarriages 
with the Quichés, and gave them a copy of the instrument by which they had received from the Emperor Charles the 
Fifth the honour of a coat of arms, for the great services they had rendered to the Spanish army in the conquest of 
New Spain.” 

Nore XLIII. 

Sauacun declares, in the introduction to his General History of New Spain, that Mexican tradition recorded that 
their ancestors the Tultecas navigated the ocean in search of the Terrestrial Paradise, and styled themselves Tamohan- 

NEO! Ese 109 

chan, that is to say, persons who had gone in quest of their original homes. This tradition, allied as it is to ancient 
Christian and Jewish prejudices, is extremely curious ; since an opinion prevailed in the early and middle ages, that 
Paradise was situated beyond the sea, that its site was adjacent to some lofty mountains, and that a circumambient 
ocean separated the portion of the globe now inhabited from that which was peopled by the antediluvian race of 
mankind. Cosmas Indicopleustes, an Egyptian monk who flourished about the middle of the sixth century, has in- 
serted a map of the world in his ‘Topographia Christiana,’ which he has adapted to this hypothesis. The earth is 
represented in that map as an oblong plane, surrounded on all sides by the ocean; beyond which is the region which 
he defines to be “yn mepav rov dkeavov, év0a mpo Tov KatakAvopov KarwKow ot dvOpwror,” “ land beyond the ocean, where 
the antediluvian race of men dwelt ; 

bP) 

on one side of which, and forming a part of it, is the Terrestrial Paradise, with 
the four rivers, the Pison, the Gihon, the Hiddekel, and the Euphrates, flowing out of it*, whose channels, pursuing 
a separate course under the sea, become again visible in our hemisphere. We may here observe, that the translators 
of the Septuagint version of the Scriptures have hesitated to bestow the more classical name of the Nile upon the 
Gihon, although they have not scrupled to explain the proper name Hiddekel to signify the Tigris. It must at the 
same time be confessed, that there is something absurd in the attempt to identify and trace the course of antediluvian 
rivers ; since, if whole continents can reasonably be supposed to have been submerged by the Deluge, how vain must 
be the task of inquiring after the fate of the rivers that flowed from Paradise. The reason why the translators of 
the Septuagint version have hesitated to bestow the name of the Nile upon the Gihon, was probably because the 
Garden of Eden is declared in Scripture to be situated in the east, and the Nile flows from the south; a difficulty 
which seems to have suggested to some other writers the notion of Paradise being situated in the region of the south, 
and of the Nile rising in Terra Australis, and thence passing under the sea, and re-appearing in Ethiopia. The map 
of the world composed by Bertius, and adapted to the geographical description of Pomponius Mela, is framed according 
to this hypothesis ; but if Pagan writers ever advocated such a theory, it was probably derived from a Hebrew source. 
We shall conclude this note with the insertion of some verses of the poet Manilius, which, evidently referring to 
another hemisphere, are very applicable te the continent of America, and to the Atlantic Ocean, declared by Egyptian 
tradition to be, in the age of Solon, no longer navigable for ships. 
“ Altera pars orbis sub aquis jacet invia nobis, 
Ignoteque hominum gentes, nec transita regna 
Commune ex uno lumen ducentia sole, 

Diversasque umbras, lavaque cadentia signa, 
Et dextros ortus coelo spectantia verso.” 

Nore XLIV. Page 266. 

Tue sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain affords incontestible proof that the ancient Mexicans excelled in 
oratory : of their poetical genius we should have been less able to form a correct notion, if time had not preserved 
the two following elegies T, composed by Nezahualcoyotl, the celebrated king of Tezcuco, nearly about the middle 

* See the twelfth chapter of the eleventh book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, in which the Mexicans are said to have believed 
that all the rivers of the globe flowed out of the Terrestrial Paradise, which itself was supposed to be situated at the base of some lofty 
mountains. 

+ It is with great pleasure that I take this opportunity of acknowledging my obligation to Don Antonio de Uguina, a Spanish gentleman 
distinguished for his literary attainments, for the copy of these elegies, now for the first time published. Their value is materially enhanced 
by the reflection, that of sixty other odes composed by the same monarch, all, with the exception of a fragment of another (a prose transla- 
tion of which has been published by Granados in his ‘ Tardes Americanas’), have been lost. This unfortunate result must certainly have been 
owing rather to the negligence of the Spaniards than to the indifference of the Indians, who for nearly half a century after the conquest 
of their country retained a perfect recollection of them. The greater portion of these odes are said to have been in Jambic metre, 
and consisted of prayers and thanksgivings addressed to Tezcatlipoca, with hymns descriptive of his power and divine attributes. To 
this circumstance some may feel inclined to attribute the fate which has befallen the numerous compositions of the royal bard; since, 
easy as would have been the task of transcribing them to any person acquainted with the Mexican language, still the Spanish clergy of 
Mexico, whose power for many years after the Conquest was almost as absolute as that of the Jesuits in Paraguay, might have feared the 
possibility of a parallel being at any future time drawn between them and the Psalms of David; and their religious scruples might have, 

VOL. VIII. C2) 

110 NOTES. 

of the fifteenth century. Without expatiating upon the poetical merits of these singularly beautiful and interesting 
odes, we shall metely observe, that they were transcribed by Don Fernandez de Echevarria y Veitia, the author of 
the ‘Historia del Origen de los Yndios de la Nueva Espaiia’, from an ancient manuscript belonging to Boturini, who 
vouches for their authenticity in the following note, which he has prefixed to his copy of them. “ Elerudito caballero 
Don Lorenzo Boturini, que sacé de la misma obscuridad copiosas luces para la Historia de las Yndias, en el Catalogo 
del Museo Indiano que colocé al fin de su Idea de Historia General de Nueva Espaiia, al folio 8, numero 2, se 
esplica de esta suerte: ‘Otro manuscrito en 12 fojas utiles de papel Europeo, contiene dos cantares del Emperador 
Nezahualcoyotl, traducidos de lengua Nahuatl en la Castellana, que redujo 4 poesia Don Fernando de Alva; de 
quien creo es tambien un pedazo de historia de la vida del referido Nezahualcoyotl.; Hasta aqui Boturini. Asi 
los cantares como el retazo de historia, se comprenden en el siguiente quaderno, copia de un antiguo manuscrito, 4 
que hemos aplicado toda la atencion y exactitud que merece por su naturaleza un rasgo tan precioso de la antiguedad. 

“Oyeme con atencion las lamentaciones que yo el Rey Nezahualcoyotl™ hago sobre el imperio, hablando con 
migo mismo, y trayendo a otro exemplo. 

“i O Rey bullicioso y poco estable, quando llegue aquel tiempo despues de tu muerte, seran destruidos y desechos 
tus vasallos: verse han en obscura confusion. Entonces ya no estara en tu mano el'mando y gobierno del imperio, 
sino en el Dios Criador y todo poderoso ! 

“ Quien vido la casa y corte del viejo Rey Tezozomoc, y quan poderoso y florecido estaba su tiranico imperio, y 
agora lo vé marchito f y seco, sin duda pareceria que siempre habia de estar en su ser, siendo burla y engafio todo lo 
que el mundo ofrece, pues todo se ha de consumir y acabar. 

“Lastimoso y admirable caso es ver y considerar la prosperidad que tubo el tiempo del tiranico imperio de aquel 
caduco y viejo Rey Tezozomoc f, que como sauz{ con la humedad de su ambicion y codicia, se levanté y seftorean- 
dose sobre todos los humildes prados y floridos campos que le ofrecid la primavera, por mucho tiempo que gozé de 
ella, al fin carcomido y seco, vino el uracan de la muerte, y arrancandolo de sus raices, hecho pedazos lo rindié por el 
suelo, que no fue menos lo que le sucedié 4 aquel antiguo Rey Colzatzli, pues no quedé memoria de su casa y linage. 

in the first instance, prohibited their publication, and subsequently caused whatever manuscript copies of them could be discovered, to be 
destroyed. The practice of confession, which has ever been rigidly enforced amongst the Indians’, would have rendered this no difficult 
task; and it does appear to us that this practice, which commenced at a very flourishing period of ancient literature, has contributed per- 
haps more than any other cause to the destruction of many valuable works of antiquity; since, by affording the facility of discovering, and 
suggesting at the same time the readiest and most private means of destroying, all manuscripts which actually contained, or which it was 
thought might possibly contain, heretical and schismatic doctrines, or, like the Decades of Livy, stories of prodigies which might offend 
the consciences of weaker brethren, an ignorant but at the same time zealous clergy would soon have had it in their power to consign 
the most valuable works of the poets, historians, and philosophers to the flames ; and in this manner, the reign of a single Pope might have 
effected a more general destruction of ancient literature, than the ruthless hand of ‘Time during many centuries. 

* Solomon commences the Book of Ecclesiastes with express mention of his regal dignity. 

‘++ Man is frequently compared in Scripture to grass and the flowers of the field, which in the morning’spring up, and in the evening are 
cut down and withered. ; 

{ Tezozomoc, the king of Azcaputzalco, for whom this elegy was composed, was during his whole life, which lasted many years, a 
tyrant, and the successful usurper of the throne of Acolhuacan, of which Nezahualcoyotl was the lawful heir. History has stigmatized 
him as a monarch devoid of principle, and of a sanguinary disposition, but possessed of very superior abilities. 

§ The language of Nezahualcoyotl bears a strong resemblance here to that of David in the thirty-seventh Psalm, who, describing 
the prosperity which sometimes attends the wicked for a season, expresses himself in the following analogous terms: “TI have seen the 
wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green bay-tree ; yet he passed away, and lo he was not; yea I sought him, but he 

could not be found.” 

1 We transcribe the following extraordinary series of categories from a manual of Confession published in Mexico in the year 163 4;— 
“In ychpochtli initech otitlatlaco, cuix huel oticcuili yni ychpochyo ynixochiyo? vel, Cuix oticxapotlac?” “ Cuix aca otictlanochili? ” 
“ Cuix acacihuatl otictecac?” Cuix otic camaoalhui?” “ Cuix oticahuilti?” “ Cuix otic nahuatequi?” ‘“ Cuix otic tenamic ?” 
“ Cuix otic chichihualtzitzqui?” “ Cuix otic matoquili?” « Cuix otimocochten?” Cuix oticochtemic in tlaelpapaquiliztli, yc oquiz 
in mo oquichyo, ahnogo mocihuayo, ahnogo otimo tlaquauhtili?” “ Auhyhquac oti hueligac, cuix yppan otipapa! ahnogo otitlaocox 
otimotequipacho?” “ Cuix otimomachiuh?” “ Cuix occotlacatl ahnogo cihuatl omitz machiuh?” “ Cuix itech otitlatlaco in magatl?” 
“Cuix aca occeoquichtli motech oacic otlatlaco? ahnoco tehuatl, oticcuilonti?” “Cuiv aca occegihuatl ammonehuan, ammomapa- 
tlachhuique?”’ Cuix monamic, otic coyoquetz, vel, otic tzincolhuazhui, vel, omitzteputzmama !”’ 

NOTES. 111 

“Y con estas mismas lamentaciones y triste canto, hoy traigo 4 la memoria y doy vivo exemplo lo que en la florida 
primavera pasa, y el fin que tuvo el Rey Tezozomoc, por mas que de ella goz6, para que viendo esto—Quien habr 
que tan duro sea, que no se derrita en lagrimas y llanto, pues esta abundancia de sus diversas flores y ricas recrea- 
ciones, son ramilletes que pasan de mano en mano, y al fin todas se marchitan y acaban en esta presente vida ! 

“Vos, hijos de los reyes y poderosos grandes y sefiores, advertid y considerad con atencion lo que en aqueste 
mi lamento y triste canto os manifiesto, lo que en la florida primavera pasa, y el fin que tubo el Rey Tezozomoc, para 
que viendo esto—Quien habré que tan duro sea, que no se derrita en lagrimas y llanto, pues esta abundancia de sus 
diversas flores y ricas recreaciones, son ramilletes que pasan de mano en mano, y al fin todas se marchitan y acaban 
en este presente vida! 

“Y gozen por agora la abundancia de la casa de el florido verano con la melodia de sus voces las parleras aves, y 

las mariposas el nectar de sus flores *. 

“ Un rato cantar quiero, 
Pues la ocasion y el tiempo se ofrece, 
Ser admitido espero, 
Mi intento lo merece, 
Y comienzo mi canto, 
Aunque fuera mejor llamarle llanto. 

« Y tu querido amigo, 
Goza la amenidad de aquestas flores, 
Alegrate conmigo ; 
Desechemos de penas los temores, 
Que el gusto trae medida, 
Por ser al fin con fin la mala vida. 

“ Yo tocaré cantando, 
El musico instrumento sonoroso, 
Tu de flores gozando 
Danza, y festeja 4 Dios que es poderoso ; 
Gozemos de esta gloria, 
Porque la humana vida es transitoria. 

“ De Acoluhacan pusiste 
En esta noble corte, y siendo tuyo 
Tus sillas, y quisiste 
Vestir las, donde argullo, 
Que con grandeza tanta 
El imperio se aumenta y se levanta. 

“O Yoyotzin prudente, 
Famoso rey, y singular monarca, 
Goza del bien presente, 

Que lo presente lo florido abarca, 
Porque vendra algun dia, 
Que busques este gusto y alegria. 

“ Entonces tu fortuna 
Te ha de quitar el cetro de la mano, 
Ha de menguar tu luna, 
No te veras tan fuerte y tan ufano, 
Entonces tus criados 
De todo bien seran desamparados. 

“¢ Y en tan triste suceso 
Los nobles descendientes de tu nido, 
De principes el peso, 
Los que de nobles padres han nacido, 
Faltando tu cabeza, 
Gustaran la amargura de pobreza. 

«Y traeran 4 la memoria 
Quien fuiste en pompa de todos embidiada, 
Tus triumfos y victoria, 
Y con la gloria y magestad pasada, 
Cotejando pesares, 
De lagrimas haran crecidos mares. 

«“ Y estos tus descendientes 
Que te sirven de pluma y de corona, 
De ti viendose ausentes, 
De Culhuacan estrafaran la cuna, 
Y tenidos por tales con sus desdichas 
Creceran sus males. 

« Y de esta grandeza rara, 
Digna de mil coronas y blasones, 
Sera la fama avara ; 
Solo se acordaran en las naciones, 
Lo bien que gobernaron 
Las tres cabezas que el imperio honraron ; 

«En Mexico famosa 
Moctezuma, valor de pecho Indiano, 
A’ Culhuacan dichosa 
De Nezahualcoyotl rigid la mano, 
Acatlapan la fuerte 
A Totoquilhuatli le salio por suerte. 

“ Y ningun olvido temo 
De lo bien que en tu reyno dispusiste, 
Estando en el supremo 
Lugar que de la mano recibiste, 
De aquel Sefior del mundo + 
Factor de aquestas cosas sin segundo. 

* This passage is extremely beautiful, nor could Euripides have uttered anything more pathetic. 
+ The Mexicans believed, like the ancient Jews, that their kings ruled by divine right;—which analogy is very curious. 

112 NOTES. 

“ Y goza pues muy gustoso, - Y que es de Cihuapan, te fies 

O Nezahualcoyotl, lo que agora tienes, Y Quautzintecomatzin el valiente, 

Con flores de este hermoso U Conahuatzin ; 

Jardin, corona tus ilustres bienes. Que es de toda esa gente? 

Oye mi canto y lira, Las voces agora acaso 

Que 4 darte gustos y placeres tira. Ya estan en la otra vida +, este es el caso ! 
“Y los gustos de esta vida, “ Ojala los que agora 

Sus riquezas y mandos son prestados*, Juntos los tiene del amor el hijo, 

Con sustancia fingida, © Que amistad atezora, 

Con apariencias solo matizados ; Vieramos de la muerte el duro filo, 

Y es tan gran verdad esta, Porque no hay bien seguro, 

Que 4 una pregunta me has de dar respuesta : Que siempre trae mudanza 4 lo futuro. 

“ Don Fernando de Avila, gobernador de la provincia de Tlalmanalco, que es descendiente de los reyes de Tezcuco, 
viniendo 4 esta ciudad encontré 4 Don Juan de Aguilar, gobernador del pueblo de Cultepec de Ja ; rovincia y juris- 
diccion de Tezcuco, cerca de Santa Clara Quatitlan, dos leguas de esta ciudad, que venia 4 ella 4 negocios de su 
republica; y el dicho Don Juan veniad pie con catorce 6 quince Indios cargados con su comida, que venian a Tacuba 
al repartimiento y repartirse, el qual venia cantando y llorando los cantos y lamentaciones del Rey Nezahualcoyotl 
de Tezcuco, y le traian el caballo sus criados ; y como el gobernador Don Fernando se parase a mirarle, admirado de 
lo que vido, el Don Juan le dijo: nieto de que te espantas que me veas ir llorando ? Sabeis que estos que aqui van 
cargados de comida, como tapixquez, son herederos hijos y descendientes del Rey Nezahualcoyotl, que la desdicha 
ha llegado 4 tanto, que como si fueran macehuales y villanos, los llevan 4 repartir 4 Tacuba, y yo les voy consolando 
y trayendoles 4 la memoria lo que dejé en sus cantos y lamentaciones ...... de otras en la lengua, que en romance 
nuestro lo tradujo el Don Fernando, y sobre ello se le impuso la lira de otras y romance siguiente. 

«“ Tiene el florido verano « Alli el.diamante estimado, 
Su casa, corte y alcazar, De fortaleza la estampa, 
Adornado de riquezas, Con aquesta y con sus visos 
Con bienes en abundancia. Vivas centellas levanta. 

“Con disposicion discreta, « Aqui se veen ofreciendo 
Estan puestas y gravadas, : Las lucidas esmeraldas, 

Ricas plumas, piedras ricas, Del galardon de sus obras 
Que al mismo sol aventajan. Mil floridas esperanzas §. 

“ Alli el precioso carbunco “ Tuego topazios se siguen, 
De sus hermosas entrafias, : Que 4 la esmeralda se igualan, 
Sin dar lugar una 4 otra, Pues el galardon prometen 
Luces de ciencia { derrama. De la celestial morada ||. 

* The same idea occurs in the Psalms, and in many passages of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain. 

+ Nezahualcoyotl ingeniously endeavours to make his first question more perplexing, by observing that the very words in which that 
interrogation was couched might even then be in another life. 

{ It is deserving of remark, that the precious stones enumerated in this and the following stanzas have all symbolical allusions. The 
Carbuncle, for example, was typical of knowledge; the Diamond, of strength or fortitude; the Emerald, of reward for meritorious actions; 
the Topaz, of celestial felicity as the recompense of virtue; the Amethyst, of the anxiety which a king must feel for the welfare of his 
subjects, and also of temperance : and if we at the same time recollect the declaration of Nezahualcoyotl in a succeeding stanza,—that all 
these gems, with their various virtues, were consecrated to the Levitical service of T'ezcatlipoca,—it will be difficult to refrain from thinking 
that the Mexicans had some tradition of the precious stones set in the breast-plate of Aaron, (to which the Jews, be it observed, attributed 
occult qualities, and considered emblematical of the cardinal virtues,) and of the ancient Hebrew mode of divination by Urim and 
Thummim, which has perplexed the Rabbis of all ages, and which some have supposed may yet lead to the discovery of the philo- 
sopher’s stone,—alchemy being a science still in repute amongst the oriental Jews. 

§ Green is a colour extremely refreshing to the eye, and the emerald might on that account have been emblematical of repose and 
pleasure after pain. 

|| The Mexicans believed that the souls of the good went after death to the house of the Sun, to enjoy eternal felicity, and they might 
have considered the Topaz a fit emblem of beatitude, from its bright and yellow rays, resembling those of the Sun. 

“‘ Aquesto es lo que de reyes, 
De principes y monarcas, 
En pechos y corazones 
Se imprime, encierra y esmalta. 

“Las amatistas con el ayre 
Significando las ansias 
Del rey para sus vasallos, 
De los gustos la templanza*. 

“Todas estas piedras ricas 
Con sus virtudes tan varias, 
O Padre! O Dios infinito ! 
Adornan tu corte y casa. 

“ Estas piedras + que al presente 
Con mil amorosas trazas, 
Yo el Rey Nezahualcoyotl 
He juntado aunque prestadas, 

“Son los principes famosos, 
A uno Axaxacatzin llaman, 
A otro Chimalpopoca 
Y Xicomatzintlamata. 

“ Hoy poco regocijado 
De sus fiestas y palabras, 
Y de los demas Sefiores 
Que aqui con ellos se hallan. 

“Solo siento que por breve 
Goza de este bien el alma, 
Pero siempre lo que es gusto 
Con facilidad se pasa. 

s¢ La presencia me recrea 
De estas aguilas { lozanas, 
De estos tigres y leones, 
Que 4 mil mundos espantaran. 

s¢ Estos que por su valor 
Eterna memoria alcanzan, 
Cuyo nombre y cuyos hechos 
Eternizaré la fama. 

“ Solo agora gozo y veo 
Piedras ricas como varias, 
Que me sirvieron de lustre . 
En mis sangrientas batallas. 

“‘ Hoy 4 principes tan nobles, 
Sombra de la Yndiana patria, _ 

NOTES. 

113 

Mi voluntad os festeja, 
Como puede les alaba. 

“‘ Parece, que respondeis 
Del alma son muestras claras, 
Como vapor que de piedras 
Preciosisimas ex4la §, 

“O Rey Nezahualcoyotl ! 
O Motezuma monarca! 
Con vuestros blandos rocios 
Vuestros vasallos se amparan. 

“ Pero al fin vendra algun dia 
Que amaine aquesta pujanza, 
Y todos aquestos queden 
En horfanidad amarga. 

“ Gozad, poderosos reyes, 
Esta magestad tan alta, 
Que os ha dado el Rey del cielo, 
Con gusto y placer gozadla. 

“ Que en esta presente vida 
De esta maquina mundana, 
No habeis de empezar dos veces, 
Gozad, porque el -bien se acaba. 

“ Mirad que el futuro tiempo 
Siempre promete mudanza, 
Tristes de vuestros vasallos, 
Porque tienen de gustarla. 

“‘ Veis aqui los instrumentos, 
Cercados con las guirnaldas 
De mil olorosas flores, 

Gozad pues de su fragrancia. 

“ Y pues hay paz y concordia, 
De amistades hoy enlazan 
Unos con otros asidos, 
Hoy regocijados con danzas. 

“ Paraque en un breve rato, 
De piedras tan estimadas 
Gozen principes y reyes, 
Gozen la nobleza Yndiana. 

‘Que para tanta nobleza 
La voluntad os consagra 
El rey Nezahualcoyotl 
Juntandoos hoy en su casa.” 

* The Greek word ésebueros, derived from «, priv., and pefuw, ebrius esse, and signifying the stone commonly named the amethyst, 
exhibits proof of a singular coincidence between the Greeks and the Mexicans in a merely popular opinion, the origin of which it would 

be difficult to explain. 

+ A transition from real gems to the wisdom and virtue contained, or supposed to be contained, within the hearts of kings, and fitting 
them for the enjoyment of happiness in another life, seems here to occur. 

{ Nezahualcoyotl here alludes to the various chiefs and warriors whom he was entertaining at a festival given in his palace, on which 

occasion this ode was either repeated by himself, or sung by his principal musician. 

It deserves to be remarked, that the appellation of 

eagles and tigers, which the Mexicans bestowed upon their two principal military orders of knighthood, might have been borrowed from 
the lamentation of David over the dead bodies of Saul and Jonathan, whose prowess he commends in the following passage of the twenty- 
third verse of the first chapter of the second book of Samuel: ‘‘ They were swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions.” 

§ This simile is borrowed from a curious belief of the Mexicans, that precious stones always emitted a fine vapour at sunrise ; a further 
account of which will be found in the 44th page of the sixth volume of this work. 

VOL. VIII. 

(2G) 

114 NeOr ay BAS: 

Having been so fortunate as to rescue from the oblivion of three centuries the above two specimens of ancient 
Mexican poetry, we cannot refrain from inserting here the following brief description of them by the Baron de 
Humboldt, whose researches in America would almost in this instance alone appear to have been unattended with 
any result advantageous to science or beneficial to the arts. “Sous le régne d’Axajacatl mourut Nezahualcojotl, roi 
d’Acolhuacan ou Tezcuco, également mémorable par la culture de son esprit et par la sagesse de sa législation. 
Ce roi de Tezcuco avoit composé, en langue Aztéque, soixante hymnes en lhonneur de |’Etre-Supréme, une élégie 
sur la destruction de la ville d’Azcapozalco, et une autre sur l’instabilité des grandeurs humaines, prouyée par le sort 
du tyran Tezozomoc. Le petit-neveu de Nezahualcojotl, baptisé sous le nom de Ferdinand Alba Ixtlilxochitl, a traduit 
une partie de ces vers en Espagnol, et le Chevalier Boturini posséda V’original de deux de ces hymnes composés 
cinquante ans avant la conquéte, et écrits du temps de Cortés, en caractéres Romains, sur du papier de metl. J’ai 
cherché vainement ces hymnes parmi les restes de la collection de Boturini, conservés au palais du vice-roy a Mexico. 
Il est encore bien digne de rémarque, que le célébre botaniste Hernandez a fait usage de beaucoup de dessins de plantes 
et d’animaux, dont le roi Nezahualcojotl avoit orné son habitation 4 Tezcuco, et qui avoient été faits par des peintres 
Aztéques.” Having mentioned at the commencement of this note a prose translation of a part of a very celebrated ode 
of Nezahualcoyotl, which that monarch is said by Torquemada, in the 139th page of the sixth volume of this work, to 
have composed on the occasion of his celebrating the dedication of his new palace, we shall here insert it, from the fourth 
chapter of the ‘Tardes Americanas’ of Granados, observing at the same time that this is the ode the first line of which, 
according to Torquemada, commenced in the Mexican language with the words “ Xochitl mamani.” “Son las caducas 
pompas del mundo como los verdes sauzes, que por mucho que anhelen 4 la duracion, 4 el fin un inopinado fuego los 
consume, una cortante acha los destroza, un zierzo los derriba, y la avanzada edad y decrepitud los agovia y entristece. 
Siguen las purpuras las propiedades de la rosa en el color y la suerte: dura la hermosura de estas en tanto que sus 
castos botones avaros recogen y conseryan aquellas porciones que quaja en ricas perlas la Aurora, y economica deshace 
y derrite en liquidos rocios. Pero apenas el Padre de los Vivientes dirige sobre ellas el mas ligero rayo de sus luces, 
les despoja su belleza y lozania, haciendo que pierdan por marchitas la encendida y purpurea color con que agrada- 
blemente ufanas se vestian. En breves periodos cuentan las deleitosas reptblicas de las flores sus reynados ; porque 
las que por la mafiana ostentan soberviamente engreidas la vanidad y el poder, por la tarde lloran la triste cadencia 
de su trono, y los repetidos parasismos que las impelen 4 el desmayo, la aridez, la muerte y el sepulcro. Todas las 
cosas dela tierra tienen termino, porque en la mas festiva carrera de sus engreimientos y bizarrias, calman sus alientos, 
caen y se despeftan para el hoyo. Toda la redondez de la tierra es un sepulcro ; no hay cosa que sustente, que con 
titulo de piedad no la esconda y entierre. Corren los rios, los arroyos, las fuentes y las aguas, y ningunas retroceden 
para sus alegres nacimientos : aceleranse con ansia para los vastos dominios de Tlaloca, y quanto mas se arriman a 
sus dilatados margenes, tanto mas van labrando las melancolicas urnas para sepultarse. Lo que fue ayer no es hoy, 
ni lo de hoy se afianza que ser4 mafiana. Llenas estan las bovedas de pestilentes polvos, que antes eran huesos, cada- 
veres y cuerpos con alma, ocupando estos los tronos, autorizando los doceles, presidiendo las asambleas, gobernando 
exercitos, conquistando provincias, poseyendo tesoros, arrastrando cultos, lisonjeandose con el fausto, la magestad, la 
fortuna, el poder yla dominacion. Pasaron estas glorias, como el pavoroso humo que vomita y sale del infernal fuego 
de Popocatepec, sin otros monumentos que acuerden sus existencias en Jas toscas pieles en que se escriben. Ha! 
ha! y si yo os introduxera 4 los obscuros senos de esos panteones, y os preguntara, qué quales eran los huesos del 
poderoso Achalchiuhtlanextzin, primer caudillo de los antiguos Tultecas; de Necaxec Mitl, reverente cultor de los 
dioses? Si os preguntara donde esta la incomparable belleza de la gloriosa emperatriz Xiuhtzal, y por el pacifico 
Tolpiltzin *, ultimo monarca del infeliz reyno Tulteco? Si os preguntara, qué quales eran las sagradas cenizas de 
nuestro primer padre Xolotl ; las del munificentisimo Nopal; las del generoso Tlotzin; y aun por los calientes car- 
bones t de mi glorioso, immortal, aunque infeliz y desventurado padre Yxtlilxochitl? Si asi os fuera preguntando 

* A sign, but it must be confessed an unfulfilled sign, of the Hebrew Messiah was, that he should reign long and peaceably over Israel ; 
whence it is possible that the Jews, borrowing the expression from Scripture, might have applied the epithet of the Prince of Peace to 
Quecalcoatle. 

+ The phrase “ calientes carbones” might lead us to suppose that Nezahualcoyotl composed this ode when his father Ixtlilxochitl’s death 
was a recent event, and probably not long after the death of Tezozomoc and the defeat of his son Maxtlaton, which, together with the 
ruin of the Tecpanecan empire, occurred in the year 1425. ; 

NOTES. 115 

por todos nuestros augustos progenitores, qué me responderiais? Lo mismo que yo respondiera, Indipohdi, indipohdi : 
nada sé, nada sé, porque los primeros y ultimos estan confundidos con el barro. Lo que fue de ellos, ha de ser de 
nosotros, y de los que nos succedieren. Anhelemos, invictisimos Principes, Capitanes esforzados, fieles amigos y 
leales vasallos, aspiremos al Cielo, que alli todo es eterno y nada se corrompe. El horror del sepulero es lisongera 
cuna para el So/, y las funestas sombras, brillantes luces para los astros. No hay quien tenga poder para immutar 
esas celestes laminas, porque como immediatamente sirven 4 la immensa grandeza del Autor, hacen que hoy vean 
nuestros ojos lo mismo que registré la preétericion, y registrara nuestra posteridad.” The resemblance which the 
language and sentiments of Nezahualcoyotl display in these odes to the Psalms, has already been pointed out; 
and we may likewise remark, that the same resemblance forcibly struck the author of the ‘Tardes Americanas,’ who, 
in a tone of astonishment, exclaims in the following energetic terms, A mi fe, que semejantes sentencias he leido, 
dictadas por el Espiritu Santo en los libros de Job y Canticos del Profeta Rey, comentando aquel, Omnia veterascunt, 
tu autem permanes ; y no sé que pudieran decir otro tanto los sabios estoycos y gentiles morales, que tanto engrande- 
cieron los Griegos y los Romanos.” He concludes his criticism of the poems by pronouncing the following splendid 
eulogium upon Nezahualcoyotl. “Conocidse en este Principe la magnificencia de sus luces, lo admirable de su genio, 
la prodigiosa fertilidad de sus sentencias, la superioridad de su estilo, la magestad de su numen, y la rara grandeza 

de su locucion, persuadiendo al desengafio los mentidos esplendores de las purpuras y las magestades, con las mismas 
voces del poeta Latino: — 

‘ Et regum cineres, structo monte quiescunt.’ ” 

Note XLV. Page 271. 

Garcra, in his celebrated treatise on the origin of the Indians, adduces as a principal argument in favour of the 
Mexicans being descended fromthe Jews, the similarity which many of their laws bore to those of the Pentateuch. 
This argument is so conclusive, that it is unnecessary to insist upon its force; in order, however, that the most 
satisfactory grounds of forming a correct judgment may be afforded to those who may wish to compare the institutions 
of the Jews and the Mexicans, we shall insert a specimen of the penal code of the latter people, which is taken from 
the thirteenth chapter of the third part of the Teatro Mexicano of Augustin de Betancourt; of which work, as well 
as of its author, who was Professor of Theology in the University of Mexico, Eguiara, in his Biblioteca Mexicana, 
speaks in the highest terms of commendation. 

“ El que se juntaba con su madre, hermana, con suegra, con entenada, por la decencia que se debe 4 la cercania de 
la sangre, y por ser grave exceso que un mismo hombre tuviese acceso con tan cercanas parientas, morian ahorcados, 
y si era con voluntad de la muger morian ambos* con una misma soga : leyes que de generacion heredaron, hechas con 
consejo, y que se ajustan al capitulo veynte del Levitico+, salvo con las cufiadas, porque si uno moria y dejaba hijos, el 
hermano mayor quedaba con la viudat, y la recebia por muger, y esto no obligava, como en la ley del Deuteronomio 

* «They shall both die,” is a form of summing up the law very usual in the Pentateuch, and which some authors have admired for its 
clearness and perspicuity. 

++ The scrupulous care with which the more civilized Indian nations, as well as the most barbarous, under which latter denomination may 
‘be included the Brazilians, avoided marrying within the degrees of consanguinity prohibited to the Jews, and especially the severity of 
the punishments inflicted by them on those who transgressed these regulations, afford a strong argument in favour of the Jews having 
established their empire in the New World; whilst their abstaining from eating the flesh of certain beasts and fowls, from the idea of 
their being unclean, and complying with several other injunctions and prohibitions contained in the twentieth chapter of Leviticus, tend 
likewise to the same conclusion. 

+ The custom of widows being deemed, in the case of elder brothers, inheritable property amongst the Jews, appears to have led to 
some shameful outrages on public decency in Peru, of which Scripture affords an instance in the history of Absalom, who was. advised 
by Ahithophel “to go in unto his father’s concubines in the sight of ALL Israel.” This advice we learn from the sixteenth chapter of 
the second book of Samuel he actually followed, and, strange to say, Scripture says that the counsel itself was “as if a man had inquired 
at the oracle of God.” ‘To understand this declaration aright, we must either suppose that the Jews, taken in the mass, were in that age 
the most infamously immoral people on the face of the globe, and that this was a step taken by Absalom to gain popularity, or that it 

116 NOTES. 

veynte y cinco; no hazian la ceremonia quando no queria, de descalzarse el zapato,* y de escupir en la cara, como 
entre los Judios, sino que era el casamiento voluntario. 

“ A los adulteros apedreaban, y era en dos maneras, 6 poniendole la cabeza sobre una piedra, y dandole con otra, 6 
apedreandole muchos J. Si era noble, por compasion le daban garrote, y despues { le tiraban piedras. Y esto avia de ser 
con testigos§, que no bastava la acusacion del marido, y era con confesion de los acusados ||. Y no tenia el marido per- 
mision para matarla, porque tenia pena de muerte, aunque los hallara juntos en adulterio {[, si lamataba, que era caso 4 
los juezes reservado, nombrados para el consentimiento de las causas de matrimonio, porque decian que era usurpar la 
juridicion real, y 4 los juezes quitarles el derecho. En el pueblo antiguo de los Hebreos, como consta del quinto de 
los Numeros la Ilevaban al sumo sacerdote, y hazia la prueba con el agua que llamaban de la zelotipia, lo qual se 

permitid algun tiempo en la primitiva de la Iglesia, y despues se prohibid por razones justas. 
“ A los que mentian ** en cosa leve, les picaban los labios con una pua de maguey, y 4 los que en cosa grave, les 
cortaban un pedazo de los labios, oy huviera muchos sin labios por lo mucho que mienten. 

was a measure of policy to persuade the Jews that the inheritance of the house of David, including his father’s concubines, had already 
devolved on him. The latter supposition, which places Absalom and all Israel in a somewhat less abominable light, is that which 
favours the conjecture, that the following Peruvian law was founded on ancient Hebrew precedent, and was not uncongenial with the 
manners of the Jews in the age of David. “ Era costumbre entre ellos que el hermano heredava las mugeres de su hermano en muriendo, 
y el hijo las del padre, y tenian acceso con ellas publicamente, y aun el dia de oy lo usan algunos.” We have transcribed the above 
passage from an ancient MS., the hand-writing of which appears to be of the sixteenth century. The anonymous writer says, in the 
section immediately preceding, that the Ingas appointed a general visitation of the provinces of their empire once every three years, 
when marriages were contracted in the following form: ‘ En cada pueblo como sabian que iba el dicho Ynga 6 visitador hallava en la 
plaza de cada pueblo, puestos en orden todos los Yndios que no tenian mugeres, que eran de quince afios hasta veynte, y veynte e cinco 
hasta treynta, y de treynta hasta quarenta, cada edad por si, y asi mesmo las mugeres solteras por sus edades, y de tal manera que los 
hombres estaban frontero de las mugeres; y de alli daban primeramente mugeres 4 los caciques y principales que no las tenian, 6 tenian 
necesidad de mas; y despues davan 4 los demas Yndios por sus edades, 4 cada qual su ygual, y este era entre ellos el matrimonio tan 
guardado que ninguno osava dexar la muger, que alli le davan, ni tener quenta con otra so pena de muerte, y ellas por el consiguiente. Y 
solamente era concedido 4 los caciques principales de 4 diez mill Yndios y de 4 mill Yndios, tener mas mugeres de una, pero avia de ser 
con licencia del dicho Ynga.” 

* Acosta says, in the tenth chapter of his Natural and Moral History of the Indies, that Peruvian marriages were contracted by 
putting a sandal on the foot of the bride; and we have introduced some observations on the analogous Hebrew custom of the widow, 
whose brother-in-law refused to marry her, rendering him free from the obligation of treating her as a wife by pulling off his sandal and 
spitting in his face, which will be found in the ninth page of the present volume. We must also remark, that the custom of edders sitting 
in the gate to determine causes,—express mention of which is made in the seventh verse of the twenty-fifth chapter of Deuteronomy,—seems 
very analogous to the court of judicature, over which ten or twelve persons presided (who were probably elders), who held their daily 
sittings in the principal square of Mexico, and took cognizance of disputes which arose in the market-place, and probably of other public 
matters also. Of this ordinary court of justice Cortes gives the following description, in a letter addressed to Charles V.: “ Hay en esta 
gran plaza una muy buena casa como de audiencia, donde estan siempre sentados diez 6 doze personas, que son jueces, y libran todos los 
casos y cosas que en el dicho mercado acarcen, y mandan castigar los delinquentes.” 

+ This mode of stoning to death was more agreeable to the letter of the Mosaic law, where there generally occurs a clause, comprised 
in the words “ and ail the people”’ or “ the men of the city,” which clause did away with the employment of private executioners, and, it 
may at the same time be inferred, greatly brutalized the manners of the Jewish populace. 

{ The stoning the dead body of a person who had already undergone the sentence of death by strangling, could have only been to fulfil 
the letter of a law which required that adulterers should be stoned to death. The Jews have, at every period of their history, shown 
themselves such great lovers of the letter of the law, that even this simple trait in the manners of the Mexicans betrays the features of 
Judaism. 

§ This would appear to have been the Hebrew custom, since we read, in the thirty-fourth verse of the first chapter of the History of 
Susanna and the Elders, that it was the two elders who, “ laying their hands upon her head,” accused her of adultery to the people, and 
not her husband on their information. We may here remark, that the fifth verse of this chapter is curious, as showing how the affairs 
of the Jews were administered during their captivity in Babylon. 

|| It is evident from the history of Achan, in the seventh chapter of Joshua, that the Jews endeavoured to obtain confession from 
accused persons, even when the evidence of their guilt was complete, and sufficient for their condemnation. 

| The laws of many ancient states justified a husband, in such a case, killing an adulterer; and Mr. Crawford states, in the fifth 
chapter of his History of the Indian Archipelago, that the same permission is granted by the laws of Java. When, therefore, the Mexican 
and Hebrew codes, which affected the most rigid regard for morality, and even punished adultery with death, granted no such license 
to the injured husband, it will lead to the inference that they were derived from the same source. 

** Lying was punished with extreme severity by the laws of the Mexicans and Peruvians, amongst the latter of whom it was made a 

NG Ou TES 117 

“El que se vestia de muger™, 6 la muger en trage de hombre, le ahorcaban. Esta fue ley del veynte y dos del Deu- 
teronomio, y es larazon, por escusar los actos libidinosos que pueden encubrirse. oe 
“Al que cometia el pecado nefando, y 4 la muger que contra otra muger tenia delectaciones carnales, que Ilamaban 

Phtlache incuba, los ahorcaban, y ponian gran cuydado en evitar este pecado, y si era sacerdote lo quemaban para 
satisfacer la gravedad del pecado. 

capital crime, as is evident from the testimony of various respectable Spanish historians, and would further appear from the following 
passage of an inedited epitome of the laws of the Peruvians, entitled, “Orden que el Ynga tubo en la governacion del Piru,” where 
the anonymous author says, “ Ninguno de los naturales era osado de mentyr sobre esto, ni sobre otra cosa, como le fuese preguntado 
por el governador, so pena de muerte.” The reason why lying was considered a crime of such magnitude by the Mexicans and the 
Peruvians, was probably because the oaths of two witnesses had the same weight in their courts of justice as among the Jews, and the life 
of an innocent man might be placed in jeopardy by a false witness. 

* It is impossible at this distance of time to know whether Moses might have permitted the Jews to act plays in the desert, in order 
to beguile away the forty tedious years of their pilgrimage; but were such a law as that adverted to by Betancourt enacted at the present 
day, it would evidently appear to be directed against the theatres, where such an interchange of dress amongst the actors is no very 
uncommon occurrence. Itis not, however, very probable that Moses would have encouraged theatrical representations; and if they were 
ever permitted in the Jewish state, it was probably in the reign of Solomon, whose taste for poetry, and inclination for whatever could 
add gaiety to a court, are too well known to need description. It would not, however, appear that the later Jewish kings were 
inclined to patronize the histrionic art; and it is an admitted fact, that the first Christian emperors who reigned at Byzantium, whose 
minds were imbued with the morose and persecuting spirit of Judaism, caused the tragedies of /schylus, Sophocles, and Euripides to be 
everywhere sought out and committed to the flames, the bishops lending their aid to this mistaken act of piety. It is hence no difficult 
task to account for the disgrace—we should rather say the infamy—which, during many a long and dark age, attached to the profession of 
an actor, and which in England appears, notwithstanding the progress of the Reformation, to have lasted even to the age of Shakspeare, 
who, in his hundred and eleventh sonnet, complains of Fortune, 

«That did not better for his life provide, 
Than publick means, which publick manners breeds.’ 

From this passage it may be inferred, notwithstanding the doubts of some critics, that our great poet was an actor as well as a writer 
of plays, and that he thought that circumstance calculated to lower him in public esteem. In Roman Catholic countries the same 
disgrace was perpetuated to a much later period, and the consolations of religion, even Christian burial, were denied to those who 
exercised a profession, which in the days of Roman glory conferred no less of fame than emolument, and, to descend to an example 
of modern times, acquired for Talma the friendship of Napoleon. It is indeed too frequently the custom of fanatical enthusiasts like 
the Rev. Mr. Irving, who are many of them men advanced in years, and naturally of a cynical and austere temperament, to inveigh 
against the immoral tendency of plays, and to declaim in the fields against acting; and since this practice has a tendency to degrade 
religion to the level of the intellect of those who profess to believe in unknown tongues, it becomes almost a duty, and is certainly 
an act of charity, to admonish those well-intentioned but self-deluded preachers, that it is unjust to argue against the use of any art or 
human institution from its abuses. The real aim of the tragic muse is to convey lessons of morality to a numerous audience, and to 
correct their passions, exalt their sentiments, and refine their feelings, by placing before their eyes great and illustrious examples of virtue; 
and such an aim is unquestionably laudable. Aristotle himself concludes his celebrated definition of tragedy, in the sixth chapter of his 
Treatise on Poetry, with a declaration that this is the true end and aim of tragic representation ; and the terms which he there employs 
are these: “By zrcov xa doBov mecaivoure tyy Tw ToouTwy mebnuatwy xedagow,” which, literally translated, signify, “ by means of fear 
and pity effectually purifying passions of that class;” by which the philosopher must mean that tragedy purifies and ennobles both pity 
and fear, and whatever other passions are allied to them, by divesting them of all selfish considerations, and causing men to feel such 
sentiments for the misfortunes of others rather than for their own. With such refined sentiments of emotion, it is to be presumed an 
Athenian audience would have witnessed the sublime agonies of Prometheus, the fortitude of Jason, the mournful fate of Agamemnon, 
and the disinterested friendship of Orestes and Pylades. It may be proper to observe, that a learned translator of Aristotle’s Treatise 
on Poetry, Mr. Twining, admits but two interpretations of the above passage of Aristotle, neither of which agrees with that here given. 
The sense in which he understands the words of Aristotle will be found in the forty-fifth note to his translation of that essay; but if due 
attention be paid to the specific employment of the words éAzou and ¢$ofov, to the relative application of rosurwy, and to the strict sense 
of xefagow, his explanation will not appear very satisfactory; and a more attentive consideration of the text will show, that Aristotle 
intended to say that the two artificial means which tragedy must resort to to attain its end, are pity and fear,—that its tendency is to 
purify those affections, as well as the kindred feelings of love and admiration, which are not however so essential to tragedy, although 
calculated to heighten its interest, and that upon the skilful application of these means the perfection of tragedy will in a great measure 
depend. It need scarcely be observed, that tragedy usually represents characters whose virtues inspire us with interest for their fate ; 
and amongst the Greeks these characters were generally selected from the early page of their own history. We may remark, in con- 
cluding, that the term roiovrwy implies an exclusion of some other class of passions, which, though frequently represented on the stage, 
being radically evil, do not admit of any purification :—of this class are envy, avarice, &c. 

VOL. VIII. (jal )) 

118 NOTES. 

“ A Jas alcaguetas sacaban dla plaza, y en publico le quemaban los cabellos hasta que llegaba 4 lo vivo * con teas, que 
llamaban ocote, y le untaban la cabeza con ceniza caliente del ocote, y si era persona de supposicion 4 quien servia de 

tercera, le afiadian mas penas al delicto. 
“ Al sacerdote que hallaban comprehendido en deshonestidad, 6 le hallaban con alguna muger, le privaban} de 

oficio, y era desterrado. 
“Si alguno tenia acceso con alguna esclava agena, y moria estando prefiada, hazian esclavo al que cometia la culpa, 

y si paria, se llevaba la cria, y la avia de libertar con precio. 

“En los hurtos, era ley general que siendo de cosa de valor, tenian pena de muerte; y si la parte se convenia, pagaba 
en mantas la cantidad al duefio, y otra mas para el fisco real; 4 esto acudian los parientes, y por la culpa guedava 
esclavo t, y si lo avia gastado, y no tenia con que, pagaba con la vida. 

“El que hurtaba en la plaza 6 feria, que llaman tianquizco, luego era alli{ muerto 4 palos, por ser enel lugar 

publico el atrevimiento. 
“El que hurtaba cantidad de mazorcas de mays, 6 arrancaba cantidad de matas, tenia pena de muerte, pero le era 

permitido el que tomara algunas para comer|. 

* This punishment is represented in the sixty-fourth plate of the Collection of Mendoza; and that it was known in ancient times to 
: the Jews,—whose penal enactments were too capital a part of their moral code for the Mexicans not to feel most solicitous to preserve 

them,—will, we think, appear from the old Hebrew proverb of heaping coals of fire on the head of an adversary by conferring benefits upon 
him, and from the clear allusion to the same punishment in the fifty-third verse of the sixteenth chapter of the second book of Esdras: 
“ Let not the sinner say that he hath not sinned, for God shall burn coals of fire upon his head, which saith before the Lord God and his 
glory, I have not sinned.” 

+ To be deprived of the priestly office was probably as great a punishment amongst the Mexicans as the Jews. This was the judgment 
which God denounced in the second chapter of the first book of Samuel against the family of Eli, on account of the iniquity of his sons. 

{ It would appear from this law that there was a surprising similarity in the Mexican laws relating to theft, and those of the same class 
contained in the twenty-second chapter of Exodus. Moses made neither theft nor the act of the incendiary,—which latter offence, from 
the evil that may thence accrue to the whole community, no penal code can treat with lenity,—capital crimes; and hence it may be pre- 
sumed that the Mexican laws, which were usually extremely sanguinary, left it at the option of the other party to require, in the first in- 
stance, restitution, or, in other words, payment to the amount of the full value of the stolen goods, with the forfeiture of as much again to the 
public treasury; with which conditions if the thief was unable to comply, he was to be sold, to make up the deficient sum, and in case of 
total failure, to be punished with death. The principle of compounding for theft by the restitution of double the value of the stolen goods, 
is laid down again and again in the twenty-second chapter of Exodus, with one solitary unintelligible exception, in the first verse of the 
same chapter, relating to sheep and oxen; where five, or at least four times the value of the stolen animal, if killed or sold, was to be 
returned to the owner; which aggravation of punishment in the case of sheep-stealing might, in the opinion of some of the Judges of the 
good old times, “ when wretches hung, that jurymen might dine,” have justified the severity of the English law against sheep-stealing. 
We shall here insert the literal text of the Mosaic law, because it is quite in conformity with the provisions of the Mexican code, and 
might have suggested, by the employment of the phrase fud/, which properly means completely, in the sense of neither more nor less, an 
amendment or modification of that portion of it which vested in the owner more than the value of his goods, and the adjudication of the 
other half of the fine to the public treasury. ‘If the sun be risen upon him (the thief), there shall be blood shed for him; for he should 
make full restitution: if he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft.” -We learn from the eighth verse of the fifth chapter of 
Nehemiah, and from the twenty-fifth verse of the eighteenth chapter of St. Matthew, that it was a Hebrew custom, tolerated and per- 
mitted by the Mosaic law, for creditors to sell their debtors for slaves, if they had not the means of discharging their debts. Elisha’s miracle 
of multiplying the widow’s oil, recorded in the fourth chapter of the second book of Kings, was to spare her the grief of seeing her two 
sons made bondsmen to her creditor, whose demands she was enabled to pay by the sale of the oil. The Mexican law, in the same 
manner, authorized, Shylock-like, the sale of debtors to pay their creditors, and children were frequently sold by their parents, and, 
which was much more just, individuals by themselves, to pay their debts. Both the Mexican and Hebrew codes, it is quite evident, 
greatly favoured a domestic slave-trade within their respective states, and it is only surprising that individuals can be found who will per- 
tinaciously deny a fact so capable of proof. ‘That the slave-trade, understood in a more general sense, was, as we have already observed 
in the 398th page of the sixth volume of this Work, encouraged by all the Christian states,—who first extensively embarked in it on the 
express plea that, like the Sabbath, it was of divine institution, or at least the accomplishment of prophecy,—is likewise a clear and -un- 
doubted fact; and if it argues a reverence for Scripture on the part of some to maintain the contrary, it is no less true that it is derogating 
from the infallibility of Scripture for them to feel ashamed of any of its doctrines. 

§ It would appear from a passage in the treatise of Maimonides concerning idolatry, that Hebrew towns could not exercise certain 
judicial privileges if they had not a proper market-place, which might have heightened the respect which the Mexicans felt for their 
paved market-places. 

|| That the Hebrew law connived at this slight invasion of private property to satisfy the calls of hunger, must be inferred from the 
story of Christ’s disciples plucking the ears of corn. 

, 

NOTES. 119 

“Si alguno vendia por esclavo algun nifio perdido*, quedaba esclavo, y le vendian la hazienda, dandole al nifio la 
mitad, y pagando al comprador lo que avia dado, y si eran muchos los vendian, y esta pena tenia tambien el que 
enagenaba 6 vendia algunas tierras que tenia en deposito +, sin licencia de la justicia. 

“El que hurtaba plata y oro, lo desollaban vivo y sacrificaban al dios de los plateros que llamaban Xipef, y lo sacaban 
por las calles para escarmiento de otros, por ser el delicto contra el dios fingido. 

“En las guerras que primero justificaban para hazerlas §, 4 los que eran causa de motin, los castigaban con muerte, 
y al que hazia algun dafio 4 los enemigos sin licencia del capitan, 6 si acometian antes del tiempo, 6 se aquartelaban 
de la vandera, 6 quebrantaban algun vando, eran degollados, y si quitaba la presa, 6 cautivo que por su persona avia 
adquirido, era pena de muerte. 

“Al traydor || que descubria 4 los enemigos los secretos de guerra, le hazian pedazos, eran sus bienes confiscados, y 
‘sus parientes quedaban manchados. 

“El que en guerra, bayle é fiesta sacaba las insignias, 6 alguna sefial, 6 armas de los reyes de Mexico, Tezcuco, y 
Tacuba, tenia pena de muerte, y confiscados los bienes. 

“Los juezes, 6 relatores que hazian falsa relacion al rey de algun pleyto, y los que injustamente y sin razon senten- 
ciaban, tenian pena de muerte. 

“A los hijos que malbaratavan la hazienda heredada, y 4 los tutores que la gastaban, los ahorcaban 4] en pena de 
que no estimaban el sudor ageno. 

“ El que quitaba los mojones y linderos que la justicia ponia en tierras y heredades, tenia pena de muerte**. 

‘El que hazia hechisos{{, y los maleficios, morian sacrificados, y abiertos por el pechos; y el que con bebedisos 
mataba era ahorcado. 

* Man-stealers are mentioned in terms of reprobation in the Old Testament. 

+ This clause might lead us to infer, not only that the Mexicans resembled the Jews in their inclination to give and take pledges, 
which custom had an evident tendency to encourage usury, but likewise that their laws discouraged the alienation of landed property, 
which, amongst the Jews, could only be sold for a term of years expiring with the jubilee; thus rendering the possession of land a 
perpetuity in the same families. 

{ Xipe was worshiped by the Mexicans under the other name of Totec; he was the Mammon adored by their goldsmiths and 
jewellers, and, in more ancient times, was equally revered by the Tultecas. 

§ The Jews made a mock justification of the wars which they undertook, by assuring their enemies that they were God’s chosen 
people, and that they ought to yield quiet possession to them of their land; to which if they assented, they contented themselves with 
plundering them of their wealth, and reducing them to the condition of slavery; but if they resisted, they were considered as rebels, and 
they, their wives, and their children were devoted to death. That the Jews were acquainted with military discipline, and enforced it by 
very severe regulations, is evident from the curse and adjuration of Saul in the twenty-fourth verse of the fourteenth chapter of the first 
book of Samuel, and from his being about to offer up his son Jonathan as a devoted victim to the Lord, if the people would have suffered 
it, as recorded in the forty-fourth verse of the same chapter of Samuel; and it must also be inferred, from the example given, in the 
forty-third verse of the first chapter of Deuteronomy, of divine chastisement falling upon disobedience to military orders in attacking the 
enemy before the time, that they would have carefully guarded against the latter error, whilst the dreadful punishment of Achan, which 
fell not alone on him, but on his unoffending children, as we are informed in the twenty-fifth verse of the seventh chapter of Joshua, would 
have led the Jews of every age to consider the embezzling or purloining, from private individuals or the public coffers, plunder taken from 
the enemy, a crime of the most atrocious magnitude. 

|| The treachery of Ahithophel to David, who betrayed his most secret counsels to Absalom, and joined his rebellion, although he had 
been his father’s <* familiar friend,” would have disposed the Jews to enact very severe laws against traitors. 

{ This law, instituted for the purpose of retaining and augmenting wealth in private families, savours extremely of Judaism, since the 
spirit of covetousness which dictated it betrays itself in the undue severity of the sentence. It may, however, be remarked, that the 
ancient Roman law punished notorious prodigals, who were in danger of wasting their estates, by authorizing the Preetor to place them 
under the care of tutors or curators. - 

*%* This was also a crime severely punished by the Mosaic law, from which it may be inferred that neither the Mexicans nor the Jews 
understood anything of land-surveying, or were acquainted with the first principles of geometry, since, if that had been the case, so much 
importance would not have been attached to land-marks as to punish the removal of them capitally. ? 

+ A similar law occurs in the eighteenth verse of the twenty-second chapter of Exodus; but it would not appear from the following 
passage of the thirteenth chapter of Ezekiel, that Moses was very successful in putting down witches, since, had that been the case, the 
latter prophet would have had no reason for indulging in the following bitter invective against the witches that existed amongst the Jews 
of his age, whom he accused of murder, divination, and hunting souls, adding to the other charges which he brings against them, that 
of fastening pillows to their arms, the meaning of which it is difficult to conjecture, unless it may refer to a pillow or stuffed knapsack 
worn, -as it seems, by the Jewish women under their arms, in the manner represented in the twentieth page of the Mexican. painting 

120 NOTES. 

“El que siendo mancebo bebia vino con demasia, lo Ilevaban 4 la carcel y alli 4 golpes le quitaban Ja vida*: 4 las 
mugeres que se embriagaban apedreaban, como adulteras: al noble le quitaban el oficio, y quedaba afrentado ; 4 los 
plebeyos les quitaban el cabello, y les derribavan las casas. En Tezcuco al noble lo ahorcaban, y lo hechaban en el 
rio, para que se hartase de agua el cuerpo que en vida bebié tanto vino ; al plebeyo lo vendian por algunos afios, y 4 la 
tercera vez le ahorcaban. “ at 

“El esclavo que salia de la prision y se entraba en el palacio, quedava sin esclavitud, y libre de las penas en que 
estaba condenado, porque era como lugar de refugio { el real palacio. 

preserved in the Royal Library at Dresden, which, we have elsewhere supposed, is only a fragment of a much larger painting, descriptive 
of the pilgrimage of the ancestors of the Mexicans from Aztlan. Without pretending to judge whether the women represented in the 
Dresden painting, whose features, it must be confessed, are decidedly Jewish, are real witches, we shall merely observe, that if that 
question be decided in the affirmative, it is highly probable that the children on their backs are imps; they being, in the opinion of the 
celebrated Chief Justice Hales, the usual concomitants of witches. ‘ Likewise, thou son of man, set thy face against the daughters of 
thy people, which prophecy out of their own heart, and prophecy thou against them, and say, Thus saith the Lord God: Woe to the 
women that sew pillows to all arm-holes, and make kerchiefs upon the head of every stature, to hunt souls ! Will ye hunt the souls 
of my people, and will ye save the souls alive that come unto you? And will ye pollute me among my people, for handfuls of barley 
and for pieces of bread, to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive that should not live, by your lying to my people 
tbat hear your lies? Wherefore thus saith the Lord God, Behold I am against your pillows, wherewith ye there hunt the souls to 
make them fly, and I will tear them from your arms, and will let the souls go, even the souls that ye hunt to make them fly. Your 
kerchiefs also will I tear, and deliver my people out of your hand, and they shall be no more in your hand to be hunted, and ye shall 
know that Iam the Lord. Because with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad whom | have not made sad, and strengthened 
the hands of the wicked that he should not return from his wicked way by promising him life. ‘Therefore ye shall see no more vanity 
nor divine divinations, for I will deliver my people out of your hand, and ye shall know that | am the Lord.” 

* Various passages occur in the Old Testament which might have led the Jews, after they had determined to effect a thorough 
reformation of morals in the New World, to constitute drunkenness a capital crime. The drunkards of Ephraim are mentioned in such 
terms of reprobation by Isaiah, in the first verse of the twenty-eighth chapter of his Prophecies, thatit is with infinite amazement we read, 
in the seventh verse of the sarne chapter, that the priests and prophets of Jerusalem delighted in drunkenness ; nor is it at all surprising, 
this being the case, that they should have “ erred in vision” or “stumbled in judgment,” since what drunken man ever saw or walked 
aright? and it would be blasphemy to suppose that in such a state the Lord would have assisted them with his outstretched arm ; which, 
at times and seasons far less necessary, the Hebrew prophets were never weary of entreating. ‘The prophet Micah indulges in a more 
satirical strain against drunkards, where, inveighing, in the eleventh verse of his second chapter, against the habitual drunkenness of the 
priests and prophets of the Jews in his age, he says: “Ifa man walking in the spirit and falsehood do le, saying, 1 will prophecy unto 
thee of wine and of strong drink, he shall even be the prophet of this people :’ 
rank by Solomon, in his exhortation to king Lemuel, in the following passage of the thirty-first chapter of his Proverbs, whose recom- 
mendation to give wine to persons ready to perish, might have induced the Mexicans to allow persons of either sex, above seventy years 

2 

‘and drunkenness is condemned in persons of the highest 

of age, to get drunk with impunity, as stated by the interpreter of the Collection of Mendoza, in the eighty-seventh page of the sixth 
volume of this work. “It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine, nor for princes strong drink, lest they drink and 
forget the law, and pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted. Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those 
that be of heavy hearts; let him drink and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more.” With respect to the punishments 
with which the Mexican laws chastised drunkenness, we shall only remark, that they all bear a Jewish character : to inflict stripes, not 
exceeding forty, was a most common mode of punishment amongst the Jews, which, in cases of extreme delinquency, might have been 
commuted into the sentence of beating the culprit to death. Stoning to death was notoriously a Hebrew punishment,—barbarous, it is 
true, but declared by Moses to have been of divine origin. ‘To have the hair shorn off completely, and not alone on the fore part of the 
head, or as a sign of grief for the death of near kindred, was considered highly disgraceful by the Jews, and is alluded to, as a reproach 
which the Lord would bring upon them, by Isaiah in the twentieth verse of the seventh chapter of his Prophecies; and we learn, from 
the twenty-ninth verse of the third chapter of Daniel, that to throw down the dwelling-houses of persons convicted of any grave public 
offence was an aggravation of their sentence, which the page of Scripture rendered familiar to the minds of the Jews, and to which 
David appears to allude in the Psalms, when he says, he passed by the house of the wicked, and it was not. “Therefore I make a 
decree that every people, nation, and language which speak anything amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego shall 
be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill.” 

+ The Jews had a certain number of cities which were named cities of refuge, from the immunity and protection from the law which 
they afforded criminals who could escape to them. The altar, dedicated to Jehovah, and within the inclosure of the temple, was also a 
place of refuge, to which Joab vainly fled to escape the anger of Solomon, who, as we are informed in the thirty-first verse of the second 
chapter of the first book of Kings, commanded the satellites of death to fall on him, and slay him at the altar, which must necessarily 
have been dyed with human blood. We may here observe, that the Hebrew altar of refuge led to the invention, in later ages and under 
the Christian dispensation, of the right of sanctuary, which proved the greatest impediment to justice that law could ever have devised, 
and often screened the most atrocious murderers from the penalty due to their guilt. 

INC OUECE Ss: 191 

“Otras muchas leyes extravagantes* que con el instinto natural con maduro consejo confirmaron, y que inviolable- 
mente guardaban, tenian los Mexicanos y los de Guatemala, como el deponer al rey con junta y consejo de Ja nobleza, 
y el promover las causas para la guerra, el guardar los fueros 4 los embajadores y correos, de que dejo escrito, y van 
en la parte de la politica advertidas: basten las puestas para el conocimiento de que no eran tan barbaros como algunos 
piensan. 

“En tres delictos en que eran en su gentilidad con todo rigor castigados, porque entonces conocian ser frequentes, 
estan oy los naturales con disolucion perdidos, que son adulterio, la embriagues y hurto, porque como son de tal 
natural, que son mas llevados por el rigor y miedo que por la razon y suavidad, con la clemencia de la Iglesia y su 
ley de gracia han soltado las riendas de su inclinacion depravada, desdicha grande que lo que no se les consentia 
quando gentiles, se les tolere siendo Christianos. Todos 4 la embriagues son tan inclinados, que porque les conviden 4 
pulque, convidan y entriegan sus mismas mugeres para la luxuria, cometen incestos en la embriagues para decir que 
estaban embriagados, siendo la disculpa su misma culpa. ‘Trabajan mas por lo que hurtan, que por lo que ganan, y 
asi-son menester muchos ojos, porque lo que sus ojos ven sus manos aguilas son. Pues el mentir; en qualquier informe 
lo primero que dicen es una mentira, si le sirve despues para su defensa, y lo que es para llorar es lo que en las confes- 
siones mienten, pensando engafiar, y en su dafio se engafian 4 si mismos, en lo que son puntuales es, que apenas tienen 
el menor achaque, quando llaman al ministro, no tanto por su bien, quanto por darle que hazer, y 4 vezes se valen de 
que los sacramenten para escaparse por enfermos, 6 para que los visiten con agasajos. Ya ha sucedido llamar 4 las nueve 
de la noche 4 los sacramentos, y 4 la mafiana ver los levantados, y averiguado el caso fue, porque aviendole renido el 
marido fingiéd achaque, se hizo sacramentar por hazer Jas pazes, y hechas se fue 4 vender 4 la mafiana sus maritatas 4 
la plaza. Esto es de mas de cinquenta afios de experiencia, y cada dia van 4 peor, porque antes eran los negros y 
mulatos sus enemigos, y con beber juntos se han hecho camaradas, de quienes aprenden otras mafias. Dios Nuestro 
Sefior les alumbre los entendimientos para que conoscan la obligacion que tienen de Christianos.” 

Those who are conversant with the ancient history of the Jews must admit, that there is scarcely a law in the 
above catalogue which may not be referred, either directly or indirectly, or by analogy, to the Pentateuch ; nor is 
there a single one which the testimony of the most respectable Spanish historians might not be adduced to show 
really formed a part of the Mexican code ; we shall here, however, only adduce that of Las Casas, bishop of Chiapa, 
the celebrity of whose name, his great erudition, undoubted means of information, and unimpeachable veracity, con- 
stitute him an authority, from which, on a question of this kind, there can be no appeal,—from whose inedited 
‘Historia Apologetica’ the following compilation of the laws of the ancient Mexicans, and some other Indian states, is 
extracted, to which we have added some miscellaneous laws, transcribed from the works of other Spanish historians. 
Beginning, then, with the ‘ Historia Apologetica,’ and with that article of Jewish faith which, with the belief in the unity 
of God,—if, indeed, the association be not blasphemous,—constitutes the essence of Judaism, namely, circumcision, 
Las Casas bears testimony, in the following passage of the 175th chapter of the above-mentioned work, to the existence 
of that rite amongst the Totonacas, who were a populous nation which inhabited the eastern provinces of New Spain, 
extending from Panuco nearly to Yucatan} “Tenian por ley en aquellas provincias que en pariendo la muger, 4 los 

* This phrase means here simply miscellaneous : it is used by Torquemada in the same sense. 

+ 1t deserves to be remarked, that the rite of circumcision seems to have prevailed thousands of leagues along the coast of the Atlantic, 
amongst nations very remote from each other, and who spoke very different languages. Peter Martyr notices, at page 335 of the sixth 
volume of this work, the existence of the above rite amongst the natives of Yucatan. Oviedo says, at page 204 of the present volume, 
that it was practised in Nicaragua; and Gumilla states, at page 272 of the sixth volume already mentioned, that it was common 
amongst the Indians of the Orinoco, observing that the ceremony was performed on the eighth day after the birth of the child. ¢ Al 
octavo dia circuncidaban sus parvulos, sin exceptuar a lus ninas.” We shall, in a succeeding note, prove, from the fourth chapter of 
Dr: Boudinot’s Star in the West, that this rite was practised amongst the North American Indians. Of its existence amongst the 
Dog-ribbed Indians there can be little doubt, from the words of the intelligent traveller Mackenzie, who, describing, in the third chapter 
of his Journal of a Voyage through the North-west Portion of the Continent of America, which he has annexed to his General History 
of the Fur Trade, the manners of that tribe, says, “ Whether circumcision be practised among them I cannot pretend to say, but the 
appearance of it was general among those whom I saw.” It would be an extremely difficult thing to determine how appearance, in 
the present case, could have differed from reality ; and we shall only observe, that as the idea of the Jews having colonized America 
appears never to have crossed the imagination of Mackenzie, he could have had no motive for noticing this curious fact in his Journal but 
its singularity, and therefore his evidence need not be received with distrust. From the accounts of travellers it would seem almost doubtful 
whether circumcision was not a custom of the Hottentots, who, according to Anquetil, were forbidden by their traditions pork, flsh 

VOL. VIII. ( 21 ) 

122 NOTES. 

veinte y ocho dias 6 veinte y nueve, varon 6 hembra los llevaban al templo, y el sacerdote sumo y el segundo tomaban 
la criatura, y teniendola encima de una piedra y tomando el capullito del miembro secreto, se lo cortaban cercen con 
cierto cuchillode pedernal que no quedaba, de el cosa alguna, de manera que los circuncidaban como lo acostumbraron 
los Egipcios y otras naciones, como se dira adelante si Dios quisiere : aquello que cortaban quemabanlo y lo hacian 
ceniza. A las nifias en lugar de circuncision el sacerdote sumo y el segundo con sus propios dedos de las manos las 
corrompian, mandando a las madres que habiendo la nifa seis alos, renovasen con sus manos 6 dedos de ellas el 
mismo corrompimiento. 

“Tenian estas gentes tambien por ley, que todos los nifios llegados 4 seis aftos hasta los nueve habian de embiar 
los padres a los templos para ser instruidos en la doctrina y noticia de sus leyes, las quales contenian casi todas 
las virtudes, explicada la ley natural, y lo contrario de ella les prohibian y ensefiaban como de los vicios se habian 
de guardar. . 

“ Otra ley tenian en sus templos, que los varones habian de guardar y guardaban castidad hasta los veinte y dos 
afios, y llegando aquella edad, mandaban los pontifices que se casasen, y ninguna otra muger conocian antes. Y si 
en aquella edad no se casaban, eran obligados 4 vivir en continencia, y la pena era sino la guardaban, ser publicados 
por malos, y ninguno les dava despues su hija, porque lo tenian como por infame. 

“‘ Las muchachas llegando a edad de quince afios se habian de casar, y no conocian otro varon antes. 

“Cerca de estos casamientos y edad en que se habian de casar, no comprendia esta ley 4 los sefiores y principales, 
porque otras leyes tenian ellos que guardaban. 

“A los adulteros el y ella por sentencia de los sacerdotes apedreaban. De estas leyes y costumbres despues se 
dira mas. 

“Tornando 4 la religion de estos, tenian una ceremonia y manera de sacramento de comunion, que adoraban y en 
quien ponian toda su devocion y esperanza; cosa cierto de maravillar. De tres en tres afios mataban tres niflos y 
sacabanles los corazones, y de la sangre que de alli salia y con una goma que Ilaman ulli, que sale de un arbol que 
se cria en tierra caliente, al qual punzandolo salen unas gotas blancas y despues se tornan como pez negra, de que 
hacen las pelotas con que juegan que saltan seis veces mas que las nuestras de viento, y no paran de bullir, saltando 
como si estubiesen Ilenas de azogue. Con este licor 6 goma digo, y la sangre de los corazones de los nifios y de 
ciertas semillas las primeras que salian en una huerta que en sus templos tenian, hacian cierta confeccion y masa; 
esta tenian por comunion y cosa santisima; llamabanla Yoliainitlacualoz, que quiere decir, manjar del anima. De 
este manjar usaban 4 semejanza de comunion, y tenian esta orden y precepto, que de seis en seis meses los hombres 
de veinte y cinco afos habian de comulgar, y las mugeres de diez y seis. Era espantosa la reverencia y veneracion 
y humildad con que los sacerdotes aquesta comunion daban, dando 4 cada una persona un muy poquito de ello, 
poniendoselo en los bezos, y la persona lo tragaba no con menos temblor y devocion. Quando aquella masa se secaba, 
desleianla con otra sangre de corazones de los que sacrificaban. Esta misma comunion y rito y supersticion se 
acostumbraba en las provincias de Chiapa, nuestro obispado, y creemos que era rito y ceremonia universal en muchas 
leguas y provincias de la Nueva Espafia, y por aquella renglera en otros reynos adelante.” 

without scales, hares, and rabbits; and it is very deserving of notice, that Edwards says nearly the same thing, in the second chapter of 
his History of the West Indies, of the Caribs, whose aversion to the flesh of the pecari or Mexican hog, assimilated them in no slight 
degree to the Indians of the Orinoco, who, according to Gumilla, held the flesh of the hog in extreme abhorrence. Josephus makes 
mention of Ethiopian or African Jews, who were a distinct race from those of Palestine; nor is it at all unlikely, that when the tide 
of Christian conversion took a decidedly eastern course, Jewish proselytism might have proceeded in an opposite direction, and made 
Africa the stepping-stone to America. It may not be amiss to observe, before concluding this note, that Las Casas declares, at the 
commencement of the 175th chapter of his ¢ Historia Apologetica,’ that his description of the laws and religious ceremonies of the Toto- 
nacas is taken from the written information of a “man of worth and good Christian,” who had been an eye-witness of them: “ estando 
solo entre aquellas gentes sin otro Espafiol alguno, al principio que en la Nueva Espafia entraron Cristianos.” His knowledge of the 
Mexican laws and religious rites, he says, was derived from the Franciscans, who had received their information from the Mexicans them- 
selves; since, as he immediately adds, although theirs was the first religious order that entered New Spain, they had witnessed none of the 
religious rites of the Mexicans: “ninguna cosa de ello vieron, sino por relacion de los mismos Indios lo supieron.” This statement of 
Las Casas confirms what we deemed it not unimportant to point out, in the 330th page of the sixth volume of this work, namely, the 
remarkable fact of three years having been suffered to elapse before the Pope and Charles the Fifth permitted any of the religious orders 
to enter Mexico, whose reason for this delay was perhaps to allow time to the secular arm to efface some unequivocal traces of Judaism, 

which would have been sure to attract the notice of a clerical order of men, however they might have been passed over unheeded by the 
military followers of Cortes. ; 

NOTES. 125 

The above laws and religious usages are those of the Totonacas, whose state bordered on Mexico and was subject 
to Montezuma, and whose religion differed but little from that of the Mexicans, carrying religious austerities, 
consisting of penance, vigils, and fasting, if possible to a greater length. The Totonacan form of government was 
priestly, and their high-priest, who possessed the supreme authority in the state, was consecrated to that office, as Las 
Casas asserts, by having his head anointed with the blood of circumcised children; a ceremony which proves the ideas 
of holiness which they attached to circumcision, and that it was not amongst them only a civil custom, but also a 
religious rite. The following collection of laws, for the authority of which Las Casas pledges himself, were those of 
the Mexican empire: they are taken from the 213th and 214th chapters of his ‘ Historia Apologetica.’ 

“Quanto 4 las penas que davan 4 los delinquentes, sera bien aqui dar cuenta de los pecados y obras malas que por 
aquellos reynos se tenian por crimenes publicos, porque estaban prohibidos por sus leyes y costumbres. Aquestas 
leyes que fueron muchas y muy justas y buenas, muchas dellas se pornan juntas abajo en el capitulo docientos catorce. 
Agora tocarse han algunas, poniendo las penas con que se punian ciertos delinquentes. 

“Esto era general, que castigaban con pena de muerte a los que perpetraban pecados graves y enormes, que segun 
razon natural deben ser entre las naciones muy politicas y son con tal pena punibles, como aquellos que pueden 
perturbar y perturban la paz y sosiego de las republicas. 

“ Destos era el que mataba 4 otro, e] qual moria por ello. 

“La muger prefiada que tomaba con que lanzar la criatura, y la que se lo dava, moria por ello. 

“El que hacia fuerza 4 alguna doncella, 6 que fuese en el campo 6 en casa del padre, moria por ello. 

“El que daba ponzofia 4 otro con que muriese, y aquel que se la dava, ambos morian por ello. 

“ Si el marido matava 4 la muger que le cometia adulterio, aunque los tomase juntos cometiendo, moria por ello. 
Daban la razon, porque usurpaba la justicia del rey, no llevando su acusacion @ los jueces, para que despues de 
averiguar la verdad, y convencida, muriera por sentencia. 

“Ta muger que cometia adulterio, y el adultero, tomandolos en el delito, 6 si avia violenta sospecha, prendianlos, y 
si no confesavan, dabanles tormento, y confesando condenavanlos 4 muerte. Unas veces los mataban atandolos pies 
y manos, y tendidos en tierra, y con una gran piedra redonda y pesada, les davan en las sienes de tal manera que 4 
pocos golpes les echavan los sesos fuera. A otros ahorcavan con unos garrotes, 6 porras de palo de encina para ello 
hechos. Otros tiempos quemaban 4 los adulteros, y 4 ellas ahorcaban ; y si eran Pipiltin, que quiere decir princi- 
pales é hidalgos, despues de ahorcados emplumavanles las cabezas, y ponianles ciertos penachuelos verdes, y asi 
ataviados los quemavan, y decian que aquella era sefial que se compadecian dellos, y que por eso les quemavan los 
cuerpos de aquella manera. Cerca deste crimen de adulterio, acaecio una justicia notable, que se hizo en la ciudad 
de Tlascala, y fue esta. Que un Sefior de muchos vasallos, muy principal y heredero de Maxixcacin uno de los 
quatro cabezas y Sefiores que governavan aquel reyno, y capitania general de todo él, y por su persona muy valeroso 
y estimado de todos, cometio adulterio, y sobre el caso juntados todos los quatro Sefiores y jueces, y con ellos el 
mismo Seftor Maxixcacin, fue determinado que muriese por ello y no se quebrantasen sus buenas costumbres y leyes 
por ninguna persona por grande que fuese. Y asi lo mataron no embargante que fuese hermano de tan sefialado 
Sefior. Cierto sentencia y justicia fue esta digna de ponerse por exemplo y dechado 4 muchas naciones. 

“A otros adulteros mandavan los jueces fuesen apedreados, y llevavanlos 4 la plaza donde se ayuntava infinita 
gente, y puestos en medio de la plaza atabanles las manos, y luego disparaban en é] mas piedras que pelos tenia en 
la cabeza, y en cayendo no penavan mucho, porque luego era muerto cubierto de piedras. 

“Si alguno aviendose embriagado, y asi embriagado, cometia adulterio, no le excusava la borrachez de la muerte, 
antes por el mismo delito moria. 

“El hombre que Ilegava en mala parte 4 su madrastra, entrambos morian por justicia. 

“El Rey de Tezcuco, agtielo del que ahora vive, mando matar por veces quatro de sus hijos, porque llegaron 4 sus 
madrastras, mugeres de su padre. Tuvieron el agtielo y padre del que hoy es, muchas mugeres y de ellas cada 
cien hijos, y otras tantas hijas segun hoy se afirma. 

“ B] hermano que llegava 4 su hermana, fuese de padre y madre, 6 solo de padre, 6 solo de madre, morian por ello 
ambos. En la Nueva Espafia se hallaron tres 6 quatro casados con sus hermanas, pero dicen que fue ndeAD UES de la 
conquista de los Espafioles, quando anduvieron las cosas rebueltas y desordenadas. 

“ El padrastro que Ilegava 4 su entenada, morian ambos por ello. 

194 NOTES. 

“Todos los que cometian, puesto en el primer grado de consanguinidad 6 de afinidad, tenian pena de muerte, salvo 
cufados y cufiadas, y quando uno moria, las mugeres que dexava, era costumbre que los hermanos mayores 6 menores, 
6 alguno dellos tomase la muger 6 mugeres del heredero difunto, aunque huviese havido hijos, quasi ad sustinendum 
semen fratris. 

“Los que conspiraban y tratavan traicion contra el rey 6 sefor propio, y los que le querian privar del sefiorio, aunque 
fuesen deudos muy propinquos, eran punidos con pena de muerte. 

“ Quando algun Sefior moria y dexava muchos hijos, si alguno se alzava en palacio y se queria preferir 4 los otros, 
aunque fuese el mayor, no lo consentia el Sefior 4 quien pertenecia la confirmacion, y menos el pueblo. Antes dexavan 
pasar un afio, 6 mas de otro, en el qual consideravan bien qual era mejor para regir 6 governar el estado, y aquel 
permanecia. por senor. 

“Los que cometian el crimen nefando, agente y paciente morian por ello. De quando en quando la justicia ponia 
diligencia en hacer inquisicion y buscava si algunos havia nefandos para los justiciar. En dos 6 en tres provincias 
lejanas de Mexico, segun se dice, uvo aquel vicio innatural quasi permitido 6 disimulado, y segun las historias 
destos, fué porque los demonios les hicieron creer que asi lo usaron los dioses que adoravan, y por consiguiente que 
dellos les era licito. Pero con todo aquel engafio del demonio, siempre lo tuvieron aquello por malo, y eran tenidos 
los perpetradores muy viles y muy infames. En todo el sefiorio de Mexico y de Tezcuco principalmente fue muy 
inquirido y castigado, y el padre del Sefior que hoy se dice ser de Tezcuco, que.......la venida de los Cristianos, 
y murio baptizado, hizo justicia de algunos que hall6 en su sefiorio. 

“ Pecado de bestialidad nunca fué oido ni visto en aquellas tierras. 

“Tos ladrones eran muy castigados y perseguidos. El que cometia hurto notable, mayormente si era cosa de los 
templos 6 de la casa del Sefior, 6 si por hurtar escalava 6 rompia casa, por la primera vez lo hacian esclavo, y 4 la 
segunda lo ahoreaban. El ladron que hurtaba en la plaza 6 mercado cosa de precio, asi como ropa 6 algun tejuelo 
de oro, 6 por freqiientacion de hurtos pequefios en el mercado, porque havia tan sotiles ladrones algunos que en 
levantandose la vendedera 6 volviendo la cabeza le apafiavan de lo que tenia, luego le ahorcavan por la orden é 
justicia del lugar, porque tenian por gran delito el que se cometia en el mercado, por el mal exemplo que 4 toda la 
comunidad se dava. 

“El hombre que andava vestido de vestidura de muger, 6 la muger que hallavan vestida de la de hombre, morian 
por ello. 

“ Cerca de qiiestiones y rencillas que entre aquestas gentes todas de estas Yndias solian acaecer, conviene reducir 
4 la memoria lo que arriba en el capitulo dejimos, la natural condicion que tienen de paz, paciencia, y sosiego, que 
cierto parecen menos de la irascible, porque papagayos hay que parecen tenir mas ira que algunos y aun muchos 
Yndios. Por esta innata propiedad reflian muy pocas veces, y quando reftian alguna vez, todos de palabra diciendose 
algunas tachas, que son entre nosotros nifierias, como decir, anda que tienes los ojos negros 6 blancos, 6 que te falta 
un diente, y cosas semejantes, 6 tomavan pufios de tierra y davanse con ella en los ojos, y luego se apartavan, y cada 
uno se alimpiava. Quando Ilegavan 4 las manos 6 darse de codazos y rempujones, y romperse cuando mas las 
mantas, y alguna vez mesarse, y acaso hacerse salir de las narices, y de las orejas sangre; 4 los quales como no 
interviniesen armas, porque nunca jamas las sacavan ni traian, sino era quando ivan 4 la guerra, 6 los cazadores de 
los sefiores que iban 4 pescar 6 cazar, presto los ponian en paz los circunstantes. Si de la question tenia noticia la 
justicia, embiabalos 4 la carcel, y alli los tenian pocos dias, y mandavanle pagar la cuenta que avia rompido, que por 
la mayor parte parava en aquello su venganza, 6 la cura, si quiza quedava algo descalabrado, pero quando refiian en 
los mercados, como 4 escandalosos y alborotadores del pueblo eran muy gravemente castigados. 

“Cuentase haver acaecido en el mercado de Tezcuco una vez, que rifiendo dos mugeres de palabras, vinieron 4 las 
manos, y mesandose la una 4 la otra lastimd en una oreja de que le corrio sangre por el rostro abajo. Llegose 4 la 
pelea destas mugeres toda la gente del mercado, todos escandalizados, como nunca se avia visto. Sabido por el Rey 
de Tezcuco, mandé luego ahorear 4 la que avia 4 la otra injuriado y sacado sangre, por haber sido causa de aquel tan 
eran escandalo, porque fuese 4 ella castigo y 4 todos los demas exemplo, de que ninguno fuese osado de cometer 
delito alguno en el mercado, ni de dar causa que el pueblo se escandalizase. 

“Cerca de estas rencillas y questiones de aquellas gentes, parece sera bien contar cierta costumbre que avia entre 
mancebos que presumian de enamorados. Acaecia enamorarse dos de una muger, y como es cosa no inusitada de 

NOOO T ys: 125 

aquella obra salir otras peores 6 malas, tenian costumbre de desaftarse, no para irse desde luego 4 matar, sino para la 
primera guerra que se ordenase. Venida la guerra, cada uno de aquellos con diligencia se buscavan, y topandose 
peleaban y se sacudian como si fueran los enemigos contra quien la guerra se habia ordenada. Y estos dexabanlos 
darse los padrinos 6 jueces que alli se allegavan, hasta que se recognoscia la ventaja. Entonces los despartian, 
porque luego entendian el caso porque se havian desafiado. ; 

“Lo mismo acontecia quando uno tenia una manceba, y otro se enamorava de ella 6 se Ja llevava de casa. Desa- 
fiavalo 4 aquel para la primera guerra, y el que mejor lo hacia en el desafio, saliendo vencedor al parecer y sentencia 
de algunos que por jueces y veedores de aquello ponian, vuelto de la guerra, aquel Ilevava la muger 4 su casa. 

“A Jas aleahuetas muy bien punian y castigavan, y era la pena, que averiguado que usaban aquel oficio, las sacavan 
4 la verguenza, y en la plaza delante todo el pueblo les quemavan los cabellos hasta que se le escalentava lo vivo de 
la cabeza. Y asi afrentadas con sus cabellos quemados, y llena la cabeza de gotas de pez de la tierra, se iban bien 
desconsoladas. Y si la persona que alcagueteava era de honra y de calidad, mayor pena le davan. 

“ Acaecié que el seflor de un pueblo llamado Tenayucan, se enamoré de la hija del sefior y rey de Tezcuco, el qual 
puso por tercera 4 cierta muger, y despues de muchos mensages concertaron de entrar donde dormia la doncella, y 
la manera fué aquesta: usanse por aquestas Indias unas cajas de cafia muy ligera cubiertas de cuero de venado, 
que llaman petacas, con sus coberteras, donde se mete y lleva ropa y otras cosas: mete dentro de una el alcagueta 
al sefor enamorado, y echaselo 4 cuestas, y metiolo dentro donde estaba la doncella. Desque la doncella lo vido, 6 
porque huvo miedo del padre que en hacer justicia era severo, 6 porque no queria, de palabras no quiso consentir al 
effeto. Por las guardas de palacio que avia muchas, no pudo el negocio encubrirse, y asi vino 4 noticia del rey, que 
se Ilamava Nezaualpilcintli, el qual mandé prender al alcagueta y al que en la caja avia en su palacio metido, y 
mandolos 4 ambos luego ahorcar. Estos delictos y las penas de ellos quedavan por memoria en todos, y por ley para 
todo el reyno y sefiorio del rey. 

“Era entre la gente de la Nueva Espafia tenido por gran vituperio y vicio vil é ignominioso emborracharse; y por 
esto usaban del vino los que lo bebian, no como quiera, ni todos los que lo querian, sino con licencia de los sefores 
6 de los jueces, los quales no lo davan sino a los viejos y viejas de cinquenta afios arriba 6 poco menos; y la razon 
que davan era, que aquellos lo avian menester, como remedio de la sangre que se les iba enfriando, para que pudiesen 
recalentar y dormir. Estos bebian dos, 6 tres, 6 quatro tazas pequefias, con las quales, del vino que ellos hacian, sino 
es con mucha cantidad, no puede alguno embriagarse. 3 

“ En sus fiestas de sus bodas y otros regocijos, podian beber los que eran de edad varonil dos 6 tres tazas y no mas. 
Los medicos davan muchas medicinas en una taza de vino, y 4 las paridas era muy comun cosa en los primeros dias 
de su parto darle 4 beber un poco de vino por salud y no por vicio. Avia muchas personas que asi tenian el vino 
aborrecido, que asi sanos ni enfermos no lo querian gustar. 

“ Los labradores y trabajadores quando acarreaban madera del monte y quando traian grandes piedras, bebian para 
templar el frio y sufrir mejor el trabajo: bebian unos mas y otros menos, segun sentian que les era necesario. Los 
sefores y principales tenian por punto de honra y tambien la gente de guerra no beber vino. Su comun bebida era 
cacao y otros brevajes hechos de harina de maiz tostado, que no embriaga sino da fuerza y refresca todo el cuerpo. 

‘La pena que se dava 4 los que se emborrachavan, 6 de haber bebido mucho se comenzaban 4 embeodar y davan 

voces 6 cantavan, era llevallos al mercado, fuese hombre 6 fuese muger, y publicamente los trasquilaban, que no es 
menor afrenta entre ellos que entre nosotros, y dar 4 uno cien azotes por las calles acostumbradas, y luego le iban 4 
derrocar la casa, dando a entender que la persona que se embeoda perdiendo el juicio de razon voluntariamente, no 
es digna tener casa en el pueblo, ni contarse por uno de los vecinos. 
- “ Esta fue la costumbre y la ley y la pena que se tuvo y se dava todos los tiempos que aquellas gentes vivieron sin 
que viesen Christianos. Lo qual todos los religiosos, en especial los de la Orden de San Francisco, escudrifiaron, 
examinaron y averiguaron, y tuvieron y tienen por cierto. Despues de los Christianos haber conquistado aquella 
tierra y quitado los sefiores naturales y jueces, y sido causa que no se usasen sus antiguas leyes, son tantos los 
excesos que en borracheras han hecho y hacen quando pueden los Indios, en especial si pueden aver vino de Castilla, 
que los mismos religiosos que digo, no podian creer que no las usasen todos en sus tiempos antiguos. Pero despues 
de conocido y muy bien inquirido, y como dije mirado y examinado, confiesan haber estado engafiados. Y es verdad 
que todo esto que aqui digo, es todo escrito dellos y de sus escritos lo he sacado. 

VOL. VIII. (2K ) 

126 NOTES 

Capituto CCXIV. 

“ Para que lo que en este capitulo siguiente se dixere se tenga en mas, y entendian los que lo leyeren, quan razon- 
ablemente aquellas gentes de aquella Nueva Espafia tenian ordenadas y regidas sus republicas, debese primero 
entender y considerar que los principes y seflores 6 governadores de todos y de qualesquiera reynos 6 republicas 
para bien y justamente gobernallas, no deben prohibir por sus leyes ordinarias todos los pecados y vicios que 
los hombres en ellas pueden cometer, sino pasar y disimular con algunos, dexandolos a la libertad de los subditos ; 
puesto que nunca licitamente pueden hacer ley por la qual manden hacer 6 aprueven cosa que sea injusta, 6 que 
induzga los hombres 4 pecar. Los vicios y pecados que con gran dificultad se pueden evitar, como los de la forni- 
cacion simple soltero con soltera, y hablar ociosamente, y los pensamientos malos, y otros que no son en perjuicio y 
escandalo de la republica, 6 de algun vecino de ella particular, y los semejantes, todos estos se han de pasar debaxo 
de disimulacion, y seria malo é iniquo prohibirlos por leyes, porque causaria muchos escandalos y dafios en la 
republica. Y esto parece por quatrorazones : la primera, porque evitar todos los vicios y pecados es sobre la facultad 
de todo hombre puro como quiera que no pueda ser sin especial divina gracia: la ley humana gracia no puede dar, 
como sea ordenada de hombre puro solo, quando esta reservado por la ley nueva de Jesu Cristo, que pudo y puede 
y da gracia para cumplirla y guardarla; y por esto prohibio y pudo prohibir todo pecado por chico y leve que sea, 
como es, decir una palabra ociosa. 

“La segunda razon es, porque la ley humana debe quitar en quanto pudiere Ja causa de escandalo, y las ocasiones 
de mayores males * que pueden succeder en la republica; y si quisiese prohibir todos los males y pecados, por evitar 
uno seguirse han otros mayores ; como si pusiese ley que prohibiese la fornicacion simple, seguirse han mil adulterios 
de donde vernian 4 matarse los hombres, y seguirianse otros males, como San Augustin dice en el libro De Ordina- 
tione, y asi aquella tal ley convertirse ha en dato de la republica. De donde se sigue, que quando por alguna ley 
se impide la utilidad de la republica, 6 por ella viene algun dafto notable y perturbacion al pacifico estado de la 
republica, la tal ley es iniqua é injusta, puesto que la intencion y el fin de constituirla fuese bueno, y para provecho 
y utilidad de la republica, y no se podra llamar ley sino corrupcion de ley, como el mismo Santo dice en el libro 
primero De Libero Arbitrio. 

“ La tercera razon es, porque si el principe quisiese por su ley evitar todos los vicios y defectos de la republica, 
seria cosa inutil, porque no le seria posible, asi como cognoscer y juzgar de los pensamientos de los hombres, y asi en 
valde y ociosamente la estableceria. 

“La quarta, porque las leyes no se constituyen sino para conservar el estado politico: conservase el estado politico 
habiendo justicia é igualdad entre los que unos con otros comunican, segun Aristoteles, é hizose la mayor y mejor 
de las comunicaciones en la policia, y la justicia que la conserva se muestra por las leyes. Las buenas leyes dos 
efectos solamente inducir en la policia pretenden; el uno es dirigir 6 enderezar 4 todo hombre y miembro de ella 
como se debe aver bien con toda la comunidad y republica, y con qualquiera persona della haciendo bien; el segundo 
es impedir é cohartar que los hombres se abstengan de hacer mal, y de toda injuria 4 toda la comunidad, y de qual- 
quiera parte 6 miembro de ella. De donde se sigue, que las leyes politicas no tienen que negociar ni entremeterse, 
sino en aquello que pertenece 4 la comunicacion de un hombre con otro en quanto haga bien y no se haga mal. Y 
quanto 4 todo lo demas que no pertenece 4 la comunicacion humana, la ley politica no tiene que entremeterse, porque 
perderia el genero de su consideracion, asi como si el geometra quisiese tratar de la musica, 6 el musico de la eeometria. 
Asi pues es que hay muchos vicios y muchas virtudes, que por alguna via no pertenecen 4 la humana comunicacion, 
porque ni la hacen buena, ni Ja hacen mala, en quanto sin aquellas virtudes, y con aquellos vicios esté el estado de 
policia pacifico: por lo qual la ley politica no tiene que entremeterse, porque todo el genero de su consideracion se 
perderia. De estos vicios es la fornicacion simple soltero con soltera, en tanto que consiste dentro de sus terminos; 
porque 4 ninguno que sea de la comunidad perjudica, ni por ella el estado de la republica se perturba 6 impide. Lo 
mismo es de los malos pensamientos, y de las palabras ociosas, quando se dicen sin injuria de otro; y dello es, que 
amen 4 Dios, 6 no le amen; porque por ninguno destos vicios se hace al proximo perjuicio, y por tanto 4 las leyes 
humanas no incumbe cerca dellos entremeterse. Porque aquellas virtudes 6 vicios hacen al hombre bueno 6 malo 

* ‘The order displayed in the laws that govern the universe, where all is perfect harmony, and even the rays of light interfere not with 

each other in their rapid course through the solar system, leads not by analogy to the conclusion, that a legislator can be placed in the 
dilemma insinuated in the text, the notion of which would seem to proceed from mistaken views of the law of nature. 

NOT ES: 197 

simpliciter, quiere decir no comparando el hombre 4 otro, sino en si mismo. Y esto hace poco y nada al caso 
quanto al estado publico, con que se halla el hombre con los demas bien y no mal, como se dijo. Y ningun filosofo 
moral de los antiguos tanto trabajé de hacer los hombres buenos, ni corregir la vida humana, que totalmente quedase 
sin algunos vicios : solamente se reserv6 por si esta preeminencia nuestro Redemptor Jesu Christo, que nos enseid 
que amasemos todos de corazon, y le rogasemos y hiciesemos bien hasta los enemigos, etc. 

“ Resta pues de lo dicho, que 4 la prudencia de qualquiera buen principe y governador de toda bien ordenada 
republica pertenece por sus leyes permitir y disimular algunos defectos y pecados en ella, quando por ellos el estado 
del reyno y de las ciudades no se perturba. Y esta permision 6 disimulacion no es otra cosa sino no punillos, los 
quales si quisiese totalmente quitar por sus leyes castigandolos, y aun si compeliese 4 todo el pueblo con graves 
penas guardar totalmente la ley Evangelica, sus leyes serian injustas, y él indiscreto ; porque asi mandaria que no 
oviese mugeres malas, y por consiguiente toda su republica turbaria y destruiria. De aqui es que por los principes 
profesores de la ley de Christo, se disimula y permite no castigando 4 las mugeres pecadoras, ni 4 los que a ellas 
van, ni que los hombres pecadores tengan sus concubinas por las razones dichas, reservando el castigo para el riguroso 
juicio divino. 

“Y es aqui agora de notar, que aunque antiguamente las leyes imperiales y reales permitian estar los hombres 
amancebados, con que fuese una y de contino la tubiese en casa; pero agora ya son aquellas leyes revocadas, como 
las de las usuras. Porque los emperadores catholicos y asi mismo los reyes, sometieron 4 si mismos y 4 sus leyes 4 
la correccion y censura de los Sacros Canones. 

« Los Sacros Canones prohiben y dafian 6 condenan estar los hombres amancebados, y los castigan, como parece en 
los Decretos, capitulo Nemo, y tractase por los canonistas en el capitulo, Cuyus sit generis, de foro competentz. 

“ Puedese aqui preguntar, que porque mas prohibe y castiga la Iglesia los amancebados que las mugeres publicas, 
pues en ambos casos estan en pecado mortal? Puedese responder, que porque el pecado de los amancebados es 
eontino y mas diuturno y comprehende 4 ambos, y parecer que es directamente contra y injuria del matrimonio, 6 
tambien porque la Iglesia impide quanto puede sin escandalo y sin mayor dafo los pecados; y castigando los 
amancebados no hay escandalo, ni de impedillos y castigallos puede suceder mayor dafio, como puede acaecer del 
impedimento y castigo si se hiciese 4 las mugeres malas, etc. 

“Todo lo dicho se ha trahido 4 proposito de que se vea y conozca la prudencia que los reyes de la Nueva Espafia 
usaban en su governacion de tan infinitos pueblos que avia dentro de sus sefiorios : los quales no solo prohibian y 
eastigavan por sus leyes los crimines y delictos que podian perturbar las policias y comunidades, pero tambien per- 
mitian y disimulaban los que sino dissimularan, fuera iniquidad € injusticia, porque causaran mayores daflos y 
escandalos en sus republicas. Esto parece porque permitieron que oviese mugeres que ganavan con sus cuerpos 4 
quien darse querian: puesto que no avia lugares publicos ni sefalados para el tal oficio, sino cada una morava y 
andava adonde le parecia. 

« Permitieron tambien que oviese mancebas, y uvo ciertas especies dellas. 

“Los mancebos antes que se casasen y viniesen 4 ser vecinos y tener casa en el pueblo, mayormente los hijos de-los 
sefiores y de los hombres ricos, tenian sus mancebas. Y vino 4 entablarse tal costumbre, que las pedian 4 sus padres 
y 4 sus madres para tenellas por tales, como quando pedian otras para tenerlas por mugeres. 

“ Esto se declara por la practica que dello se tenia, y tambien por el nombre propio y vocablo que lo significa ; 
porque 4 la manceba llamavan ¢lacarcavili, é 41a que pedian por muger legitima decian ciwatlantli. Donde no habia cos- 
tumbre demandar la hija 4 los padres por manceba, nombrabase por otro nombre general de manceba, y este fue temecauh. 

“ Acostumbrabase comunmente 6 por la mayor parte, que despues que aquel mancebo habia un hijo de su manceba, 
6 la dexar del todo, 6 la tomar por su muger legitima, porque asi se lo requerian los padres, diciendolo, que pues ya 
tenia hijo, como si dixeran, pues ya parece aver razon para que la tomeis por muger, tomadla, y si no, dexadla, que 
nosotros buscaremos con quien casemos nuestra hija, porque ya no es razon que viva mas tiempo amancebada. 

“ Si el mozo acordava de la tomar por muger, convidavanse los parientes de ambas partes, y hacianse las ceremonias 
que usaban en sus legitimos casamientos. 

“ Avia otra especie de mancebas, como las suele aver entre los Christianos que no son de aquel vicio limpios, que 
quando se enamoravan el de ella y ella del, se ayuntavan, y si despues de algun tiempo poco 6. mucho, determinavan 
casarse, notificavanlo 4 sus deudos y hacian las cerimonias y ritos arriba dichos, y desde alli llamavan al mancebo, no 

198 NOTES. 

mancebo, que era telpuchtli, sino ¢/apalihuy, como si dixeran casado y hombre vecino del pueblo, & hombre que tiene 
cuidado de su casa y de sumuger. Y 4 ella no la nombravan nomecahuh como de antes, mas nociuahuh 6 ciuatlantle, 
que significa muger legitima. 

“ Otra especie de mancebas se permitian, y estas eran las que los sefiores y principales tenian, 6 que las tomavan 
ellos, 6 las pedian despues de ya casados con la sefiora y legitima muger que llamaban ciwapili : tenian sus nombres 
particulares sin el general de manceba. Las que pedian 4 los padres que eran doncellas, y aunque no lo fuesen, 
Iamavanse ciwanemactly é tambien tlaciuantli. Las que ellos tomavan sin pedillas, decianse tlaciuaantin. Muchas 
veces tomavan algunas con afecto matrimonial como la primera, por tenellas por legitimas mugeres sin las mancebas. 

“Todas estas especies de mancebas, puesto que muchos las tenian, y tenerlas en muchas partes se usaba, tenianse 
por todos empero ilicitas, y solamente por permitidas. Esto parece, porque los padres y parientes viejos siempre 
amonestavan 4 sus hijos y deudos mancebos que huyesen de aquel vicio, y los reprehendian y castigavan quando 
podian sobre ello. Y por esto tenian las hijas muy guardadas y encerradas, temiendo no fuesen por engafio 6 por 
aficion 4 aquella deshonestidad persuadidas. 

“De lo dicho pues, parece la orden buena y policia que aquellas gentes tenian en sus republicas por sus buenas 
leyes, unos delictos prohibiendo y castigando, conviene 4 saber, los que cognoscian ser en dafio del estado de ellas; 
otros, que si los quisieran del todo succedieran males mayores, disimulando y permitiendo: que no hizo mas alguna 
republica de gente muy politica, mz hace menos ni mas hoy la Cristiana policia. 

Capituto CCXV. 
En el qual se refieren todas las Leyes por las quales los reynos de la Nueva Espana se regian. 

“ Porque mas en suma se vea la buena y prudente governacion que los reyes de Nueva Espafia en sus reynos tenian 
puesta, sera bien referir en este capitulo todas las leyes que yo he podido saber que avia en ellos, sacadas y colegidas 
con diligencia por religiosos muy entendidos y experimentados y que penetraron de raiz aquella lengua. Las quales 
tengo en mi poder confirmadas de su nombre, y comienzan como me las dieron de la manera siguiente. 

“< Eistas son las leyes que tenian los Indios de la Nueva Espaiia. 

“Si el hijo del principal era tahur; é vendia la hacienda que su padre tenia, 6 vendia alguna suerte de tierra, moria 
por ello, secretamente ahogado. Y si era plebeyo 6 de baja suerte hacian lo esclavo. 

“Si alguno tomava de los magueyes, que son los cardones 6 arbolillos de espinas de que arriba en el capitulo.... 
se dixo que hacian veinte cosas, provechosos para hacer miel, y eran de veinte pies 6 arboles, pagavanlos con las 
mantas que los jueces sentenciavan, y sino las tienen, 6 es de mas pies de magueyes, hacenlo esclavo. 

“El que pida algunas mantas fiadas 6 prestadas, y no las pagava, era esclayo. 

“Si alguno hurtaba alguna red de pescar, pagavala con mantas, y si no las tenia, era esclavo. 

“Si alguno hurtaba algun acanoa (que es los barquillos de un madero con que nayvegan,) pagavanla con mantas 
quantas valia la canoa, y si no las tenia, era esclavo. 

“Si alguna esclava que no era de edad para llegar hombre 4 ella, alguno usaba mal della, era esclavo. 

“Si llevé 4 vender su esclava 4 Ascapucalco, donde se hacia la feria de los esclavos, y el que se la compré le did 
mantas por ella y el las de suyo y se contenté dellas, si despues se arrepintiese, volvia las mantas y perdia el esclavo. 

“Si alguno qued6 pequefiito, y los parientes lo venden, y se sabia despues quando era mayor, sacavan los jueces 
de aquellos las mantas que los parecian y davanlas al que lo compro, y el vendido quedava libre. 

“Si algun esclavo se huya y se vendia el mismo a otra persona, pareciendose volvia 4 su duefio, y perdia lo que dio 
por él el que lo compro. 

“Si alguno tenia parte con alguna esclava agena, y acaecia morir estando prefiada, era esclavo el que la emprefio, 
pero si pare sin peligro, lo que pare es libre, y llevavalo el padre. 

“Si algunos vendieron algun nifio por esclavo, y despues se sabe, todos los que entendieron en ello eran esclavos, y 
dellos davan uno al que lo compré, y los otros repartian entre la madre del nifio y entre é1 que lo descubrié. 

“Los que daban bebidizos para que alguno muriese, moria por ello 4 garrotazos; y si la muerte era de esclava, le 
hacian esclavo al que los daba. 

“Si hurtavan las mazorcas de mahiz de veinte arriba, moria por ello; y si menos, pagava en lo que lo condenavan 
que pagase. 

NOTES. 129. 

“ E] que arrancaba el mahiz antes que granase, moria por ello. 

“ El que hurtaba un tecomatl, que es una calabazilla atada con unos cueros colorados por la cabeza con unas borlas 
de pluma al cabo, de que usan los sefiores y traen en ella polvos verdes que toman por la boca con humo que en laisla 
Espafiola Ilamavan ‘tabacos,’ moria por ello 4 garrotazos. 

“ El que hurtaba algun chalchui, que era piedra que tenian por preciosa, y otra qualquiera joya en qualquiera parte 
que la hurtase, era apedreado en el mercado, porque no la podia tener ningun hombre baxo. 

“ Bl que en el mercado hurtava algo, los mismos del mercado tenian licencia para lo matar 4 pedradas. 

“El que salteava en el camino era publicamente apedreado. 

“Tenian ley que si el sumo pontifice se emborrachava, donde quiera que le hallasen borracho, con unas porras lo 

miatavan. 
“El mozo por casar, que se emborrachaba, era llevado 4 una casa que se decia Telpuchcalli, é alli lo matavan 4 

garrotazos. 
“E] principal que tenia algun oficio 6 cargo, si se embeodava, quitavanle el oficio, y si era por valiente hombre dado, 

que entre ellos era honroso titulo, quitavanselo. 

“Si el padre acaecia pecar con su hija, morian con una soga al pescuezo ahogados ambos. 

“El que pecaba con su hermana moria ahogado con garrote, lo qual era entre ellos muy detestable. 

“ Si una muger pecava con otra, morian de la misma manera ahogadas. 

“ Si el sumo pontifice era hallado con alguna muger secretamente, lo matavan con garrote, 6lo quemavan. Dicese 
tambien que le derrocaban la casa, y la hacienda le confiscaban; tambien morian todos los que lo sabian y callavan. 

“ Para convencer de adulterio no bastava probanza, si juntos no los tomavan, y la pena era publicamente apedreallos. 

«“ Alounas destas leyes suso referidas no son del todo autenticas, porque se sacan de un librillo de Indios no 
autorizado; pero las que se siguen son tenidas todas por autenticas y verdaderas ; en las quales se prohiben y castigan 
quatro principales crimines, el primero de los hechizeros y salteadores, el segundo de los ladrones, el tercero de los 
carnales, el cuarto de las guerras. 

“ Era ley que fuese sacrificado abierto por los pechos, el que hiciese hechizos y maleficios para que viniese algun 
mal sobre la ciudad. 

“ Era otra ley que ahorcasen al hechizero que con sus maleficios ponia suefios 4 los de la casa para poder mas 
seguro entrar 4 roballa. 

“ Era ley por la qual ahorcavan 4 quien matava con hechizos. 

“ Era ley ahorcar 4 los que por los caminos yendo para hacer mal, se finjian ser mensajeros de los reyes 6 sefiores. 

Quanto a los Carnales. 

“ Ahorcavan al que forzaba 4 su madre, y si ella era voluntaria, la misma pena le davan, y era entre ellos tenido 
aqueste pecado por horrible y abominable. 

« Ahorcavan los hermanos que pecavan con sus hermanas. 

«¢ Ahorcavan los que pecaban con sus entenadas, y 4 ella lo mismo si no era forzada. 

“ Tenian pena de muerte los que hacian lo mismo con su suegra. 

«‘ Apedreaban los adulteros ambos *. 

«“ A ninguna muger ni hombre castigavan por adulterio, si solo el marido della los acusaba, sino que havia de haver 
testigos y confesion dellos. Y si los adulteros eran personas principales, ahogavanlos en la carcel. 

“Tenia pena de muerte el que matava 4 su muger por sospecha 6 indicio, y aunque la tomase con otro, sino que 
los jueces la avian de castigar. 

_«En algunas partes castigavan al marido que tenia parte con su muger, despues que le habia hecho traicion. 
“ Por la ley no tenia pena el que llegaba 4 la manceba de otro, sino era que oviese mucho tiempo que la tenia el 

otro, y era estimado de sus vecinos por casado. 

* That this was the punishment which the Mexican code adjudged to adulterers, is attested by the evidence of the Mexican paintings, 
and of the earliest Spanish historians. Valades says in the 220th page of his Rhetorica Christiana, “ Mechum in adulterio deprehensum 
impuné necari volebant, nec ullum gravius flagitium quam adulterium vindicabant. Ideo in adulterio deprehensus cum adultera absque 
misericordid, absque mor, ab omnibus lapidabatur.” The treatise of this author was printed in 1579, and dedicated to Gregory XIII. 

VOL. VIII. (2L) 

130 NOTES. 

“ Ahorcavan al que cometia el pecado nefando, y lo mismo al que tomava el habito de muger. 

“¢ Ahorcavan al medico 6 hechizera que dava bebidizos para hechar del vientre las criaturas, y lo mismo hacian 4 la 
prefiada si para este fin tomava algo. 

“ Desterravan, privavanlos de los bienes, y davan otros castigos recios a los papas 6 pontifices sumos, tomandolos 
con alguna muger. Y si acaso eran culpados en el pecado nefando los quemavan en algunas partes, y en otras los 
ahogavan, 6 de otra manera los matavan. 

Quanto a los Ladrones. 

“ Hacian esclavo al ladron si no habia gastado lo hurtado, y si lo habia gastado siendo cosa de valor, lo mataban. 

« Bl que en el mercado algo hurtava, era ley que luego publicamente alli en el mismo mercado lo matasen a palos. 

« Ahorcavan los que hurtaban cantidad de mazorcas de maiz, 6 arrancaban algunos maizales, excepto sino era de la 
primera ringlera que estaba junto al camino; porque desta los caminantes tenian licencia de tomar algunas mazorcas 
para su camino. . 

“Era ley, y con rigor guardada, que si alguno vendia por esclavo algun nifio perdido, que se hiciese esclavo al que 
lo vendia, y su hacienda se partiese en dos partes, la una era para el nifio, y la otra al que lo havia comprado, y si 
quizas lo avian vendido y eran muchos, 4 todos hacian esclavos. 

Quanto a lo de las Guerras. 

“ Quando algun pueblo se rebelaba, enviaban luego los Sefiores de los tres Reynos principales su ejercito, Tezcuco e 
Tlacupa secretamente 4 saber si aquella rebelion procedia de todo el pueblo, 6 solamente por mandado del sefior 6 
governador que lo regia. Si solo del sefior habia originado, proveian que fuesen capitanes y jueces con gente para 
prender 4 aquel sefior rebelde, y que hiciesen justicia del publicamente, y de los que con él culpados hallasen. Si la 
rebelion era causada tambien por todo el pueblo, embiabanles 4 requerir muchas veces que tornasen 4 la devocion y 
obediencia que tenian y fuesen subjectos y pagasen los tributos como de antes hacian. Los quales si pertinazes eran, 
enviabanseles ciertas armas y rodelas en sefial de amenazas y desafio, y luego apregonasen 4 fuego y sangre la guerra. 
Y esta suponia siempre tal condicion que en qualquiera tiempo y hora que saliesen de paz y tornasen la obediencia 
cesava la guerra. De creer es que se devia de dar alguna pena, puesto que no lo sabemos. 

“Bra ley que degollasen 4 los que en la guerra hacian algun dajfio 4 los enemigos sin licencia del capitan, 6 acometian 
antes de tiempo, 6 se apartavan de la bandera 6 capitania. 

“Tenia pena de muerte aquel que 4 otro quitava la presa en la guerra. 

“Tenia pena de muerte tambien, y de perdimiento de bienes y otras graves penas el sefior 6 principal que en algun 
baile, 6 fiesta, 6 guerra, sacaba alguna divisa, que fuesen como las armas 6 divisas de los seflores de Mexico, 6 de 
Tezcuco, 6de Tlacupa, sobre lo qual avia guerra algunas veces. 

“« Hacian pedazos y confiscaban todos los bienes al que era traidor, avisando 4 los enemigos en la guerra de lo que 
se trataba 6 platicaba en el real, y hacian esclavos 4 todos sus deudos y parientes. 

Las que siguen eran leyes diversas. 

“Tenian pena de muerte los jueces que hacian alguna relacion falsa al rey 6 seftor superior en algun pleyto; y asi 
mismo los jueces que sentenciaban a alguno injustamente. 

“ Ahorcavan y grandisimamente castigavan 4 los hijos que gastavan mal la hacienda que sus padres les habian 
dexado, 6 si destruian las armas, 6 joyas, 6 cosas sefialadas que uvieron de los padres. La misma pena tenian los 
que daban por tutores, si no davan buena cuenta 4 los hijos de los bienes del padre difunto. 

“Tenia pena de muerte el que quitava 6 apartava los mojones y terminos 6 sefiales de las tierras y heredades. 

“El modo que tenian de castigar 4 los hijos y hijas siendo mozos, quando salian viciosos y desobedientes y tra.- 
viesos, era trasquilarlos y traerlos maltratados, y punzarles las orejas y los muslos y los brazos con las puas 6 espinas 
de los maguelles. 

«“ Era cosa muy vedaday reprehendida y castigada el emborracharse los mancebos, ni beber vino hasta que Ilegasen 4 
cincuenta afios, y en algunas partes havia penas graves sefialadas. 

“ Hacian esclavo 4 quien vendia alguna tierra agena, 6 que tuviese depositada como en terceria, sin licencia de la 
justicia, 6 de quien podia darsela. 

NOTES. 131 

“Era ley que el esclavo que estaba preso y se soltava de la prision, y se iba 4 palacio, en entrando que entrase en 
el patio, era libre de la servidumbre, y como libre andava seguro. 

“Era costumbre que los hijos de los sefiores y hombres ricos en siendo de siete afios, poco mas 6 menos, entraban 
en los templos 4 servir 4 los dioses. Alli servian barriendo y haciendo fuego delante de los templos y salas y patios, 
y echavan los inciensos en los fuegos segun se acostumbrava, y servian 4 los sacerdotes. Y quando eran negligentes 
6 traviesos, 6 hacian alguna inobediencia, castigavanlos atandoles pies y manos, y punzavanlos los muslos, y los brazos, 
y los pechos, y hechabanlos 4 rodar por las gradas abajo de los templos pequefios. 

“En la ciudad de Mexico, y en la de Tezcuco, y en la de Tlacupa, avia tres consejos: el primero era consejo de 
las cosas de guerra: el segundo era donde habia quatro oidores para oir los pleytos de la gente comun: el tercero 
era donde se averiguavan las causas y pleytos que ocurrian entre sefiores y caballeros, y entre pueblos sobre sefiorios 
y terminos y jurisdicciones. Y este consejo en ciertas cosas sefialadas le dava parte al rey, que eran como casos 
reservados 4 aquellos tres reyes. 

Estas que se siguen son las leyes por las cuales condenavan & algun esclavo. 

“‘Hacian pedazos y perdia sus bienes el que era traidor, avisando 4 los enemigos en la guerra de lo que se deter- 
minaba en el real, y hacian esclavos 4 todos sus deudos. 

“ Hacian esclavo al que havia hecho algun hurto en cantidad, si aun no lo habia gastado. 

“‘ Era ley que si alguno vendia por esclavo algun nifio perdido, lo hacian esclavo, y 4 todos quantos en ello eran, 
aunque fuesen muchos. 

“Hacian esclavo al que vendia alguna tierra agena, 6 que tuviese depositada sin licencia, etc. 

“ En algunas partes habia ley que hiciesen esclavo al que hacia prefiada alguna esclava si acaecia morir del parto, 
6 si por causa del parto quedava lisiada. 

“ Hacian esclavos 4 los que hurtaban cantidad de mazorcas de mahiz en los mahizales de los templos é de los 
sefores. 

“Por otras causas tambien hacian esclavos, puesto que eran arbitrarias. Pero estas leyes ningun juez tenia poder 
para dispensar de ellas, sino en matando al que cometia los mismos delictos por no hacello esclavo. 

“Todas las leyes de suso puestas dice aquel religioso, que fue el que mas supo de la lengua Mexicana y mas la 
penetré como dije, que son todas verdad ; porque las sacé de un libro de pinturas muy autentico de la Nueva Espafia, 
que los Indios tenian con gran veneracion*, y era entre ellos de mucha autoridad. Y porque es verdad todo lo que 
aqui refirio, dijo que lo firmava de su nombre, y asi lo tengo como dije, firmado del mismo. Y parece tambien que 
muchas de las cosas arriba de otros religiosos de diversas ordenes y aun de seglares, por mi avidas, son con estas 
conformes.” 

The above laws, as it appears from the following passage of the 212th chapter of the Apologetic History of Las 
Casas, were not confined to the provinces of the Mexican empire, but were, with some slight modifications, the 

system of jurisprudence adopted throughout the whole of New Spain, which portion of the American continent it is 
probable was for many ages the centre of Judaism in the New World}. “ En toda la Nueva Espafia, en unas partes 
poco mas, y en otras poco menos, el govierno y las leyes quasi no diferian; por manera, que por lo que de unas partes 
dixeremos, y adonde tuvimos mayor noticia, se podra entender, y quiza seré mejor decirlo en comun y general- 
mente.” 

* Echevarria affirms, that the ritual and ceremonial laws of the Mexicans were contained in the Teoamoxtli, and that this collection 
of sacred paintings was preserved in the archives of Tezcuco until the arrival of the Spaniards in New Spain. It hence appears not 
improbable that the ecclesiastic to whom Las Casas here alludes might have seen that mysterious volume, and have extracted from thence 
some of the laws contained in this catalogue. 

+ Parece, falta ¢referidas.’ 

+ The similitude which some Spanish writers have thought they have discovered between the proper names Aztecas and Israelites, 
will not appear so fanciful, when it is recollected that the first syllable of the former term,—which is the appellative part of the name, the 
remaining portion being merely terminative, as in the words Tultecas, Cholultecas, and Mixtecas,— nearly resembles the first 
syllable of the Hebrew proper name >81t#, and that even if the appellative portion of the Mexican proper name had extended to the 
second syllable, the analogy could not have been preserved, since the Mexican language excludes from its alphabet the letters b, d, f, 

and r. 

132 NOTES. 

Las Casas, having completed his summary of the laws of New Spain, proceeds to take a brief survey of the laws 
and customs of the adjoining states of Verapaz, Guatemala, Nicaragua, and Yucatan, whence he passes to Peru, and 
gives an outline of the ancient history of that country, with which he acknowledges that he was but imperfectly 
acquainted, ascribing much of the ignorance that prevailed respecting the institutions of the Peruvians and the 
religion which they professed to the cupidity of the Spaniards ; who, when they plundered the Peruvian temples of their 
immense riches, so terrified the priests, the only enlightened class of the community, that they fled to the inaccessible 
range of the Andes, taking with them no inconsiderable share of the spoils, which their descendants continued to enjoy 
for many years after the conquest. The following were the laws of the Indians of Verapaz, a region known to the 
Mexicans by the name of Anaoac, and with which the Mexican merchants carried on a very extensive trade in the 
reign of Ahuitzotl, Montezuma’s predecessor on the throne. 

“ Tenian gran cuidado en estas provincias de la Verapaz en instruir y doctrinar los padres @ los hijos. Ensefia- 
vanles que fuesen devotos 4 los dioses, y que guardasen y cumpliesen lo que los sacerdotes y ministros de los templos 
de lo tocante 4 la religion 6 divino culto les dixesen. Y para que de esto fuesen mejor informados, y desde nifios la 
devocion y exercicio de la religion en si recibiesen, hacianlos conversar de dia y de noche en los templos. 

_“ Que honrasen a los padres y les fuesen obedientes. 

“‘ Que no tuviesen codicia de muchos bienes. 

“ Que no adulterasen con muger agena. 

“Que no fornicasen, ni llegasen 4 muger, sino 4 la que fuese suya. 

“ Que no mirasen 4las mugeres para codiciallas *, diciendo que no traspasasen umbral ageno. 

“Que si anduviesen de noche por el pueblo, que llevasen lumbre en la mano. 

“ Que siguiesen su camino derecho, que no bajasen de camino, ni subiesen tampoco del. 

“ Que 4 los ciegos no les pusiesen ofendiculo para que cayesen f. 

“« A los lisiados no escarneciesen y de los locos no se riesen, porque todo aquello era malo. 

“ Que trabajen y no estubiesen ociosos; y para esto desde nifios les enseflavan como havian de hacer las sementeras 
y como beneficiallas y cogellas. 

“‘ Instruianlos en como se havian de sacrificar con las navajas y sacar sangre de las lenguas {, de los molledos, brazos 

* This resembles the language of Christ in the twenty-seventh and twenty-eighth verses of the fifth chapter of St. Matthew, who there 
inculcates purity of thought as well as of action in the following forcible terms: “ Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, 
Thou shalt not commit adultery: But I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath committed adultery with 
her already in his heart.” It is, doubtless, surprising that this refinement on the Mosaic law should not have added greater efficacy to 
Christian morals; but it would be a mistake to suppose that the principle here advocated was unknown to the religions of antiquity, which 
however contented themselves with a different choice of terms to express the very same sentiments. If this truth seem to be opposed to the 
doctrines daily delivered from the pulpit, let those who doubt it refer to the peculiar tenets of the Pythagorean school, and they will confess 
that Solomon was right, when he declared there was nothing mew under the sun; but if mere phraseology is a matter of such weight in their 
estimation, they will feel gratified at learning, on the high authority of Sahagun, that to commit adultery with alook, was a crime which the 
Mexican laws occasionally punished with death; and that the infamy of that act was perpetuated to distant ages by a proverb which the same 
learned author takes occasion to notice in the following extremely curious passage of the twenty-second chapter of the sixth book of his 
History of New Spain. “ No mires con curiosidad el gesto y disposicion de la gente principal, mayormente de las mugeres, especialmente 
de las casadas, porque dice el refran, que el que curiosamente mira 4 la muger, adulétera con la vista, y aun algunos fueron premiados con 
pena de muerte por esta causa.” “ Do not look inquisitively at the features and deportment of persons of superior rank, especially of the 
women, particularly of the married women; for the proverb says, that he who looks inquisitively at a woman commits adultery with her 
with a look, and some have even been punished with death on that very account.” 

+ It is said in the fourteenth verse of the nineteenth chapter of Leviticus, ‘‘ Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block 
before the blind, but shalt fear thy God: [I am the Lord.” 

{ The interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus affirms, in the 178th page of the sixth volume of this work, that Quecalcoatle taught men to 
propitiate the divine anger by making voluntary offerings of their own blood; and that mysterious personage appears to be practising 
the precept which he inculcated, in the fourth page of the Codex Borgianus, where he is represented surrounded by his four disciples 
with a stream of blood issuing from a self-inflicted wound in the lower part of his body. The same interpreter obscurely intimates, 
in the 208th page of the volume referred to, that Quecalcoatle carried the doctrine of propitiation and atonement by means of 
human blood to such a length as himself to die upon a cross for the sins of mankind; which event seems also plainly alluded to 
in the fourth and seventy-fifth pages of the Codex Borgianus. -The sins which Quecalcoatle chiefly condemned were those of the flesh, for 
which he thought the flesh ought to suffer, by voluntarily enduring the most exquisite tortures; this doctrine, on which Confession was 
speedily engrafted, led the Mexicans to invent many extraordinary kinds of penance, some of which will be noticed in the sequel. It deserves, 

NOTES. 133 

y muslos, y de las partes secretas. Amonestavanlos frequentes veces, que no pecasen, y entendian por esto que no se 
maculasen con pecados de la carne principalmente * 

however, to be remarked, that in giving the precedency to that class of sins, the Mexicans closely imitated the Jews ; since it was a maxim of 
the jurisprudence of other more enlightened nations, not to outrage public decency by taking cognizance of every species of immorality that 
might come under public notice; and their jurists justified the principle upon which this exception was founded, by observing that where 
there was no complaint, the law could not presume the existence of znjwry; and where there was no injury, neither could it assume the exist- 
ence of wrong; and where there was no wrong, there could be no need of legal redress. This, it may be contended, was a mere fiction of law, 
agreeable to the rules of some antiquated code fitted for the manners of other times: but to this objection we shall only reply, that whether 
it was a fiction founded on expediency, or a genuine expression of sentiment, it is of little importance to the present subject to enquire. 
Before noticing the extraordinary austerities practised by the Mexicans, we shall transcribe a passage from a valuable inedited MS. 
preserved in the library of the Royal Academy of History at Madrid, entitled Miscellanea dela Nueva Espafia ; from which it will appear, 
that the part of the body from which the Mexicans drew an offering of blood, was principally determined by the nature of the sin com- 
mitted, or which the party imagined they were likely to commit : “ Sacabanse sangre de la lengua, si habian ofendido con ella hablando, 
y de los parpados de los ojos por haber mirado', y de los brazos por haber pecado de floxedad, de las piernas, de los muslos, de las orejas y 
narices, segun las culpas en que habian errado y caido, disculpandose con el demonio, y al cabo le ofrecian el corazon por lo mejor de su 
cuerpo, que no tenian otra cosa que le dar, prometiendo darle tantos corazones de hombres y de nifios para aplacar la ira de sus dioses, 
6 para alcanzar y conseguir otras pretensiones que deseaban, y esto les servia de confesion vocal para con el perverso enemigo del genero 
humano.” “They drew blood from their tongue, if they had offended with it in speaking; and from their eyelids, if they had offended in 
looking; and from their arms, if they had sinned through lustful desire; from their legs, thighs, ears and noses, according to the faults which 
they had committed, reconciling themselves in this manner with the devil; and at last they offered him their hearts, as the best part of their 
body, having nothing more to give him, promising to give him so many hearts of men and children in order to appease the anger of their 
gods, orto procure and obtain any other object of their desires; and this served them as oral confession with the perverse enemy of the human 
race.” Those who consider that one of the gravest charges brought against the religion of the ancients by the early fathers was, that it con- 
nived at licentiousness of morals, and encouraged profligacy of every description, by enlisting even deities on the side-adverse to virtue,— 
will feel surprised at learning from the following passage of the twenty-sixth chapter of the ninth book of Torquemada’s Indian Monarchy, 
on what zew grounds the Spanish monks of the sixteenth century, who first visited America, ascribed the temperance, sobriety and chas- 
tity inculcated by the religion of the Mexicans to the devil, who, as they chose to maintain, carried his ambition to rival and equal God 
to such a height, as even to enjoin the practice of virtue to mankind; a notion which, however extravagant, absurd and blasphemous, 
did away with the necessity of their recognising in the horrid superstitions of the Mexicans the dark features of Judaism, and excused 
them from bowing the knee at the bloody shrine of the Mexican Jehovah. “ De los sacerdotes de Etiopia, dice San Augustin (tratando 
de la peregrinacion que hizo por aquellas regiones, en uno de los sermones 4 los monges del yermo) estas formales palabras: Ya era obispo 
Hiponense, y fuime con algunos siervos de Jesu-Christo 4 Etiopia, 4 predicarles su santa lei y evangelio, y vimos alli muchos hombres y 
mugeres que no tenian cabeza, sino los qjos en los pechos, entre los quales vimos, que los sacerdotes eran casados ; pero de tanta abstinencia, 
que jamas, sino era una vez en el afio, conversaban con sus mugeres, el qual dia se abstenian de poner las manos en ningun sacrificio. 
Vimos mas (dice luego) en las partes mas bajas de esta region, otros hombres, que no tenian mas de un ojo en la frente, cuios sacerdotes 
huian toda conversacion de hombres, y se abstenian de todos los malos deseos y apetitos de la carne, y tan abstinentes, que la semana 
que les cabia de sacrificar y servir sus templos, no comian, contentandose solo con beber una vez al dia una metreta de agua. Y mas 
adelante afiade: O miseria grande de los Christianos! Veis aqui que los paganos se hacen doctores y maestros de los fieles, y-los peca~ 
dores y las mugeres rameras les preceden en el reino de Dios. Estas son palabras de este excelentisimo doctor. Esta limpieza, que 
sus sucios ministros queria que huviese el demonio, es la que Dios ha querido y quiere, que tengan sus ministros y sacerdotes, y la 
que en la lei antigua pedia 4 los que eran de su casa y templo; y asi dijo en el Levitico (hablando del sacerdote) que fuese virgen la 
que avia de tomar por esposa, no viuda, 6 publica ramera, 6 repudiada. Pero que pretende en esto Dios? No mas (segun dice Inno- 
cencio, Papa primero de este nombre) sino que se entienda, que le permitia aquello solo, sin lo qual no podia pasar para dexar heredero 
en su oficio sacerdotal, y que era con aquella limitacion, para dar 4 entender que si pudiera seguirse de otra manera, aun aquello no le 
concediera, por la limpieza que pretende en sus ministros. Y quando los sacerdotes avian de ocuparse en el ministerio de su semana, se 
abstenian de todo acto carnal licito ; y para esto avia casas y aposentos donde los dichos ministros asistian el tiempo dicho de su adminis- 
tracion. Y para que se entienda lo mucho que queria que sus sacerdotes fuesen castos y limpios, se debe notar aquella gravisima y 
rigurosisima lei, que estaba divulgada contra las hijas de los sacerdotes, la qual era: si la hija de algun sacerdote fuere hallada aver per- 
dido secretamente su pureza y virginidad, y huviere manchado con esta macula la casa de su padre, sea quemada en llamas de fuego. De 
donde es fuerza colegir la grande limpieza y castidad que queria que tuviesen sus sacerdotes ; porque si 4 la hija incasta y flaca mandaba 
quemar porque pecé, quanto con mayor rigor y castigo debia de ser castigado el padre, que siendo ministro de Dios, y sacerdote para 

* Balboa, speaking of the Indians of some of the provinces of Peru, says, “ Quemavan la ropa que tenian vestida quando pecaron,” 
which reminds us of the language of St. Jude in the twenty-third verse of his General Epistle. 

1 This passage singularly confirms what Sahagun says of the belief of the Mexicans that the guilt of adultery might be incurred even 
by a look, which, it need scarcely be observed, was a Gospel precept likewise. 

VOL, VIII. Ie | 

134. NOTES. 

“Y es aqui de saber, que tenian por grave pecado el de la sodomia como abajo dirémos, y comunmente los padres lo 
aborrecian y prohibian 4 los hijos. Pero por causa de que fuesen instruidos en la religion, mandavanles dormir en los 

ofrecerle sus sacrificios, pecaba? No salian de esta obligacion los sacerdotes Indios de esta Nueva Espafia, los quales queria el 
demonio, que fuesen castos ; y asi digo, que eran tan continentes como hemos visto y dicho de ellos en muchos lugares, en especial de los 
sumos sacerdotes y pontifices mayores, y los dos sacerdotes 6 monjes constituidos 4 la diosa Cinteutl; los quales avian de aver sido 
casados, pero no quando servian el oficio de sacerdote; porque en aquel tiempo avian de guardar castidad perpetua € inviolable. De 
los ministros y capellanes de los templos de Tehuacan sabemos, que si cometian este pecado (como se supiese) era por él muerto 4 
palos, y entregado a la gente popular de noche, para que en él laexecutasen. Y de las mugeres que servian en los templos, hemos dicho 
ser continentisimas, las quales guardaban perpetua castidad y virginidad sin manchar en nada su pureza. Y era tanto lo que temian caer 
en esta culpa, que entendian si la cometian, aver de ser rigurosamente por los dioses castigadas, mayormente, si se sabia, morian por ella. 
De este rigor se puede colegir el cuidado con que vivian los sacerdotes, y lo mucho que cuidaban de vivir castamente, por tener entendido 
ser aquella la voluntad de sus falsos dioses, y creer que se ofendian gravemente con lo contrario. Y de aqui queda sabido, como el de- 
monio, no por ser limpio, sino por imitar en alguna manera G Dios en su limpieza, ha querido que sus manistros lo sean, y se abstengan de 
semejantes actos en las cosas posibles ; queriendo el demonio que los de su falsa lei y seta hiciesen esta inferencia—la castidad es buena y 
nuestro Dios nos la ensefia y manda que seamos castos; luego bueno es él. Y no advertian estos desventurados ciegos, que no porque él es 
bueno, mandaba un acto de virtud tan heroico, sino que por ser el hecho en si bueno, es apetecible, y que la razon natural inclina al 
hombre & apetecer aquello que es mas conforme 4 la rectitud de la naturaleza; y asi, no porque el demonio fuese bueno (que no 
lo es) era bueno el acto, sino por ser bueno el acto y hecho, parecia bueno el que lo mandaba.” The following account of the voluntary 
penance practised by the Mexicans, and the Indians of some other provinces of New Spain, is taken from the hundred-and-seventy- 
fourth chapter of the Historia Apologetica of Las Casas; and it deserves to be remarked, that the mortification of the flesh was the 
principal object of the cruel austerities thus described by the pen of that prelate: ‘ Pues aun no es acabado lo que hay que 
decir de ayunos y penitencia y devocion y hervor para con sus dioses, en que aquellos infieles que habemos mucho menospreciado, 
nos han hecho mil ventajas. Los vecinos de las ciudades de Teuacan, Cuzcatlan, y Teutlitlan, especialmente los sacerdotes de ellos 
y verdugos de si mismos tenian de costumbre de se sacrificar muchas veces y de muchas partes. Los dias de las fiestas hacian 
en lo alto de las orejas con una navaja de piedra negra de que ya hemos hablado, un agujero por el qual metian y sacaban una cafia 
tan gruesa como el dedo de la mano, y tan larga como un brazo. Y por las lenguas metian y sacaban unas pajas agujereando las 
lenguas por medio y atravesandolas. Otros con las puntas de maguey se punzaban y pasaban; y todo lo que de esto salia ensangrentado 
ofrecian 4 su Dios poniendoselo delante. En estas ciudades que eran de frontera que por muchas partes tenian guerra, sacrificaban los 
esclavos. Hacian en si mismo un sacrificio horrendo y nunca antes jamas imaginado. -Cortaban y hendian su miembro genital entre 
cuero y carne, y hacian tan grande abertura que por ella pasaba una soga tan gruesa como el brazo, y de largo segun la devocion y 
esfuerzo del penitente: algunas veces era de diez brazas, otras de quince, y otras de veinte; y si alguno desmayaba con la mucha sangre y 
con el horrible dolor, decian, que procedia por haber tocado 4 muger, porque los que 4 este sacrificio tan costoso y doloroso hacian, eran 
todos mancebos por casar. No era maravilla que desmayasen y aun que muriesen, pues por una sangria que es una picadura de una 
lanceta muy sotil, muchos desmayan; y de la circuncision que mucho era menos que aquello, los hijos de Jacob mataron 4 los varones 
de la ciudad de Sichen, y quasi la asolaron por no poderse defender tantos de tan pocos, por el grandisimo dolor con que estaban por 
haberse poco antes circuncidado!: quanto mas estos que padecian seis veces doblado dolor y derramaban veinte veces mas sangre. La 
otra gente popular solo se sacrificaba de las orejas y de los brazos y del pico de la lengua, de donde sacaban unas gotas de sangre que 
ofrecian, y los que eran mas devotos se precian en traer, hombres y mugeres, las lenguas y las orejas mas arpadas; y hoy dia los vemos de 
aquellos harto sefialados. Ayunaban los ministros de los templos sus quaresmas y todos los de sus casas cada afio sus ochenta dias, y 
tambien ayunaban quaresmas voluntarias antes de las fiestas, unas de diez dias, y otras de veinte, y otras de quarenta, y otras de ochenta ; 
comiendo solo pan y sal y agua, de que muchos infermaban. Al pueblo comun y 4 las veces 4 los muchachos mandaban los sacerdotes 
que ayunasen 4 dos y 4 quatro y 4 cinco dias, y hasta diez dias el pueblo ayunaba. Estos ayunos no eran de una manera en toda la 
tierra, sino que cada provincia tenia su modo y costumbre y cerimonias y rigor segun sus devociones diversas de 4 sus dioses ayunar.” 
Las Casas again reverts to the religious austerities of the Mexicans, in the hundred-and-eighty-ninth chapter of his Historia Apologetica, 
and, professing it to be his opinion that no nation ever equalled them in the practice of superstitious rites and ceremonies, corroborates in the 

‘ The history alluded to occurs in the thirty-fourth chapter of Genesis, and involves in an equal degree of criminality two of the Hebrew 
patriarchs, Simeon and Levi; upon both of whom Jacob, when dying, pronounced the following malediction: “Simeon and Levi are 
brethren ; instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. O my soul! come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honour, 
be not thou united! for in their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will they digged down a wall. Cursed be their anger, for it was 
fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.” Since it would be absurd to imagine 
that Jacob could here have intended to predict the future elevation of the tribe of Levi to the sacerdotal dignity, and the consequent disper- 
sion of the Levites and their possessions throughout those of the other tribes, we are under the necessity of supposing, that the portion of 
this prophecy which related to the dispersion of the tribe of Levy has never been accomplished, and that when he foretold, in the tenth verse 
of the same chapter of Genesis, the advent of the Messiah, and that the sceptre should not depart from Judah until Shiloh came, his lan- 
guage assumed a truer tone of inspiration. 

NOTES. 135 

templos donde los mozos mayores en aquel vicio 4 los nifios corrompian. Y despues salidos de alli mal acostum- 
brados, dificil era librallos de aquel vicio. Por esta causa eran los padres muy solicitos de casallos quan presto 
podian, por los apartar de aquella corrupcion vilissima, aunque casallos muchachos contra su voluntad y forzados, y 
solamente por aquel respeto lo hacian. La razon es porque tenian de costumbre de nunca casar los hijos hasta que 
pasaban de treinta afios arriba. Y asi dicen los ancianos que sus padres les decian, que en los tiempos que los 
muchachos engendrasen, y las mozas pariesen, tuviesen por cierto que estava cerca la fin del mundo, y que entonces 
vendrian otras gentes mejores que ellos, que les dirian lo que mas les cumplia, y que aquellas durarian hasta que se 
acabase el mundo. Todo esto asi escudrifiando nuestros religiosos de Santo Domingo, que mas que ningunos otros y 
mejor diré que ninguno otro porque alli ninguno ha entrado sino ellos, estan en la lengua de aquellas gentes indus- 

triados, y ellos me lo han dado por escrito.” 
Las Casas remarks in a succeeding chapter of his Historia Apologetica, that the Indians of Verapaz kept the greater 

portion of the Ten Commandments. He observes, however, that they erred in the first, and expresses himself of the 

rest in the following terms :— 
“ Quanto al segundo y tercero mandamientos ninguna pena ponian: lo. uno porque no tenian juramentos quanto al 
segundo, ni dias feriados quanto al tercero, porque aunque se juntavan todos 4 celebrar sus fiestas, pero no prohibian 

que no trabajasen * en ellas. 
“ Quanto al quarto, guardavanlo estrechamente como nosotros, porque los padres con mucha diligencia ensefiavan y 

exortavan los hijos, 4 que honrasen y obedeciesen y sirviesen los padres, como ya se vido, y lo mismo @ sus sefiores y 
principales. Y 4 los que se ensobervecian contra los sefiores, aspirando al seforio, 6 impidiendo a los vasallos que 
no les obedeciesen, 6 llevasenlos iejos de manera que acudir con tributos y el servicio que devian al sefior no 
pudiesen, luego los ahorcavan. Cerca del quinto mandamiento que prohibe matar ni hacer injuria y agravio 4 otro, 
guardavanlo como nosotros. Si alguno matava 4 otro, los que lo sabian luego lo denunciavan al sefior, el qual 

following terms his previous relation. “Que se puede comparar al dolor y tormento y amarguras que aquellos sufrian, sacandose trescientos 
y cuatrocientos palos por las lenguas? y este tormento sufrian cantando como arriba referimos. El sacrificio que hacian en Teuacan y Cuzcatlan 
y otros pueblos de que arriba mencion hecimos, hendiendo y cortandose el miembro genital entre cuero y carne, y haciendo tan grande la 
abertura, que pasaban por ella una soga tan gruesa como el brazo, y de diez y quince y veinte brazas, segun la devocion era mayor 6 menor 
del que de aquella manera se sacrificaba, con que dolores ni con muerte que en un credo se acaba, lo podemos cotejar? Porque si algunos 
se daban voluntariamente con la muerte ser sacrificados, aquel postrer tormento en breve tiempo se pasaba, aunque muriesen quemados, 
pero aquestos, principalmente los que eran sacerdotes, que toda su yida en muchas festividades aquel martirio sostubiesen, grandisima era de 
los otros el morir una vez la ventaja que ganaba. Muchos habria en el mundo, si contra su voluntad 4 padecer aquel tan luengo dolor y 
tantas veces fuesen forzados, que eligirian mas morir qualquiera muerte violenta siendo breve y arrebatada, que sufrir no digo toda la vida, | 
pero ni un afio pena tan dolorosa y tan horrenda. Aunque los que se castraban por honor y en las fiestas de la diosa Sinia padecian gran 
dolor, no merecen ser comparados 4 estos, porque aquellos no lo hacian sino quando eran llenos de furor y arrebatados del demonio, y por 
consiguiente no estaban en su libre albedrio como parecia arriba. Pero estos no arrebatados de furor sino estando en su seso y voluntaria- 
mente lo hacian. Los ayunos y abstinencias no solo del comer pero del dormir que hacian, estando sin pegar los ojos ni echarse, sino 
sentados y arrimados sesenta dias, y sacandose cada hora con aquellas puas de las orejas y de otra parte mucha sangre, 4 que tormento sino 
4 los infernales pueden ser comparados? Quedese tambien por decir con otros particularidades, millares de pajas gruesas como el dedo 
que por las lenguas se metian y sacaban: las quales aunque no eran tantos tormentos como los dichos, todavia eran muy dolorosas, y 
pocas 6 ningunas naciones hubo en el mundo, que tal.sacrificio inventasen y pasasen. Y por tanto bien podemos en estos tres 6 quatro 
postreros sacrificios quitar la corona, si alguna tubieran, de todas las gentes supersticiosas del mundo pasadas, y ponersela sin engafio ni 
agravio de ninguna 4 las de la Nueva Espafia. Pues si ofrecer & Dios, 6 4 los dioses verdaderos 6 falsos, pero por verdaderos estimados, 
sacrificio mas precioso y mas costoso y doloroso, voluntario, arguye tener mas noble y mas digno concepto natural y estimacion y conoci- 
miento de la excelencia y merecimientos de Dios, y por consiguiente mejor discurso y juicio de razon, y mas claro y desplegado entendi- 
miento, y las gentes de la Nueva Espafia excedieron 4 todas las otras naciones del mundo en ofrecer 4 sus dioses sacrificios tan costosos y 
dolorosos, y por eso mas preciosos aunque horrendos, luego tambien las excedieron en el concepto, estimacion y conocimiento natural de 
Dios, y asi en tener mas desplegado y claro entendimiento y mejor juicio y discurso natural de razon.” 

* Oviedo says, that the Indians of Nicaragua refrained from all work on the days dedicated to religious festivals, and the same custom 
existed amongst the Peruvians, of whose sabbaths we shall make some mention in a succeeding note, merely observing that it is very pro- 
bable that the sabbath of the seventh day was known in some parts of America; since Boturini informs us that the Indians of Chiapa 
were acquainted with a week of seven days. If, however, the fact were otherwise, it should still be recollected that, although the Pharisees, 
in the age of Christ, were extremely particular about the due observance of the sabbath, the Jews are accused in various passages of the 
Old Testament of great indifference to their new moons and sabbaths, and this indifference would have been likely to lead to the total 

oblivion of that institution in another hemisphere. 

136 NOTES. 

preguntava con diligencia quien era el muerto y el matador y la causa, y quien se lo havia mandado, y si tuvo com- 
pafieros en ello. Lo qual todo averiguado, embiaba sus executores de justicia y davanle garrote y asi moria por ello; 
y pocas dilaciones y gastos de letrados y procuradores eran necesarios hacerse. Comun cosa era entre algunos 
Indios vender unos 4 otros. El] que mas podia, 6 mas ruindades sabia y astucia tenia, vendia 4 los otros y hallava 
quien se lo comprase. Pero tenian estos plagiarios graves penas™ por las leyes; averiguado que alguno havia 
vendido 4 otro sin dilacion mandavan darle garrote al plagiario vendedor. Allende la muerte que le davan, le 
vendian los hijos y la muger.{ Del precio que por ellos se sacava, llevava el fisco y camara del sefior cierta parte, y 
todo lo demas se gastava en comida y bebida para todo el pueblo { que para este regocijo se convidava y juntava. 

“‘ Quando rifendo unos con otros se herian, que pocas veces acaecia, en siendo avisado el sefior por las quejas de 
los parientes del herido, embiava un gueso 6 una hacha, 6 otra cosa al heridor, el qual entendido que lo sabia, 
embiabale rogadores que lo perdonase, poniendo las excusas que podia, para hacer mas leve y aliviado el caso. El 
seflor mostrava mucho enojo, y disimulava el delicto, hasta que lo sentenciava en que pagase cierta pena, como 
ciertas plumas, cierto cacao, 6 ciertas mantas, en que le condenava, lo qual todo aplicava para el fisco y su camara. 

“ El que matava, 6 heria, 6 hacia otro algun dafio 4 su esclavo 6 esclava, ninguna pena tenia; porque decian que sus 
esclavos eran su hacienda y su caudal. ; ; 

“El que matava esclavo ageno, comunmente se lo mandavan pagar, y los parientes del matador echavan entre si la 
paga. 

“ E] que matava hombre libre, no podia por alguna via escapar de muerte, sino que sin dilacion, era 6 ahorcado 6 
dado garrote, que segun tengo entendido era el mas comun genero de muerte que se dava 4 los criminosos que la 
merecian. 

“ El que matava 4 su muger, 6 la muger al marido, eran ahorcados por ello. 

“En lo tocante al sexto mandamiento tenian lo siguiente. Deste mandamiento tenian tanta noticia las gentes de 
aquella tierra, que quando decian ‘pecado’ sin aditamento, entendian por el pecado de la carne, y el dela fornicacion 
mayormente, puesto que tambien usaban este vocablo ‘pecado’ por los otros pecados de qualquiera especie; pero 
antonomastice, que es decir por excelencia, por pecado|| entendian el de la carne como es dicho. 

“« El mancebo que fornicava con alguna doncella, no le davan otra pena, sino compelerle 4 que la tomase por muger{. 

* The Jews would have felt inclined to punish this crime with extreme severity, from the recollection of the history of Joseph, and 
the cruel manner in which his brothers sold him to the Ishmaelites, as recorded in the thirty-seventh chapter of Genesis. We accordingly 
learn from the following ordinance of the twenty-first chapter of Exodus, that the Jews punished man-stealing with death: “ And he that 
stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall swre/y be put to death.” The Indians attaching, as it would appear, 
an emphatic signification to the expression ‘surely,’ in the above law, and acting in conformity with the vindictive spirit of the Hebrew 
code, commanded the wife and the children of the guilty party to be sold, in addition to the punishment of strangling, to which the real delin- 
quent was himself sentenced. 

+ An instance of a woman and her children being first stoned, and afterwards burned, for the transgression of her husband, will be 
found in the twenty-fifth verse of the seventh chapter of the Book of Joshua. 

{ This was by way of interesting the principal inhabitants of a town in the detection and punishment of man-stealers: the rites for the 
expiation of uncertain murder, prescribed by Moses in the twenty-first chapter of Deuteronomy, seem also to have been instituted with 
the view of making the preservation of the laws, in the cases of injury done to individuals, a matter of public concern. 

§ The Hebrew law, both in the impunity which it accorded to the crime of murder when the individual killed was only a slave, and in 
the plea with which it justified such impunity when death followed beating after an interval of two days, bears a striking resemblance 
to the above Indian law; as the perusal of the following enactment of the twenty-first chapter of Exodus will more fully show: “ And if 
aman smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die under his hand, he shall be surely punished. Notwithstanding, 2f he continue 
a day or two, he shall not be punished, for he ts hts money.” Reason and humanity have in every age alike condemned cruelty towards 
men or animals: but were that unfortunately not the case, where would be the utility of putting the Bible into the hands of the West 
India planters when it is found to contain such a doctrine? 

|| Las Casas means to say, that the Indians of Verapaz marked their abhorrence of sensual sins by applying to them the epithet of sin 
in an exclusive or transcendent sense, as if other sins compared with that particular class hardly deserved the name of sins. This, we must 
observe, was a peculiar feature of the Jewish religion, which affected a purity of morals that but ill contrasted with the manners of the 
Jews, who, even taking it for granted that they had the best code of laws in the world, were at the same time confessedly the worst 
people on the face of the earth. 

q This was in exact conformity with the Hebrew law, as we learn from the following ordinance of the twenty-second chapter of Ex- 
odus, by which it is evident that it was a Hebrew custom for the husband to give the parents of the woman a marriage dowry; and 

NOTES. 137 

Si la doncella estava desposada con otro, no la tomava su esposof, ni la via mas, sino pedia que le restituyesen su dote, 
6 arras 6 precio que avia dado; el qual pagava él que avia corrompido y adulterado la doncella, dando al padre y 
4 la madre de ella. 

“ El que cometia fornicacion con viuda y con esclava, hacianle pagar luego algunas veces sesenta plumas {, otras 
veces ciento, 6 otras cosas semejantes. 

“ E] que adulterava con muger casada, le davan la misma pena de las cien plumas; pero si lo tenia de costumbre, 4 
ambos 4 dos ahogavan en pena. 

“ El mozo, libre 6 esclavo, que se atrevia 4 pecar con la seflora, muger del seftor, era luego ahogado; y sino, vendido 
para ser sacrificado en sus fiestas. 

« Si esclavo mozo, casado 6 soltero, pecava con muger esclava dentro de casa, llevavanla luego al cabo del pueblo, 
y alli la matavan, quebrandole la cabeza con dos piedras, 6 hincandole un palo por la garganta, 6 dandole garrote ; y lo 
mismo hacian 4 él, 6 para sacrificar lo vendian. 

“ Si hombre casado cometia adulterio con doncella, sus parientes de ella lo callavan, encubriendo el pecado, porque 
no se supiese, y la hija perdiese casamiento; pero si lo denunciavan, mandavanle pagar sesenta plumas 6 ciento. 

«“ Si casado pecava con viuda 6 con casada, castigavanle una y dos veces; y si muchas lo vian perseverar en pe- 
cado, atavanles 4 ambos las manos atras en alto, que no Ilegavan al suelo, y quemavan debajo de ellos una yerva, que 
llamavan tabacoyay, que debia ser hedionda, y davanles humo 4 narices§ y fuego buen rato, y despues dexabanlos ir, 
amonestandolos que se enmendasen. 

« Esta misma pena se dava 4 todos los casados que pecavan como se ha dicho atras, puesto que no siempre; y si 
otra vez despues de asi castigados, tornavan al pecado, matavanlos de la manera dicha delante toda la gente. 

« Algunas veces dicen los Indios, que los que eran buenos hombres y pacientes, no decian al sefior el pecado de su 
muger; sino davanle un paxaro de los que ellos sacrificavan, y decian 4 su muger y al adultero que sacrificasen y se 
confesasen ||, 4 la manera que ellos se confesavan. Y con este sacrificio y confesion se contentavan como abaxo se diré, 

the text declares that this was also an Indian usage. ‘If a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely 
endow her to be his wife. If her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins.” 

4- Thus we read in the first chapter of St. Matthew, that Joseph, to whom the Virgin Mary was espoused, discovering that she was 
pregnant before they came together, resolved, in conformity with the manners of his countrymen, to repudiate her; and was only dis- 
suaded from his purpose of putting her away privily, by an angel appearing to him in a dream, and assuring him that she was with child 
by the Holy Ghost. 

{ The feathers, which are here said to have been imposed as a fine for the above offences, were of the rarest and most valuable descrip- 
tion, and were procured from a bird which, by the laws of Verapaz, it was death to kill, in consequence of the value which the Indians set 
upon its plumage, which formed an article of commerce between them and the adjoining provinces. ‘The Mexicans, it may be observed, 
employed feathers in those works of art to which the Spaniards gave the name of paintings. Sahagun bestows the appellation of Mosaic 
work on this art of painting with feathers, peculiar, at the time of its discovery, to the New World, but which there is reason to suppose 
the Phcenicians were acquainted with many ages before the Christian era. 

§ There is a passage in the Old Testament, in which the Jews are compared by God to smoke ascending into his nostrils. ‘This was 
doubtless an emphatic mode of expressing the extreme abomination which he felt for their sins; but the simile recurred to would lead one 
to suppose that inhaling smoke of a noxious quality was a punishment known to the Jews as well as to the Mexicans. There are some 
other passages likewise in the Pentateuch and the Book of Joshua, which prove that the Jews were accustomed, like the Mexicans, to 
punish offenders by running thorns into their body, and putting out their eyes; we shall here only refer to one which occurs in the 
fifty-fifth verse of the thirty-third chapter of Numbers, and which alludes to this-cruel and barbarous custom: “ But if ye will not drive 
out the inhabitants of the land from before you, then it shall come to pass that those which ye let remain of them shall be pricks in your 
eyes, and thorns in your sides, and shall vex you in the land wherein ye dwell.” 

|| [tis very deserving of notice, that confession and a sacrifice of atonement were strictly enjoined on the Jews, who were conscious of having 
committed sin; and it is a singular coincidence, that this injunction should be contained in the following passage of the fifth chapter of 
Numbers, which principally treats of the mode of convicting a woman accused of adultery, by compelling her to drink the bitter water that 
caused the curse: “ And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, When a man or woman shall commit any 
sin that men commit, to do a trespass against the Lord, and that person be guilty; then they shall confess their sin which they have 
done: and he shall recompense his trespass with the principal thereof, and add unto it the fifth part thereof, and give it unto him against 
whom he hath trespassed. But if the man have no kinsman to recompense the trespass unto, let the trespass be recompensed unto the 
Lord, even to the priest; beside the ram of the atonement, whereby an atonement shall be made for him.” We may reasonably suppose, 
that half the offerings represented in the Mexican paintings were trespass offerings, or sacrifices of atonement for the commission of sins ; 
since that unequivocal feature of Judaism was strongly developed in the religion of the Mexicans, which enjoined frequent sacrifices of 

VOL. VIII. G@2eNe) 

138 NOTES. 

y no pedian de su injuria otra venganza; y 4 todos los que con esta satisfaccion disimulavan su afrenta, eran tenidos 
por hombres virtwosos * y humanos. 

“ Cerca del pecado nefando, lo que hay que con verdad decir es, que nunca se vido entre aquellas gentes, antes se 
tubo por grande y abominable pecado, hasta que les aparecio un demonio en figura de Indio llamado Cu, y en otra 
lengua Chin, y en otras Cavil y Maran, que los indujo 4 que lo cometiesen, como él lo cometio con otro demonio. Y dé 
aqui vino 4 que no le tubieron algunos de ellos por pecado {, diciendo que pues aquel dios 6 diablo lo cometia y lo 
persuadio, que no debia ser pecado: de alli vino que daban algunos padres 4 los que eran mozos un nifo para que lo 
tubiesen por muger, y si algun otro Ilegaba al nifio, selo mandaban pagar como hacen cerca de las mugeres al que vio- 
laba muger agena. Con toda esta corrupcion, si alguno forzaba 4 algun muchacho resistiendolo él, lo castigaban con la 
pena del que forzaba muger; y lo que mas es, que todos los viejos y viejas reprehendian y refiian con los muchachos, 
porque consentian en si aquellos malos actos que eran gran pecado, y que se guardasen de el, porque se moririan los 
que tal sufriesen y cometiesen. Finalmente, siempre habia de ellos quien murmuraban del y lo afeaban y abominaban. 
Y quando leyeren los lectores esto, acuerdense de leer luego lo que en el capitulo — dexamos escrito de los Franceses, 
y de los Griegos, grandes philosophos, y de los Emperadores Romanos, tan prudentes y poderosos, porque no hagan 
tantos milagros destas gentes {. 

“ Entre otras costumbres que estos tenian buenas y malas, usaban de una buena y otra mala; pero la mala pervertia 
6 destruia la buena. La buena era que cada uno que caia malo, luego se confesaba sus pecados, diciendolos al me- 
dico que lo curaba, 6 al sacerdote 6 hechizero, que contaba para sus supersticiones los dias como se dixo arriba: 6 los 

atonement, because that description of offerings was to be eaten by the priests, as expressly commanded in the seventh verse of the seventh 
chapter of Leviticus. With respect to the Hebrew mode of trial for adultery, those who will take the trouble of referring to the eighty- 
seventh page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present volume, will perceive what strong reasons there are for supposing that it 
was known by tradition at least to the Indians who peopled New Granada. 

* That the same custom existed amongst the Jews, may be inferred from the following passage of the first chapter of the Gospel of 
St. Matthew: “ Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came 
together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost. Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a 
public example, was minded to put her away privily.” 

4 Pedro de Castafieda, an early Spanish missionary, says, in a manuscript account of the Indians of Culiacan, a province situated two 
hundred and ten leagues to the north-west of Mexico, ‘Estos idolatraban y hacian presentes 4 el demonio de sus haberes y riquezas, que 
era ropa y turquesas: no comian carne humana ni la sacrificaban: habia entre ellos hombres que se casaban con otros hombres.” ‘The 
author of the continuation of Morfis’ inedited history of the province of Texas,—a vast tract of territory situated to the north-east of 
Mexico, and contiguous to Louisiana,—says the same of the Indians inhabiting that district; and the same thing is stated by other Spa- 
nish authors of the Indians of Florida. 

+ It has been a matter of dispute, whether, in the no less true than beautiful lines, — 

“ He who the sword of Heaven would wield, 
Should be as holy as severe,” 

prohibition or exhortation was intended chiefly to be expressed by the poet. When however we reflect that holiness, in the strict sense 
of the word, is an attribute which belongs not to man but to the Deity, but that mercy is a quality common to angels and to men, and 
which dwells on earth as well as reigns in heaven, we must consider that the sense of the above passage is strongly prohibitive, and that it was 
written in dissuasion of all atrocious legal sentences, and intended to convey a forcible admonition to the judge, that when conscious himself 
of perfect purity, he might then inflict extreme punishment on vices of an opposite description. It has generally been remarked, that the best 
of human beings have invariably shown themselves the most merciful to those failings of their fellow-creatures that did not involve in them 
a destructive principle, or that did not come under the definition, if we may be allowed to quote Aristotle, of ‘ d0aprixoy ts,” either in 
reference to human existence or human happiness; since vices of the latter description,—which strike at what legislation most prizes and 
chiefly aims to promote, which is the happiness of man,—it is evident, must be curbed by strong penal laws, calculated to awe and terrify 
the wicked. The same was likewise a Gospel precept, as appears from the eighth chapter of St. John; for although adultery was a crime 
punished with death by the Mosaic law, yet Christ saved the woman convicted of adultery and about to be stoned, by desiring him that 
was without sin to cast the first stone at her; when all being convicted by their own consciences, the law remained without a single indi- 
vidual to put it in force, and the woman was dismissed with a charge to go and sin no more. There are some persons, however, who in 
these days of moral purity contend that the example of Christ ought not to be followed, and who fain would change the reading of the 
texts of Scripture, —“ Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord, and I will repay :” “ The eyes of God are too pure to behold evil,”—into the im. 
pious protest, “ God may, if he pleases, show mercy ; but the eyes of man are too pure to behold evil.” Without demanding of these modern 
Pharisees whether they believe in the immortality of the soul, and in a future state of rewards and punishments, when the most perfect 
justice will be rendered to every individual for every action, good or bad, which he may have performed in this life-—or whether their 
religion has degenerated into that of the Sadducees of old, who, denying the immortality of the soul, and ridiculing the notion of a day of 

NOTES. 139 

mozos se confesaban 4 sus padres, 6 la muger 4 su marido, 6 el marido 4 la muger, 6 4 qualquiera de sus parientes *. 
Y esta era la costumbre buena, 6 al menos tenia principio y aparencia y color de bondad. La mala é irracional era, que 
diciendo la muger en aquella confesion que algun hombre havia pecado con ella }, luego le acusaban delante el sefior, 
y sin testigos ni otra probacion, penavan al que la muger en la confesion declaraba aver sido su complice, aunque el lo 
negase; y este error procedia tanto, que por lo que la muger declaraba en la confesion, le ahorcaban. A mi me acon- 
tecié que lo vi, y castigué 4los...... en la tierra, puesto que no en el mismo pueblo donde se efectud, que estando la 
muger de un sefior enferma y 4 la muerte de su enfermedad, confesé de que con cierto mancebo avia pecado, al qual 
luego ahorcaron. Cierto esta era costumbre harto injusta é irracionable. 

“ En lo que concierne al septimo mandamiento, era claro 4 estas gentes como el sexto, y asi los padres 4 los hijos 
amonestaban que no hurtasen, como que ni adulterasen, con suma diligencia. 

“ Era ley que el que hurtase cosas de poca estima, como una gallina, 6 algun poco de trigo mahiz 6 otras semejantes, 
mandabanle volver lo hurtado, y sobre aquello, que pagase algunas plumas 6 otras cosas, que seria como eé/ otro tanto {. 
que valia lo que havia hurtado, y todo el hurto y la pena que le echavan, era del sefior, porque ninguna cosa de ella 
queria el duefio de lo hurtado tomar, aunque el sefior se lo daba, quasi teniendolo por inficionado y no digno de tor- 
narse 4 recibir de manos tan malas §. 

“ El ladron que hurtase alouna cosa de mucho valor, segun la estimacion de ellos, como una diadema de oro que 
ellos usaban, 6 otra cosa preciosa, buelto lo que hurtaba si lo tenia, penabanlo en mucho mas, como en cien plumas que 
eran entre ellos de valor; y sino tenia de que pagar, vendianlo por esclavo. 

« El que usurpava las tierras, mudando los terminos y limites 6 mojones ||, 6en los montes 6 en las sembradas, 
embiaba el sefior veedores, y al que havia entrado y usurpado en la posesion agena, mandavanle pagar y poner mojo- 
nes y terminos con nuevas sefiales, para que no tornasen a tener pendencias sobre ello. 

« El que hurtava plumas en el monte ageno, donde criaban los pajaros que las tienen, 6 cacao 6 otra cosa semejante, 
se la hacian pagar con la pena ya dicha. 

judgement, contended for the fulfilment to the letter of all the bloody enactments of the Mosaic law, and thereby drew down upon them- 
selves the condemnation of Christ,—we shall merely observe, that the strongest argument in favour of a mild and merciful administration of 
penal laws, is the attestation of reason and of nature, that there isa Power above who will assuredly award to guilt, either here or hereafter, 
its due measure of punishment, and who cannot err in discriminating between the nature of human actions, as is too often the case when 
mani is the judge of his fellow-creatures. Any mistrust of the truth of the religious creed in which they have been educated ought cer- 
tainly to make those who fill judicial stations very cautious of trying human actions by the standard of moral rectitude which such a 
creed inculcates, which, except it be adapted to all ages and nations, and be conformable to the reason of men of every climate, is itself 
extremely suspicious, and likely to be founded in error and imposture. 

* «¢ Confess your sins one to another,” appears to have been a Gospel precept; but the mode in which confession was to be received seems 
never to have been precisely defined by Christ or his Apostles. Strong objections were certainly urged, at the commencement of the Refor- 
mation, against the Abelards of the Roman Catholic Church administering that rite to their female penitents; and it is a curious fact, that 
the Peruvians should have remedied the evil which might possibly thence ensue, by instituting an order of female confessors for the express 
purpose of receiving the confessions of women. 

+ An anonymous Spanish author gives the following account of the Indian confession of the sick. Si algun Indio enfermaba, iban 
los parientes ante esta vieja sortilega que les dixere de qué procedia el mal: la cual echaba unos granos de maiz y frisoles sobre un petate- 
arrojandolos 4 una tablilla como la que tiene en la mano, y estando ante el demonio, y decia lo que se le antojaba y llamaba al demonio 
que se lo declarase: y si caia un grano de maiz sobre el otro, decia que de sometico era su mal. Tambien estas viejas eran parteras 6 
comadres, y quando iban 4 partear aleuna muger, si tenia recio parto, la vieja la decia que no podia parir si primero no le descubria con 
quantos hombres, sin su marido, habia tenido parte; y la prefiada los descubria sin recelar cosa alguna, porque tenia entendido que si no lo 
decia no pariria. Y si por ventura alguna moria de parto, decian que no habia descubierto todo lo que habia hecho. Y si el nifio moria 
en naciendo, decian lo mismo. Y esta vieja lo descubria despues 4 quien queria, y 4 su marido si queria. Y quando acontecia nacer 
algun nifio con ronchas 6 bermejo, decian las viejas que fue algun antojo, 6 de comer carne humana, 6 de algun perillo.” 

+ Itis said, in the ninth verse of the twenty-second chapter of Exodus: “ For any manner of lost thing, which another challengeth to be 
his, the cause of both parties shall come before the judges; and whom the judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his neighbour.” 
It may be proper to observe, that stolen goods are the Jost things here referred to. 

§ That it was the opinion of the Jews, that money contracted uncleanness from the hands through which it passed, and the manner in 
which it was acquired, is evident from the eighteenth verse of the twenty-third chapter of Deuteronomy, and is exemplified in the sixth 
verse of the twenty-seventh chapter of the Gospel of St. Matthew. i 

|| It is said in the seventeenth verse of the twenty-seventh chapter of Deuteronomy: “Cursed be he that removeth his neighbour’s 
landmark.” 

140 NOTES. 

« El que tomaba prestado algo *, si lo perdia 6 no lo volvia, siempre se lo mandavan pagar. 
« Rl que recibia fiada { alguna cosa, sino pagava en el tiempo sefialado, pedianselo ante el sefior, y mandavanselo 

volver luego. 

«Si alguno tomaba muchas cosas fiadas de unos y de otros, y despues no podia pagar, vendian la persona, y lo 
que davan por él davanlo los acrehedores al seflor: otras veces como 4 quien roba en poblado, lo matavan dandole 
garrote. 

“ Quanto al octavo mandamiento, siempre fue cognoscido por malo entre aquellas gentes /evantar falso testimonto, y 
asi tienen nombre proprio como del hurto y adulterio, y como 4 tal lo amonestavan y prohibian los padres 4 los hijos, y 
lo mismo los sefiores 4 los subditos. 

“ Lo mismo era de las mentiras{, que igualmente las prohibian y detestaban los mayores, diciendoles : 0 os levan- 
teis testimonio falso, no mentais, porque es muy malo. 

“La pena que se dava al que se probaba haver mentido, levantando falso testimonio, era que le refiia el sefior 
asperamente y deshonraba de palabra, y mandavale que pagase diez 6 quince 6 veinte plumas, segun que le 

parecia. 

% A similar ordinance occurs in the fourteenth verse of the twenty-second chapter of Exodus. 

‘+ It would appear from the enactments relating to pledges, in the sixth and tenth verses of the twenty-fourth chapter of Deuteronomy, 
that this mode of dealing was very common among the ancient Jews, whose descendants are even still much inclined to the trade of pawn- 
brokers. It cannot, however, be doubted, that if the custom of giving and taking pledges favoured the growth of usury, to which the 
Jews have ever been extremely addicted, it afforded many advantages to the labouring poor, whom sickness or want might have obliged 
in this manner to seek temporary relief. A clause in the Hebrew law, providing, that if raiment was pledged by a poor man, it should be 
returned to him before the sun went down, that he “ might sleep in his own raiment,” has induced some Spanish writers to observe, that 
the Mexicans resembled the Jews in sleeping in their ordinary apparel; which custom, Torquemada says, was general amongst the In- 
dians of New Spain, whose beds were mats, woven from rushes or the leaves of the palm, the rich alone making use of cotton counter- 
panes. It is probable, from the special attention which the Mexican law bestowed on pledges, that that trait of domestic policy was 
borrowed by the Mexicans from the Jews. 

+ Brulius declares, in the third chapter of the first book of his Historia Peruana, that the Peruvians punished liars and perjurers with 
death: “ Mendacem et falsd jurantem semel iterumve, null4 emendatione castigatum, publica plectebant morte.” This extraordinary 
severity doubtless originated in the great weight which the oaths of two or three witnesses had in their courts of justice; and some 
Spanish writers affirm, that even the first act of perjury was, in grave cases, punished with death. It is certainly a singular coincidence, 
that throughout the New World, or at least that portion of it which was most civilized at the period of the Spanish conquest, those crimes 
which the Jews regarded as of the greatest magnitude, were precisely those so considered by the Indians; and those virtues, on the con- 
trary, which were most prized by the Romans,—such as honour and generosity, respect for valour even in an enemy, clemency to the van- 
quished, patriotism, candour, disinterestedness, and contempt for fraud and artifice of every description, mildness in the administration of 
justice, a regard for the liberties of the people, and for individual rights, and especially toleration in religion,—were as little esteemed by the 
Mexicans and the Peruvians, whose whole morality consisted in a due observance of their ceremonial law, an affected humility, visible in 
the cxvbpwmia of the figures introduced in the Mexican paintings, and peculiar in the age of Christ to the Pharisees, and fasting, penance, 
and mortification, carried beyond all reasonable bounds. If, however, the act of simply lying was a vice held in abomination by the 
Peruvians, and expressly forbidden to the Jews in the eleventh verse of the nineteenth chapter of Leviticus, judicial lying or. perjury, 
whereby the life of an individual might be endangered, must by every code of human law have been judged most impious, and was by 
that statute of the Roman law entitled ¢ Lex Cornelia de Sicariis’ punished with death: and certainly it does appear, that of all crimes, that 
of swearing away the life of an innocent person is the most detestable; since here even the common temptations to kill are wanting, and 
vite sacra fames wust be the only incentive. Amongst the Jews, this description of swearing was punished with death, as appears by 
the following enactment of the nineteenth chapter of Deuteronomy: “ If a false witness rise up against any man, to testify against him 
that which is wrong; then both the men, between whom the controversy is, shall stand before the Lord, before the priests and the judges. 
which shall be in those days; and the judges shall make diligent inquisition: and, behold, if the witness be a false witness, and hath testified 
falsely against his brother; then shall ye do unto him ashe had thought to have done unto his brother : so shalt thou put the evil away from 
among you. And those which remain shall hear, and fear, and shall henceforth commit no more any such evil among you.” We subjoin the 
following passage from the thirteenth chapter of the eighth book of Nieremberg’s Natural History, because it proves that the Peruvians 
refrained from swearing on all ordinary occasions, and, like the Jews, were apprehensive of taking the name of God in vain: “ Peruensibus 
inusitatum jusjurandum : coactus a lictore quidam nobilis barbarus sententiam suam sacramento firmare, respondit: ‘nondum Christianus 
sum, quomodo vis ut firmem meum sensum nomine Dei tui?’ Lictor retulit, sufficere invocare nomen Solis aut Lune. Tunc Indus: ‘nos 
non utimur Divino nomine nisi ut adoremus, propterea non licet aliter ore sumere.’ ‘ Quid ergo,’ lictor inquit, ‘ faciemus?’ ‘Sat sit,” Curaca 
ille dixit, ‘si promittam verum dicere, et cogitare coram rege Hispano me loqui, cujus nunc ipse vicarius es.’” The reply of the Indian to 
the Spaniard in the foregoing’ passage is further deserving of notice, as showing that the Peruvians, like the Jews, considered the Divine 
name ineffable, an analogy which we have elsewhere pointed out. 

NOTES. 141 

“ Y comunmente no creian fuera de la confesion* a la muger que venia 4 decir haver pecado 6 hechole fuerza algun 
hombre. Por lo qual si venia muger alguna estando sana sin enfermedad 4 dar queja de alguno que la avia forzado, 
6 hecho algun otro dafio, luego le pedia el senor de ello testigos, 6 la sefial de la verdad. Y esta senal era que havia 
de traer alguna cosa que huviese tomado al que la quiso forzar; como el pafio de manos, 6 el mastel que es los panos 
menores con que cubren sus verguenzas, la manta que trae cubierta, 6 otra cosa que se cognosciese ser de aquel. En- 
tonces la creian decir verdad y sentenciavanlo en la pena del adulterio ya dicha. ; 

« Si alguna vez havia quien acusase los adulterios y ellos lo negavan, davanles tormento f de cuerda, atandolos 
reciamente los brazos atras por los molledos, y davanles el garrote detras y demas de esto sino confesavan davanles 
humo 4 narices, y quemavanlos estando ellos en alto como se dixo ya. Estos mismos tormentos davan 4 los ladrones, 
hasta hacerles confesar la verdad. 

“ Del nono y decimo mandamientos tambien tuvieron gran noticia estos Indios, como parece por la diligencia que 
ponian los padres en la instruccion y amonestaciones que hacian en esto 4 los hijos, diciendoles, que no codiciasen 
las mugeres, no solo las agenas, pero ni otras ningunas, y que no mirasen las hermosas, ni la disposicion y atavios 
que trujesen, y asi huyesen las ocasiones. Y afiidian Ja razon, diciendo, que no era una muger diferente de otra, 
porque tan verdadera muger era la fea, como la hermosa. Lo mismo amonestavan las madres 4 las hijas doncellas por 
respecto de los hombres. 

“En la misma forma tenian y platicavan el decimo mandamiento, amonestando los padres 4 los hijos que no 
deseasen { el oro ni plata, ni plumas ni cacao, ni las demas cosas agenas, y que si para sus necesidades querian 
tenerlas, que trabajasen por su solicitud é industria y trabajo haverlas. 

“ Otras muchas buenas costumbres y leyes y orden buena de gobierno tenian las gentes de aquellas provincias, 
dignas de loor aunque apartadas de este nuestro orbe, y carecientes de lumbre de fé y doctrina: las quales segun me 
han dado por escripto los religiosos que alli han sudado y trabajado de sabellas, con las malas que entre ellos avia, 
como gentes sin gracia divina—las malas para se las quitar y disuadir, y las buenas para loarselas y persuadirlos A 
la conservacion y perpetuidad de ellas—el tiempo andando de la lengua de ellos en nuestro Castellano dixeron, que 
como dignas de ser vistas y practicadas convertirian, por las quales se podra con facilidad entender, no haver sido de 
todas las infieles y gentiles antiguas naciones estas las mas infimas.” 

The laws above enumerated were those of the Indians of Verapaz: those which follow, which are likewise copied 
from the Historia Apologetica of Las Casas, were peculiar to Guatemala §, especially to Utatlan, its principal province, 

* The confession of a sick woman was considered unexceptionable evidence by the laws of Verapaz; and such weight was attached to it, . 
that Las Casas declares, that men whom they charged with having committed adultery with them, were, upon that testimony alone, sometimes 
put to death, even although they denied the fact. Hence it appears in what a solemn light the Indians viewed the rite of confession. It 
need scarcely be remarked, that by a rule of the Catholic Church, which in very rare cases admits exception, priests are forbidden to reveal 
anything communicated to them in confession. At what period sucha prohibition was first imposed, it would be difficult to say; but it 
probably originated in the inconveniences which would have resulted if such a rule had not been adopted: and even under this salutary 
restriction, as the Church deems it, confession gives the clergy great influence over their flocks; and in the primitive ages of Christianity 
it was an instrument which might justly be compared to a two-edged sword, and which, doubtless, greatly contributed to the ascendancy 
which the Church so long maintained throughout every country of Europe. It deserves to be remarked, that a woman in health was not 
believed, except she produced witnesses, or at least some part of the apparel of the man whom she accused; which reminds us of the 
story of Joseph and the wife of Potiphar, in the thirty-ninth chapter of Genesis, which was probably known by tradition to the Indians. 

+ To inflict torture was not repugnant to the spirit of the Mosaic law, as we learn from various passages of Scripture; and for that 
reason the use of the rack was, till within a comparatively recent period, tolerated by the jurisprudence of nearly all Christendom, and 
was even recommended by the Inquisition, who tortured in the first instance those unhappy victims whom they afterwards condemned to 
the flames. If there be aught meritorious in retributive justice, what great concessions should modern legislation make to the spirit of the 
present age, were it only to atone for the crimes with which intolerance has afflicted the earth, and to appease the shades of those who, like 
the Grecian ghosts so pathetically introduced in Dryden’s Ode, may still be supposed to visit this earth, and, frequenting the scenes of 
their ignominious sufferings, to implore the tardy vengeance of posterity! 

+ Gomara, describing,—in the chapter of his History of the Indies, which he entitles ‘ Calidades y Costumbres del Cuzco, —the man- 
ners of the Peruvians, says, ‘‘Castigan de muerte los adulterios. Sacan los ojos al ladron, que me parece su propio castigo. Guardan 
mucha justicia en todo.” The latter punishment, it deserves to be remarked, was known to the Jews, and received the sanction of the 
Mosaic law; and it appears to be occasionally represented in the Mexican paintings. 

§ Juarros informs us, in his History of Guatemala, that that territory comprised three monarchies, two of which acknowledged a sort 
of feudal supremacy in Utatlan, which latter State is said to have been for many ages governed by princes of Jewish descent. New Spain 

VOL. VIII. 2505) 

142 NOTES. 

which, with the territory adjoining, formed at the period of the Spanish invasion a powerful and independent 
kingdom. The latter laws were likewise commion to Honduras and Nicaragua, being, as the above-mentioned pre- 
late observes, “ Las leyes y costumbres que tenian por todas aquellas provincias en mas de docientas leguas segun 

creemos.” 

was in fact subdivided into many different kingdoms, some of which, like Michuacan, were even formidable to the Mexicans, and it con- 
tained an immense and redundant population,—a fact which the ruins of ancient cities, scattered over a vast extent of country, still suffi- 
ciently attest: the diversity of languages proves likewise that it was originally peopled by many different nations, and must consequently 
have been subject from the earliest times to the sway of many princes. It is however deserving of remark, that only one language was 
spoken throughout the extensive peninsula of Yucatan,—a fact which Las Casas and other Spanish writers have particularly pointed out, 
attributing to that cause its peaceful and flourishing state when first discovered by the Spaniards. That Yucatan, however, had been 
subject to great revolutions, may be inferred from the following passage of Gomara’s History of the Indies: “ Viven mucho estos _Yuca- 
tenses, y Alquimpech sacerdote del pueblo do es agora Merida, vivio mas de ciento y veynte afios. El qual, aun que ya era Christiano, 
llorava la entrada y amistad de los Espafioles. Y dixo 4 Montejo como avia ochenta afios que vino una inchazon pestilencial 4 los ombres, 
que rebentavan lenos de gusanos: y luego otra mortandad de increible hedor: y que uvo dos batallas, no quarenta afios antes que fuesen 
ellos, en que murieron mas de ciento y cinquenta mil ombres. Empero que sentian mas el mando y estado de los Espafioles, porque 
nunca se irian de alli, que todo lo passado.” Gomara, whose authority as an historian has always been considered great, and whose inti- 
macy with Cortes opened to him an original source of information, confirms, in the following passage of the above chapter, what Peter 
Martyr says, in the 204th page of the present volume, of the rite of circumcision being discovered amongst the Indians of Yucatan. 
«« Hiendense las orejas, hazense coronas sobre la frente, que parecen calvos, y trencanse los cabellos, que traen largos, al colodrillo. 
Retajanse, aunque no todos. Y ni hurtan, ni comen carne de ombre, aunque los sacrifican, que no es poco segun usanga de Indios.” 
Las Casas himself confirms, in the following passage of the 241st chapter of his Historia Apologetica, what is stated by Oviedo, ina 
subsequent paragraph, respecting the existence of that rite amongst the Indians of Nicaragua. ‘‘Tornando al proposito, dixose que 
algunos de ellos y no todos se circuncidaban: no se sabe si lo hacian por cerimonia, 6 por otro respeto alguno. Mas comun era la 
circuncision en la provincia de Nicaragua, puesto que no todo aquello superfluo segun alli supimos, se cortavan. En otra parte de todas 
las Indias no he oido que se circuncidasen.” Gomara agrees likewise with Peter Martyr in asserting, that the Indians of the island of 
Cozumel or Acuzamil, which was situated a few leagues only from the coast of Yucatan, were circumcised; whose manners he thus 
describes in the tenth page of his History of the Conquest of Mexico. “ Retajanse: son idolatras: sacrifican nifios, mas pocos, y muchas 
vezes perros en su lugar. En lo demas gente pobre es, pero caritativa, y muy religiosa-en aquella su falsa creencia.” A reason for the 
ignorance and uncertainty which so generally prevailed respecting the manners and customs, the different forms of government, and 
the laws and institutions of many considerable Indian states, will be found in the following passage of the 24@nd chapter of the 
Historia Apologetica of Las Casas. “ Finalmente como ya hemos en algunas partes dicho, todas las Indias parece aver tenido el 
regimiento real, muy pocas partes sacadas. Y asi creo ser averiguado en todas las provincias y reynos agora nombradas, y las de Tierra- 
firme desde Paria, Cumana, Venezuela, y Santa Marta, y Darien, y el Cenu, y la tierra adentro las provincias de Popayan, y sin haver 
duda alguna el Nuevo Reyno de Granada, que Ilamavan en aquella lengua Bogota, la ultima silaba aguda. Todas estas provincias y 
reynos tenian sus reyes y sefiores, 4 quien obedecian los pueblos que por sefiores los recognoscian. De cuya manera de governacion, como 
fueron acabados presto, al menos los de ambas 4 dos costas 6 riberas de la mar, yendo de Guatemala por el oriente hasta Panama y 
Nombre de Dios, y tambien por no haver habido en aquellas provincias religiosos que para predicalles, aprehendiesen sus lenguas, los 
quales solos son los que saben y penetran sus secretos, tener noticia no pudimos.” Having quoted many passages from Spanish authors 
in proof of the existence of the rite of circumcision amongst the Indians, we shall add to these testimonies the following, which is taken from 
the third chapter of an extremely rare treatise, entitled, “A Short Discourse concerning the New World or America,” published in the year 
1660, and professedly the work of the Rev. Thomas Thorowgood. A strict regard to delicacy and propriety of language would almost justify 
the omission of some passages in this extract, were not such a mode of quotation wholly unwarrantable. «I begin with circumcision, and 
justly, for it is the mainest point of Jewish religion, saith Bishop Montague; it had the front among the former sacred rites and customs; 
but something, I suppose, considerable will now be added thereto, the rather because it hath been confidently affirmed, by some most 
opposite to these conjectures, if that Judaical badge were certainly known to be upon the Indians, there would be more than consenting 
to the probabilities; and they would say with Hornius, (a very learned man, and one that hath travelled as far into these inquiries as any 
other,) if there were any certain testimonies of their circumcision, he would judge them to be of Judaical extract. I shall, therefore, now 
in this be more express, not troubling the reader with that which puzzled Herodotus, whether the Egyptians had circumcision from the 
Ethiopians, or these from them; seeing we know assuredly, from the word of truth, it came originally from the Jews, Gen. xvii., which 
caused Theodoret to write so confidently, it was no old law among the Egyptians to circumcise infants, for Pharaoh’s daughter, finding 
Moses by the river side, saw him circumcised, and said thereupon presently, ‘This is one of the Hebrews’ children,’ Exod. ii.6. That, 
then, of P. Martyr to the former mentionings may be inserted, which was received from the mouth of a fugitive Indian, that in some parts 
of America, as they had cities walled, people clothed, and government by laws, so they were circumcised likewise. In Yucatana they be 
all cut in that part, and in the island of the Holy Cross, Cuba, and many other places; and in a book he wrote after his Decads, he tells 
in a manner they were all circumcised ; and in one island, he saith, they carried them away all as hares, and thought they might do it 
lawfully, because of their circumcision. Mr. Brerewood, also, whose judgment is very ponderous, writes confidently, that in Yucatana 
the inhabitants have circumcision still in use, which is not only avouched by Grotius, but he tells the same of many other nations in 

NOTES. 143 

«“ Primeramente, quando algun sefior era tirano y en su regimiento cruel, aquellos que eran cabezas de familias * 
que se sentian de agraviados, comunicaban sus quejas y agravios 4 los principales de la ciudad y del reyno; y si 
hallavan en ellos aparejo y que Jes querian en su proposito ayudar, juntavanse todos y matavanlo, y tomavanle sus 
mugeres é hijos por captivos, y toda su hacienda, sin dexar cosa salva. Pero si todo el reyno 6 pueblo no convenia en 
conspirar con los querellantes y agraviados, acudian al sefor que mas poder de los circunstantes y comarcanos tenia, 
que sentian que los ayudaria, ofreciendole que llevaria las mugeres y los esclavos y hacienda para provocallo, el qual 
si lo aceptaba, embiava su gente de guerra, para que por la mejor manera que pudiesen lo matase. 

“ Qualquiera sefior 6 principal que impedia que los vasallos no obedeciesen al rey 6 sefior, moria por ello, y ponian 
otro en aquel estado y lugar. 

“ Qualquiera que matava 4 otro moria por ello. 

America, Tolonas, Acuzamitenses, Guazacualcenses, and others about Mexico; and when Jo. de Laet was in a manner convinced of this 
truth, he studies to elude it by another evasion, as if it were the mark of the filthy disease, and not the sign of circumcision; but Grotius 
merrily, and with fine force, beats him from that fence and fancy, saying, as if the venereous pest were in that country so Judaical, that it 
was content to take off the prepuce or foreskin only, and spare the other parts of the body. And when the same learned man tells him 
there are so many witnesses affirming divers of the people in America to be circumcised, that it doth not become a modest man to deny it, 
it did extort from Jo. de Laet himself, notwithstanding his former allegation, that expression, ‘ Neither do I absolutely deny it’; and again, 
“It is possible it may be so.’ Suetonius, telling of some cruelties exercised by Domitian upon the Jews, saith, when he was a young man 
he saw among very many others, when a public inspection was made of a man ninety years old, whether he were circumsected. And here, 
because ocular witnesses, and of owr own nation, in this may seem almost a cogent probability, I shall therefore produce two most irrefra- 
gable testimonies of that convincing kind. I saw Mr. Eliot’s letters to Mr. Winslow, the New England agent here, in these words among 
others: « You tell me one will publish probabilities that at least some of the ten tribes are in America. It would be a glad tidings 
to my heart; and when Mr. Dudley heard of it, he said, Captain Cromwel, that died lately at Boston here, reported he saw many Indians 
to the southward circumcised.’ And for a further confirmation hereof, I had it not only from the mouth of Mr. Thomas Gage and his 
printed book, but I have his letter by me wherein he doth assert, that in the town of Mixco, where he preached five or six years, he had 
often deep discourse with an old Indian, named Domingo de Gusman, which was fiscal or clerk of the church ; this Indian did often show 
him some papers in written hand of antiquity, wherein were many practices of their forefathers agreeing much with the Jews’ customs, 
but especially he would talk often of the cutting off young children’s flesh, when they were newly born; which I myself, saith he, saw also 
once performed among them, to whom I went with a guard of Spaniards, where we all beheld their priest cutting with a razor made of 
flint the foreskin of a new-born babe. Other of his general observations will be mentioned hereafter; and now, as Genebrard writes 
confidently of the Tartars, that they are Jewish, because they were circumcised long before they received any of the Mahometan rites, it 
will doubtless seem probable also, that many Indian nations are of Judaical race, seeing this frequent and constant character of circum- 
cision, so singularly fixed to the Jews, is to be found among them.” The reasoning of Mr. Thorowgood in the above extract is the more 
satisfactory, because it is founded upon facts which had come to his own knowledge, and not merely upon conjectures or the unsupported . 
assertions of contemporary writers who had never visited America. For the information, however, of those who might otherwise feel little 
disposed to concede to the testimony of Mr. Eliot that weight to which it is entitled from the great respectability of the individual, we must 
observe, that he was the translator of the Scriptures into the Mohawk language, and from his great zeal in the conversion of those rude 
tribes to Christianity, received the appellation of the Apostle of the Indians. The testimony of other and later Anglo-American writers 
might be adduced, to prove that circumcision was practised in ancient times amongst the North American Indians. Doctor Boudinot 
thus expresses himself in the 113th page of the fourth chapter of his “Star in the West,” a Work published so recently as the year 
1816. “The Indians to the eastward say, that previous to the white people coming into the country, their ancestors were in the habit of 
using circumcision; but latterly, not being able to assign any reason for so strange a practice, their young people insisted on its being 
abolished. M‘Kensie says the same of the Indians he saw on his route even at this day.—‘ History,’ page 34. Speaking of the nations of 
the Slave and Dog-rib Indians very far to the north-west, he says, ‘ Whether circumcision be practised among them I cannot pretend 
to say; but the appearance of it was general among those I saw.’ The Dog-rib Indians live about two or three hundred miles from the 
Straits of Kamschatka. Dr. Beatty says, in his Journal of a visit he paid to the Indians on the Ohio about fifty years ago, that an old 
Christian Indian informed him, that an old uncle of his, who died about the year 1728, related to him several customs and traditions of 
former times, and among others, that circumcision was practised among the Indians long ago, but their young men making a mock at it, 
brought it into disrepute, and so it came to be disused.—‘ Journal,’ page 89.” The perusal of the above passage leads naturally to the 
inference, that the young men of New Spain would likewise have made a mock of this ceremony, as soon as they discovered that it caused 
the Spaniards to suspect that they were descended from the Jews, against whom such a bitter persecution raged about that tame in Spain; 
and hence it is likely that they would have refrained from circumcising their children, if they could not, as suggested by the Apostle, 
themselves become uncircumcised; and this would account for the almost total disappearance, in a single generation, of this rite amongst 
the Mexicans, and the consequent silence with respect to it of the Spanish and Indian historians who wrote towards the latter end of the 

sixteenth century. 
%* The heads of families had considerable influence in the affairs of the Jews, as appears by the frequent mention of them in the Old 

Testament. . 

144 NOTES. 

““ Qualquiera que adulterava con la muger del sefior, si era persona principal moria por ello, pero si era hombre 
vil lo despefaban. 

“ Qualquiera que llegava 4 esclava agena, la pena era como pecuniaria, 6 daba otro tanto como la esclava valia, 6 
compraba otra, y mayor pena le davan si era tal que algun sefor tenia quenta con ella. 

“ Qualquiera que hurtava, lo punian con pena pecuniaria, y esta pena era para el rey 6 su fisco, allende que avia 
de restituir 4 su duefio lo hurtado. 

“ Qualquiera ladron que en aquel oficio era incorregible, lo ahorcavan, denunciandolo 4 sus parientes, si querian 
pagar por él: ellos respondian que ya estaban hartos de hacer tales pagas, que lo castigasen 6 matasen. 

“« A todos los que sentenciaban 4 muerte por sus delictos, comunmente los confiscavan sus bienes, y sus mugeres y 
hijos y esclavos. 

“ Qualquiera que era bruxo 6 bruxa quemayan, y llamavanlo en su lengua Balam*, que quiere decir tigre, porque 
el demonio se revestia en ellos, y por sus prestigios hacia que pareciesen tigres 4 quien los mirava, como en el capi- 
tulo 92 esto como puede ser, largamente declaramos. Estos hacian muchos dajfios, y por esto los quemavan; y lo 
mismo se hacia de los que se hallasen entre Christianos. 

“ A los que fornicavan, soltero con soltera, penavan como con pena pecuniaria, quando el sefior 4 saberlo alcanzava. 
Pero si ayia parte que pretendiese injuria y reclamase, como padre por hija, 6 hermano por hermana, le davan pena de 
muerte, 6 le hacian esclavo. 

“ Al que hurtava cosa de los templos 6 de sus dioses, despefiavan, 6 lo hacian esclavo si era cosa liviana. 

“ El que hacia alouna fuerza 4 muger, si era cosa notable, lo matavan 6 hacian esclavo. 

“A los plagiarios que vendian persona libre, si era su natural, matavan, pero de los estrangeros, aunque los ven- 
diesen por esclavos, no se hacia tanto caso. 

“ Al que cometia crimen de trahicion contra el sefior 6 su republica, y descubria los secretos de ella, 6 se pasava a 
los enemigos, matavan y confiscavanle todos sus bienes, y 4 sus hijos y muger hacian esclavos. 

“ Kn la provincia de Verapaz, (de que luego en el siguiente capitulo se tractara,) tenia pena de muerte el que matase 
pajaro de las plumas ricas, porque no las havia en otra parte, y era cosa de mucho valor, porque usaban de ellas como 
de monedo, y por consiguiente avianlo por gran dafio del bien comun. 

“Todos los que salvavan en las guerras, chicos 6 grandes, los hacian esclavos f. 

‘¢ Las personas principales, como sefores y hermanos de sefiores, y otras tales que prendian en las guerras, los sacri- 
ficavan a sus idolos, y despues los comian, por asombrar y poner miedo y terror 4 los enemigos. 

“Lo mismo, aunque disimuladamente, hizo Ptolemeo, hijo de Cleopatra reyna de Egipto, (conviene 4 saber,) para 
poner temor a los enemigos, mostrando que eran comedores los de su exercito de carne humana. El qual, peleando 
contra Alexandro rey en Judea, hermano de Aristobulo, y habida la victoria, y triumphando por la provincia, entro 
en ciertas villas de Judea, las quales hallando Ilenas de mugeres y nifios, los mand6 matar todos, mugeres y nifios, 
a los de su exercito, y hacer pedazos y tajadas y echallas en calderas 4 cocer, fingiendo que lo hacian para comerlos, 
para que los que se avian escapado de la batalla creyesen que comian carne humana, y asi les tuviesen horrible temor. 
Asi lo cuenta Josepho, libro 13, capitulo 21, de las Antiguedades Judaicas §. 

* This name singularly agrees with that of Balaam, the false prophet whom Balak is said, in the twenty-second and twenty-third 
chapters of the Book of Numbers, to have expressly charged to curse the Jews on their entrance into the land of Canaan; and hence it 
might have been used as a term of reproach by the Jews of later ages, and have been indiscriminately applied to witches and conjurors. 
The curious fact of Montezuma having imitated the policy of Balak king of Moab, by sending his diviners and enchanters to stop the 
advance of the Spaniards towards Mexico, is recorded by Sahagun in the eighth chapter of the twelfth book of his History of New 
Spain. 

+ The chapter to which Las Casas alludes is the ninety-second of the Historia Apologetica, which commences with an appeal to the 
authority of St. Augustin, to prove that witches are able to metamorphose men into animals, who, in the sixteenth chapter of the eighteenth 
book of his treatise De Civitate Dei, instances the example of Circe, who changed the companions of Ulysses into swine. 

{ This was in accordance with the ancient usages of the Jews. 

§ The following is the passage of Josephus to which Las Casas here refers: “ Tirorsponos d¢ merce THY Vinny mpooxaradpayay THY ywpay, 
ius yevomevys, ev TIC! XMMOLS Tals Tovdcias xcerewervev, chs YUVCINwY EUPWY METTCLG Keb YNTIWY, EXEAEUTE TOUS TTPATIMTAS amorharroyvras avtoug xcs 
upeoupyourras, tmerree els AcByras Ccovras eviEvTaS To MEY amaprer beer. touro be mpoceraker, iv’ of Srehuyovres ex THS PANN xeb MmpOS aubrous éAdoyrec, 
Tupxoparyous UmoAaGwory elves Tous TOAE IOUS, xe Oi TOUTO ETS LLAAAOY aUTOUS naramreyouos taut’ iovras. Agvet de xa StpaBav xas Nixoruos, ors 

NOTES 145 

“ Tornando a contar las leyes de las provincias que Ilamamos de Guatemala, otra ley fue, que el vasallo que huia 
de su sefior, si con tiempo se sabia, embiaban de presto por él, y alcanzandolo lo matavan, y 4 su muger y hijos hacian 
esclavos, y le confiscavan toda su hacienda. 

TOUTOY aUTOIS Expyoavro TOY TpomOY neds xdeyw mpoeipyxc. * But Ptolemy, after the victory, scouring the country, halted late in the evening 
in certain villages of Judea, which finding full of women and children, he commanded the soldiers, having killed them and cut them into 
pieces, to throw their limbs into boiling cauldrons; and he issued these orders, that those who had escaped from the battle and fled to them 
might imagine that the enemy were cannibals, and on that account, having witnessed these things, might entertain a still greater terror of 
them. Strabo and Nicolaus declare that they treated them in the manner in which I likewise have related.” We may here remark, that 
in the Latin edition of the Jewish Antiquities, published in the year 1546, the concluding paragraph of the above passage, in which men- 
tion is made of Strabo and Nicolaus, is entirely wanting. It cannot, however, be doubted, that mutilations and interpolations of all kinds 
have in the course of ages greatly corrupted the text of the Jewish historian. The account, however, which he gives of Ptolemy having 
caused his soldiers to put to death captive women and children, and to cast their limbs into boiling cauldrons, as if they were to be served 
up at a banquet, is not only in itself extremely improbable, but savours of recrimination against the Greek author Apion, who had accused 
the Jews of cannibalism in the following passage of his treatise cited by Josephus: “‘ Propheta vero aliorum factus est Apion, et dixit Anti- 
ochum zm templo invenisse lectum, et hominem in eo jacentem, et oppositam ei mensulam maritimis terrenisque volatilium dapibus plenam, 
et quod obstupuisset his homo. Illum vero mox adorasse regis ingressum, tanquam maximam sibi opem preebituri: ac procidentem ad 
ejus genua, extensa dextera poposcisse libertatem: et jubente rege ut consideret, et diceret quis esset, vel cur ibidem habitaret, vel que 
esset causa ciborum ejus, tunc hominem cum gemitu et lacrymis lamentabiliter suam narrasse necessitatem. Ait, Inquit, esse se Greecum : 
et dum peragraret provinciam parandi victus causa, correptum se subito ab alienigenis hominibus, atque deductum ad templum, et inclusum 
_ illic, et a nullo conspici, sed cunctdé dapium apparatione saginari. Et primum quidem hec sibi inopinabilia beneficia visa attulisse letitiam : 
deinde suspicionem, postea stuporem: postremum consulentem a ministris ad se accedentibus, audisse legem ineffabilem Judeorum, pro 
qua nutriebatur: et hoc allos facere singulis annis quodam tempore constituto: et comprehendere quidem Grecum peregrinum, eumque 
annuo tempore saginare, et deductum ad quandam sylvam, occidere quidem eum hominem, ejusque corpus sacrificare secundum suas 
solennitates, et gustare ex ejus visceribus, et jusjurandum facere in immolatione Greci, ut inimicitias contra Greecos haberent: et tunc in 
quandam foveam reliqua hominis pereuntis abjicere. Deinde refert eum dixisse, paucos jam dies debitos sibimet superesse, atque rogasse, 
ut reveritus Greecorum deos, et superans in suo sanguine insidias Judseorum, de malis eum circumstantibus deliberaret. Hujusmodi ergo 
fabula non tantum omni tragcedia plenissima est, sed etiam crudeli tmpudentia redundat. Non tamen a sacrilegio privat Antiochum, sicut 
arbitrati sunt, qui hee ad illius gratiam conscripsé¢re : non enim presumpsit aliquid tale, ut ad templum accederet; sed sic invenit non 
sperans. Fuit ergo voluntatibus iniquis impius, et nihilominus sine Deo, quicquid jussit mendacii superfluitas, quam ex ipsa re cognoscere 
valde facillimum est. Non enim circa solos Greecos discordia legum esse dignoscitur, sed maxime adversus AZgyptios et plurimos alios. 
Cujus enim regionis homines non contigit aliquando apud nos peregrinari? ut adversus solos Greecos renovata conjuratione per effusionem 
sanguinis ageremus. Vel quomodo possibile, ut ad has hostias omnes Judzi colligerentur, et tantis millibus ad gustandum viscera illa 
sufficerent, sicut ait Apion? Vel cur inventum hominem quicunque fuit (non enim suo nomine conscripsit) aut quomodo eum in suam 
patriam rex non cum pompd deduxit? Dum posset hoc faciens, ipse quidem putari pius, et Grecorum amator eximius, assumere vero 
contra Judeorum odium auxilia magna cunctorum. Sed hec relinquo; insensatos enim non verbis, sed operibus decet arguere.” We 
may here observe, that the Latin translation alone of the above passage of Josephus’s Treatise against Apion has been preserved ; the text 
of which was probably mutilated at a very early period, nor is it found entire in the most ancient manuscript copies of that author’s 
Works; neither does Josephus say, that all the Jews collected together to eat the human victim, stated to have been annually sacrificed 
by an ineffable law of their religion. It is at the same time highly deserving of notice, that the Mexicans, according to the testimony of 
Sahagun, in the twenty-fourth chapter of the second book of his History of New Spain, actually sacrificed, in the manner described 
by Apion, a human victim to Tezcatlipoca, whom they nourished with all kinds of delicacies for the space of a year. ‘The words of 
Sahagun are as follows: “ Al quinto mes llamaban Toxcatl. [En este mes hacian fiesta y pasqua 4 honra del principal Dios llamado 
Tezcatlipuca, y por otro nombre Titlacaoan, y por otro Yautl, y por otro Telpuchtli, y por otro Tlamatzincatl. En esta fiesta mataban 
un mancebo muy acabado en disposicion, al qual habian criado por espacio de un ano en deleites ; decian que era la imagen de Tezcatli- 
puca. En matando el mancebo que estaba de un afio criado, luego ponian otro en su lugar para criarle por espacio de un afio, y de estos 
tenian muchos guardados para que luego sucediese otro al que habia muerto. Escogianlos entre todos los captivos los mas gentiles 
hombres, y tenianlos guardados los Calpixques. Ponian gran diligencia en que fuesen los mas habiles y mas bien dispuestos que se 
pudiesen haber, y sin tacha ninguna corporal.” “They named the fifth month Toxcatl. They celebrated in this month a festival and 
passover in honour of their principal God, designated Tezcatlipuca, and by another name Titlacaoan, and by another name Yautl, and by 
another name Telpuchtli, and by another name Tlamatzincatl. They killed on this festival a young man of superior merit, whom they had 
nourished in luxury for the space of a year ; they said that he was the image of Tezcatlipuca. On killing this young man, who had been 
regaled for a year, they immediately substituted another in his place, to nourish him for the space of a year; and they had many of these 
young men in their custody, in order that another might be immediately substituted in the place of him who had been sacrificed. They 
selected from all the captives the handsomest men, and the Calpixques were those who guarded them. ‘They took great care that they 
should be the ablest and the best looking men that could be found, and that they should have no bodily defect.” The signification of the 
names which the Mexicans bestowed upon Tezcatlipoca, amongst which that of Yautl is very deserving of notice, will be found in the 
note subjoined to the 128th page of the sixth volume of this Work, where, however, the epithet Tlamatzincatl,—which means ‘ the God of 

VOL. VIIIs @2Re) 

146 NOTES. 

“ Los que pescavan 6 cazaban en tierras 6 terminos agenos, si los tomavan con la caza 6 pesca, se la quitavan si 
eran amigos, pero si eran de los enemigos los Ilevavan al sefior, el qual 6 los mandava matar luego, 6 dava’ para 
sacrificar, 6 hacia esclavos. 

° - o OO 7 ° Le 7 ma 

« Fl que servia en casa de algun sefor, qualquiera cosa que hiciese menos 6 perdiese, 6 quebrase 6 se dafiase por 

su culpa, le hacia pagar, 6 que se comprase otra semejante*. 

“ Qualquiera cosa que alguno tuviese en deposito, 6 recibido prestada, si se perdia 6 se la hurtavan, se la man- 
davan pagar. 
“Quando alguno havia dado palabra de casar su hija con otro, y despues no se la dava, mandavanle pagar qual- 

quiera joya 6 dadiva que huviese por aquella causa recebido | y castigavanlo, porque no consentian que ninguno 
burlase 4 otro en tal caso, puesto que pocas veces esto acaecia. 

“La muger que una vez era dotada, 6 la avian comprado como ellos dicen, no volvia jamas entre sus parientes, sino 

que en muriendo.el marido, la casaban con otro de la parentela, y muchos veces con el hermano dél marido, y esto 
era comun casarse con los cunados t. 

“ Qualquiera que se huia la muger 4 alguno, 6 se iva con otro, 6 por rencilla que avia entre ambos se absentaba 
para casa de sus padres, si despues de requerida no queria volver 4 su marido, el se casaba con otra, porque en este 
caso las mugeres eran poderosas 4 no ir sino querian, y por no poder vivir sin muger por causa de guisar la comida 
y hacer las otras cosas de casa, como forzados se tornavan 4 casar. Algunos se sufrian y aguardavan un afio y mas, 
esperando si quisiese tornar.” 

Las Casas having completed his Survey of the laws of Guatemala and Verapaz, and made some brief and incidental 
mention of the civil history of the former province, or that portion of it which he says the Indians named ‘ Calcatuz,’ 
as if in allusion to the passage of Deuteronomy “ omnis locus quem calcaverit pes tuus, tuus erit,” proceeds to give the 

penitence,’ and was a name emphatically given by the Jews to the Deity—does not occur. Other reasons for supposing that Apion’s 
account of the prisoner confined in the temple of Jerusalem and destined for sacrifice, was not a mere fable, will be found in the 487th page 
of the sixth volume of this Work; and we shall only further remark, in reference to the above passage, that Adam is expressly declared, in 
the twenty-seventh verse of the first chapter of Genesis, to have been created in the image of God; which might have suggested to the 
Mexicans the honorary title which they bestowed upon their unfortunate victim. It need scarcely be mentioned that it was a Levitical 
ordinance, that victims without any blemish or defect should be offered to the Deity; to which Sahagun intended, perhaps, to allude, in 
making use of the above expression ‘passover.’ ‘The Mexicans were accustomed to clothe themselves in the skins of the victims whom they 
had sacrificed, and history informs us, that the Jews in the reign of Trajan rebelled against the Romans, and having killed vast numbers of 
them, ate their flesh, and wore their skins by way of triumph. Lerius accordingly strives to palliate the cruelties which the Brazilians exercised 
towards.their enemies, by quoting the example of the Jews, in the following passage of the fifteenth chapter of his ‘ Historia Navigationis in 
Brasiliam’: “‘ Hec porro immanis crudelitas apud barbaros frequentissima, per se est quidem abominanda. Atqui portentosius id esse videtur 
quod patratum a Judeis fuisse legimus, (quos tamen humanitate ceteras gentes antecellere par erat, prohibito a Deo sanguinis esu). Illi 
enim tumultibus concitandis, ut tradunt historiz, deditissimi, Trajani temporibus adeo horrendas seditiones excitarunt, eoque crudelitatis 
et immanitatis processerunt, ut cesis quadraginta hominum mullibus in Algypto, Cyrene, et Cypro, eorum carnibus vesci, sanguineque vul- 
tum oblinire suum sustinuerint. Quin multos a vertice transfixere medios, eorumque pellibus induti immanissimam pr@ se ferentes rabiem 
obambulavere. Que historia si non absolvat, saltem extenwet Americanorum crudelitatem.” We have already remarked, in the nute sub- 
joined to the 309th page of the sixth volume of this Work, that the Jews might have worn the skins of their enemies to verify ancient 
prophecies, interpreted by them in a fanatical sense; but since in the Mexican paintings figures occur clothed in the skins of women, 
and Sahagun informs us that the Mexican priests sometimes wore the skins of the unfortunate female victims whom they had sacrificed at 
their festivals, the latter atrocity might have been to verify, in an extraordinary sense, the prodigy foretold by Jeremiah, in the twenty- 
second verse of the thirty-first chapter of his Prophecies: «The Lord hath created a new thing in the earth, a woman shall compass a man;” 
the same passage is translated in the Septuagint, éxrice Kugios owrnpiay cig xaradurevow xouvyy, ev cwrnpie wepteAcucovran dvbownos, “ The 
Lord hath established safety for the purpose of a new plantation, men shall go about in safety,”—affording another instance, in addition to 
the many already given, of important variations between the texts of the Hebrew Bible and the Septuagint. 

* Tt appears, from the thirty-ninth verse of the thirty-first chapter of Genesis, that Jacob was accountable to Laban, during the twenty 
years which he served him, for whatever was stolen or missing, of that which had been confided to his care. 

+ This custom was analogous to that of the Jews in the earliest ages, since we read in the twenty-ninth chapter of Genesis that the 
patriarch Jacob purchased his two wives Rachael and Leah of their father Laban, by agreeing to serve him for a stated number of years. 

{: The following passage occurs in a MS. preserved in the library of the Royal Academy of History at Madrid, entitled * Miscelanea 
de la Nueva Espafia,’ “ Quando algun sefior moria como tubiese hermano, heredaba el hermano las mujeres y casaba con sus cujadas, y 
asi mismo heredaba los bienes del hermano, y no los hijos, que asi era costumbre.” The uncles, in such cases, were perhaps constituted the 
guardians of their deceased brother’s children, which would account for their succeeding to the temporary inheritance. 

NOTES. hg 

following slight account of the laws of Yucatan ; the history of which extensive region, it is to be regretted, he did not 
more carefully investigate, since there are reasons for supposing, that it was a part of the American continent which 
was colonized in very early ages both by Jews and Christians, and where it is not impossible they might have recon- 
ciled some of the conflicting tenets of their respective creeds; time being, as Lord Bacon observes, a great innovator 
even in religious matters; and tradition, a very imperfect means of preserving its rites and ceremonies in a pure and 
uncorrupted state. 

ef Porque con las provincias de la Verapaz parte sus terminos el reyno grande de Yucatan, dentro del qual se 
incluyen muchas y grandes provincias, porque tiene cerca de trescientas leguas en torno, y todas de una lengua 6 
lenguaje solo, cosa no poco de maravillar en aquella tierra firme, que tan immenso numero de gentes como en aquel 
reyno havia, no tener mas de una lengua, digamos algo de las naciones del, y esto sera muy poco por mi gran inadver- 
tencia ; que quando estube en aquel reyno, y fue parte de mi obispado, y pudiera ser informado muy de raiz de todo 
lo que de aquellas gentes quisiera saber, y aun despues muchas veces, tractando con religiosos que alli avian estado 
y sabian la lengua, no cai en preguntarlo ¢ informarme *. 

“To que puedo decir de ellas es, que todos eran gentes muy politicas y prudentes: tenian sus reyes y sefiores 
grandes 4 quien obedecian, gran numero de vasallos, porque eran muchas las gentes que en aquel reyno havia; tenian 
maravilloso govierno, leyes y costumbres buenas, vivian en paz y justicia, y de esto puede por argumento claro bastar 
la multitud de las poblaciones llenas de gentes pacificas, que se hallaron quando primeramente alli fueron los nuestros, 
4 lo qual ayudava la conformidad y unidad de la lengua. No tenian mas de una sola muger, 4 lo que tenemos enten- 
dido, sefiores ni subditos. Los hombres andavan vestidos con camisetas de colores cubiertas con sus mantas pintadas, 
con zarcillos en las orejas de oro, y patenas y otras joyas al cuello. Las mugeres cubiertas las cabezas y pechos, y sus 
faldillas de la cinta abajo hasta los pies, curando siempre que de ellos cosa no se les parezca. Cubrianse unas mantas 
delgadas como velos en lugar de tovallas 6 mantos. 

“ De tres vicios fuimos certificados carecen mas que otras las gentes de este reyno, del pecado nefando, y de comer 
carne humana, y de sacrificar hombres. Uno de los que han presumido escrivir las costumbres destas gentes, sola- 
mente por oidas sin haver visto cosa de ellas, sino por dicho de quien les iva interese decir lo que 4 él hacia, este 
dixo que pocos usaban la sodomia, y que sacrificavan algunos hombres. 

“ Otro acerrimo infamador de estas naciones, que Dios Nuestro Seftor haya, en cuya historia creo yo que tuvo 
Dios harto poca parte, dixo ser indicio notorio de que aquellas gentes eran contaminadas del vicio nefando por haver 
hallado en cierta parte de aquella tierra, hechos de barro ciertos idolos uno encima de otro. Como si entre nuestros 
pintores 6 figulos no se finjan cada dia figuras feas y de diversos actos, que no hay sospecha por nadie obrarse, y con- 
denarlos todos por aquello, haciendolos reos de vicio tan indigno de se hablar, no carece de muy culpable temeridad, 
y asi lo que arriba dije tengo por la verdad, y lo demas por falsos testimonios dignos de divino castigo. 

“ Ninguno entre ellos hurtava; los mercados en que sus cosas unas por otras truecan 6 commutan, simple y fideli- 
simamente y sin engafio usan. Asi debemos presumir carecer de todos los otros vicios que la razon natural muestra 
ser prohibidos, y argumento de ello es, lo que Pedro Martir en el capitulo 2° de su Decada 4° refiere, hablando del 
descubrimiento de este reyno, lo qual debio de los mismos que lo vieron saber, que el sefior de un pueblo de tres 
mil casas llamado Campeche, donde yo despues estube, mostré 4 los primeros descubridores un patibulo lugar donde 
punian los malhechores, que era hecho de esta manera: era como un pie de cruz quadrado de quatro gradas en alto, 
hecho de piedra 6 canteria 6 marmor, y encima de lo alto de uno como pulpito no hueco sino macizo, alli estava escul- 
pida una imagen de hombre, y junto 4 ella dos figuras de animales de quatro pies no conocidos: los parecian que 
como perros rabiosos acometian el vientre del hombre para lo hacer pedazos: estava luego alli una serpiente de cal y 

* It is to be regretted that Las Casas was so negligent, as he here admits; since it appears from the hundred and twenty-third chapter 
of the Historia Apologetica, that the people of Yucatan were acquainted with the doctrine of the Trinity, and that Ycona, Bacab or 
Bacabab, and Echuac, were the names given to the Three Persons of which it was composed. The account there contained is in substance, 
and nearly in words, the same as that which will be found in the 160th page of the sixth volume of this Work, and we shall insert it at 
length: in a future note. The fact stated by Las Casas, that the people of Yucatan named Friday Ymis, and fasted, from a tradition that 
Bacab had been crucified on that day, is very singular, and proves that they were acquainted with a week of seven days, as Boturini affirms 
in the 338th page of the sixth volume of this Work of the people of Chiapa, a province which bordered, it deserves to be remarked, on 

Yucatan. 

148 Ow sS: 

canto, labrada tan gruesa como un buey, y de longura tenia quarenta y siete pies, que tragava un leon de marmol : 
estavan tres vigas grandes hincadas en el suelo, y otras tres que las atravesaban, y muchas flechas 6 saetas rociadas 
con sangre alli echadas : finalmente era cosa admirable, donde parece figurar el rigor de la justicia, para poner temor 
y freno que no perpetren mal los malos. 

“ No puede con verdad alguna en contrario de lo dicho decir, que aquel lugar devia ser donde sacrificaban hombres 
a los idolos ; porque ya esta esto reprobado por los que mas despues andando el tiempo de las costumbres de estas 
gentes conocieron, y el que mas se alargo 4 decir contra estos, no dixo sino que algunos hombres sacrificaban : pero 
tambien parece falso, pues Pedro Martir que se informé de los que lo vieron, dijo que era lugar no de sacrificio de 
los dioses, sino para los criminosos de suplicio. 

“No es chico indicio de su prudencia y buena policia los admirables y antiquisimos edificios de boveda * quasi 
piramides, al menos quanto 4 la grandeza, y sobre montes 6 sierras hechas de tierra junta y traida 4 mano edificados, 
y los caracteres y letreros que tambien alli en ellos se han hallado. 

“ Ytem la multitud de colmenas y grandes colmenares de abejas domesticas } que daban infinita cantidad de miel 
y cera, lo qual no se ha visto jamas en alguna parte de las Indias, en todo quanto de ellas se ha andado, sino que la 
miel y cera que se halla y usa es silvestre y no domestica, porque las abejas la producen y obran algunas en hoyos 
dentro de la tierra, y otras en los arboles. 

“ Los hombres de estas naciones eran muy esforzados, valientes y industriosos en las guerras: peleavan con arcos 
y flechas, lanzas 6 varas largas: tenian rodelas y cascos de palo hechos {, y con armas de algodon como corazas 6 
jubones fuertes, y estas armas comunes eran en toda la Nueva Espafia, 6 las mas de ellas, Nunca daban batalla 6 
movian guerra sin hacer primero muchos cumplimientos y cerimonias.” 

The last code of Indian law which Las Casas notices in his Historia Apologetica is that of the Peruvians, whose 
criminal jurisprudence he thus briefly describes. 

“ ios adulterios si eran de voluntad de ambos, 4 ambos mataban, y si el varon hacia fuerza 4 la casada, él solo 
con la muerte hacia pago. 

“Los hurtos asperamente se castigaban, porque el primero matava si era cosa notable, como aquellos que menos 
razon de hurtar tenian, por haber puesto el rey tanto recaudo y provision que los pobres fuesen provehidos en sus 

* The ancient use of the arch in the architecture of the New World is here distinctly asserted by Las Casas, and all must agree with 
that distinguished prelate, that that invention, by whatever means it was introduced to the knowledge of the Indians, was an unequivocal 
proof of their advanced state of civilization. It has, indeed, been a matter of dispute, whether the Jews, till a comparatively recent period 
of their history, employed the arch in their architecture, or were even acquainted with the principle of its construction. Parkhurst, 
however, was of the latter opinion, as appears by his definition of the Hebrew term 3 28 in the following passage of his Lexicon ; from 
which it would appear that he believed that invention to have been known to the Jews so early as the age of Job: “nh as the key-stone, 
as of an arch, where both sides of the arch meet, and which looks or is turned towards both: occurrit, Job xxxvil. 6. Upon what are 
its bases sunk, and who laid mnsp yas, ‘the key-stone thereof’? Compare Psalms xxiv. 2. civ. 5. cxxxvi. 6. and Proverbs viii. 27.” 

+ Oviedo gives a description of these bees in the sixth chapter of the thirty-second book of the inedited portion of his Natural History 
of the Indies. He says they resembled the Spanish bees, “ escepto que en la color estotras son blancas é muy domesticas, porque ni huyen 
ni hacen mal, é tomando una é mastrujandola entre los dedos huele muy bien.” From Oviedo’s description it must be inferred that these 
bees had no stings. 

+ It would appear from the following passage of Gomara’s History of the Indies, that the Peruvians wore helmets of metal as well as 
of wood; which must be considered a proof of their advanced state of civilization. “ Las armas que los del Peru comunmente usan son 
hondas, flechas, picas de palma, dardos, porras, achas, alabardas que tienen los hierros de cobre, plata y oro: usan tambien cascos de 
metal, y de madera, y jubones enbastados de algodon. ‘ Cuentan uno, diez, ciento, mil, diez cientos, diez miles, diez cientos de miles, y asi 
yan multiplicando. Traen la cuenta por piedras, y por nudos en cuerdas de color, y es tan cierta y concertada que los nuestros se 
maravillan. Juegan con un solo dado de cinco puntos, que no tienen mayor suerte.” La Istoria de las Indias, fol. cvi. Nieremberg 
notices the arithmetical skill of the Peruvians, in the following passage of the eighth book of his Historia Nature, in which he also states 
that they were well acquainted with the principles of geometry,—a fact difficult to credit, yet not entirely to be disbelieved, from the high 
character of the historian who asserts it, who had access to many valuable manuscripts preserved in the Escurial, which other authors 
had no means of consulting: « Redeo jam ad Peruanorum philosophiam : terram innatare oceano rati, solem dicunt quotidie mergi et 
yeluti strenuum urinatorem exilire ultra: geometrie, peregrino tamen ritu, doctissimi fuere, satis etiam in geographia instructi: arith- 
meticam quoque eximie docti, at quia ignari litterarum, quibusdam funiculis discoloribus per quosdam nodos numerabant, multiplicabant, 
partiebant, prout unus positus color ante aut post.” Some curious facts are stated by the same author in the fifteenth chapter of the 
book of his history already referred to. 

NOTES. 149 

extremas necesidades*, y mandando que no hubiese vagabundos }, y que todos para tener lo que hubiesen menester, 
trabajasen. Hurtillos.de poco valor, y rencillas livianas, y cosas semejantes, los seflores de cada pueblo y goberna- 
dores los castigaban con castigos moderados, como hacerles dar con una piedra{ ciertos golpes en las espaldas, y 
los semejantes. 

“ Los homicidas que mataban 4 alguno, sin tener remedio eran con muerte justiciados. 

«“ Los que mentian eran muy castigados{ segun la calidad de la mentira, y comunmente 4 las mugeres que men- 
tian, aunque fuesen las mentiras livianas, por castigo tresquilaban ||. A los hechizeros y brujos que en las mugeres 
causaban esterilidad, 6 ligavan los maridos que no pudiesen 4 sus mugeres llegar, 6 que con hechizos mataban, cosas 
que muchas veces se usavan entre ellos por algunas personas malas que debian tener hecho pacto con el diablo, 
crudelisimamente las mataban, y no donde quiera, sino que aqueste genero de delinquentes los traian 4 la ciudad 
de Cuzco, para que alli fuesen justiciados, y su muerte y castigo mas por el reyno se sonase {]. 

«“ Los delictos que se cometian en perjuicio de la comunidad, y otros graves castigavan los governadores 6 mayor- 
domos que tenia el rey Inga en cada provincia, pero pocas veces condenaban estos 4 muerte sin particular consulta y 
mandamiento suyo, porque como se ha dicho, quasi toda la jurisdiccion de lo criminal, al menos de pena de muerte, 

avia para si reservado. 
“ Los contadores mayores.y menores tenian en las cuentas gran facilidad, pero si en alguna cosa les hallaba menti- 

rosos al tiempo de dar las cuentas, luego los mandaba matar. 
“ Si algun sefior deudo del rey, 6 de sangre real, cometia crimen alguno digno de muerte, y por privilegio no le 
queria matar, condenabalo 4 carcel perpetua, y esta era crudelisima carcel. Tenianla un quarto de legua del Cuzco, 

y llamabanla Bimbilla, donde lo ponian, y hasta que moria, con esta vida estaba. 
“Tenia ley puesta, que hubiese por todos sus reynos peso y medida,** para que ninguno fuese agraviado 6 engafiado. 

* This was in accordance with the Mosaic law, since charity was prescribed to the Jews in the following ordinance of the twenty-fifth 
chapter of Leviticus: “And if thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee ; then thou shalt relieve him : yea, though he be a 
stranger, or a sojourner ; that he may live with thee.” 

4; A special enactment of the fifteenth chapter of Deuteronomy rendered it an imperative duty on the Jews to relieve the necessities of 
their poorer brethren; but the admonition of Solomon, “ My son, lead not a beggar’s life; it is better to die than to beg,” would have 
disposed them to attach ideas of disgrace to the life of a common mendicant. 

+ Perhaps they intended by this punishment to admonish the criminal that if he persisted in the sane course of conduct, he would at 
last be sentenced to be stoned to death. 

§ It has already been observed, that the Mosaic law displayed great severities towards liars and false witnesses ; and to that severity 
Solomon alludes in the fifth and ninth verses of the nineteenth chapter of Proverbs, where he twice reiterates the same precept. 

|| This was a Jewish punishment, as the authors of the English Universal History remark, in the 676th page of the first volume of that . 
work; who thus explain the phrase ‘ uncover her head,’ in the eighteenth verse of the fifth chapter of Numbers,—“ The Jews understand 
by it, shaving her hair, or at least cutting the curls off.” The same punishment of shaving off the hair was likewise common amongst 
the Mexicans, and it is represented in the sixty-fourth plate of the collection of Mendoza. 

q Besides the enactment “ Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live,” in the eighteenth verse of the twenty-second chapter of Exodus, there 
are many other ordinances in the Pentateuch which would have disposed the Jews to punish witches and necromancers with extreme 
severity. The prohibition “ Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after wizards to be defiled by them,” occurs in the 
thirty-first verse of the nineteenth chapter of Leviticus; and a similar injunction against using enchantment, and observing tzmes, in the 
twenty-sixth verse of the same chapter, which must serve to remind us of the superstitious use the Mexicans made of their Tonalametl, or 
judicial calendar. From the variety of names given to witches and wizards in the Pentateuch may be inferred the variety of persons 
exercising different branches of the magical art in the days of Moses; and from the variety of laws, the necessity which existed for con- 
trolling the pernicious influence which such impostors exercised over the minds of an extremely ignorant and credulous people, such as 
were the Jews in the time of Moses. Scripture likewise informs us, that at a later period of their history, by some centuries, not only 
did the Hebrew populace, but even their kings, frequently consult witches and false prophets; and a striking example is afforded us in 
Saul himself, who when in difficulty did not hesitate to consult the witch of Endor: and hence it is plain that the laws of Moses, however 
admirably they might have been adapted to the manners of the Jews, failed in producing the end proposed, which could be no other than 
the reformation of the people for whom they were enacted; who nevertheless, throughout their history, invariably proceeded from bad to 
worse; and we accordingly find that so far were the laws against witches from attaining the end contemplated by Moses, that it is 
extremely problematical whether the class of persons designated by the appellation of ‘ the false prophets’ in the Old Testament, did not 
occupy a middle state between witches and those who are styled in Scripture ‘the sons of the prophets,’ who were a very numerous class 
in ages antecedent to the Babylonian captivity amongst the Jews. 

. #® [tis said, in the nineteenth chapter of Leviticus, “ Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgement, in meteyard, in weight, or in measure. 
Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin shall ye have: I am the Lord your God, which brought you out of the land of 

VOL. VIII. (2Q ) 

150 NOTES. 

“Era tambien ley que ninguno entrase ni saliese puesto el sol ni antes que saliese, en la ciudad del Cuzco%*, 
porque se supiese y cognosciesen todos los que en la ciudad estaban, y de donde venian 6 eran. 

“Otras muchas leyes y buenas costumbres pueden colegir de la orden y ordenes, que cerca de la governacion 
arriba en diversos capitulos quedan referidas.” 

The following were some miscellaneous laws and usages of the Peruvians which are noticed by various Spanish 
authors, amongst which that relating to blasphemy J, as exemplified in the cruel death to which the Inga Tupac 
sentenced the missionary Diego Ortiz, is very deserving of notice; it is contained in the following passage of the 
Preface to the second edition of Garcilaso de la Vega’s ‘ Commentarios Reales de los Incas.’ 

“Llegaron 4 Marcanai, y avisaron al Inca Tupac que traian 4 Frai Diego; pero el no quiso verle; y preguntan- 
dole que harian de él, respondié que le matasen por blasfemia contra sus Dioses. Llevaronle arrastrando{ por 
una ladera cercana 4 un rio, al sitio llamado la horca del Inca, porque en él eran ajusticiados los malhechores. Alli 
le bolvieron 4 agotar y 4 palear; le metieron por entre las ufias y la carne espinas agudas y cafias delgadas que 
Jlaman Chonta, cubriendole despues de flechas. Intentaron ahogarle con humos asquerosos, tapandole la boca y las 
narices. para que no respirase ; y viendo que no moria en tantos tormentos, empegaron 4 desconfiar los Indios de 
acabarle la vida, y 4 gritar Mananguanunca, que significa, en ninguna manera morira. En esta confusion, Juan 
Tupac le did con una hacha dos golpes en el celebro, de que caié en el suelo sin habla. Ya 4 lo ultimo de la vida 
le cogieron, y teniendo la cabega abajo y los pies levantados, le hincaron un palo por las ingles que le sacaron por el 
celebro 4 la nuca; y le levantaron en alto, cubriendole de predras y tierra. Sacaronle despues muerto, y le tendieron en 

Egypt:” and Solomon alludes to the same commandment when he says, in the first verse of the eleventh chapter of the Proverbs, “A false 
balance is abomination to the Lord, but a just weight is his delight.” We may hence infer that the invention of the balance was known in 
the earliest ages to the Jews, and it is not surprising that it should have been used throughout the extensive empire of the Ingas, since those 
arts and inventions which had been the subject of Hebrew legislation, such as battlements on houses, and fringes on garments, were pre- 
cisely the ones which the Jews who colonized America would have been most likely to have carried over with them to that continent. 

* The suspicious fear of strangers which this singular law implies, and which the Jews, wherever they had acquired a temporal domi- 
nion, would have been likely to have displayed from a vague tradition of the past persecutions which their ancestors, during a long 
course of ages, had suffered from Christians, might be accounted for on the maxim of policy which Dido pleaded to Eneas for excluding 
the Trojans from the Carthaginian shores, who thus excuses herself to the shipwrecked chief of Troy: 

«« Res dure et regni novitas me talia cogunt 
Moliri, et laté fines custode tueri.” 

It deserves to be remarked, that Montezuma’s apprehension of evils likely to result to his kingdom from permitting his subjects to have 
any intercourse with foreigners, led him to forbid the Spaniards in the most express terms even to approach the city of Mexico. 

+ Blasphemy was punished capitally by the Mosaic law, as we learn from the following passage of the twenty-fourth chapter of 
Leviticus : ‘And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, Whosoever curseth his God, shall bear his sin; and he that blas- 
phemeth the name of the Lord, shall be put to death, and all the congregation shall certainly stone him: as well the stranger, as he that 
is born in the land, when he blasphemeth the name of the Lord, shall be put to death.” It is extremely singular that the Peruvians 
should have agreed with the Jews in punishing this spiritual offence with death. Polo de Ondegardo states this curious fact in 
the following passage of his inedited treatise concerning the manners of the Peruvians; wherein he observes, that blasphemy, sacrilege, 
adultery, and homicide, were four crimes which the Peruvian laws punished with the greatest severity. ‘“ En los pleitos criminales 
tuvieron grandes leyes, y tenian quatro delitos que se castigaban asperamente: la blasfemia contra él que tenian por Dios, 6 contra los 
Guacas, 6 contra el Inga: el hurto especialmente si era cosa de religion, 6 cosa que tocase al Inga; y era mas castigado si alguno 
hurtaba lo que no habia menester: tambien se castigava asperamente el adulterio y el homicidio.” 

£ A most edifying note will be found in the ninety-second page of the fourth volume of Blackstone’s Commentaries, in which the editor 
quotes the authority of Sir Edward Coke to show that the punishment which the English law has adjudged to high-treason ‘is 
warranted by divers examples in Scripture; for Joab was drawn, Bigthan was hanged, Judas was embowelled, and so of the rest.” 
(3 Inst. 211.) Notwithstanding the unfeeling and flippant tone of levity which pervades this note, the observation will be found 
generally true, that most of our penal enactments are founded upon Scripture precedent and the usages of the Jews; neither can it be 
denied that the traditions of the Pentateuch have been perverted by Christians to as corrupt purposes as ever they were in ancient times 
among the Jews. History can attest this important truth; and if the ponderous tomes of the state trials and the judicial proceedings of 
our legal tribunals in past times be examined, it will be found, that Henry the Eighth became the cruel executioner of his subjects 
and his wives, and justified the atrocities of his bloody reign, by a constant appeal to the Mosaic law; that his daughter Queen Mary 
dragged heretics to the stake, and illuminated Smithfield with funereal flames, from a persuasion that she was acting agreeably to the 
written word of God; that Queen Elizabeth deduced many arguments from Scripture to prove that she was justified in ¢rying and 
beheading the unfortunate Mary Queen of Scots, who unavailingly pleaded in her own behalf the rights of an independent sovereign ; 
and finally, that the puritanical and disloyal subjects of Charles the First were at no loss for weighty reasons of Scripture to vindicate 

NOTES. 151 

el suelo, mandando 4 todos pasasen sobre ¢/*; y no creyendo que estaba muerto, le cortaron la cabeca y la pusieron en 
un cerro, y aun dudaban si vivia. Quitolos el recelo D. Diego Aucalli, aconsejandolos que le enterrasen en un hoio, he- 
chando debajo la cabeca, y el cuerpo encima con los pies arriba: asi lo ejecutaron, Ilenando el hoio de piedras, salref, 
chicha, y otras cosas supersticiosas que usaban en los castigos de los blasfemos.” It is evident from the concluding 
sentence of the above passage, that the crime for which Diego Ortiz suffered so cruel a death, was that which the Jews, 
and even Paul himself before his miraculous conversion to Christianity, are represented in the New Testament as being 
most zealous to punish,—that is to say, blasphemy; and it may readily be imagined, that a missionary might easily have 
rendered himself obnoxious to such an accusation, when it is recollected that Christ himself was termed a blasphemer 
by the Jews, who were only restrained from putting him to death by fear of the Romans. The barbarous treatment 
which the same missionary had previously experienced from the Indians, is described in the following passage of the 
Preface to Garcilaso de la Vega’s ‘Royal Commentaries’; and it is very deserving of remark, that a cross was used as 
an instrument of punishment ; which was probably eitber in allusion to his being a Christian, or because such a mode 
of punishment in the case of blasphemers accorded with the laws and the ancient usages of the Ingas. 

“Le llevaron al cementerio, y le ataron con sogas de cortaderas por la garganta, piernas y brazos 4 una cruzf, 
donde unos le azotaban cruelmente, otros profanaban 4 su vista los calices y ornamentos §, blasfemando de la Omni- 
potencia, y otros le robaron quanto tenia en su celda, haciendo chuspas 6 talegas de sus vestidos, desatinando todos en 

their conduct in bringing that ill-fated and too confiding monarch to the block. The custom of wresting Scripture precedent to the 
most depraved ends, both in daw and politics, which was so prevalent in Europe in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, did not escape 
the keen penetration of one of the Turkish Sultans, who, professing an inclination to become a convert to Christianity, ironically 
assigned as a principal reason, that then he should find a precedent in the Bible, which he could not discover in the Coran, for a king’s 
putting to death an elder brother who had a better title than himself to the throne; alluding, it is to be presumed, to the history of 
Adonijah in the second chapter of the First Book of Kings, who was put to death by his younger brother Solomon, notwithstanding the 
pressing entreaties of his mother to spare his life. 

* The Peruvian custom of trampling upon the bodies of their prisoners has already been noticed in the eighty-first page of the Notes 
annexed to the present Volume, where its resemblance to an analogous Hebrew custom is also pointed out. 

+ Abimelech is said in the forty-fifth verse of the ninth chapter of Judges, to have “beat down the city (of Shechem), and sowed it 
with salt; which accompanying act was doubtless to signify that the site of that city was thenceforward accursed. The association of 
salt in the minds of the Jews and the Peruvians with something accursed, argues an identity of feeling, connected perhaps with some 
fabulous incident in the early mythology of the former people ; which is the more remarkable, since amongst other nations salt and wheat 
were emblematical of abundance and prosperity, and is therefore a proof of Hebrew traditions having passed over to the New World. 
We may further remark, in reference to the same chapter of the Book of Judges, that the description of the house of the god Berith in 
the forty-sixth verse of that chapter singularly agrees with the plan of the Mexican Teocallis, which had platforms above, upon the area 
of which was built the house of the god to whom the temple itself was dedicated ; and which, like the Temple of Jerusalem, served in © 
time of war as strong fortifications, and places of refuge to the besieged citizens. 

{ It might at first appear, that this mode of punishment was resorted to by the Peruvians to mark their contempt for the religion which 
the unhappy missionary professed ; and the supposition itself is by no means improbable. We may however observe, that Zarate 
affirms that the Spaniards found the crucified bodies of men and boys fastened to crosses in some of the provinces contiguous to Peru ; 
from which circumstance it may be inferred that crucifixion was a mode of punishment introduced into the New World by the Jews. 
If this conjecture be deemed at all at variance with probability, it should. be recollected that the Mosaic law accustomed the Jews to 
believe that legal penalties could not be too severe; and some of the Rabbis go so far as to recommend pouring melted lead down the 
throats of criminals. This punishment, it is unnecessary to observe, is nowhere ordained in the Pentateuch ; but the following account 
of it, as a sentence known to the ancient Jews, is taken from the 673rd page of the first volume of the English Universal History,— 
a work deservedly held in high estimation. “The first kind (of burning to death) they call ‘burning of the body,’ and the other ‘ burning 
of the soul’; this last was the most frequent among them, and some of the Rabbis acknowledge no other way but this to have been 
used, though the places mentioned above imply rather the former. The Talmudists do indeed condemn it, and think it unlawful to burn 
the bodies of their brethren to ashes. They infer it from what is said of the sons of Aaron, who, though killed by a supernatural fire, yet 
remained unconsumed ; since the text says that they were carried dead out of the camp in their coats; but Rabbi Eleazar is said in the 
Talmud to have disallowed the conclusion, affirming that he had seen a priest’s daughter burnt to ashes ; to which he is only answered, that 
her judges were ignorant Cutheans, that is, a mongrel kind of Samaritans, who knew nothing of the law.” Whether the charge of want 
of veracity which is here insinuated against Rabbi Eleazar, or of ignorance of the Mosaic law alleged on the part of the Cutheans, be well 
founded, will best appear by reference to the twenty-first chapter of Leviticus, where the following ordinance occurs: “ The daughter 
of any priest, if she profane herself by playing the whore, she profaneth her father: she shall be burnt with fire.” It is unnecessary to 
observe that this passage of Scripture fully corroborates the testimony of Rabbi Eleazar, which would thus receive sufficient confirmation, 
even although the authority of the Talmud should go for nothing. 

§ This was evidently in mockery of Christianity. 

152 NOTES. 

locas execraciones contra la religion y Frai Diego, hasta raspar el suelo que ocupaba quando rezaba y decia misa ; 
cuio polvo* y los pedazos de los altares que deshicieron, lo arrojaron junto, como cosa maldita y ominosa en el rio. 
Desataronle, y pidid algo de comer, dieronle un poco de vizcocho, tan duro que no pudiendo morderle, bolvié 4 
pedir un poco de agua en que mojarle, y al punto Ilevaron un vaso de orines, sal, salitre y colpa (yerva amarga como 
hiel) y se lo dieron 4 beber: repard, aunque tan atormentado, en la asquerosa bebida, y escuso probarla ; pero los 
Indios asestandole las lanzas, le decian: Bebe embustero, que si no, hemos de pasarte el cuerpo. Bebiola toda, y 
luego le apartaron de la cruz, para agujerearle las megillas y la barba. Metieronle una soga de las mismas cortade- 
ras por los agujeros, y tirando de ella como de diestro, le Ilevaron por las calles hasta Ilegar donde estaba Dofia 
Angelina, que no contenta con tanta lastima, le heché muchas maldiciones, y queriendo algunos de los Indios que 
la acompanaban lisongearla, siguieron 4 los que maltrataban 4 Frai Diego. Llevaronle al pueblo de Marcanay, que 
dista dos leguas de Villcapamba, donde se estaban celebrando las fiestas de la coronacion de Tupac Amaru, que 
por muerte de su hermano avia recibido la borla colorada§: distaria de Puquiura, donde empezé el ‘martirio, aquel 
pueblo doce 6, quince leguas Espaiiclas, pobladas de cerros, montes, pefias y pedregales. Si no podia andar, le 
arrastraban con tanta impiedad, que aviendose parado 4 verle en el camino Don Alfonso Tipso, Indio principal de Nu- 
cuma, con otros, viendolos condolidos, digeron los que llevaban: Qué mirais bestias? Mirad 4 donde vais, que os 

* The idea of the ground and the very dust of the earth contracting pollution from the sins of those who inhabited it, seems to occur 
in that chapter of the New Testament, in which Christ commands his disciples to shake off the dust from their feet, as a testimony against 
those cities that refused to receive the annunciation of the Gospel: and that it was a Hebrew custom to cast the powder of accursed 
things into running streams, is also evident from the twentieth verse of the thirty-second chapter of Exodus, where it is said of Moses, 
“ And he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon the water, and made 
the children of Israel drink of it?;”” and it perhaps may be inferred from the sixth verse of the twenty-third chapter of the Second Book 
of Kings, where it is said of king Josiah, «‘ And he brought out the grove from the house of the Lord, without Jerusalem, unto the brook 
Kidron, and burned it at the brook Kidron, and stamped it small to powder, and cast the powder thereof upon the graves of the children 
of the people.” Sahagun affirms that the Mexicans were accustomed to shake off the dust from their feet as a religious ceremony on one 
of their festivals; and it is extremely probable, that that ceremony had some connexion with ancient Hebrew superstitions. 

+ Donna Angelina was a Peruvian lady of high rank, who had been converted to Christianity by the Spaniards, and who afterwards, as 
was not unusually the case amongst the Indians, relapsed to the religion of her countrymen, and persecuted the missionaries who attempted 
to proselyte them to their faith. 

§ A crimson tassel worn on the forehead was the insignia of royalty amongst the Peruvians, and an analogous ornament suspended 
from the crown of the head was the mark of distinguished valour amongst the Mexicans. 

1 Selden informs us, in his disquisition concerning the Golden Calf, that according to an ancient Hebrew tradition, the beards of those 
Israelites who worshiped the Calf were, on their drinking the water into which Moses threw the powder, into which he had ground the gold 
of which it was composed, immediately changed into a golden colour, and that in this manner they were miraculously convicted of guilt. 
The situation of Aaron, whose office obliged him to wear an extremely long beard, that he might appear the more venerable in the eyes 
of the people, must under such circumstances have been very ludicrous, and was certainly a just punishment for the sin of idolatry, into 
which it would appear he had been rather reluctantly led, but which under any circumstances was most unpardonable in the brother 
himself of Moses, and the high-priest of God. The following is the passage of Selden’s treatise De Diis Syris, in which this excellent 
story of yellow beards being produced by drinking golden soup is contained: “ Nec preterire visum est ridiculum illud sed vetustum He- 
breorum commentum, de aureé illa potatione quam Israelitis exhibuit Moses, cum redactus in pulverem vitulus potatum ab eo dabatur3 
inde scilicet natas fuisse aureo colore barbas, apud eos nimirum posterosque eorum, qui, cum vituli cultui maximé fuissent dediti, etiam 
pulverem illum avidius potando haurientes, et barbas et menta et maxillas superfluo, ut fit, liquore tingebant.” The same learned writer 
closes his account of the Jewish fable with the insertion of an epigram composed by Petrus Rhemensis, of which the following lines 

may serve as a specimen :— i } 
“ Hebrei tradunt Moysen fecisse quod audis, 

Ut sciret solos hac ratione reos. 
Nam rutilans auro monstrabat barba nocentes 
Dum patulo latices fluminis ore bibunt. 
Aurum, quod fudit Aaron, descendit eorum 
In barbas tantum qui coluere bovem.” 

Those judges of poetry who with Steevens, the most fastidious of all the critics of Shakspeare, cannot reconcile with their notions of 
propriety, and the license usually accorded to a poet, the line in the play of Macbeth— 

“ Flis silver skin laced with his golden blood,” 

descriptive of the murder of Duncan, and the horrid spectacle presented by his wounds,—will perhaps discover somewhat to admire in 
the above epigram, since there at least the good taste of the reader is not shocked by an antithesis, or too striking a contrast of hues, 

NOTES. 153 

haremos pedazos si os deteneis. El descanso que le daban en las noches aquellos barbaros impios, era desnu- 
darle, hiriendole con inumerables azotes, dejandole despues al yelo sin darle de comer; y la ultima antes de llegar 
4 Marcanai, le metieron en una cueva, poniendole al golpe de una canal de agua que caia sobre él, sufriendo con 
tanta paciencia sobre los immensos dolores que padecia, esta invencion maldita, que no se le oid en toda la noche 
otra palabra que, sea por amor de Dios, él os perdone y tenga misericordia de mi. 

“Quando edifican alguna casa principal de sefior cacique poderoso, dura mucho tiempo la obra, pero jamas les 
faltan ceremonias que hacer, todas dirigidas al demonio*, sol y luna, paraque aquel edificio sea mas fixo y durable f, 

* This vituperative epithet is here bestowed upon Pachacamac, the supreme god of the Peruvians; next to whom in dignity was 
Viracocha, who was adored under the image of the Sun, whilst the homage which they paid to the Moon resembled that which the 
Jews of ancient times were accustomed to pay to Astarte or Ashtaroth, the renowned goddess of the Sidonians, who is frequently men- 
tioned in the Old Testament. 

‘+ The passage of Scripture “ Except the Lord build the house, the labour of the workman is in vain,” might have suggested to the 
Jews the performance of rites, which in process of time degenerated into the superstitious ceremonies with which the Peruvians cele- 
brated the dedication of their houses. ‘The Mexicans, between whose customs and those of the Peruvians there was great similarity, 
imitated them likewise in this particular ceremony, as Torquemada informs us in the 139th page of the sixth volume of this Work; whose 
account is confirmed by the Ode which king Nezahualcoyotl composed on the completion of his new palace in Tezcuco, and which is 
inserted in Note XLIV. of the present volume. The resemblance which existed between some of the Mexican and Peruvian rites was noticed 
by the Spaniards, and is incidentally mentioned by Oviedo in the following passage of the fiftieth chapter of the second volume of the 
inedited portion of his General History of the Indies, who quotes the authority of Don Antonio de Mendoza, the first Viceroy of Mexico, in 
his summary Relation transmitted to the Emperor Charles V., which contains the following curious tradition of the origin of the Mexicans. 
«“Cuanto 4 la fundacion de Tenustitan, que dice que aquel capitan llamado Orchilobos fue de la parte del norte hacia Panuco, é de ahi 4 
Mexico con quatro cientos hombres armados de oro é plata é cuenta la forma que tubo parase hacer sefior ; é les dio leyes é cerimonias, 
é orden de sacrificios, é leyes de combates; & que les hizo una habla cuando se quiso ir, prometiendoles de tornar cuando mas necesidad 
tubiesen; € que se fue hacia Guatemala, € creen que de alli fue al Peru, porque hay relacion que alla hay vestigios de sacrificios é 
Orchilobos; 6 dice mas una manera de fabula de como fue engendrado Montezuma de la pluma del ydolo, que su madre se met26 en el 
pecho; & como fue hecho sefior por su esfuerzo é gran ser de su persona, € despues su hijo Montezuma; é dice que 4 Cortes le 
recibieron los Yndios de la tierra pensando que era Orchilobos que volvia 4 cabo de quatro cientos afios que habia que era ido, é que 
estas é otras historias tienen por figuras en sus libros. E para esto digo, que es muy diferente la relacion que Hernando Cortes escribié 
al Emperador nuestro Sefior, segun el mismo Montezuma le dijo, como mas largamente queda escripto en el capitulo cinco. E alli no 
dice que dela parte del norte viniese Orchilobos, sino de la parte de levante hacia donde el sol sale; ¢ tambien dice, que ya ese capitan 
volvié € no le quisieron recebir, é otras cosas muchas é apartadas de la relacion que se hizo al Visorrey; 6 es de creer que Montezuma 
mejor estaria informado de su generacion é origen que no los nuevos € modernos informadores de agora, cuanto mas que lo que dijo Cortes 
4 Montezuma fue en presencia de los mas principales de su sefiorio, de los cuales pocos 6 ningunos hay al presente de aquellos ancianos é 
sabios que entonces habia. E mas adelante en el capitulo nono el mismo Montezuma reiterando la misma relacion de su origen 4 sus 
vasallos, en publica audiencia en presencia de Cortes é de los Espafioles, da razon de como vinieron 4 la tierra sus antecesores. Demas 
de eso en la relacion que se tractaba en el capitulo quarenta cinco, se cuenta la forma que Montezuma tubo para se hacer sefior de 
Tenuxtitan, ayudando 4 la parcialidad de los Mexicanos contra el vando de los que seguian la parte 6 apellido Tlatalulco, tomando 
cautelosamente por yerno al Sefior de dicho vando, llamado Samalie, é en una fiesta 6 banquete le hizo matar 4 él, 6 sus capitanes. Y en 
la relacion antes de esta del Visorrey, en el capitulo quarenta ocho, dice que el padre é el abuelo de Montezuma vinieron de muy lejos 
de Tenuxtitan, € conquistaron la tierra ochenta afios antes que los Cristianos fuesen 4 ella. Lo que 4 mi me parece es, que no se debe 
creer que el origen de Montezuma fuese Orchilobos él oviese venido de la parte del norte, ni de la del Peru, que esta de la Nueva Espafia 
4 la parte del viento sueste, antes se debe sospechar, que fué de la parte de Nicaragua, que es provincia mas oriental que Guatemala, en 
la costa del Sur, de la misma lengua que se habla en la Nueva Espafia, la cual Guatemala estd entre lo uno é lo otro, é los Orchilobos 
sacrificios, € comer de carne humana, é otros ritos, ansi como sacrificarse las orejas, é lenguas, é miembros generativos, é otras muchas 
cosas que acostumbran, todo es de una manera é muy conforme. Eansi pienso yo, é pensaran los que viesen aquella tierra é leyeren lo que 
es dicho, que es justo que se piense, que no del Peru, sino de Nicaragua ovieron origen esos Indios é su capitan Orchilobos; é los mismos 
Orchilobos, 6 ques 6 templos, 6 idolos tienen por aquella costa, é lo del Peru es muy estrafio é apartado deso, asi en la lengua como en lo 
demas. Y este nombre ‘ Peru’ es impropio, porque no es de aquella tierra donde el gobernador Pizarro é Almagro han andado, donde 
Atabaliba fue sefior, sino muy mas cerca del Darien é de Panama, como se diré en su lugar, cuando se tracte de la Tercera Parte desta 
General Historia. Cuanto 4la elecion de Montezuma, me parece pues, que dice esa relacion que habia quatro cientos afios que Orchilobos 
habia ido, no consuena con lo que Cortes é otros dicen que entendieron de Montezuma € otras personas, pues Montezuma dice que tambien 
su abuelo fue sefior de aquella tierra, é que el abuelo é el padre vinieron 4 ella. Cuanto 4 lo que dice esa relacion, que viniendo Cortes con 
los Espafioles, los de la tierra los recibieron pensando que era Orchilobos, tampoco se debe creer, porque como la historia ha contado, 
antes que Cortes fuese, habia ido Juan de Grijalva, é Alvarado é otros, € antes que esos Francisco Hernandez de Cordova, é les habian 
muerto Cristianos, é lo mismo hicieron 4 Cortes, é lo echaron de Tenuxtitan mas que de paso 4 lanzadas, ¢ le mataron la mayor parte de 
la gente. Adquel suefio que dice de como fue concebibo su padre de Montezuma, me parece mucho al cuento de Rea, madre de Romulo 
& Remo, virgen vestal, que otros llaman Ilia, é otros Silvia, como mas largamente lo escriben Plutarco é Tito Livio; é la una fabula é 

VOL. VIII. G2) 

154 NOTES. 

remuneracion y paga que al falso engaitador con quien muchas veces hablan, apareciendoles en formas diferentes, 
sacrifican animales de los mas estimados que tienen, como son venados vivos, carneros de la tierra *, cuies y coca, 
sacando 4 estos animales estando vivos los corazones, los quales juntamente con la sangre ante todas cosas ofrecen, 
y luego se los comen crudos], y con la sangre untan las paredes { de la casa y con maiz blanco molido y con 

la otra se quieren parecer. Oficio es de las malas buscar escusas para encubrir é dorar sus delitos é lujuria, é digo dorar, porque no 
solamente los encubren, pero hacenlos milagro. La madre de aquellos fundadores de Roma, los quiso hacer hijos de Marte dios de las 
patallas ; é esta otra que se durmié con aquella pluma en el pecho, quiso hacer d sw hijo divino, pues dice en esa Relacion, gue Orchilobos 
era embiado de Dios, & que dijo cuando se fué de Tenuxtitan, que retornaba para él. Por manera que resolviendo mi opinion, los ante- 
cesores de Montezuma son de la misma costa del Sur de Nicaragua, € de aquel golfo de Orotina, é de alli abajo hacia el Occidente ; 
é por tierra pudieron ir muchos 4 su placer 4 la Nueva Espafia; e no es cosa nueva en el mundo 4 los capitanes transportarse de unas 
provincias é partes estrafias en otras, é adquirir nuevos estados é sefiorios. Cuanto 4 lo demas en la forma de se enseforear.en la tierra 
Montezuma € sus progenitores, dicho esta lo que he podido entender, aunque diversamente congeture é lea el que quisiere ser bien infor- 
mado, é tome destas historias lo que viere es mas verosimil.” 

* The Spaniards named the llamas ‘sheep’ from the resemblance which they bore to that animal, and from their flesh and wool supplying 
the Peruvians with food and raiment, like the sheep of the other quarters of the globe. The Jews, on their arrival in America, might for the 
same reason have substituted the sacrifices of llamas for those of sheep, and the coca possibly supplied the place of the salt which they were 
commanded in the thirteenth verse of the second chapter of Leviticus to offer with all their offerings, since this leaf, mixed with a pre- 
paration of saline and unctuous clay, was to the Peruvians what the Betel leaf is at present to many nations of the East. 

+ The Jews were forbidden, in the fourth verse of the ninth chapter of Genesis, to eat the flesh with the life, which is there declared to 
be the blood; since, however, they were strictly enjoined by another special ordinance to refrain from the blood of animals, Maimonides 
supposes that the former prohibition alluded to the cruel custom of cutting flesh from the bodies of living animals, and eating it, as was 
the practice of some wandering Arab tribes in remote ages, whose example Moses might have thought the Jews likely to follow when 
pressed by hunger in the desert. This barbarous custom doubtless originated in the inconvenience which resulted to those tribes from 
carrying entire, or waiting to cut into pieces, so large an animal as an ox, when killed on a rapid journey. The testimony even of modern 
travellers might be adduced to prove the existence of the same custom amongst some of the African tribes bordering on Abyssinia, 
who, after cutting portions of flesh from the body of a living animal, plaster up the wounds with clay, and in this manner compel their 
wretched victim to proceed along with the rest of the camp. Wee shall here remark, that most commentators on Scripture maintain that 
the two Mosaic ordinances, forbidding the Jews to eat blood, or to muzzle an ox when treading out the corn, were instituted for the 
express purpose of teaching that people humanity. Voltaire, however, deduced a different conclusion from the first of these laws, to 
which he might have been led by the perusal of what is said in the thirty-second verse of the fourteenth chapter of the First Book of 
Samuel, of the Jews after their slaughter of the Philistines ¢ flying’ at the sheep and oxen, and, having killed them, greedily devouring the 
flesh with the’blood, and thereby incurring the displeasure of Saul; and with respect to the second, which contains a prohibition against 
muzzling an ox when treading out the corn, St. Paul distinctly denies that that law had any reference to humanity ; plainly intimating by the 
question“ Doth God take care for oxen?” that compassion for the brute creation was not here enjoined, but that the ordinance itself was 
inerély typical, and intended to foreshow that the clergy were entitled to receive tithes from the laity. The passage of St. Paul, in which 
this interpretation is put upon the latter Mosaic ordinance, occurs in the ninth chapter of his First Epistle to the Corinthians, and is as 
follows, ‘Say I ‘these things asa man? or saith not the law. the same also? For it is written in the law of Moses, Thow shalt not 
muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn. Doth God take care for oxen? Or saith he it altogether for our sakes? For our 
sakes, no doubt, this is written: that he that ploweth should plow in hope; and that he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of his 
hope. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your-carnal things ” Notwithstanding the severity 
of the Mosaic law against eating blood, that law, like many others, such as abstaining from the flesh of swine and circumcision, was 
abolished by the New Dispensation, although it still would appear from the fifteenth chapter of the Acts, and from the second chapter of 
St. Paul’s Epistle to the Galatians, in which he says that he withstood Peter to the face, that both he and St. Peter found it extremely 
difficult to divest themselves of their old Hebrew prejudices, and that James’s sentence, in the nineteenth verse of the first-mentioned 
chapter, was as much produced by a sense of expediency as by conviction; and hence St. Paul is said, in the very next chapter, to 
have himself circumcised a young man of the name of Timothy, which was an extraordinary act for a Christianand an Apostle to perform, 
who was just about to preach to the Jews the abolition of the old law which enjoined that rite. It deserves, however, to be remarked, 
that whatever prejudices the early Christians might have felt against eating blood, they were likely to have undergone considerable 
modification from the account of the famous vision of St. Peter in the tenth chapter of the Acts, who, falling into a trance, beheld what 
resembled a sheet let down from heaven, filled with all manner of beasts and creeping things, and heard at the same time a voice exclaim, 
“Rise, Peter, kill and eat;” which on his objecting to do, from a fear that they might be unclean, the same voice answered, “ What 
God hath cieansed, that call not thou common.” From that time, there is every reason to suppose that all distinction of meats was 
done away with amongst Christians, and that blood was henceforward eaten by them without scruple. ; 

+ It is extremely singular that the Mexicans should have imitated the Jews in the uses to which they applied the blood of sacrifices, 
which were principally four, and consisted in the ceremony of powring it upon the earth, and sprinkling it, of marking persons with it, 
and smearing it upon walls and other inanimate things. Maimonides expressly says, in the forty-sixth chapter of the third part of his 
treatise entitled « More Nevochim,’ that God commanded the Jews to offer him blood per effusionem, and not per collectionem, in 

NOTES: 155 

la coca, persuadidos y engafados del demonio, el qual les hace entender por si y por sus ministros los hechi- 
ceros, ser este el sustento de aquel edificio, adonde por su Ilamado ha de estar con ellos parte del tiempo. Con 

the manner of the Gentiles, who, he remarks, were accustomed to collect the blood of their sacrifices in vases, and to sit in a circle 
round it, and feast on the flesh of the victim, imagining, in this manner, that they acquired a sort of fraternity with the gods, whose 
portion was the blood, by partaking with them at the same table ; and hence the origin of the impious fiction, that the blood of sacrifices 
was the beverage of the gods,—a notion which was analogous to that contained in the sixteenth verse of the third chapter of Leviticus, 
where the term ‘food’ is bestowed upon the fat and kidneys of the offering which Aaron was commanded to burn on the brazen altar, a 
notion, too, which was common to the Mexicans in the earliest ages, as appears from the following passage, “and they fed the Sun and 
the Earth with blood and the flesh of men,” which occurs in the sixty-second page of the Appendix to the present volume, who might also 
have believed blood to be the beverage of the Earth, from what is said in the eleventh verse of the fourth chapter of Genesis, of the Earth 
“opening her mouth’ to receive the blood of Abel, and from the Jews being commanded by Moses to pour the blood of all slaughtered 
animals upon the earth like water. The passage of the More Nevochim of Maimonides above referred to is so singular, that we shall 
insert it here, together with another passage of the same author, in which he asserts that it was a Pagan or Zabian custom fo collect 
the blood of sacrifices in vases, in opposition to which custom he declares that God commanded the Jews to pour and sprinkle it on 
the ground. “Attamen et mundum pronuntiavit sanguinem Lex, et ordinavit ut quicquid tangeret mundaret, sicut dicitur: ¢ Atque 
asperges super Aharon, et super vestes ejus, et super vestes filiorum ejus cum eo, et sanctificabitur ipse, vestesque ejus,’ &c. Ita 
preecepit, ut sanguis super altare aspergatur. Omnem vero cultum eo peragendum jussit fierl per effusionem, non per collectionem 
ejus, sicut dicitur: ‘Ego autem dedi illum vobis super altare ad expiandum animas vestras;’ per effusionem scilicet illius, sicut 
alibi ait: ‘Et totum sanguinem reliquum effundet,’ &c. Item: ‘Sanguis autem aliorum sacrificiorum tuorum fundetur super altare,’ 
&c- Quin imo universaliter omnium bestiarum qu mactantur, sanguinem jussit effundere, etiamsi non sint oblationes: ‘Super terram, 
inquit, effundetis illum instar aque.’ Post hsec, prohibuit quoque convenire vel congregare se circa sanguinem, et ibi epulari, dicendo, 
‘Non comedetis ad vel apud sanguinem.’..... Porro scito, quod licet sanguis zmmundus et ¢mpurus admodum fuerit in oculis Zabiorum, 
tamen ab illis comestus fuerit, eo quod existimarent, cibum hunc esse demonum, et quod is qui eum comedit, hac ratione communi- 
cationem aliquam cum demonibus acquirat, ita ut familiariter cum illo conversentur, et futura ei apernant, prout vulgus demonibus 
ista attribuere solet. Fuerunt tamen quidam inter illos, quibus valdé durum et difficile videbatur sanguinem comedere (est enim res, 4 
qué natura homo abhorret) ; hi mactantes bestiam aliquam, sanguinem ejus accipiebant, et in vase vel fossuld aliqud colligebant, carnem 
vero mactatam circa illum sanguinem in circulo sedentes comedebant ; imaginantes sibi in hoc opere, ipsis carnem comedentibus, 
deemones illum sanguinem comedere, et hunc ipsorum esse cibum, hocque medio ainicitiam, fraternitatem et familiaritatem inter ipsos 
contrahi, quia omnes in una mensa edunt, et uno consessu accumbunt. Preterea opinabantur demones in somnio sibi comparere, 
futura indicare, plurimumque prodesse.” It is very deserving of remark, that Maimonides in the foregoing passages declares, that the 
idolaters or Zabians considered blood both unclean and impure, but that the Jews on the contrary deemed it pure, and possessed of a 
cleansing and sanctifying property; and it is evident that the Mexicans must have been of the latter opinion, or they never would have 
allowed the walls of their temples to be smeared with blood in the manner related by Bernal Diaz, who states that some Spaniards, 
entering into the sanctuary of one of their principal temples, discovered with horror that the walls were encrusted nearly two inches 
thick with the blood of human sacrifices, a fact which they ascertained by piercing the surface with the points of their swords. That 
the Peruvians, likewise, believed that blood was possessed of a sanctifying and purifying quality, is evident from the following passage 
of the eleventh chapter of the first book of the Historia de los Ingas, by Juan de Betanzos, a portion of whose inedited History entitled 
‘Suma y Narracion de los Yngas que los Yndios llamaron Capaccuna’ is preserved in manuscript in the library of the Escurial, whose 
account of the high-priest of Viracocha being consecrated to the sacerdotal office by the Ynga Yupangue marking lines of blood upon 
his face, is so extremely like the ceremony with which Aaron and his sons are said in the twenty-third verse of the eighth chapter of 
Leviticus to have been consecrated priests by Moses, that this analogy is very deserving of notice'. “Esto hecho, mandé Ynga 

1 The same analogy forcibly struck Las Casas, who, describing in the 138th chapter of his Historia Apologetica the manner in which 
the Totonacas consecrated their high-priest, says, that they anointed his head with the blood of circumcised children. The following are 
the words of that prelate: “ En la provincia que dijimos de los Totones 6 Totonacas, eran puestos en el sacerdocio por eleccion, como 
antiguamente los pueblos elegian 4 los obispos, y tambien al sumo pontifice el pueblo Romano: y esto parece por muchos Decretos, 
y en las historias de los Santos, como de San Silvestre, San Gregorio, San Nicolas y San Ambrosio. Elegidos en aquella provincia seis, 
el uno en sumo pontifice y Papa, si es verdad que asi lo llamaban, y los otros en sacerdotes de mayor dignidad el uno que el otro, 
cuanto era mas cereano el numero al mas alto, como diciendo asi: el primero es el sumo, el segundo despues de él era otro, el 
tercero otro, y asi de los demas; y segun aquel mas 6 menos propinquo era en numero, era mayor 6 menor en poder 6 dignidad. 
Cuando el sumo pontifice 6 Papa moria, celebradas sus obsequias que abajo se diran, sucedia en el sumo pontificado el segundo 
sacerdote como la segunda dignidad; al qual los otros sacerdotes con gran fiesta que hacian, lo ungian y consagraban con un unguento 
hecho de. un licor que se llama en su lengua ‘oles,’ y de sangre de los nizos que circuncidaban. Esto se ponia en la cabeza, y por esta 
uncion y ceremonia tomaba y aprendia la posesion 6 quasi posesion y potestad del pontificado; y luego todo el pueblo le hacia 
grandisima reverencia y acatamiento, y con gran aplauso le daban gracias porque se encargaba y recibia aquel estado, quasi como 
agradeciendole que de ellos y de su regimiento espiritual tomaba cuidado. Este acto y ceremonia de ungir los sacerdotes mand6 Dios 
verdadero & Moises que hiciese @ Aron y & sus hijos, despues de haber edificado el tabernaculo, como parece en el Levitico, capitulo 
octavo. Estos eran castisimos, y de vida irreprehensible y loable entre ellos, y aun entre nosotros, lo fueran sacada su infidelidad.” 

156 NOTES. 

lagrimas y sollozos entrafiables se debe mucho sentir su desordenada ceguedad ; solo se satisfacen con el nombre de 
Cristianos, favoreciendose y conformandose en las obras con sus ritos y ceremonias antiguas, y asi hasta hoy han 

Yupangue ! 4 los sefiores del Cuzco, que para de alli 4 diez dias tubiesen aparejado mucho proveimiento, maiz, ovejas, corderos, y 
asi mismo mucha ropa fina, y cierta suma de nifios y nifias, que ellos llaman Capacocha; todo lo cual era para hacer sacrificio al Sol; y 
siendo los diez dias cumplidos, y esto ya todo junto, Ynga Yupangue mandé hacer un gran fuego, en el cual fuego mandé, despues de 
haber hecho degollar las ovejas y corderos, que fuesen echados en él, y las demas, ropa y maiz, ofreciendolo todo al Sol, y los nifios y nifias 
que asi han juntado, estando bien vestidos y aderezados, manddlos enterrar vivos en aquella casa que en especial era hecha para donde 
estubiese el bulto del Sol. Y con la sangre que de los corderos y ovejas habian sacado, mand6 que fuesen hechas ciertas rayas en las 
paredes de esta casa; todo lo cual hacia él y los sus tres amigos € otros: todo lo cual significaba una manera de bendecir y consagrar esta 
casa: en el cual sacrificio andaba Ynga Yupangue y sus compafieros descalzos, y mostrando gran reverencia 4 esta casa y al Sol; é asi 
mismo con la misma sangre el Ynga Yupangue hizo ciertas rayas en la cara de aquel Seftor que era senalado por mayordomo de esta casa, 
y lo mismo hizo 4 aquellos sefiores sus tres amigos, 6 4 las Mamaconas, monjas que para el servicio del Sol eran: y alli luego mand6 que 
todos los de la ciudad, asi hombres como mugeres, viniesen 4 hacer sus sacrificios alli 4 la casa del Sol; los cuales sacrificios que asi la 
gente como hizo, fue quemar cierto maiz y coca en aquel fuego que asi era hecho, entrando cada uno de estos uno 4 uno, y descalzos, los 
ojos bajos; y al salir, que asi salian despues de haber hecho su sacrificio cada uno de estos por si, mandé Ynga Yupangue que aquel 
mayordomo del Sol hiciese la raya misma que habeis ordo con la sangre de las ovgas en los rostros de estos que asi salian; 4 los cuales 
les era mandado, que desde aquella hora hasta que el bulto del Sol fuese hecho de oro, todos estubiesen en ayuno, y que no comiesen 
carne ni pescado, ni nada guisado, ni llegasen @ muger, ni comiesen verdura ninguna, y que solamente comiesen maiz crudo y bebiesen 
chicha, so pena que el que el ayuno quebrantase fuese sacrificado al Sol y quemado en el mismo fuego: el cual fuego mandé Ynga 
Yupangue que siempre estubiese ardiendo de noche y de dia, la lefta del cual fuego mandé Ynga Yupangue que fuese labrada y 
quemada, y mientras el idolo se hiciese, se hiciesen en el fuego sacrificios, los cuales mand6é que durante este tiempo hiciesen las 
Mamaconas del Sol, las cuales asi mismo estaban en grande ayuno, y lo mismo el Ynga Yupangue y los demas sefiores: y esto hecho y 
provehido, mandé Ynga Yupangue que viniesen alli los plateros que en la ciudad habia, y los mejores oficiales, y dandoles todo aparejo 
alli dentro en las casas del Sol, les mandé que hiciesen un niiio de oro mazizo y vaziadizo, que fue del tamano del nifo, y del altor y 
proporcion de un nifio de un ato, y desnudo, porque dicen, que aquel que le hablava cuando él se puso en oracion estando en el suefio, 
que viniera 4 él en aquella figura de un nifio muy resplandeciente, y que él vino 4 él despues estando despierto, la noche antes que diese 
la batalla 4 Usco Vilca, como ya gs hé contado, que fué tanto el resplandor que vid que de él resultaba, que no le dejé ver que figura 
tenia, y asi mando hacer este idolo al tamafio y figura de un nifio de edad de un afio: el cual bulto se tard6 en hacer un mes, en el cual 
mes tubieron grandes sacrificios y ayunos: y este bulto acabado, mandé Ynga Yupangue que aquel sefior que habia sefialado por 
mayordomo del Sol, que tomase el idolo; el cual le tomé con mucha reverencia, y vistiole una camiseta muy ricamente tejida de oro y 
lana é de diversas labores, y pusole en la cabeza cierta atadura 4 su uso y costumbre de ellos, y luego le puso una borla segun la del 
estado de los sefiores, y encima de ella le puso una patena de oro, y en los pies le calz6 unos zapatos, drutas que ellos llaman, asi mismo 
de oro: y estando asi el bulto, lleg6 Ynga Yupangue 4 do el bulto estaba; el cual 2ba descalzo, y como llegase 4 él, hizole sus mochas 
y gran reverencia, mostrandole gran respeto; é asi tom el bulto del idolo en sus manos, y llevdlo 4 do era la casa y lugar do él habia de 
estar, en la cual casa estaba puesto un escafio hecho de madera, y muy bien cubierta la madera de una pluma de pajaros tornasoles de 
diversas maneras y colores, de las cuales y con las cuales era muy vistosamente labrado: en el cual escafio puso Ynga Yupangue el bulto 
del idolo; y siendo alli puesto, hizo traer un brasero de oro, y siendo encendido en el fuego, mandole poner delante del idolo; en el cual 
fuego y brasero hizo hechar ciertos pajaritos y ciertos granos de maiz, y derramar en el tal fuego cierta chicha: todo lo cual dijo gue como 
el Sol, é que haciendo aquello, le daba de comer; y de alli adelante se tubo aquella costumbre ordinariamente, lo cual hacia aquel 
mayordomo de él, asi como si fuera persona que comiera y bebiera, asi se tenia especial cuidado de le guisar de comer diversas comidas 
y maneras de manjares, y asi las quemaban delante 4 la tarde y 4 la mafiana braseros de oro y plata, en la manera que ya habeis oido; y 
dende alli adelante adoraban en aquel idolo, y no entrarian dentro del idolo donde estaba, sino eran los sefiores principales, entrando con 
mucha reverencia y veneracion, los zapatos quitados y las cabezas bajas; y el Ynga Yupangue entraba solo, y él mismo por su mano sacri- 
ficaba las ovejas y corderos®, haciendo él el fuego, y quemando el sacrificio: y cuando él asi estaba haciendo el sacrificio, ningun sefior 
osaba entrar dentro, y todos se quedaban en el patio y alli hacian ellos fuera sus sacrificios, y sus mochas y adoramientos; y para en que 
la gente comun adorasen alla fuera (porque no habian de entrar alla dentro, sino fuesen seflores, y estos en el patio) hizo poner en medio 

1 This word signifies ‘valiant’ in the Peruvian language, and was a name borne by several of the Ingas, as was also Capac, which 
simply means ‘king’, and wasa title given to Mango Capac the founder of the Peruvian monarchy, by his subjects, whose descendants were 
styled Capaccuna. Betanzos says, that Yupangue was the patronymic or family name of all the Ingas, and that the signification of the 
title Capaccuna is ‘there is not, nor can there be, a greater, —mayor no lo hay, ni puede haber. 

2 No one excepting the Jewish high-priest was permitted to enter the Holy of Holies, where it was lawful for him alone to offer an atone- 
ment for himself and for the sins of the Jewish people. To this ordinance St. Paul alludes in the following passage of the ninth chapter of 
his Epistle to the Hebrews: “‘ Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle, accomplishing 
the service of God. But into the second went the high-priest alone, once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and 
for the errors of the people.” It is probable, however, that the Jewish kings were many of them as unmindful as Uzziah of this command of 

Moses. 

NOTES. 157 

sido muy pocos de los que mas reputacion y renombre han tenido en su vida, que hayan dejado de dar sefial de 

de la plaza del Cuzco, donde ahora es el rollo, una piedra de la hechura de un pan de azucar ', puntiagudo para arriba, y aforrada de una 
hoja de oro; la cual piedra hizo asi mismo labrar el dia que mandé hacer el bulto del Sol ; y esta piedra para en que el comun adorase, y 
el bulto en la casa del Sol los sefiores : la cual casa era reverenciada y tenida en gran reverencia, no solamente el bulto, mas las piedras de 
ella, y los servientes y Anaconas de ella eran tenidos por cosa bendita y consagrada; y al tiempo que la edificaban, estando asentando 
cierta piedra, quebrése de la juntura de la tal piedra un pedazo como tres dedos en ancho y largo, y mandé Ynga Yupangue que luego 
fuese alli derretida cierta plata, y vaciada de tal manera en la piedra y quebrado de ella, que viniese al justo de lo que de la piedra se 
quebr6; todo lo cual era de canteria, y la juntura de la tal canteria de piedra con piedra era tan sutilmente asentada, que parecia raya 
hecha con un clavo en una piedra; en la cual casa se enterraban los sefiores principales en los patios y aposentos, ecepto donde.el idolo 
estaba: y el dia que el idolo se puso en las casas, entraron en la ciudad que no lo saben ni pueden numerar: dicen que la vez que menos 
ovejas y corderos alli sacrificaron, que pasaban de mas de quinientos.” Enough having been said, clearly to prove the resemblance of the 
ritual observances of the Mexicans and Peruvians, in regard to the blood of sacrifices, to those of the Jews, it is unnecessary to dwell 
on minuter analogies ; we cannot however refrain from observing, that the curious ceremony of sprinkling blood from the nail of the fingers 
seven times, was observed at some of the Mexican sacrifices, which would seem to be derived from the following ordinance of the 
sixteenth chapter of Leviticus: “And he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and hallow it 
from the uncleanness of the children of Israel.’” This ordinance related to the atonement which Aaron was commanded to make for the 
Hebrew altar, by means of the blood of a bullock and a goat. The estimation in which the Jews held the blood of sacrifices may 
doubtless in a great measure be ascribed to the language which Moses puts into the mouth of God in the following passage of the 
seventeeth chapter of Leviticus, who forbidding the Jews to taste blood thus explains its nature and properties: “ And whatsoever man 
there be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, that eateth any manner of blood; [I will even set my face 
against that soul that eateth blood, and will cut him off from among his people. For the Jife of the flesh is zn the blood: and I have 
given it to you wpon the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for zt is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul. Therefore 
I said unto the children of Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood, neither shall any stranger that sojourneth among you eat blood. And 
whatsoever man there be of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, which hunteth and catcheth any beast or 
fowl that may be eaten; he shali even pour out the blood thereof, and cover it with dust. or it is the life of all flesh; the blood of it is 
for the life thereof: therefore I said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh: for the life of all flesh zs the 
blood thereof : whosoever eateth it shall be cut off.” Without inquiring whether it is not possible that the Jewish belief in the Resurrec- 
tion might have originated in what is here said of the life being in the blood, we shall merely observe, that the North American Indians 
with whom Adair was acquainted, resembled the Jews in abstaining from eating blood ; and he describes their aversion to it in the following 
terms : “The Indians, through a strong principle of religzon, abstain in the strictest manner from eating the blood of any animal, as it 
contains the life and spirit of the beast, and was the very essence of the sacrifices that were to be offered up for sinners. And this was 
the Jewish opinion and law of sacrifice, Leviticus xvii. 11. ‘ For the life of the flesh is in the blood: and 1 have given it to you upon the 
altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it is the blood which maketh an atonement for the soul.’ When the English traders have 
been making sausages mixt with hog’s blood, I have observed the Indians to cast their eyes upon them with the horror of their reputed 
forefathers, when they viewed the predicted abomination of desolation fulfilled by Antiochus in defiling the Temple. An instance lately 
happened, which sufficiently shows their utter aversion to blood. A Chikkesah woman, a domestic of one of the traders, being very ill 
with a complication of disorders, the Indian physician seemed to use his best endeavours to cure her, but without the least visible effect. 
To preserve his medical credit with the people, he at last ascribed her ailment to the eating of swine’s flesh, blood, and other polluting 
food, and said, that such an ugly or accursed sickness overcame the power of all his beloved songs and physic; and in anger he left his 
supposed criminal patient to be punished by Loak Ishtohoollo. I asked her some time afterwards what her ailments were, and what she 
imagined might have occasioned them? She said she was full of pain, that she had abeeka ookproo, ‘the accursed sickness,’ because she 
had eaten a great many fowls, after the manner of the white people, with the issish ookproo ‘accursed blood’ in them. In time she 
recovered, and now strictly abstains from tame fowls, unless they are bled to death, for fear of incurring future evil by the like pollution.” 
(Adair’s History of the American Indians, cap. xii.) Adair also remarks, in the following passage of the same Work, that the Indians 
entertained the same degree of abhorrence for the flesh of swine as the Jews; and this double analogy in an arbitrary association of 
ideas of pollution with blood and eating the flesh of swine, increases in much more than a twofold ratio the probability that the Indians 
derived their notions of wncleanness from the Jews, and were deeply imbued with all the prejudices of the Old Law; it serves likewise to 
confirm a similar opinion expressed in reference to the Mexicans in the 275th page of the sixth volume of this Work. Having noticed their 
division of animals into clean and unclean,—under which latter denomination they included hogs, wolves, panthers, foxes, cats, mice, 
rats, moles, and even the beaver, only excepting the bear from the prohibition which Moses laid in the eleventh chapter of Leviticus 
on eating any of the species of animals here enumerated,—he adds, that they esteemed the flesh of every kind of eagle, ravens, crows, 
buzzards, swallows, bats, and owls as unclean, and that they believed that to swallow flies, musketoes, gnats, or worms caused sick- 
ness, and that they were also unclean and hurtful. The same author adds: “I have already shown their aversion to eating of unsanc- 
tified fruits, and in this Argument that they abstain from several other things, contrary to the usage of all the old heathen world. 
It may be objected, that now they seldom refuse to eat hog’s flesh, when the traders invite them to it; but this proceeds entirely from 

1 A stone of this peculiar shape appears to be represented in the 41st page of the Mexican painting presented to the Bodleian Library 
by Archbishop Laud. 

VOL, VILL. (28) 

158 NOTES. 

idolatria en su muerte, dejando hecho ofrecimiento en su memoria al Sol *, 6 4 algun cerro segun sus inclinaciones, 

vicious imitation, and which is common with the most civilized nations. When swine were first brought among them, they deemed it 
such:a horrid abomination in any of their people to eat that filthy and impure food, that they excluded the criminal from all religious com- 
munion? in their circular town-house, or in their quadrangular holy ground at the annual expiation of sins, equally as if he had eaten 
unsanctified fruits. After the yearly atonement was made at the Temple, he was indeed re-admitted to his usual privileges. Formerly, 
none of their beloved men or warriors would eat or drink with us on the most pressing invitation, through fear of polluting themselves, 
they deemed us such impure animals : our eating the flesh of swine and venison with the gravy in it, helped to rivet their dislike, for this 
they reckon as blood. I once asked the archimagus to sit down and partake of my dinner, but he excused himself, saying he had 
in a few days some holy duty to perform, and that if he eat evil or accursed food it would spoil him, alluding to swine’s flesh, Though 
most of their virtue hath lately been corrupted in this particular, they still affix vicious and contemptible ideas to the eating of swine’s 

1 Reference to a note in the 389th page of the sixth volume of this Work, will show that the ancient Jewish rite of excommunication 
was known to the Mexicans, and that they resorted to it particularly in cases where the priests absented themselves from the sacrifices of 
children; whence it may be inferred, that the Mexican religion was upheld by a system of terror, similar to that which prevailed in former 
ages in the Synagogue, and which armed the Hebrew theocracy with a temporal and spiritual power, dreadful to the community over 
which it was exercised, and that human sacrifices was that part and parcel of their law which the Mexican priests were most desirous 
should not be abolished. This consideration should cause the professors of every creed which arrogates to itself exclusive excellence, to 
pause in their career of uncompromising intolerance, and to interrogate their own consciences, whether they would wish to see verified in 
a sense never intended by the Sybil the memorable prediction 

66 PONE BESS bella, horrida bella, 
Et Tybrim multo spumantem sanguine cerno:” 

which has in part been fulfilled by the bloody wars growing out of the Reformation which desolated Europe in the sixteenth century, or 
whether they are eager like true mercenaries for that war of opinion which a late British statesman foresaw and deprecated even more 
than a transient engagement with the sword, and would wish again, in the event of such a crisis, to introduce the term ‘infidel’ in a 
manifesto against France. With respect to the modes of excommunication in ancient times customary amongst the Jews, it is 
contended by some writers that there were three kinds, although Selden allows but two, which the Hebrew doctors severally named "13 
separation, from 1173 to separate, dn an anathema, and snot, which corresponds with the phrase Maran-atta used by St. Paul, and 
which some derive from the Hebrew words ow there, and mno death, and others from ot the name, meaning God or the ineffable name, and 
Ths fo come, or be at hand. The authors of the English Universal History give the following description of this last kind of excommuni- 
cation in the 674th page of the first volume of that work: “ But the most dreadful of all their punishments, though not a capital one, was 
excommunication, especially that which they called Shematta, answering to the Syrian Maran-atta used by St. Paul, which signifies in both 
tongues, ‘ the Lord comes, or is at hand.’ Enoch, the seventh from Adam, is supposed the author of it, because St. Jude quotes that saying 
of his ‘ Behold the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his saints to execute judgement,’ and so on, which must have been at least owing 
to some tradition among the Jews. However, these fetch the original of it both from those frequent expressions in the Mosaic writings 
That soul shall be cut off from Israel’ and * Thou shalt put away evil from the midst of thee,’ and more particularly from the words in 
Deborah’s Song, ‘ Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the inhabitants of it. But without inquiring into the 
validity of these subtile etymologies, we find a more express form of it in Ezra and Nehemiah, who excommunicated all those that 
refused to repudiate their strange wives, and exacted an oath from the people to avoid all affinity and commerce with them. ‘The same 
account of it we find in Josephus, who adds, that the goods of the excommunicated person were to be confiscated to the holy treasury. 
It is true, this was done after the Captivity, but we need not doubt that they had precedents and laws for it before that time, for it is said 
that it was performed in a legal way, and pursuant to the laws of God. As for the form and method of pronouncing it, and in what cases 
it was to be done, we cannot be certain. Buxtorf hath indeed given us a full account of it from the Talmudists ; but besides that we dare 
not vouch for its antiquity, the form of it is so full of the most dreadful imprecations that they cannot be read without horror. Some of 
them seem to have been taken from the hundred and ninth Psalm, and improved with all the dire curses both of this world and the next. 
As excommunication passed from the’ Jews to the Christians, St. Paul makes use of some other of their expressions besides that of 
Maran-atta, particularly that of delivering up to Satan; but it is plain by what he subjoins immediately after, ‘for the mortifying of the 
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord,’ that it was not used by the primitive Church in that damning sense in which 
the Jews and some modern churches understand it.” There is, it will be perceived, a candid admission in the above passage, that the 
imprecations used by the Rabbis on occasions of excommunication, which could not be read without horror, were borrowed from the 
Psalms and other books of the Old Testament; and by the same process of reasoning it may also be inferred, that some of the punish- 
ments disgraceful to humanity, which crept into the Hebrew penal code in the long course of ages, were derived from the Pentateuch, 
and were thence incorporated into the laws of the New World by the Jewish colonies who first migrated to its shores. And here we 

* Viracocha was typified by the Sun, and it was a Peruvian as well as a Hebrew custom to make choice of hills as places of sepulchre, 
where. the body of the deceased was generally placed in a sitting posture, as was also customary amongst the Mexicans. ‘These two cir- 
cumstances might have induced the Peruvians, even after they became converts to Christianity, to continue their superstitious offerings to 
the hills and to Viracocha, by which appellation it is very deserving of remark that Domingo de Santo Thomas designates Christ in his Pe- 
ruvian Dictionary, who perhaps recollected that the appellation of the Sun of Righteousness is given to the Messiah in the Old Testament. 

NOTES. 159 

apartandose del todo de la carrera de salvacion y animandose siempre 4 lo contrario dafioso y perjudicial para el 

flesh, insomuch that Shukapa (swine-eater) is the most opprobrious epithet they can use to brand us with: they commonly subjoin 
Akanggapa (eater of dunghill fowls) ; both together signify ¢ filthy helpless animals.’” Du Tertre, an old French author, who published a 
General History of the Islands of St. Christopher, Guadeloupe and Martinique, in the year 1654, remarks in the third section of the first 
chapter of the fifth part of that work, that the Indians, either of all or of some of these islands, abstained from eating the flesh of swine, and 
also from many kinds of fish. “When it is recollected that the group of islands of which the three above mentioned formed a portion were 
originally inhabited by the Caribs, from whom they received the appellation of the Caribbean Islands, and that they were peopled from the 
coast of the adjacent continent, and by the tribes dwelling in the vicinity of the Orinoco, this fact will not appear so extraordinary ; since 
Gumilla declares, in the 273rd page of the sixth volume of this Work, that the Indians of the Orinoco were circumcised, and held the flesh 
of swine in extreme abhorrence; and we learn from the following passages of the eleventh chapter of Leviticus, that turtle, eels, lobsters, 
crabs, oysters, periwinkles, and even shrimps, were an abomination to the Jews. ‘These shall ye eat of all that are in the waters: what- 
soever hath fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, them shall ye eat. And all that have not fins and scales in the seas, 
and in the rivers, of all that move in the waters, and of any living thing which is in the waters, they shall be an abomination unto you. They 
shall be even an abomination unto you; ye shall not eat of their flesh, but ye shall have their carcases in abomination. Whatsoever hath 
no fins nor scales in the waters, that shall be an abomination unto you.... These also shall be unclean unto you among the creeping 
things that creep upon the earth; the weasel, and the mouse, and the tortoise after his kind.” The following is the passage in which 
Gumilla’s account of the Indians of the Oricono refraining from the flesh of swine, is corroborated by the much earlier testimony of Du 
Tertre. “11 faut aussi rapporter & une sorte de superstition les jeusnes qu’ils observent pour divers sujets : Quand une fille a atteint l’age 
de puberté, quand un garcon entre dans l’adolescence; quand les enfans ont perdu leur pere ou leur mere; quand un mary a perdu sa 
femme, ou bien la femme son mary; quand ils ont tué quelques-uns de leurs ennemis dans la guerre ; quand ceux qui sont nouvellement 
mariez ont un garcon pour leur premier enfant, c’est icy le plus solennel de leurs jeusnes, ils passent quelquefois cing ou six jours 

may observe, that the learned writer of this article, who in using the expression ‘ modern Churches’ undoubtedly alludes to the Church of 
Rome, has, from an aversion to Popery which was extremely natural in his age, softened the signification of the Greek word éAs§pov in the 
fifth verse of the fifth chapter of St. Paul’s first Epistle to the Corinthians, which properly means destruction in the most emphatic sense 
of the word, into the gentler phrase ‘ mortification ’; which he did not, however, borrow from the English version of the New Testament, 
where ‘ destruction’ is the term actually employed by the translators: he probably thought that if éAe@gov was understood in the sense of 
destruction, as in the above passage, the five first verses of the chapter of St. Paul’s Epistle to the Corinthians referred to, would prove, as 
plainly as language can, that the spiritual heads of the Christian Church exercised, even in the apostolic age, dominion over the bodies as 
well.as the souls of men, and he therefore assigned it another signification, which cannot possibly, by any forced construction, rightly 
belong to it. This passage of St. Paul’s Epistle to the Corinthians is so important, as well in a doctrinal point of view, as in af- 
fording a refutation to those who contend, with the early Fathers, that all the accusations brought against the primitive Christians by the 
Pagans were unfounded and the offspring of malice and falsehood, that we shall take the liberty of quoting it from the English translation 
of the Bible, and likewise from the Greek Testament. ‘It is reported commonly that there is fornication among you, and such fornica- 
tion as is not somuch as named among the Gentiles, that one should have his father’s wife. And ye are puffed up, and have not rather 
mourned, that he that hath done this deed might be taken away from among you. For I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have | 
judged already, as though I were present, concerning him that hath so done this deed, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are 
gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, 
that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.” ‘Oaws dxouerces 2v jury mogveice, xos Torry mogvela Hris ovde ev ToIs ebversy dyomenterott, 
Sore yuvaina tive. Tov waroos eye. Kar dwsis meduosmpevor tore, rou odrys poardov emevoyoerre, ive Eaeby ex weoov dummy 6 To eoryov Touro moinoas; “EDO 
psy yao ds dno Tw coma, mupwy de Tw myevsers, 1oy KEKPIKA ob¢ ropwy rov obrw Touro xarepyacapevoy, ey TH dvomars rou Kupiou jucy *Inoov 
Xeicrov, cuvaybevroy duov xo tov suo mvevparos, STN TH ATNAMEL tov Kugiou fpwv’Incou Xeisrov, magatovvas roy rosouroy ry Saraver eis 
éacbooy THE SAPKOS, ive TO INEYMA coy ty ry Su20e tov Kugsov “Incov. Upon this passage of the New Testament we shall only 
remark, that although the crime alluded to by St. Paul was, as he confesses, unknown to the Gentiles, it was committed by the Jews in 
the earlier and later periods of their history; and no other cause than that is assigned, in the forty-ninth chapter of Genesis, for Reuben the 
eldest of the twelve Hebrew patriarchs having been deprived of his birthright, whom Jacob his father thus emphatically cursed a few hours 
only before his death. ‘ Reuben, thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the 
excellency of power: unstable as water, thou shalt not excel ; because thou wentest up to thy father’s bed; then defiledst thou it: he went 
up to my couch.” In a later age Absalom the son of David, and the aspirant to his crown, is said in the following passage of the sixteenth 
chapter of the Second Book of Samuel to have imitated-the example of Reuben. “ Then said Absalom to Ahithophel, Give counsel 
among you what we shall do. And Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Go in unto thy father’s concubines, which he hath left to keep the 
house; and all Israel shall hear that thou art abhorred of thy father: then shall the hands of all that are with thee be strong. So they 
spread Absalom a tent upon the top of the house; and Absalom went in unto his father’s concubines in the sight of all Israel. And 
the counsel of Ahithophel, which he counselled in those days, was as if a man had inquired at the oracle of God: so was all the counsel 
of Ahithophel both with David and with Absalom.” From the latter example of Jewish history, the morality of the Jews at the most 
flourishing period of their history, which the reign of David is allowed to have been, may easily be inferred, and it cannot be doubted 
that the manners of the Roman populace in the age of Romulus and Tarquinius Priscus would have presented a most favourable con- 
ttast to the vitiated taste of the subjects of Solomon the son of David, the glory of the East, and the pattern to all succeeding kings ; and 
would have been much more agreeable to modern notions of reason and virtue. 

160 NOTES. 

alma. A estos quadra bien lo que dice Jeremias* en el capitulo primero en nombre del Seftor: ‘ Dejaronme y sacri- 
ficaron 4 dioses agenos y adoraron la obra de sus manos.”—Lope de Atienza. (MS.) 

sans manger, ny boire: d’autres plus robustes se contentent pendant neuf ou dix jours d’un peu d’eau; s’ils ne faisoient ces rigou- 
reuses abstinences, ils seroient tenus pour des lasches. Je ne sgay si c’est par religion qu’ils s’abstiennent de manger quelques animaux, 
comme poulles, ceufs, porcs, et les plus delicieux poissons. Ils croyent !immortalité de lame, mais ils tiennent que chaque personne 
ena trois: une au ceur, une a la teste, et Vautre au bras, Celle du coeur, qui se manifeste par le battement d’iceluy, va, ce disent-ils, 
droit au ciel apres la mort, pour y estre bien-heureuse: celles du bras et de la teste, qui se manifestent par le battement des poulces, 
et par le mouvement des artéres, deviennent Maboyas, c’est a dire, esprits malins, ausquels ils imputent tout ce qui leur arrive de si- 
nistre et de funeste.” It is singular that the Indians of the West India islands should have agreed with some of the Talmudists in 
the absurd belief that man has three souls, and that one belonged to the heart, whilst the other two were assigned to the head and 
arms, on account of the pulsation of the veins and arteries, which would seem to imply that they thought with the Jews that the life 
was in the blood; nor is it wholly undeserving of notice, that the distinction between the vegetative soul or anima,.and the animus, 
seems, although disguised by fable, to have been derived to them from the Old Continent. Reference to the last line of the fifty-first page 
of the Notes subjoined to the present volume will show, that the Peruvians entertained precisely the same notion of the soul quitting 
the body during sleep, and of dreams being the recollection of what it beheld when wandering on such occasions through the universe. 
St. Paul also declares in the twelfth chapter of his second Epistle to the Corinthians, that he knew a man, whether in the body or out of 
the body he could not tell, who was caught up to the third heaven and saw viszons of the Lord ; and that such was the opinion of the Jews 
of later ages, will appear from the following passage, which is extracted from the eleventh chapter of a work elsewhere referred to, entitled 
«A View of the Jewish Religion.’ “ Margarita in his Book of the Faith of the Jewes, writes thus, ‘ The Jews write in their Talmud that 
every man hath three soules, and they fetch it from this place of Esaias: ‘Thus saith the Lord God, he that created the heavens and 
stretched them out, he that spread forth the earth, and that which cometh out of it, he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and 
spirit to them that walk therein.’ From this text they ascribe two soules unto man, which with the true and naturall soule of man make 
three : they write farther, hat when a man sleeps the two former soules flye away; the one ascends upwards to God, and there heareth all 
things that are to come; the other descends downward to the earth, and to flye up and down here and there and to see nothing but vanity, 
iniquity, sin and foolishnesse. This they call a bruitish soul and irrationall; but that soule that was first inspired into man is alwaies an 
individual companion fo his heart, and seeth all things that those two other soules hear, see or doe, that are gone forth of his body ; hence 
arise all dreams, which therefore are not to be neglected. But on the Sabath day the fourth soule is added as an addition, which stirreth 
up and moveth the minds of men, that they may give more honour to the Sabath; but when the Sabath ends, this soule flyes away again, 
whence it comes to pass that the mind is troubled; wherefore to refresh themselves they smell to these sweet spices.’ Hitherto Margarita, 
but whence he fetched these things I have not yet found in the bookes of the Jewes; onely this I read in the Talmud, concerning that 
soule that is added on the Sabath day. ‘ Rabbi Jose said, from the opinion of Rabbi Simeas, the son of Jechai, all the precepts which 
God gave to the people of Israel he gave openly and publiquely, if you except the precept of the Sabath, which was privately delivered 
unto them as it is written, ‘It is a sign betweene me and the children of Israel for ever,’ which say they is not, as the words sound, a sign 
for ever, but a sign to be kept secret, as if he had said, it is kept close and hid from other nations, onely the Jewes are acquainted with it. 
Here their wise men in Gemara ask and object, that since the Christians and others are ignorant that we have a Sabath day, wherefore 
then shall they be punished because they keep not the Sabath ? Answer, They know that we have a Sabath, nor is this hid from them, and 
they shall be punished because they observe it not, but they know not the reward of the Sabath; God hath kept this secret from them ; but 
should they keep the Sabath as they ought, then the reward of the Sabath would be known unto them, but great pity it is that ¢hzs cannot 
be for want of that soule which God giveth as an addition to the Jewes on the Sabath day, whereby they may rest on both sides and 
rejoice, and so cast away all care and sorrow out of their mindes. ‘Therefore Rabbi Simeon the son of Lakis prayed, God hath infused 
into man’a superfluous and supernumerary soule, which when the Sabath ends he receiveth againe, as it is written ‘when he hath rested 
on the Sabath, alas he shall lose his soule, namely that soule that was added to him shall be taken from him.’ So far the Talmud, where 
you may observe farther their corrupting the Scripture, for the word vai naphesch, which signifieth properly ‘shall be recruited or 
refreshed,’ they are known most filthily by their cabalisticall art which they call ‘notaricon,’ to break into vai’ nephesch, « woe to the soul” 
as if the meaning were, ‘so soon as the soule hath kept the Sabath alas it perisheth,’ or ‘oh thesoule is deprived,’ which by anthropopathy 
is ascribed to God, upon whom by no meanes can fall the spoiling or deprivation of the soule. In such trifles and bruitish fictions of 
blinded people, is the chiefest wisdome of the Jewes employed. Concerning their superfluous and redundant soule, Rabbi Abraham a 
Spaniard, in his commentaries on the Pentateuch, disputeth most subtilly, which book he calls A Bundle of Mirth.” 

* It is surprising how naturally and with what ease the thoughts of the Spanish missionaries, when treating of the superstitions of the 
Indians, flow in a Hebrew channel. Aguado, for example, in his inedited History of the Conquest of Santa Marta, thus alludes to a 
remarkable passage of Josephus’s History of the Jewish War: “Comian de aquellas carnes humanas tan sin asco ni pavor, como 
si se huvieran criado en ello; mas no es de maravillar que hombres usasen de este genero de crueldad por remedio contra las angustias 
del hambre, pues escriviendo Josepho en sus historias, y lo refiere Eusebio en el tercero libro de la Historia Kclesiastica en el 
- capitulo segundo, que teniendo Tito cercado 4 Jerusalem, y habiendola ya entrado 6 tomado, sobrevino tan gran hambre en la ciudad, 
que una muger que vivia ribera del rio Jordan, de la aldea de Benzob llamada Maria, hija de Eleazaro, muger rica y noble de linaje, 
hallandose en aquellos dias en Jerusalem, con un cuchillo por sw propia mano degollé 4 su hijo, y partiendolo por medio, puso luego la 
mitad al fuego, y asandola se la comid, y despues vino 4 comer la otra mitad, cosa por cierto de grande admiracion y que parece escan- 

4 

Nr OP ans) 161 

The resemblance between the laws of the Mexicans and the Peruvians and the institutions of the Jews having been 
sufficiently pointed out in the great outlines of their criminal code, which is that part of legislation, much more than the 
civil, which receives its form and impress from the religious creed of the nation for which it is framed, we shall proceed 
to notice some of the enactments of the Mexican civil law, which exhibited a striking conformity with the Hebrew ordi- 
nances: these were their laws respecting landed property, slaves and marriages ; which from the comprehensiveness of 
their nature, the universality of their application, and their intimate connexion with the individual interests of every 
member of the community, must be admitted to constitute the principal elements of civil law, and greatly to affect the 
state and well-being of society. It is a well-known fact that among the Jews land was held by a very peculiar tenure, 
and that it could not be alienated by the possessor for more than a certain number of years; at the expiration of which 
period it reverted again, either to the proprietor himself or to his family, and in no case could be inherited or conveyed 
out of the tribe to which the owner himself belonged, and to which it had been originally granted at the time of the 
division of the lands conquered from the Canaanites. This tenure is thus described in the twenty-fifth chapter of Le- 
viticus, and in the thirty-sixth chapter of Numbers. “The land shall not be sold for ever: for the land is mine ; for 
yeare strangers and sojourners with me. And in all the land of your possession ye shall grant a redemption for the 
land. If thy brother be waxen poor, and hath sold away some of his possession, and if any of his kin come to redeem 
it, then shall he redeem that which his brother sold. And if the man have none to redeem it, and himself be able to 
redeem it; then let him count the years of the sale thereof, and restore the overplus unto the man to whom he sold 
it; that he may return unto his possession. But if he be not able to restore it to him, then that which is sold shall 
remain in the hand of him that hath bought it until the year of jubilee: and in the jubilee it shall go out, and he shall 
return unto his possession. And if a man sell a dwelling-house in a walled city, then he may redeem it within a 
whole year after it is sold; within a full year may he redeem it. And if it be not redeemed within the space of a 
full year, then the house that is in the walled city shall be established for ever to him that bought it throughout his 
generations: it shall not go out in the jubilee. But the houses of the villages which have no wall round about them 
shall be counted as the fields of the country: they may be redeemed, and they shall go out in the jubilee.” “And 
the chief fathers of the families of the children of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of 
the sons of Joseph, came near, and spake before Moses, and before the princes, the chief fathers of the children of 
Israel: and they said, The Lord commanded my lord to give the land for an inheritance by lot to the children of 
Israel: and my lord was commanded by the Lord to give the inheritance of Zelophehad our brother unto his 
daughters. And if they be married to any of the sons of the other tribes of the children of Israel, then shall their 
inheritance be taken from the inheritance of our fathers, and shall be put to the inheritance of the tribe whereunto 
they are received: so shall it be taken from the lot of our inheritance. And when the jubilee of the children of Israel 
shall be, then shall their inheritance be put unto the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they are received : so shalj 
their inheritance be taken away from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers. And Moses commanded the children 
of Israel according to the word of the Lord, saying, The tribe of the sons of Joseph hath said well. This is the thing 
which the Lord doth command concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, saying, Let them marry to whom they think 
best; only to the family of the tribe of their father shall they marry. So shall not the inheritance of the children of 
Israel remove from tribe to tribe ;’ for every one of the children of Israel shall keep himself to the inheritance of the 
tribe of his fathers. And every daughter, that possesseth an inheritance in any tribe of the children of Israel, shall 
be wife unto one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the children of Israel may enjoy every man the inherit- 
ance of his fathers. Neither shall the inheritance remove from one tribe to another tribe ; but every one of the tribes 
of the children of Israel shall keep himself to his own inheritance. Even as the Lord commanded Moses, so did the 
daughters of Zelophehad: for Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, 
were married unto their father’s brothers’ sons: and they were married into the families of the sons of Manasseh the 

dalizar solo ei oirlo.” The passage of Josephus, to which Aguado here alludes, occurs in the eighth chapter of his seventh book of the 
History of the Jewish war, and it is somewhat singular that the expression Svcs, or sacrifice, is the phrase which the Jewish woman 
uses in reference to her son: 4 d¢ 2uov, Oy, Touro TO TexXvoy YyyyTIOY, xe TO Epryoy Euov Dayete, xas yap yw Bebpwxa. py yevnode more morc 
XWTEpOL yuVaiXos, pyTe TUMMeerTEpOS wyTpOS. Ei Y duets edoe Bers, xo Tyy Gunv dmoorpeterbs OTXIAN, eyw prev juiov BeBowxer, xcs To Aosmoy 0 2wos 
pewarw. But she replied, This is my child, and my deed; eat, for I have fed, and be neither more effeminate than a woman, nor more 
compassionate than a mother; but if ye are pious and loathe my sacrifice, I have eaten half, let the rest remain forme.” 

VOL, VIII. G27n>) 

4e 

162 NOTES. 

son of Joseph, and their inheritance remained in the tribe of the family of their father. These are the commandments 
and the judgments, which the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses unto the children of Israel in the plains of Moab 
by Jordan near Jericho.” This peculiar tenure of land, it is very deserving of remark, could only exist in a theocracy 
similar to that of the Jewish commonwealth, where every individual of the state held his property from God in capite*, 
with a binding covenant to assist him in his wars against the idolatrous nations of the land of Canaan, that being 
distinctly specified in the twenty-third verse of the twenty-fifth chapter of Leviticus. “The land shall not be sold for 
ever: for the land is mine; for ye are strangers and sojourners with me.” And since the Mexican government was a 
theocracy, and the Mexicans, like the Jews, were a chosen people, it is highly probable that their inalienable tenure of 
land, under the denomination of Calpullis, was founded on Scripture precedent and the ancient usages of the Jews, the 
nature of which tenure is thus explained by Alonzo de Zorita in his official reply to the questions put by Philip the 
Second of Spain to the Royal court of Audience in Mexico, of which work Dr. Robertson speaks in terms of deserved 
commendation in one of the notes subjoined to the third volume of his History of America. “La tercera manera de 
sefiores se llamaban y Ilaman Calpullec, 6 Chinancallee en plural, y quiere decir cabezas 6 parientes mayores que 
vienen de muy antiguo, porque calpulli 6 chinancalli, que es todo uno, quiere decir barrio de gente conocida 6 linage 
antiguo, y que tiene de muy antiguo sus tierras y terminos conocidos, que son de aquella cepa y linage y barrio. 
Y las tales tierras Ilaman calpulli, que quiere decir tierra de aquel barrio 6 linage. Estos calpullis 6 linages 
6 barrios son muchos en cada provincia, y tambien tenian estas cabezas 6 calpullis last que se daban 4 los se- 

gundos sefiores {, como se ha dicho, de por vida. Las rentas que poseen fueron repartimientos del comun, de 

, 

cuando vinieron 4 la tierra y tomé cada linage 6 quadrilla sus pedazos 6 swertes y terminos seflalados para ellos ‘y 
para sus descendientes, y asi hasta hoy las han poseydo y tienen nombre de calpullis ; y estas tierras no son en par- 
ticular de cada uno del barrio, sino en comun del calpulli, y el que las poseé no las puede enagenar, sino que goze 

* Although the origin of the Mexican calpullis, or lands appertaining in common to each separate calpulli or tribe, is not explained by 
any Spanish author, still all the circumstances of the migration of the Aztecas being taken into consideration, and that they, like their 
Hebrew ancestors, came to take possession of a promised land, bringing with them an ark supposed to contain the Deity, it is highly pro- 
bable that the lands conquered by the Aztecas from the Chichimecas, were distributed by them into calpullis, regard being had to the 
ancient Hebrew precedent under Joshua, whose division of the land of Canaan amongst the twelve tribes of Israel they might have imi- 
tated as far as the change of time and circumstances would permit. This opinion receives some confirmation from the following passage 
of a fragment of a very ancient Mexican Chronicle, the author of which Boturini supposes might have been Istlilxochitl. “En el pueblo 
que se nombra el gran Teotihuacan, y antiguamente se nombr6 Tolteca, que la pusieron y nombraron Esperanza en los Dioses, porque 
alli idolatravan y invocaban 4 sus Dioses los Toltecas, como ahora nosotros los Cristianos tenemos en Roma nuestra casa de mayor ado- 
racion; y gobernando el Tolteca este reyno de los Toltecas, se perdieron y murieron los idolatras con guerras, peste y hambre; y habien- 
dose destruido, los pocos que escaparon, algunos se fueron 4 vivir 4 la casa del dios del agua, y habiendose ido, se nombraron Collimaz 
que habian ido. Y esta tierra que fué de los Toltecas, ahora se nombra Nueva Espafia. Y 4 los cinco afios que faltavan los Toltecas, 
estaban ya demolidos y desbaratados sus cercados y casas, quando vino Xolotzin, rey y gran sefior de los Chichimecas con gran numero 
de sus vasallos, y la vido ayrosa y que solo era de los Dioses esta tierra en donde vivieron los Toltecas, se apoderé de ella, y se la adjudico 
y (como dicen los antiguos en el Canto del Reyno de los Chichimecas,) ¢ Fué el primer humo 6 niebla que vino & ponerse en esta tierra,’ y 
habiendo tomado posesion de ella, luego fué poniendo y dandolos tierras 4 sus vasallos los Chichimecas, para que le diesen y pagasen sus 
tributos, y en todas las partes que tenian su oficio le respondian con él al rey de los Chichimecas, y Xolotzin que habia hechado en la 
tierra de los Toltecas 4 sus vasallos los Chichimecas, les puso por sefiores y gobernadores 4 los dos aquellos principes y sefiores que 
trajo de su corte, sus hermanos y parientes ; y los otros sefiores que se nombran de los Colhuas Misxhuaguez, grandes sefiores que despues 
vinieron 4 dar con él. YY 4 los ciento y tres afios que se perdieron los Toltecas, Xolotzin hizo sefor 4 Tochin-Teuhtli hijo de Quetzal- 
mazatl, sefior de Quahuacan, y le entregé el gobierno de Huexotla y Oztipac, que ahora pertenece 4 Tezcuco y 4 Chiauhtla; y este 
pueblo de Teotihuacan le dio de una vez con todas sus tierras y vasallos que habia en ellas, y lo casé con la hija de Opanteuhtli sefior de 
Xaltoacan, que se nombraba gran sefior de los Otomites y rey de ellos, y se llamaba la muger de Tochinteuhtli, Tomeyauhtzin, que ya era 
prima hermana de Xolotzin, porque era nieto de Opanteuhtli padre de Tomeyauhtzin. 

+ The word ‘rentas’ or ‘ preeminencias’ seems to be here wanting. 

+ Zorita says, there were four descriptions of Mexican lords, the first of whom were supreme, and named Tlatoque, from the verb 
tlatoa, to speak or pronounce judicial sentences, and such were Montezuma in Mexico and Nezahualpilli in Tezcuco : the second class, 
which comprised nobles of various titles and dignities, were distinguished by the general appellation of Tecutzin, Teutley, Tec, and 
Uitzan : they were not hereditary, but possessed dignities for life, and are therefore compared by Zorita to those persons who in Spain re- 
ceived encomiendas as a mark of favour from the Crown’: the third class were the Calpullis; and the fourth were designated Tlatopipiltzin, 
and Pipiltzin, who enjoyed hereditary dignity and exemption from ‘tribute, but without’ encomiendas, in consideration of their being the 
sons and descendants of the kings of Mexico and other great men, subordinate to whom were the T’equiuac, who were the sons and de- 
scendants of the possessors of encomiendas, and considered hidalgos or gentlemen. 

NOTES. 163 

de ellas por su vida; y las puede dejar 4 sus hijos y herederos. Calpulli es singular, y calpullec es plural. De 
estos calpullis 6 barrios 6 linages, unos son mayores que otros segun los antiguos conquistadores y pobladores las. 
repartieron entre si 4 cada linage, y son para si y para sus descendientes, y si alguna casa se acaba, muriendo todos, 
quedan las tierras al comun del calpulli, y aquel sefior 6 pariente mayor las da 4 quien las ha menester del mismo 
barrio, como se vera adelante. Por manera que nunca jamas se daban ni dan las tierras 4 quien no sea natural del 
calpulli 6 barrio, gue es como los Israelitas, que no podian ni era licito enagenar la tierra de una tribu en otra, y esta 
entre otras es una de las causas y razones porque algunos se mueven 4 creer que los naturales de aquellas partes 
descienden de los del Pueblo de Israel, porque muchas de sus ceremonias y usos y costumbres se conforman con las de 
aquellas gentes, y la lengua de Mechoacan *, que era un gran reyno, dicen que tenia muchos vocablos Hebreos, y 
esta lengua, y casi todas las demas, son semejantes en la pronunciacion 4 la Hebrea. Lo mismo afirman los que han 
estado en las provincias del Peru, y en las demas partes de Indias, de sus ritos y ceremonias; y lo que en la Nueva 
Espafia Ilaman calpullis, es lo mismo que entre los Israelitas lamaban tridus. Podianse dar estas tierras 4 los de 
otro barrio 6 calpulli 4 renta, y era para las necesidades publicas y comunes del calpulli; 4 esta causa se permitian 
arrendarlas, y no en otra manera, porque si es posible, por una via ni por otra se permitia ni permite que los de un 
calpulli labren las tierras de otro calpulli, por no dar lugar 4 que se mesclen unos con otros, ni salgan del linage. 
La causa porque querran estas tierras 4 renta, y no tomanlas en su calpulli de gracia, era porque se las daban labra- 
das, y la renta era poca, 6 parte de la cosecha segun se concertaban, 6 porque acontecia que eran mejores que las que 
tenian 6 les daban’en su calpulli, 6 por no haberlas para darselas, 6 porque querian y podian labrar las unas y las 
otras. Si acaso algun vecino de un calpulli 6 barrio se iba 4 habitar 4 otro, perdia las tierras que le estaban sefta- 
ladas para que las labrase, porque esta era y es costumbre antiguisima entre ellos, y jamas se quebrantaba, ni habia 
en ello contradiccion alguna, y quedaban y quedan al comun del calpulli cuyas son, y el pariente mayor { las reparte 
entre los demas del barrio que no tienen tierras. Si algunas hay vacias 6 por labrar en el calpulli, tenian y tienen 
gran cuenta con ellas, para que otro calpulli no se les entren en ellas, y sobre esto tenian y tienen grandes penden- 
cias por defender cada uno las tierras de sucalpulli. Si alguno habia 6 hay sin tierras, el pariente mayor con parecer 
de otros viejos, les daba y dad las que ha menester conforme 4 su calidad y posibilidad, y para las labrar; y pasaban 
y pasan 4 sus herederos en la forma que se ha dicho, y ninguna cosa hace este principal que no sea con parecer de otros 
viejos del calpulli 6 barrio. Si uno tenia unas tierras y las labraba, no se le podia otro entrar en ellas, ni el principal se 
las podia quitar ni dar 4 otro. Sino eran buenas, las podia dejar y buscar otras mejores, y pedirlas 4 su principal ; y 
si estaban vacas y sin perjuicio, se las daban en la forma que se ha dicho. El que tenia algunas tierras de su calpulli, 
si no las labraba dos afios por culpa y negligencia suya, y no habiendo causa justa, como por ser menor, huerfano, 6 muy 
viejo, enfermo que no podia trabajar, le apercebian que las labrase 4 otro afio, y si no, que se darian 4 otro, y asi se 
hacia. Por ser estas rentas del comun 6 de los calpullis 6 barrios, ha habido y hay desorden en las que se han dado 
y dan 4 Espafioles, porque en habiendo 6 teniendo noticia de algunas que no estan labradas, las piden al que gobierna, 
y el que se nombra porque las vaya 4 ver, hace poca diligencia en pro de los Indios; y si acierta 4 nombrar para ello 
algun buen Cristiano, tiene el que pide las tierras formas para lo impedir, y para que se nombre otro 4 su contento, 

* This observation of Zorita may be understood in a double sense; either in reference to the words and grammatical zdiom of the lan- 
guage of the people of Mechoacan, or to the phraseology and metaphors which they commonly employed; in which latter sense alone the 
Mexican language can be said to resemble the Hebrew. When it is recollected, however, that the Jews, according to the prevailing 
opinion of the most learned of their rabbis, forgot their own language in the comparatively short space of their seventy years captivity in 
Babylon,—which opinion, nevertheless, is not entitled from its improbability to much weight, except other concurring causes, such as 
obedience to the absolute commands of the Babylonians, that under pain of death the captive Jews in Babylon should cease to speak 
the Hebrew language, and should teach their children the Chaldee, can be shown to justify it, it will cause little surprise that no traces of 
the Hebrew language should have been discovered by the Spaniards after the lapse of so many ages amongst the Mexicans and Peru- 
vians, although the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain does certainly contain many metaphors and figures of speech evidently 
derived from the Scriptures, and which unequivocally prove the existence, in former ages at least, of the. Hebrew language in America, 
Whether, however, the private language which according to Garcilaso de la Vega was spoken by the Ingas in their intercourse with each 
other, and which it was death for others than those of their own race to learn, might not have been a corrupt dialect of Hebrew, can 
only be matter of vague conjecture. It is, however, an undoubted fact, that the laws of the kingdom of Mechoacan, and the dress of the 
people of that state, which is represented in a manuscript preserved in the library of the Escurial, bore a strong resemblance to those of 
the Jews, whom they likewise resembled in making use of an ark in war. 

+ The terms pariente mayor, cabeza, and principal, are here used in the same signification, and refer to the head of the tribe. 

164 NOTES. 

en especial si hay algun respeto de por medio que nunca falta, 6 interes, y asi siempre dan parecer que se pueden 
dar al que las pide, porque estan sin perjuicio y no labradas; y aunque hay en ellas muestras de haber sido labradas, 
y los contradicen los del barrio 6 calpulli, aunque aleguen que las tienen para 4 los que se casen, 6 4 los que no 
tienen tierras, no les vale, y dicen que lo hacen de malicia, y asi informaron 4 Vuestra Magestad algunas personas 
que debian pretender en ello algun interes, como parece por un capitulo de una carta de Vuestra Magestad, que 
mandé escribir 4 la Audiencia de Mexico, por Setiembre de cincuenta y seis; y no hay estancia, ni tierras, que no 
este muy en perjuicio de los Indios, asi por los datos que reciben, como por haberles quitado sus tierras, y estrecha- 
doles sus terminos, y puestolos en un continuo trabajo de guardar sus sementeras, y aun con todo esto se las comen y 
destruyen los ganados, y aun algunas veces, aunque tengan poseedor y esten labradas 6 sembradas, no les aprovecha 
para dejar de darles, porque los arguien que maliciosamente las labran porque no se diesen a Espafioles; y ha sido 
todo esto causa de que esten yaen algun pueblo tan estrechos y cercados de labranzas de Espafoles, que no les queda 
4 los naturales donde poder sembrar, y en otras partes estan tan cercados de estancia de ganado mayor, y son tantos 
los datos que de ellos reciben, que lo poco que siembran se lo comen y destruyen, porque anda el ganado sin guarda, 
y no les valen 4 los naturales estar ocupados de noche y dia guardando sus sementeras, 4 cuya causa padecen gran 
necesidad y hambre todo el afio, ademas de otros estorvos que hay para no poder sembrar ni beneficiar lo poco que 
siembran, como adelante se diré. Asi que por tener los calpullis 6 barrios las tierras de comun, y no entenderlos, 
ha sido causa de haberlos dejado en terminos que no tienen donde poder sembrar, en especial en los pueblos que estan 
cerca de los Espafioles 4 donde hay buenas tierras, y en esto hay gran ecceso y desorden, y tambien en el dafio que 
reciben de los ganados de sus encomenderos, que siempre los tienen en sus pueblos. Los comunes de estos barrios 
6 calpullis siempre tienen una cabeza, y no quieren estar sin ella, y ha de ser de los mismos, y no de otro calpulli, ni 
forastero, porque no lo sufren, y ha de ser principal y habil para los amparar y defender, y lo elegian y eligen entre 
si, y deste tenian y tienen como por sefior, y es, como en Viscaya y en las montafias, el pariente mayor, y no por 
succesion, sino muerto uno, eligen 4 otro, el mas honrado, sabio, y habil 4 su modo, y viejo, el que mejor les parece 
para ello. Si queda algun hijo del difunto suficiente, lo eligen, y siempre eligen pariente del difunto, como lo haya 
y sea para ello. Este principal tiene cuidado de mirar por las tierras del calpulli y defenderlas, y tiene pintadas las 
suertes que son, y los lindes, y 4 donde y con quien parten terminos, y quien las labra, y las que tiene cada uno, 
y quales estan vacas, y quales se han dado 4 Espafioles, y quien y quando, y a quien las dieron; y van renovando 
siempre sus pinturas, segun los sucesos, y se entienden muy bien por ellas, y es 4 su cargo, como esta dicho, dar tierras 
4 los que no las tienen para sus sementeras; 6 si tienen pocas, segun sus familias les dan mas, y tienen cuidado de 
amparar la gente del calpulli, y de hablar por ellos ante la justicia y ante los gobernadores, y en casa de este se juntan 
los del calpulli 4 hacer y tratar lo que conviene 4 su calpulli, y 4 sus tributos, y 4 sus fiestas, y en esto gasta mucho, 
porque siempre en todas juntas, que son muchas por afio, les da de comer y beber, y es necesario para tenerlos 
contentos.y quietos. El provecho que tenian y tienen estos sehores, y de que y como pueden sufrir los gastos que 
hacen con el comun, se dira adelante en la respuesta del quarto capitulo. En entender laarmonia de estos calpullis va 
mucho para los sustentar en justicia, y para no los confundir, como lo estan casi todos, y tan divisos que nunca 
tornaron 4 la buena educacion y orden que en esto tenian; y por no los querer entender, ni hacer caso de ello, se han 
adjudicado a muchos las tierras que tenian de su calpulli para las labrar en la manera que se ha dicho, por probar 
que las han poseido y labrado ellos y sus pasados, impuestos para ello por Espafioles, y Mestizos y Mulatos, que 
aprovechan y viven de esto, como adelante se dird, y no les vale 4a los principales contradecirlo, y decir que son del 
ealpulli, y clamar sobre ello, porque no son entendidos ; y es gran perjuicio de los demas que se queden sin aquel 
aprovechamiento que pretenden, porque aquellos 4 quienes se adjudican, las venden y enagenan en perjuicio del 
calpulli."—Zorita, Relacion Sumaria. (MS.)* 

Of slavery as it existed amongst the Mexicans much has been said in the note subjoined to the 320th page of the 

* The following is the title prefixed by Zorita to his Work: “ Breve y Sumaria Relacion de los Sefiores, Maneras y Diferencias que 
habia de ellos en la Nueva Espafia, y en otras Provincias sus comarcanas, y de sus leyes, usos y costumbres, y de la forma que tenian en 
les tributar sus vasallos en tiempo de su gentilidad, y la que despues de conquistados se ha tenido y tiene en los tributos que pagan 4 su 
Magestad, y 4 otros en su Real nombre, y en el imponerlos, y repartirlos, y de la orden que se podra tener para cumplir con el precepto 
de los diezmos, sin que lo tengan por nueva imposicion y carga los naturales de aquellas partes; dirigida 4 la Catolica Real Magestad del 

Rey Don Felipe Nuestro Sefior: Por el Doctor Alonzo de Zorita, oydor que fué de la Real Audiencia, que reside en la muy insigne y 
gran Ciudad de Mexico dela Nueva Espafia.” 

NOTES. 165 

sixth volume of the present Work, where its conformity with the several kinds of slavery known in ancient times to 
the Jews, and its diversity from all other kinds of slavery, have been pointed out. The sentiments of some of its advo- 
cates, founded on their interpretation of Scripture, will also be found in the 399th page of the same volume. It may 
however be observed, that both a domestic and a foreign slave-trade were authorized by the terms of God’s covenant with 
Abraham, on the ove sole condition, that the slaves should be circumcised immediately after having been purchased by 
their Hebrew masters; and a privilege accorded in so solemn an instrument must needs have justified slavery * in the 
eyes of all succeeding generations amongst the Jews t. Since proof of this kind is absolutely conclusive, we shall here 

* A more distinct permission was given by Moses to the slave-trade in the following ordinance of the twenty-fifth chapter of Leviticus, 
wherein two things are very deserving of notice; first, that he there made a great distinction between slaves bought by the Jews from each 
other, and of Hebrew race, and those purchased from foreigners; the former of whom were to-be treated in every respect like hired 
servants, and to be made free on the year of the Jubilee, unless they voluntarily submitted to the ceremony of having their ears bored 
through with an awl, as described in the sixth verse of the twenty-first chapter of Exodus; whilst the latter were to be the perpetual and 
hereditary slaves of the Jews and their posterity, and to be placed exactly on the same footing with respect to their owners as the negro 
slaves in the West Indies, in whose behalf such frequent appeals are now made to Scripture, although the condemnation of the slave- 
trade is nowhere to be found in its inspired pages ; but on the contrary, the curse pronounced by Noah on the posterity of Ham, and the 
sanction accorded to it by the Mosaic law, justified it in the opinion of later times, and furnished Christian states with an excuse for colo- 
‘nizing America with African slaves, and embarking in a slave-trade of gigantic magnitude and unparalleled atrocity in the sixteenth century : 
secondly, that the Hebrew slave-trade did not, as some writers attempt to prove, originate in the wars of the Holy Land, when massacre 
was the fate that awaited the vanquished, but was a traffic altogether of a pecuniary nature, and carried on in the slave-markets of Egypt, 
Tyre, and other countries of the East, as well as in Judea. “ And if thy brother that dwelleth by thee be waxen poor, and be sold unto 
thee; thou shalt not compel him to serve as a bond servant: but as an héred servant, and as a sojourner, he shall be with thee, and shall 
serve thee unto the year of Jubilee: and then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children with him, and shall return unto his own 
family, and unto the possession of his fathers shall he return. For they are my servants, which I brought forth out of the land of Egypt : 
they shall not be sold as bondmen. Thou shalt not rule over ham with rigour; but shalt fear thy God. Both thy bondmen and thy bond- 
maids, which thou shalt have, shall be of the heathen that areround about you ; of themshall ye buy bondmen and bondmaids. Moreover 
of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them shall ye buy, and of their families that are with you, which they begat 
in your land: and they shall be your possession. And ye shall take them as an inheritance for your children after you, to inherit them for a 
possession; they shall be your bondmen for ever: but over your brethren the children of Israel, ye shall not rule one over another with 
rigour.’ It is scarcely necessary to observe that the above ordinance of the twenty-fifth chapter of Leviticus fixes the year of Jubilee 
as the year of release for Hebrew slaves: but the following ordinance of the twenty-first chapter of Exodus appoints the Sabbatical year 
for the same purpose. How, it may be inquired, are these conflicting laws to be reconciled with each other? “ Now these are the judg- 
ments which thou shalt set before them. If thou buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve: and in the seventh he shall go out free 
for nothing. If he came in by himself, he shall go out by himself: if he were married, then his wife shall go out with him, If his master 
have given him a wife, and she have born Aim sons or daughters; the wife and her children shall be her master’s, and he shall go out by 
himself. And if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free: then his master shall bring 
him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or unto the door post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an aul; and 
he shall serve him for ever.” From the cruelty of the condition annexed to this law, it will be immediately perceived that its operation 
as regarded the release of Hebrew slaves would have been extremely limited, and that many would have preferred slavery to a lasting 
separation from their wives and children. The inference from all which must necessarily be that Hebrew slaves were numerous in every age 
amongst the Jews, and that a great portion of the Jewish population had their ears bored; which curious fact we have already observed in 
the note subjoined to the forty-third page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present Volume. Whether, however, the pro- 
phetic exclamation of Isaiah “ Mine ears hast thou bored,” uttered in reference to the Messiah, might be intended to foreshow that 
he would remain the perpetual servant of God, and would never forsake the church his spouse, or the Jews his children, it is of little 
importance to the present subject to inquire: we may however observe, that the Song of Solomon is generally understood by the 
Rabbis allegorically to refer to the Messiah; who add, that although Solomon appears there to speak in his own person, and to address 
the daughter of Pharaoh, he is in reality speaking in inspired language the sentiments of the Jews respecting the Messiah. It was a 
remark even made by the Gentiles, that the Hebrew Messiah is represented in Scripture under so many different characters that they 
appear quite irreconcilable with each other; and hence the Rabbis do not scruple to affirm that the prophets speak of two different 
Messiahs, the one the son of David and the other the anointed or adopted son of God; both of whom they invest with attributes which 
the New ‘estament does not assign in the most remote manner to Christ, and which would infinitely better become Hercules or Leda’s 
son than the benign founder of Christianity. 

+ Don Juan Bautista Mufioz, a Spanish historian of the last century, admits in the following passage of the inedited portion of his 
Historia del Nuevo Mundo, the unhappy influence which the sanction given to slavery in the Old Testament exercised over the counsels 
of kings and princes in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries: “ Nada digamos de las inveteradas practicas en orden 4 esclavos, dela potestad 
para condenar 4 servidumbre generaciones enteras, de apropiarse como legitimo el poder de los antiguos Romanos sobre las naciones 

barbaras, de aplicar 4 la suavisima ley de gracia ciertos ejemplos de sumo rigor, peculiares del gobierno teocratico de los Israelitas, de 

(2U) 

166 NOTES. 

insert God’s covenant with Abraham, transcribing it from the seventeenth chapter of Genesis : “And God said unto Abra- 
ham, Thou shalt keep my covenant therefore, thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations. This is my covenant, 
which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy seed after thee; Every man child among you shall be circumcised. 
And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you. And 
he that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every man child in your generations, he that is born in the 
house, or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy seed. He that is born in thy house, and he that is 
bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised ; and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant. 
And the uncircumcised man child, whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people ; 
he hath broken my covenant.” That slavery was exceedingly common amongst the Jews of later ages, and in the 
days of the prophet Amos had attained a frightful pitch of iniquity, must be inferred from the denunciation of that 
prophet against his countrymen, in the second chapter of his prophecies: “Thus saith the Lord; For three transgres- 
sions of Israel, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they soldthe righteous for silver, 
and the poor for a pair of shoes; that pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, and turn aside the way of 
the meek.” From the prophet’s concluding expression, “pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor,” it 
might be inferred, that so avaricious were the Jews of his time, that they took tribute and offerings from the poor of 
the smallest things which they possessed, to mark their state of dependence and servitude ; not disdaining to receive, 
when they had nothing else to give, a tribute of filth and vermin: and this would have accorded with a usage of the 
Mexicans noticed by Clavigero in the following passage of the fourth section of the fifth book of his History of 
Mexico: “ Even beggars, that they might not be totally idle, were enjoined to contribute a certain quantity of those 
filthy insects, which are the breed of nastiness and adherents of wretchedness*,” which kind of tribute is likewise men- 
tioned by Pedro Simon in the fourteenth chapter of the fourth book of his inedited Noticias Historiales, where he 
treats of the manners of the Indians of Bogota. That the Hebrew law recognised that peculiar sort of slavery which 
Oriental jealousy has rendered habitual from the earliest ages to the present time amongst the nations of the Kast, may 
be inferred from the first verse of the twenty-third chapter of Deuteronomy, and from the nineteenth verse of the thirty- 
fourth chapter of Jeremiah, as well as from other passages of Scripture}; and although there is no express license 
accorded to it in the Pentateuch, it still should be recollected that it is a legal maxim that what the law does not 
prohibit it permits, which applies with still greater force where the legislator makes frequent mention of, and the 
people are known commonly to practise, what the law does not forbid. That the Jews occasionally made merchan- 
dize of children must be inferred from the following passage of the twenty-fourth chapter of Deuteronomy: “If aman 
be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of Israel, and maketh merchandize of him, or selleth him; then 
that thief shall die; and thou shalt put evil away from among you.” That Hebrew parents sometimes sold their 

estender 4 la fuerza armada la compulsion evangelica para entrar al convite. Por ventura se convidé 4 los Caribes en la forma prescrita 
por los pios monarcas? se les requirid y exdrt6 suficientemente de un modo inteligible y propio para persuadir?” &c. The first volume 
of Mufioz’s Historia del Nuevo Mundo was published at Madrid in the year 1793; and the prologue to that work, although it dero- 
gates from the just merits of Peter Martyr and Gomara, cannot be read without interest by those who desire to know what materials may 
exist in the Spanish libraries for a new history of America. 

* The custom of the Ingas exacting tribute for the sake of tribute, without any regard to its value, from the meanest of their subjects, 
is noticed by Juan de Matienzo in the following passage of the first chapter of the first part of his inedited history, entitled ‘Gobierno del 
Peru’: “ Tributos pagaban todos sin escusarse ninguno, y les traian 4 cuestas al Cuzco ciento y duzientas leguas y mas; y los que no 
tenian que tributarles, hazian que trajesen piojos en unos cafutos, y con ellos venian ciento y duzientas leguas. Finalmente eran mas 
que esclavos, ni aun eran sefiores de sus mugeres y hijos, antes el Inga los daba 4 quien queria.” ‘This trait of resemblance in the 
policy of the Ingas and the Mexican kings is certainly deserving of notice. 

+ The Oriental practice above alluded to existed amongst the Peruvians, as we learn from the following passage of the inedited third 
part of Oviedo’s Historia General y Natural de las Indias: “ El Seftor de esta isla de Puna se sirve con mucha pompa, é quando sale 
de su casa es con trompetas é atabales; tiene porteros 6 guardas de sus mugeres, ¢ porque estos no les parezcan bien 4 ellas, traen 
cortados los bezos & narizes, é los miembros genitales; é la manera que tienen para cortarles los miembros es, que tendidos les ponen 
una viga sobre los pechos, é otra sobre los muslos, é despues de haberles cortado aquello, los vuelven de boca en tierra hasta que se 
desangran, que dicen que aquella sangre se havia de convertir en materia, é luego con dieta é ciertos polvos de yerva que les hechan, 
sanan.” The existence of the above-mentioned custom amongst the Peruvians has scarcely been noticed by Spanish authors; but there 
are grounds for supposing that the ‘corcobados’ and dwarfs who waited on Montezuma in the interior of his palace, of whom Diego 
Duran makes express mention in the sixty-seventh chapter of the first part of his History of Mexico, were slaves who had been subjected 
to the same description of mutilation. 

NOTES. 167 

children, and individuals themselves, to pay their debts, must also be inferred from the words of Isaiah in the first 
verse of the fiftieth chapter of his prophecies, who would never have introduced the Deity using the language which 
he does, if such a custom had not been prevalent amongst the Jews: “Thus saith the Lord, Where is the bill of your 
mother’s divorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for 
your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away.” From the concluding 
declaration of this passage it might be conjectured that the Hebrew law which authorized a husband to divorce his 
wife on the trivial plea of “not finding favour in his eyes,” might have likewise conceded to him the power of putting 
her away if her children gave him any serious cause of displeasure; nor would such a permission, had it been 
accorded by Moses, have been at all at variance with the whole spirit of his code, which, at the same time that it 
made great allowance for the hardness, made scarcely any for the weakness or the errors, of the human heart. 

Of the ancient form of sclemnizing marriages among the Jews little is said in the Pentateuch; and from the 
account of the marriage of Boaz and Ruth, in the third chapter of the Book of Ruth, it is almost doubtful whether 
they were celebrated by any other rite than that described in the ninth verse of the above-mentioned chapter. It 
would be wrong, however, thence to infer that marriage was regarded by the Jews merely in the light of a civil 
contract, since we meet in Scripture with many laws of Mosaic enactment immediately connected with the subject of 
marriage, such, for example, as the license accorded to polygamy, the facility granted to divorces, the obligation imposed 
upon brothers to marry brothers’ widows*, the infamy attaching to their refusal to comply with that precept of the law {, 

* Las Casas remarks, in his Historia Apologetica, that the custom of brothers marrying brothers’ widows, “ quasi ad sustinendum 
semen fratris,” was common in New Spain ; and the existence of a similar custom amongst the Peruvians is attested by Pizarro in the 
following passage of the fifteenth chapter of his valuable inedited History of the Discovery and Conquest of Peru, which is preserved 
in manuscript in the Royal Library of Madrid: « Eran estos Orejones muy sobervios y presuntuosos; tenian por costumbre ellos que 
las mugeres que habian sido de sus padres, como no fuesen sus mismas madres, las tomaban por mugeres; asi mismo tomaban por 
mugeres das de sus hermanos si morian : tenian otras muchas maldades que por ser muchas no las digo.” 

+ The opinion which the Jews of later ages entertained of the obligatory nature of the Mosaic law which enjoined the next of kin to 
raise up seed to a deceased brother or kinsman by marrying his widow if he died childless, is exemplified in the following passage of the 
sixth chapter of the Book of Tobit, where the exhortation of the angel Raphael, and the sentence of “ guilty of death according to 
the law of Moses,” which he pronounces against Raguel, should he evade compliance with the letter of the law by marrying his daughter 
to any other than Tobias, are extremely deserving of notice, and prove how fully established was that custom amongst the Jews, how- 
ever repugnant to the spirit and letter of all other ancient and modern codes. We may further observe that the same chapter affords 
grounds for supposing that Hebrew marriages were arranged in the first instance by the intervention of a third party, or ¢ negotiator,” 
which, as Sahagun informs us, was also customary amongst the Mexicans: “The angel said to the young man, Brother, to day we 
shall lodge with Raguel, who is thy cousin: he also hath one only daughter, named Sara; I will speak for her, that she may be given thee 
for a wife ; for to thee doth the right of her appertain, seeing thou only art of her kindred, and the maid is fair and wise. Now, there- 
fore, hear me, and I will speak to her father ; and when we return from Rages, we will celebrate the marriage; for I know that Raguel 
cannot marry her to another, according to the law of Moses, but he shall be guilty of death, because the right of inheritance doth rather 
appertain to thee than to any other. Then the young man answered the angel: I have heard say, brother Azarias, that this maid hath 
been given to seven men, who all died in the marriage chamber: and now I am the only son of my father, and I am afraid lest if I go in 
unto her I die as the other before; for a wicked spirit loveth her', which hurteth nobody but those which come unto her: wherefore I also 
fear lest I die, and bring my father’s and my mother’s life, because of me, to the grave with sorrow, for they have no other son to bury them.” 

1 The Spanish historian Pedro Simon has recorded with much gravity, in his Noticias Historiales, an Indian tradition of the devil 
having become enamoured of one of the wives of the Cacique of Bogota. The good monk who relates this story does indeed exclaim in a 
tone of great simplicity, “ Well may we arch the brows and shrug the shoulders at the inscrutable counsels of God.” Itis probable, how- 
ever, that if he had never read the extraordinary narrative contained in the sixth chapter of the book of Tobit, he would, instead of permit- 
ting himself to inquire how God could have allowed such things to be, have rejected the whole as an absurd fable. And here we may 
remark, that the Book of Tobit, although not forming a canonical portion of Scripture, contains a very ancient piece of Hebrew history, 
and appears to have been of high authority among the Jews. All doubt, however, would be set at rest on this matter if it could be 
satisfactorily proved that the Sadducees referred to the wife of Tobias in the following passage of the twentieth chapter of the Gospel of 
St. Luke, which itself furnishes proof, if the argument which Christ so successfully employed against the Sadducees be held to be valid at 
the present day, that the resurrection of the body was no less a tenet of the Mexican religion than it was of the ancient Jews ; since the 
unequivocal declaration of the Mexican high priest that Tezcatlipoca was the god of the Mexican lords Quitzieguaguatzin, Maceuhcatzin 
and Tlacavepatzin, and of other famous chieftains who had died in war, which occurs in the prayer addressed to that deity in the third 
chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, leads, by parity of reasoning, to the conclusion that he was not a god of the 
dead but of the living, conformably with the signification of his name, Ipalnemoani, and that the Mexicans believed in the resurrection of 
the body as well as in the immortality of the soul: “Then came to him certain of the Sadducees, which deny that there is any resur- 

168. NOTES. 

and the manner of their release from the obligation *, the punishment of adultery by stoning to death, and the 
prohibition against marrying within certain degrees f of consanguinity {; to which may be added two other He- 
brew laws immediately connected with marriage, which we shall here transcribe, because they were closely allied 
to similar laws existing amongst the Mexicans and the Indians of Bogota, and were intended to guard against. 
the evil consequences that might possibly result to wives from the jealous dispositions of their husbands. These 
laws are taken from the fifth chapter of Numbers and the twenty-second chapter of Deuteronomy, and were as follow : 
“ And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, If any man’s wife 
go aside, and commit a trespass against him, and a man lie with her carnally, and it be hid from the eyes of her hus- 
band, and be kept close, and she be defiled, and there be no witness against her, neither she be taken with the 
manner; and the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be defiled: or if the 
spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be not defiled: then shall the man bring 
his wife unto the priest, and he shall bring her offering for her, the tenth part of an ephah of barley meal; he 
shall pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense thereon ; for it is an offering of jealousy, an offering of memorial, 
bringing iniquity to remembrance. And the priest shall bring her near, and set her before the Lord: and the priest 
shall take holy water in an earthen vessel; and of the dust that is in the floor of the tabernacle the priest shall 
take, and put it into the water: and the priest shall set the woman before the Lord, and uncover the woman’s 
head, and put the offering of memorial in her hands, which is the jealousy offering: and the priest shall have in his 
hand the bitter water that causeth the curse: and the priest shall charge her by an oath, and say unto the woman, 

If no man have lain with thee, and if thou hast not gone aside to uncleanness with another instead of thy husband, be 
thou free from this bitter water that causeth the curse: but if thou hast gone aside to another instead of thy husband, 
and if thou be defiled, and some man have lain with thee beside thine husband: then the priest shall charge the 
woman with an oath of cursing, and the priest shall say unto the woman, The Lord make thee a curse and an oath 
among thy people, when the Lord doth make thy thigh to rot, and thy belly to swell ; and this water that causeth the 
curse shall go into thy bowels, to make thy belly to swell, and thy thigh to rot: And the woman shall say, Amen, 
amen. And the priest shall write these curses in a book, and he shall blot them out with the bitter water: and he 
shall cause the woman to drink the bitter water that causeth the curse: and the water that causeth the curse shall 

* A curious analogy between the Peruvian mode of celebrating marriages by means of a sandal fastened on the foot of the bride, and that 
which appears to have been the custom in ancient times amongst the Jews, has already been noticed in the tenth page of the first part 
of the present volume; and the account there given by Acosta is, as far as relates to the putting on the ofova, or sandal, confirmed by 
Brulius in the following passage of the second chapter of the first book of his Historia Peruana: “ In Peruvia sponsus ad sponse des 
deferebat ponebatque calceum; ex lana, si virgo esset; si corrupta, ex juncis, quo facto constabat matrimonium.” 

+ The marriage of a man with his mother-in-law, was named by the Mexicans totetzauh, which phrase signifies ‘abomination’, and 
corresponds exactly with the Greek term fdeAvyya, an expression occasionally made use of by Moses in the Pentateuch. 

{ The languages of several South American nations are extremely copious in terms expressive of the different degrees of consanguinity ; 
nor indeed is this surprising, since religion never fails to convey its meaning in appropriate terms, and has augmented the vocabularies of 
most languages. We shall in a subsequent note insert a long list of names for the various degrees of consanguinity formerly known amongst 
the Muizcas. They are preserved in a manuscript dictionary of the language of that forgotten and now almost extinct people. This ~ 
dictionary, which is inscribed “ Mariquita, 1788,” professes in the title-page to have been copied “de los unicos MSS. originales que 
conserva Don Jose Celestino Mutis.” M.de Humboldt has observed in his dissertation on the ancient calendar of the Muizcas, inserted 

in the second volume of his American Monuments, that the language of that nation is now unknown. 

rection; and they asked him, saying, Master, Moses wrote unto us, If any man’s brother die, having a wife, and he die without children, 
that his brother should take his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother. There were therefore seven brethren : and the first took a wife, and 
died without children. And the second took her to wife, and he died childless. And the third took her; and in like manner the seven also: 
and they left no children, and died. Last of all the woman died also. Therefore in the resurrection whose wife of them is she? for seven 
had her to wife. And Jesus answering said unto them, The children of this world marry, and are given in marriage: but they which 
shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage: neither can 
they die any more: for they are equal unto the angels; and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection. Now that the 
dead are raised, even Moses showed at the bush, when he calleth the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of 
Jacob. For he is not a God of the dead, but of the living : for all live unto him. Then certain of the Scribes answering said, Master, 
thou hast well said. And after that they durst not ask him any question at all. And he said unto them, How say they that Christ is 
David’s son? And David himself saith in the book of Psalms, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on ay) right hand, till I make thine 
enemies thy footstool. David therefore calleth him Lord, how is he then his son :” 

NOTES. 169 

enter into her, and become bitter. Then the priest shall take the jealousy offering out of the woman’s hand, and 
shall wave the offering before the Lord, and offer it upon the altar: and the priest shall take an handful of the offer- 
ing, even the memorial thereof, and burn it upon the altar, and afterward shall cause the woman to drink the 
water. And when he hath made her to drink the water, then it shall come to pass, that, if she be defiled, and have 
done trespass against her husband, that the water that causeth the curse shall enter into her, and become bitter, and 
her belly shall swell, and her thigh shall rot: and the woman shall be a curse among her people. And if the 
woman be not defiled, but be clean; then she shall be free, and shall conceive seed. This is the law of jealousies, 
when a wife goeth aside to another instead of her husband, and is defiled; or when the spirit of jealousy cometh 
upon him, and he be jealous over his wife, and shall set the woman before the Lord, and the priest shall execute 
upon her all this law. Then shall the man be guiltless from iniquity, and this woman shall bear her iniquity.” 

“If any man take a wife, and go in unto her, and hate her, and give occasions of speech against her, and bring 
up an evil name upon her, and say, I took this woman, and when I came to her, I found her not a maid: then shall 
the father of the damsel, and her mother, take and bring forth the tokens of the damsel’s virginity unto the elders of 
the city in the gate: and the damsel’s father shall say unto the elders, 1 gave my daughter unto this man to wife, 
and he hateth her; and, lo, he hath given occasions of speech against her, saying, I found not thy daughter a maid ; 
and yet these are the tokens of my daughter’s virginity. And they shall spread the cloth before the elders of the 
city. And the elders of that city shall take that man and chastise him; and they shall amerce him in an hun- 
dred shekels of silver, and give them unto the father of the damsel, because he hath brought up an evil name 
upon a virgin of Israel: and she shall be his wife; he may not put her away all his days. But if this thing be 
true, and the tokens of virginity be not found for the damsel: then they shall bring out the damsel to the door of 
her father’s house, and the men of her city shall stone her with stones that she die: because she hath wrought folly 
in Israel, to play the whore in her father’s house: so shalt thou put evil away from among you.” 

The resemblance of the former of these ordinances to the description given by Pedro Simon, in the 87th page of 
the present volume, of the trial of jealousy in use amongst the Muizcas, and the cruel ordeal to which they subjected 
a woman accused of adultery, will appear by the perusal of the following extract, which is the literal translation of the 
passage referred to. “ It is true that after marriage they strongly resented adultery, and the women whom they sus- 
pected of it they compelled to swallow a large quantity of Indian pepper, which caused them to feel burning torture 
within, exhorting them at the same time ¢o confess their guilt, which very frequently they did from the intensity of the 
pain, and even that of which they were not guilty. They gave them on confession water, with which they mitigated 
the ardent heat of the pepper, and sentenced them to death, together with the adulterer, agreeably to the law. Other 
women would not confess, and were cleared of the charge, by the torment of the ordeal which they had undergone, in 
whose honour they made great feasts.” The latter ordinance exhibits such a striking conformity with an analogous 
usage of the Mexicans, that it is only necessary to peruse the following extract from the third chapter of the second 
volume of Echevarria’s inedited History of the Origin of the Indians of New Spain, descriptive of the marriage rites of 
the Tultecas, which nearly resembled those of the Mexicans, to feel convinced that both nations were indebted to the 
Pentateuch for a legislative enactment, traces of which it is impossible to discover in any other civilized code *. “ El 

* The existence of a similar custom amongst the rude tribes of Western Africa cannot be considered in the least at variance with the 
truth of this assertion, since the well-attested fact of their practising circumcision, their universal belief in dreams and witches, and their 
accustomed ordeal of drinking red water, to which they resort on the most comnion occasions, though frequently attended with fatal con- 
sequences, seem sufficiently to point out the true source from which these various superstitions are derived. Lieutenant Matthews thus 
describes the former custom at page 118 of his Voyage to Sierra Leone. << In the evening the bridegroom retires to his wife’s apartment. 
If he finds room to suspect she has before admitted the embraces of a man, he immediately leaves her, which is no sooner known by her 
friends than they instantly abscond, shouting and howling with shame and confusion; but if he is satisfied, he remains with her all night. 
Great rejoicings are then made by her friends, who carry the tokens of her virginity, according to the Mosaical institution, in wild proces- 
sion through the streets. In either case he is at liberty to retain her; but should he send her back, he must send everything she brought 
with her.” The same author, after describing, in his sixth letter, the nature of the above-mentioned ordeal, takes occasion to comment in 
the following terms on its pernicious consequences on’ the community at large: ‘The collusion between the parties concerned in this 
curious ceremony is so obvious, that it appears astonishing to me the common people have not as yet discovered it, though it has existed 
time immemorial. Iam told that in the interior parts of the country they found suffering the people to drink red water upon every trifling 
occasion was attended with such fatal consequences as would in time depopulate the country; and although they could not entirely sup- 

VOL. VIII. (2X) 

170 NOTES. 

afio de este desposorio le seftalan con el geroglifico de Siete Caiias, que corresponde segun las tablas al de 1135, seis 
afios despues de la muerte de Xiuhtemoc: y diciendonos que tomé el medio de casar 4 su hija con Pochotl para sose- 
gar la inquietud de algunos nobles que llevaban & mal su exaltacion al trono, parece que esta debid ser por estos 
tiempos, y pasados ya algunos afios de la muerte de Xiuhtemoc, como dejo sentado. Con motivo de estas bodas, nos 
dicen los historiadores las ceremonias de que usaban yd por estos tiempos los Tultecas * en sus desposorios y eran las 
siguientes: prevenian una pieza de la casa y aseada, que colgaban y aderezaban por el techo, paredes y suelo con 
ramos} de arboles y multitud de flores colocadas con proporcion y simetria, de suerte que hiciesen una especie de 
colgadura que todo lo cubriese. En medio de la pieza levantaban un pequefio fogon, en que encendian fuego f; y 
estando todo preparado, el padrino, acompafiado de los parientes y amigos del novio, le conducia 4 aquella pieza, y 
poco despues la madrina Ilevaba 4 la novia acompafiandola§ sus parientas y amigos con el mismo orden. Sentaban 

press it, as the common people, and particularly the women, are strongly prepossessed in favour of its infallibility, they have hit upon a 
method that has greatly lessened the practice. When a person is to drink red water, the friends of both parties assemble, armed as in a 
Polish diet, and the instant the poison operates either in causing them to vomit or fall down dead, the friends of the accused imme- 
diately attack the other party, either to revenge their injured innocence or death.” 

* The Mexican marriage ceremony differed very little from that in use amongst the Tultecas, from which nation they were by inter- 
marriages descended, and the manners of both nations bore a striking resemblance to those of the Jews. 

+ The Hebrew custom of rejoicing with branches of trees, and welcoming the arrival of distinguished guests by strewing them on the 
roads, is noticed in the New Testament, in connexion with one remarkable incident in the life of Christ; analogous to which, likewise, was 
that of celebrating rejoicings in private houses by adorning the walls with garlands of flowers, and spreading green boughs on the floors. 
This observation leads us to remark that the reception of Cortes by Montezuma, who, relying on ancient prophecies, believed him to be 
Quetzalcoatle, and went out of the city of Mexico to meet him accompanied with a great multitude of the citizens, carrying branches of 
trees in their hands, was not unlike the Jews’ reception of Christ, as described by St. John in the twelfth chapter of his Gospel: “ On 
the next day much people that were come to the feast, when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, took branches of palm trees, 
and went forth to meet him, and cried, Hosanna: Blessed is the King of Israel that cometh in the name of the Lord. And Jesus, when 
he had found a young ass, sat thereon; as it is written, Fear not, daughter of Sion: behold, thy King cometh, sitting on an ass’s colt.” 
It may be proper to remark that Saint Matthew declares, in the twenty-first chapter of his Gospel, that the people strewed the way with 
branches ; but says nothing of their carrying branches in their hands. But it is likewise material to observe that neither St. Matthew nor 
St, John adopt the Septuagint reading of Zechariah’s prophecy respecting the Messiah, which occurs in the ninth verse of the ninth 
chapter of his prophecies, and to which they both appeal in proof of Christ having verified the ancient prediction that the king of the 
Jews should enter Jerusalem upon an ass. The conjecture is obvious that the Mosaic ordinance respecting the feast of tabernacles, and 
the Hebrew custom of rejoicing on certain festivals with branches of the palm tree and willows of the brook, would have naturally led 
the Jews to associate ideas of festivity with the display of branches of trees, which practice we learn, from the first volume of the 
Religious Ceremonies of all Nations, the modern Jews still retain at their weddings. 

+ This fire is represented in the sixty-second plate of the Collection of Mendoza, descriptive of the marriage rites of the ancient Mexi- 
cans; and it would appear from the following passage of the sixth chapter of the book of Tobit, that to burn incense in a marriage chamber 
was an ancient Hebrew custom: “Then the Angel said unto him, Dost thou not remember the precepts which thy father gave thee, that 
thou shouldest marry a wife of thine own kindred? Wherefore hear me, O my brother, for she shall be given thee to wife, and make thou 
no reckoning of the evil spirit, for this same night shall she be given thee in marriage. And when thou shalt come into the marriage 
chamber, thou shalt take the ashes of perfume, and shalt lay upon them some of the heart and liver of the fish, and shalt make a smoke 
with it. And the devil shall smell it and flee away, and never come again any more; but when thou shalt come to her, rise up both of 
you and pray to God, which is merciful, who will have pity on you and save you: fear not, for she is appointed unto thee from the begin- 
ning, and thou shalt preserve her, and she shall go with thee. Moreover, I suppose that she shall bear thee children. Now when Tobias 
had heard these things, he loved her, and his heart was effectually joined to her.” We may here remark that the concluding exhortation 
of the angel Raphael:to Tobias might have led the Jews, in process of time, to practise all those religious austerities, consisting of vigils, 
fasts, and penance, with which the Mexicans celebrated their marriages; whilst the declaration, “ She is appointed unto thee from the 
beginning,” unequivocally proves that the Jews resembled the Mexicans in believing that marriages were predestined by the Deity. 

§ The twenty-third. chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain gives a minute description of the various rites 
which accompanied the celebration of Mexican marriages ; and it is really amazing to find how many Hebrew customs and superstitions 
were mixed up with that ceremony. That it was a Hebrew custom to solemnize marriages with feasts, and for the guests to indulge 
freely in wine, is evident from the miracle.recorded of Christ in the second chapter of St.John, whose conversion of water into wine at:a 
marriage feast, in Cana of Galilee; would have been. likely to perpetuate the custom of marriage feasts amongst Christians of later ages. 
The latter custom is likewise described by Sahagun.as extremely prevalent amongst ‘the Mexicans, who, although they were forbidden.on 
other occasions to drink wine, were allowed at such festivals to drink to excess, and even paid a sort of superstitious reverence to the wine 
which was used.on such occasions, for in that sense the words of the above-mentioned author, “este vino era adorado,” must be understood. 
Agreeably, likewise, to Jewish usage, the bride was conducted by torch-light to the house of the bridegroom attired in her richest apparel; 

NOTES. val 

al novio en una silla al lado derecho del fogon, y @ la novia en una estera en el suelo al lado siniestro. Entonces un 
anciano, 4 quien daban el nombre de Cihuatlanqui*, que interpretan ‘casamentero,’ que hacia el papel principal en 
estas funciones, y no faltaba uno de ellos en cada pueblo, comenzaba una especie de platica, en que declaraba 4 los 
desposados las obligaciones del estado que tomaban, la obediencia > que debia tener la muger al marido, y la atencion 
y cuidado con que este debia mirarla, obligandose 4 mantenerla y sustentarla y 4 la prole que tuviesen, criando y 
educando 4 los hijos @ su lado, y ensefiandoles todo lo que segun su esfera debian saber para ser utiles 4 la 
republica y no ociosos y vagabundos ; que la muger por sw parte habia de trabajar para ayudar § al marido y con- 
tribuir 4 su propia subsistencia y la de su familia en aquellas labores que acostumbraban las de su sexo y calidad, 
que habian de guardarse mutua fidelidad, que habian de mantener entre si paz y buena armonia, szfriendose recipro- 
camente uno 4 otro sus defectos para hacer tolerables las pensiones de la vida, considerando que este vinculo no 
habia de poderle romper mas que la muerte||. Estos y otros semejantes consejos de la mas sana moral eran los que 
contenia la platica del anciano. Concluida esta se levantaban los desposados, y el mismo anciano ataba la punta de 
la manta del hombre a la de la muger, que la Ilevaba sobre la cabeza 4 manera de manto, quedando siempre uno 4 
cada lado del fogon, en el que al mismo tiempo echaban varios perfumes, como ambar, incienso, copalli, y otros 
con que los perfumaban, y al mismo tiempo les echaban al cuello cadenas de flores y les ponian en las cabezas { 
guirnaldas ** muy vistosas. Esta costumbre subsiste todavia en nuestros dias, y la hé visto practicar en la capilla 

and if young, her face was painted with yellow ochre, named in the Mexican language, tecocahuit/. She was accompanied likewise by many 
of her female companions and relatives, who followed her in procession, imitating, as it were, the description of the Psalmist in the following 
passage of the forty-fifth Psalm: ‘‘ Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear ; forget also thine own people, and thy father’s 
house. So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty : for he is thy lord; and worship thou him, And the daughter of Tyre shall be there with 
a gift; even the rich among the people shall entreat thy favour. The king’s daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold. 
She shall be brought unto the king in raiment of needlework : the virgins her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee. With 
gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall enter into the king’s palace. Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom 
thou mayest make princes in all the earth.” Notwithstanding the doubts of some commentators, it is extremely probable that the above 
Psalm was composed on the occasion of Solomon’s nuptials with the daughter of Pharaoh, king of Eygpt; and the Queen, his mother, 
may be supposed in the passage above quoted to address her daughter-in-law. The sixth verse of the same Psalm: “Thy throne, 
O God, is for ever and ever; the sceptre of thy kingdom is a right sceptre,” would seem to refer to the anticipated durability of the 
Jewish monarchy under the successors of David; and the language employed agrees surprisingly with the Mexican notion, that the throne 
on which Montezuma and his predecessors sat belonged to the Deity, whose vicegerents they were, and was a seat of judicature, from 
which they pronounced judgements conformable to the revealed will of God, and prompted by his direct inspiration. This extraordinary 
belief of the Mexicans is fully developed in the speech of the Mexican orator in the sixteenth chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s 
History of New Spain, where its conformity with the declaration of Scripture, that God elevates kings to thrones, and again debases them 
when he thinks fit, is extremely deserving of notice, and serves to remind us of the history of Saul and David. 

* It would appear from the sixth chapter of the Book of Tobit, that the angel Raphael discharged the duties of this office for 
Tobias. 

+ Passive obedience on the part of the wife to the husband was in a peculiar manner inculcated by the religion of the Jews. This 
doctrine was grounded on the curse which God pronounced on Eve, in the sixteenth verse of the third chapter of Genesis: ‘ Unto the 
woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be 
to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.” 

{ Attention to the education of their children of both sexes was amongst the Jews and the Mexicans considered an imperative duty 
on parents. ‘The opinions of the ancient Jews on this point may be collected from the following passage of the seventh chapter of the 
book of Ecclesiasticus: “ Hast thou children? instruct them, and bow down their neck from their youth. Hast thou daughters? have a 
care of their body, and show not thyself cheerful towards them.” 

§ Eve is named in the eighteenth verse of the second chapter of Genesis ‘the help meet’ of Adam, to which expression there is pro- 
bably here more than an accidental allusion. 

|| The doctrine here inculcated very much resembles the language of St. Paul in the seventh chapter of his First Epistle to the Corin- 
thians, which chapter, it is deserving of remark, laid the foundation of the monastic institutions of Europe, and imposed celibacy as a 
matter of conscience, if not of duty, on the clergy. 

4 A similar custom is perhaps alluded to in the following passage of the third chapter of the Song of Solomon, “ Go forth, O ye 
daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals and in the 
day of the gladness of his heart.” . 

** Tt was customary in former ages amongst the Jews as well as the Greeks to wear garlands at festivals, and to adorn their persons 
and dwellings with flowers; and to this usage there is an allusion in the following passage of the second chapter of the Wisdom of 
Solomon, which breathes the voluptuous sentiments of Epicurus: “Let us fill ourselves with costly wine and ointments, and let no 

72 NOTES. 

de los Indios de la santa Iglesia catedral de la Puebla, de suerte que para asistir a la misa nupcial les ponen 4 los 
desposados guirnaldas de flores, y tanto 4 ellos como @ los padrinos les dan tantas de ellas que tengan en las manos 
con las velas. Concluidas estas ceremonias de sus antiguos desposorios, reposaban un rato y recibian los parabienes 
y enorabuenas de los concurrentes ; y luego se formaba una danza al son de sus instrumentos, que eran tamboriles 6 
teponaztlis, chirimias y flautas de varias hechuras, y con esta danza * y acompanamiento llevaban 4 los desposados 
al templo, 4 cuyas puertas salian 4 recibirles sus Tlamacaxques 6 sacerdotes, y quedandose toda la comitiva abajo, 
solo subian las gradas del templo los desposados, cada uno con su padrino, y los padres y madres de entrambos si 
los tenian. El sacerdote estaba revestido con sus ropas de ceremonia, y un incensario en la mano con los ‘mismos 
perfumes, con el que luego que llegaban los incensaba. Poniase luego en media de los dos, quedando el hombre a 
la derecha y la muger 4 la izquierda, y tomandolos por las manos, los llevaba de esta suerte hasta el altar} 6 ara de su 
idolo, rezando varias deprecaciones. Llegados al altar, le ponia 4 cada uno de ellos una manta muy fina y vistosa, 

flower of the spring pass by us: Let us crown ourselves with rosebuds before they be withered.” The interpreter of the Codex Vati- 
canus remarks, in the two hundred and twenty-ninth page of the sixth volume of this work, that the Mexicans were extremely fond 
of flowers; and the celebrated Spanish naturalist Hernandez commends their great skill in horticulture in his Historia Plantarum Nove 
Hispanie. j 

* The Mexicans and the Jews were accustomed to celebrate their religious festivals with dances in the courts of their temples; and 
we read in the fifteenth chapter of the first book of Chronicles of David bringing up the ark of the Lord into the city of Jerusalem with 
dances and the sound of vocal and instrumental music. It is probable that these religious dances, having in course of time degenerated 
into scenes of profane debauchery, were suffered to fall into disuse; but that they originally constituted a very essential feature in 
the rites of the Jewish religion, as they did also of the Mexican, no one will attempt to deny. 

+ To burn incense before persons of distinction was a usage of the ancient Jews, some traces of which have been preserved in the 
existing rites of the Roman Catholic Church. 

+ The rites with which the Mexicans celebrated their marriages, and the reasons which they assigned for believing the marriage con- 
tract to be indissoluble, furnish the strongest argument for concluding that they were of Jewish origin, and grounded on the traditions 
of the Hebrew Pentateuch. We in fact find, on a nearer comparison of their peculiar tenets with the doctrines of the Jews, that the 
reasons which they employed to give validity to their system were precisely the same as those contained in the early chapters of the book 
of Genesis; viz. first, that God had in the beginning created man in his own image, and made them male and female; secondly, that 
Adam and Eve were of the same flesh; thirdly, that woman was formed out of the rib of man; and fourthly, that God himself had 
united them together in the bonds of matrimony. ‘These doctrines, resting on the basis of historic truth, necessarily led to the same 
moral results in both hemispheres, and we accordingly find that the relative duties of husband and wife were considered the same by 
the Mexicans and the Jews, and that the submission of the wife to the husband was equally enjoined as a religious duty by both nations. 
The proof of that which is here asserted is briefly exhibited in the following extracts from the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New 
Spain, each of which considered separately is to a certain degree conclusive, whilst the whole collectively presents such a mass of evidence 
as irresistibly to force conviction on the mind. The first passage which shall be quoted from the above historian in proof of its being a 
doctrine of the Mexican religion, that God having created mankind in the beginning male and female, marriages were necessarily indis- 
soluble, and polygamy highly offensive to him, is the following, which is taken from the twenty-first chapter of the sixth book of that author’s 
history : “Nota, hijo mio, lo que te digo; mira que el mundo ya tiene este estilo de engendrar y multiplicar 1, y para esta generacion y 
multiplicacion ordené Dios, que una muger usase de un varon, y un varon de una muger.” “ Consider, my son, the words which I address to 
you; know that this is the mode of multiplying and increasing in this world, and that God ordained for the sake of progeny and increase, 
that one woman should be the wife of one man, and one man the husband of one woman.” The second passage in proof of the Mexicans sub- 
scribing to the incomprehensible Jewish dogma, that a man and his wife were by virtue of marriage mysteriously converted into the same 
body, and were no longer twain but one flesh, a doctrine which St. Paul declares, in the thirty-second verse of the fifth chapter of his Epistle 
to the Ephesians, to be a great mystery, and to which he again reverts in the sixteenth verse of the sixth chapter of his first Epistle to the 
Corinthians, occurs in the same chapter of the same book of Sahagun: “ Nota otra cosa, hijo mio, que ya que te cases en buen tiempo y 
en buena sazon tomes muger, mira que no te des demasiadamente 4 ella, porque te echara 4 perder, aunque és asi que és tu muger y és tu 
cuerpo.” “Be mindful also, my son, after thou hast married early and taken a wife in good season, not to become intemperately addicted to 
her, for she will lead thee into perdition, although so it be that she is thy wife and is thy body.” The third argument in proof of the Mexi- 
cans entertaining the peculiarly Jewish notion, that the first woman was formed out of the rib of the first man, is of an inferential nature, 
and derived from the expression “ y és tu cuerpo” in the foregoing passage. Itis also founded upon analogy, and deducible from the curious 

1 The style of expression here made use of by the Mexican orator extremely resembles the language employed by the eldest daughter 
of Lot in the thirty-first verse of the nineteenth chapter of Genesis, the subject of which chapter, if the testimony of the Mexican 
historian Axayaca is to be relied upon, was painted upon the wall of the Teotlatollitecpan, or court of criminal audience, in the city of 
Tezcuco: “ And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father is old, and there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the 
manner of all the earth.” 

NOTES. 173 
tegida y matizada de varios colores, pero que en el medio tenia pintado un esqueleto, 6 imagen de la muerte, para 

fact of the comparatively rude and uncivilized tribes of the Orinoco being acquainted with the history of the formation of Eve from the rib 
of Adam while he slept, who also, according to the Abbé Gilli, agreed with the Mexicans in believing that light was created before the sun, 
which likewise was a Hebrew doctrine founded on the history of the creation of light in the third verse of the first chapter of Genesis, and 
was one so opposed to the philosophical opinions of the heathen world, that the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus does not scruple to 
affirm, in the two hundred and fourth page of the sixth volume of this Work, that the Mexicans had either derived the knowledge of it from 
the devil, or were a people descended from the Jews. Both the facts above alluded to are recorded by Gilli in his Saggio di Storia 
Americana, the former in the following remarkable passage, which occurs in the thirty-seventh page of the Supplementary Notes to the 
present volume: “Ma é mirabile cid che siegue ; dormendo uomo, Purrtnaminari gli recise una costola, e ne formd la donna.” “ But 
that which I am going to relate is wonderful; whilst the man slept, Purruuaminari took one of his ribs, and formed out of it a woman.” 
The third passage of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, which evidently proves that the Mexicans believed that God was the prime 
institutor of marriage, who had himself joined together in the persons of our first parents all married persons, and therefore that marriages 
should be indissoluble, is the following, which is taken from the twenty-fifth chapter of the sixth book of the same author’s History: “ Por 
ventura las olvidaré, 6 ambos las olvidarémos yo y mi marido, el qual aqui esta, que és vuestro siervo y criado N., d los quales ambos 
nuestro Senor nos ha juntado, por ventura con descuido lo olvidaré.” “ Perhaps I may forget thy words, or we both may forget them, I 
and my husband N., who is here present, who is thy servant and suitor, who have both been joined together by our Lord, perhaps I may 
through negligence forget them.” From this doctrine of the Mexicans doubtless originated the ancient Mexican custom of solemnizing 
marriages by knotting together the garments and joining the hands of the two parties in the manner represented in the sixty-second 
plate of the Collection of Mendoza. ‘The latter ceremony is expressly mentioned in the following passage of the twenty-fifth chapter of 
the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, where a married woman is thus supposed in tender terms to allude to her husband 
and the infant still within her womb: “ Aqui esté presente vuestro siervo y criado; siempre andamos juntos como trabados de las manos, 
no sé si lo vera, no sé silo conoceré, no sé si veré la cara de lo que de su sangre se ha hecho.” “ Thy servant and suitor is here present ; 
we always accompany each other wherever we go as persons who have been joined together by the hands; 1 know not whether he will 
behold it, I know not whether he will know it, I know not whether he will look upon the features of the babe which has been fashioned 
from his blood.” The doctrine which Christ inculcated in the Gospels upon the subject of marriage and divorce as opposed to the opi- 
nions, or at least to the practice of the Jews of his own age, and even to the sentiments of some of his disciples, and yet derived from the 
Mosaic history of the creation, is explained in the following passage of the nineteenth chapter of the Gospel of St. Matthew, where his 
injunction that a man should forsake his father and mother, and cleave unto his wife, wonderfully accords with the Mexican precept, that a 
woman should forsake her father and mother, and cleave unto her husband, as contained in the following passage of the twenty-third chapter 
of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain: “ Ya te has de apartar de tu padre y madre, ya los has de dejar del todo. 
Hija nuestra, deseamos que seas bienaventurada y prospera.” ‘ Now thou must separate thyself from thy father and mother, now 
thou must wholly forsake them. My daughter, we desire thy happiness and prosperity.” ‘* The Pharisees also came unto him, tempting 
him, and saying unto him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause? And he answered and said unto them, 
Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female, and said, For this cause shall a man 
leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh? Wherefore they are no more twain, but one 
flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder. They say unto him, Why did Moses then command 
to give a writing of divorcement, and to put her away? He saith unto them, Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered 
you to put away your wives: but from the beginning it was not so. And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except 
it be for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery: and whoso marrieth her which is put away doth commit adultery. 
His disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with his wife, it is not good to marry. But he said unto them, All men 
cannot receive this saying, save they to whom it is given. For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from their mother’s womb : 
and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of men: and there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the 
kingdom of heaven’s sake. He that is able to receive it, let him receive it.” It must strike every one as an extremely singular fact, that upon 
the subject of divorce the provisions of the Mexican code should have agreed exactly with those of the Mosaic law. Amongst the Jews 
it was unlawful for a husband to remarry, or to take back a divorced wife, to which prohibition Christ annexed another clause, viz. that 
it should be unlawful for any other man to marry her; which latter enactment of the founder of Christianity, although respected in 
Catholic countries, is not considered binding upon English Protestants; or, to speak more technically, is not part and parcel of the law 
of England. The above curious coincidence is particularly pointed out by Torquemada in the following passage of the fourth chapter 
of the twelfth book of his Monarquia Indiana: “ Al marido que tenia acceso con su muger despues de haverle faltado en la fe conjugal, 
le castigaban, y esto era en algunas partes y es cosa mut de notar.” This passage deserves to be compared with the following ordinance 
of the twenty-fourth chapter of Deuteronomy: “ When a man hath taken a wife, and married her, and it come to pass that she find no 
favour in his eyes, because he hath found some uncleanness in her, then let him write her a bill of divorcement, and give it in her hand, 
and send her out of his house. And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be another man’s wife. And if the latter hus- 
band hate her, and write her a bill of divorcement, and giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her out of his house; or if the latter husband 
die, which took her to be his wife ; her former husband, which sent her away, may not take her again to be his wife, after that she is defiled ; 
for that is abomination before the Lord, and thou shalt not cause the land to sin, which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance.” 
It only remains to be observed, in addition to the analogies already pointed out in the usages of the Mexicans and the Jews in regard to 

VOL. VIII. C2 ¥: ) 

174 NOTES. 
que entendiesen, gue se matrimonio habia de durar hasta la muerte, sin que pudiesen separarse el uno del otro. Luego los 

marriages, that as among the Jews the history of the creation of Adam and Eve, as recorded in Genesis, gave the greatest weight and 
authority to the enactments of the Mosaic law which regulated marriages, having probably been expressly written for that purpose, so 
amongst the Mexicans the history of the creation of man was made subservient to the purposes of legislation, and invested their legal 
code with the authority and sanction of the Deity. That it was the belief of the Mexicans that man was originally created in the 
image of God, is clearly expressed in a passage already quoted from the seventh chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New 
Spain; and its existence furnishes the strongest evidence of the true source from which it was derived, for what other nation, we may 
ask, but the Jews and the Mexicans, together with the Peruvians, entertained a doctrine which would have shocked the piety of the 
wisest of the ancients, who, impressed with a truer sense of religion, repudiated the thought, as highly derogatory to the Deity, that the 
form of the creature could resemble that of the Creator, or that He could have an image and likeness who was essentially of a spiritual and 
incorporeal nature? and from whom but the Jews could the Mexicans and Peruvians have derived that doctrine? It is, however, de- 
serving of remark, that this ancient Jewish notion seems to have induced the Mexicans to ascribe human features and the image of a man 
whom they represented under the form of a youth of perfect beauty and comeliness, and named Telpuchtli, or The Youth’, to Tezcatli- 

”-a mode 

poca, whilst at the same time they designated him “ El invisible é incorporeo UNICO,” “'The invisible and incorporeal One ; 
of expression quite Scriptural, significative of the unity of the divine essence, and enunciative of a name as proper to the Deity in the Bible 

as Yao or Jehovah, God being frequently designated in the Old Testament as the Holy One of Israel*. The proof of the Mexicans 

1 The combination of youthful beauty and a beardless face with godlike force of attitude and limb, is finely described by Mr. Milman 
in his Ode on the Statue of the Apollo Belvidere, which justly admired poem was printed some years ago at Oxford, and is inserted in 
the collection of Oxford Prize Poems. 

2 The apparent inconsistency in the belief of the Mexicans that their supreme deity Tezcatlipoca possessed a bodily form, and was at 
the same time an incorporeal spirit, involves no more real contradiction than those passages of the Old Testament in which Jehovah is 
described as a man, with all the attributes of a man, and as appearing to the prophets in a bodily form, while he is also declared 
to be an incorporeal spirit ; and those discordant ideas are reconciled with each other in precisely the same manner, namely, by supposing 
the Deity himself to be an incorporeal spirit, but that when he conversed in visions with mortals they spoke with his shade. In this latter 
sense Moses must be understood, in the tenth verse of the thirty-fourth chapter of Deuteronomy, to have “known God face to face,” and 
this peculiar figure of speech to harmonize with the declaration of God himself in the twentieth verse of the thirty-third chapter of Exo. 
dus: “ Thou canst not see my face, for there shall xo man see me and live?’ 
in the seventh verse of the seventh chapter of his Prophecies, to have seen the Lord standing upon a wall with a plumb-line in his hand ; 
for although God is named in.a variety of passages of Scripture a man,—for example, in the third verse of the fifteenth chapter of Exo- 
dus, where Moses in his Song of Triumph exclaims, “ The Lord is a man of war, the Lord is his name;” and he is again so described in 

’ and in the same sense the prophet Amos must be presumed, 

the following passage of the seventy-eighth Psalm, “Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by 
reason of wine ;” and he is expressly declared, in the twenty-seventh verse of the first chapter of Genesis, to have created man in his own 
image and likeness, which would reasonably have favoured the belief that he was not without a form, and therefore could be represented 
by a likeness, and might have led the Mexicans to adore Tezcatlipoca under the image of a slave, whom they sacrificed in his honour 
on one of their most solemn festivals,—yet Christ himself emphatically says, in the twenty-fourth verse of the fourth chapter of St. John, 
«‘ God is a spirit ;” and in the thirty-seventh verse of the fifth chapter of the same Gospel he declares that neither his shape nor his voice had 
been seen or heard at any time by the Jews; thus glancing, as it were, at the promulgation of the Mosaic law from Mount Sinai: “ And 
the Father himself, which hath sent me, hath borne witness of me: ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape :” and 
we may feel assured, from the foregoing passages of Scripture, that the Jewish doctrine on this point was precisely the same as that of 
the Mexicans, as explained more at length in the following passages of the second chapter of the third book, and the seventh chapter of 
the sixth book, of Sahagun’s History of New Spain: “ El dios llamado Titlacavan, decian que era Criador del cielo y de la tierra, y era todo 
poderoso, el qual daba 4 los vivos todo quanto era menester de comer y beber, y riquezas; y el dicho Titlacavan era invisible y como obscu- 
ridad y aire, y quando aparecia y hablaba 4 algun hombre, era con su sombra, y sabia los secretos de los hombres que tenian en los corazones, 
y le clamaban y le rogaban diciendole..... » « They affirm that the God:named Titlacavan was the Creator of heaven and earth, and that he 
was omnipotent, who bestowed upon mortals the daily sustenance which they stood in need of, as likewise riches; and that the said Titla- 
cavan was invisible, and resembled obscurity and air* ; and that when he appeared and spoke to any man 2 was by his shade; and that he 
knew the secrets of men which lay hidden within their hearts; and that they called upon him”, and entreated him, saying..... ” Omitting 
the insertion of the prayer which immediately follows, the beginning of which bears much resemblance to the Lord’s Prayer, and leaving to 
others the task of determining whether the visions of the Lord which’ Ezekiel declares, in the first verse of the first chapter of his Prophecies, 

a They therefore named him Yoalliehecatl, which appellation means literally ‘night and wind.’ Acosta’s ignorance of the true signifi- 
cation of this epithet led him into the error of asserting that the Mexicans adored the night and winds on one of their principal festivals. 

b The practice of calling upon the name of the Lord is said, in the twenty-sixth verse of the fourth chapter of Genesis, to have com- 
menced in the days of Enos the son of Seth. This declaration might at first appear to involve the assumption of great irreligion on the 
part of Adam and Eve for a long period after their expulsion from Paradise; but since the above-mentioned chapter of Genesis treais of 
the origin of human arts, it seems rather designed to give prayers'a place amongst the earliest inventions of mankind. 

NOTES. 175 

volvia 4 perfumar con el incensario, y los conducia por el mismo orden hasta la puerta del templo, donde los recibia 

believing that man was created in the image of God will be found in the following passage of the twelfth chapter of the ninth book of 
Sahagun’s Flistory of New Spain: “ Hijo nuestro, ya hemos visto y entendido tu deseo y lo que pretendes, lo cual con lagrimas nos has 

he saw by the side of the river Chebar in Babylon, might not have been the shadow of Jehovah, described in the twenty-sixth verse of 
the same chapter as “ the likeness as the appearance of a man,” which figure of speech it must be confessed is very suitable to the de- 
scription of a shadow, we shall transcribe another passage from the same chapter, which is extremely curious, as showing that the 
Mexicans ascribed not only the same attributes to Tezcatlipoca, but gave him the same name as the Jews did to Jehovah, that is to say, 
the great ineffable name contained in the tetragram, of which the Rabbis relate so many marvels, every letter of which constitutes a 
separate charm, and the complete enunciation of its syllables a spell of sufficient potency to bind men and devils, and which to suppose 
that the Devil could have ventured to assume to himself in the New World, in order to imitate God, or, as the superstitious Spanish 
historians of the sixteenth century assert, to remedy or substitute himself for God, “remediar a Dios,” involves much more inconvenient 
consequences than the supposition of his having counterfeited the rite of circumcision amongst the Mexicans, and having led them forth, 
like the Israelites, on a pilgrimage in search of a promised land. The great name above alluded to, it is scarcely necessary to observe, 
was 71>, the true pronunciation of which was not Jehovah, as erroneously translated by the earliest interpreters of the Scriptures from the 
Hebrew, whose error might have proceeded from an unwillingness to commit it to writing, but Yao, as is evident from the thirteenth verse 
of the last chapter of the Revelations, where the declaration “I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the last,” 
undoubtedly refers to the true pronunciation of the great name, since to suppose that this remarkable passage has no other reference than 
to the fortuitous order of the letters of the Greek alphabet, would be absurd; nor would it at all explain, even on such a supposition, why 
the Greek should have been preferred to the Hebrew alphabet. The Rabbis however, with their usual tone of indifference, do not 
scruple to affirm that they have long lost the true pronunciation of the divine name; and happy shall we feel to enlighten their 
ignorance by the suggestion that the Mexican term Yaotzin in the following passage is the divine name, with the reverential particle 
tzin, added, as is usual in Mexican proper names. “El dicho Titlacavan tambien se llamaba Tezcatlipuca, y Moyocayatzin, 
y Yaotzin, y Necocayautl, y Necaoalpilli. Llamabanle Moyocayatzin, por razon que hacia todo quanto queria y pensaba, y que ninguno 
le podia contradecir 4 lo que hacia, nien el cielo ni en este mundo; y enriquecia 4 quien queria, y tambien daba pobreza y miseria 4 
quien queria; y mas decian, que el dia que fuese servido destruir y derribar ed cielo, que lo haria, y los vivos se acabarian; y al dicho 
Titlacavan todos le adoraban y rogaban, y en todos los caminos y divisiones de calles le ponian un asiento hecho de piedra para él, que se 
llamaba momitztli, y le ponian ciertos ramos en el dicho asiento por su honra y servicio cada cinco dias, allende de los veinte dias de fiesta 
que le hacian; y asi tenian la costumbre y orden de hacerlo siempre.” “The said Titlacavan was likewise named Tezcatlipuca, and 
Moyocayatzin, and Yaotzin, and Necocayautl, and Necaoalpilli. They named him Moyocayatzin because he did whatsoever he pleased 
or thought fit, and none could resist him in heaven or on earth; and he enriched whom he would, and likewise sent poverty and affliction 
on whom he pleased ; and they further add, that on the day he shall think fit to destroy and cast down heaven he will do it, and that the 
living will have an end; and the said Titlacavan was worshiped and entreated by all, and they placed a stone seat for him in all the high- 
ways and divisions of the streets, which they named ‘ momitztli’, and strewed it with branches of trees every five days, to serve and honour 
him, exclusively of the twenty days of the feast which they dedicated to him; and this was their constant custom and practice.” The 
significations of some of the epithets here bestowed upon Tezcatlipoca will be found in the 128th page of the sixth volume of this Work, 
to which may be added that of Necaoalpilli, which means ‘ the god of fasting’, an appellation which bore particular allusion to Tezcat- 
lipoca having instituted the fasts of the Mexican calendar. The curious custom likewise of placing stone seats for the same deity in the 
streets and highways may be explained by supposing that they were typical of his being the god of sabath, or of rest, and of his having 
chosen Mexico as the seat of his continual habitation, in order to verify, as it were, the prophecies of Ezekiel respecting New Jerusalem, 
which city it was foretold should enjoy the continual presence of the Lord. This conjecture derives increased probability from the fol- 
lowing passage of the seventh chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, which contains the exhortation of a Mexican 
priest to a penitent, to whom he had administered absolution, and whom he thus addresses, forcibly admonishing him to lead a new life. 
« And now thou hast confessed all thy sins unto our Lord, who is the protector of all, and the pardoner and the purifier of all smners. 
Account not this a thing to be jested at, for in truth thou hast entered into the fountain of mercy, which resembles the limpid water with 
which our Lord God, the protector and favourer of all who are converted unto him, washes away the defilements of the soul. Thou hadst 
cast thyself into hell, and now thou hast returned to life in this world like one who comes back from another. Thou hast lately become 
regenerate ; thou hast now begun to live a new life. Our Lord God now gives thee light, and a new sun. Now thou newly beginnest 
to blossom and to bud, like a pure and faultless gem which is taken from the womb of the parent, where it grew. And this being the 
case, endeavour to live with great caution and circumspection henceforward, as long as thou shalt live in this world under the power and 
dominion of our most gracious, most bountiful, and most magnificent Lord God; and weep and feel contrition, walking with humility 
and meekness, and with a lowly and inclined neck praying to our Lord. Take care lest thou become proud in thine own conceit; 
encourage not feelings of pride within thee, for shouldest thou do so, thou wilt displease our Lord, who sees the hearts and the thoughts of 
all men. Of what value dost thou account thyself? What dost thou esteem thyself? What is thy stay and support? Upon what 
foundation dost thou stand? It is plain that thou art nothing and canst do nothing, and art nothing worth ; for our Lord will accomplish on 
thee whatsoever he thinks fit without any one venturing to restrain his hand. Will it be necessary peradventure that he should instruct 
thee in the things with which he punishes, and with which he afflicts, that thou mayest look upon them with thine eyes in this world? 

176 NOTES. 

el concurso y con las danzas y fiestas los volvian 4 su casa. A esto seguia 4 su hora el banquete mas 6 menos abun- 

significado. Avisamoste que no te ensoberbezcas ni altivezcas, ni desprecies 4 nadie: ten reverencia 4 los viejos y viejas, aunque sean 
pobres; y 4 la otra gente baja y pobre haz misericordia con ella; dales que vistan y con que se cubran, aunque sea la que tu deseches ; 

No, truly; for the torments and dreadful sufferings with which he torments in another world are znviszble, and those who live in this 
world cannot behold them. Or perhaps he will condemn and cast thee into the universal house of hell; and thine own house in which 
thou now livest will fall and will be destroyed, and will become like a sink of filth and uncleanness; that in which thou hast been accus- 
tomed to live much to thine own content, awaiting that which our Lord and protector, the invisible and incorporeal One, may dispose 
concerning thee, and when it may be his pleasure and he may think fit to level the walls of thy house, and the hedges and ditches with 
which, with much labour, thou hast encompassed it; wherefore I entreat thee to arise and to use thy utmost diligence not to be in future 
that which thou hast been heretofore. Tuke a new heart and renew thy life, and be very mindful not to return to thy past sins. Consider 
that thou canst not behold with thine eyes our Lord God, who is invisible and impalpable. ‘This Tezcatlipoca and this Titlacavan is a 
youth of perfect perfection, and without spot. Apply thyself strenuously to the task of sweeping and cleansing and repairing thy whole 
house? ; and® thou wilt offend extremely the most gracious youth, who continually visiteth our dwellings and the places of our abode, taking 
his pleasure and his pastime amongst us, and diligently searcheth out his friends to comfort them, and to comfort himself with them. 
Lastly, | charge thee to go and employ thyself in cleaning and removing the dung and the sweepings from thine house®, and purify thyself, 
and procure a slave for a sacrifice before God, and prepare a banquet® for the chief men of the city, and let them sing the praises of our 
Lord. It is likewise fit that thou shouldest perform penance, labouring a year or more in the house’ of God; and there thou must bleed 
thyself, and pierce thy body with thorns of the aloe, drawing forth thy blood. And in order that thou mayest do penance for the adulteries 
and other filthy acts which thou hast committed, thou wilt have twice each day to pass rods, once through thine ears, and once through 
thy tongue, and to do this not only as a penance for the above-named sensual sins, but likewise as a penance for the evil and slanderous 
words with which thou hast injured and maligned thy neighbours with thine evil tongue’, and for the ingratitude which thou hast shown 

a A very obscure verse of the twelfth chapter of the Gospel of St. Matthew would seem to receive elucidation from this singular 
passage in the exhortation of the Mexican priest to the penitent, who had just received absolution of his sins; since if for a moment we 
contrast the relative situations in which an absolved sinner and a man from whose body a devil had been cast out may be supposed to be 
placed with respect to the Deity, and likewise consider that the Jews believed that the entrance of an evil spirit into a man was a punish- 
ment for sin, and that the Mexicans agreed with them in believing in the imaginary disease of devils, as we have already observed in the 
248th page of the sixth volume of this Work, and that in each case it would have been natural for the priest to recommend to the person 
who had so lately experienced the divine mercy the performance of some act agreeable to the Deity and conformable to the religious 
usages of his countrymen, the fact will be accounted for why the man from whom the unclean spirit had departed found his house 
swept and garnished in the manner described in the chapter of St. Matthew above alluded to: “When the unclean spirit is gone out of 
aman, he walketh through dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none. Then he saith, I will return into my house from whence I came 
out; and when he is come, he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished.” 'To the objection which may be taken to the proposed explanation 
of this abstruse passage of the New Testament, viz. that the exorcised Jew found, but did not cause, his house to be swept and garnished, 
we have only to reply, that he might have both found and caused the sweeping and garnishing of his former dwelling-place, which must 
have become unclean by being the habitation of a person possessed by an unclean spirit, and which therefore, according to Jewish notions, 
ought to have undergone cleansing and purification. 

b We must suppose, in order to render this passage intelligible, the omission, after the word ‘and’, of some phrase equivalent in mean- 
ing to ‘shouldst thou not do so’. 

¢ It deserves to be remarked, that the Holy Ghost is called in Scripture the Comforter, and Christ is named the consolation of Israel 
in the twenty-fifth verse of the second chapter of the Gospel of St. Luke. The language of the New Testament being borrowed from the 
Old, and the attributes of the second and third persons of the Trinity predicable also of the first, it is evident that the Mexicans, in assign- 
ing the office of a comforter of his people to Vezcatlipoca, agreed with the Jews in believing that this was an office peculiarly belonging 
to the Deity. 

4 The reiteration of the zmjunction here given to the penitent to cleanse his house, clearly proves the importance which was attached, in 
a religious point of view, by the Mexicans to the performance of that ceremony, whilst it is equally deserving of remark that it immediately 
precedes a command to the sinner to purify hzmself. 

e It was customary amongst the Mesicans to eat the flesh of their sacrifices of atonement; and we have adduced many reasons in the 
309th page of the sixth volume of this Work, all derived from Scripture, for supposing that this custom degenerated into cannibalism in 
the New World. The remark is true that to different races and sects of mankind belong different habits of thinking; but a disciple of 
Pythagoras, an ancient Egyptian, or a modern Hindoo, would feel very much disposed, on meditating on the ancient Hebrew sacrifices, to 
fancy that he beheld a mysterious decree of Providence, which, vindicating the ways of God to the irrational portion of his creatures, doomed 
the sacrificers in their turn to be sacrificed, and the devourers of the flesh of victims themselves to be eaten by their own species. 

f The tongue is a part of the human body against which there are very severe denunciations in Scripture; these denunciations, which 
might possibly have induced the Mexicans to invent the cruel penance of passing it through with rods, in the manner represented in the 
third plate of the Second Part of the Codex Telleriano-Remensis, are contained in the following passage of the third chapter of the 

NOTES. 177 

dante en comida y bebida segun la posibilidad de los desposados, pero siempre duraba la fiesta todo el dia, hasta 

dales de comer y de beber, porque son imagines de Dios. Por esto te acrecentaré Dioslos dias de la vida: si vivieres largos dias, sino 
hicieres lo que te aconsejamos, cegaras, 6 te tullirds, 6 te parards contrahecho ; y esté tu mismo te lo buscaras, y Dios te lo dard, porque 

for the favours which our Lord hath conferred upon thee, and for the inhumanity which thou hast displayed towards thy neighbours in 
offering them no portion of the goods which have been given thee by God, nor in sharing with the poor those temporal goods which have 
been bestowed upon thee by our Lord. Thou wilt have to offer paper and incense, and likewise ¢o give alms to the hungry and needy, 
who have not anything to eat nor to drink, nor wherewithal to clothe themselves, although thou be obliged to deprive thyself of thine own 
proper sustenance to give it to them, and strive to clothe the naked and destitute. Consider that their flesh is as thine, and that they are 
men like thee, especially the sick, for they are the image of God. I have nothing more to say to thee; go thy way in peace, and I pray 
God to assist thee to fulfill that which thou art bound to do, since he is the favourer of all.” The above passage, which reflects much 
light on the religious opinions of the Mexicans, must bring to recollection many of the attributes which Scripture ascribes to the 
Deity; and the moral precepts which it inculcates are nearly the same as those enjoined in the Gospels, including even the new 
commandment which Christ gave to his disciples. ‘There is one epithet, however, which so little accords with what are generally 
considered the Jewish notions of the Deity, that it may be proper to observe that it was applied by the Mexicans to Tezcatlipoca, 
with a strict regard to Scripture accuracy and the ancient opinions of the Jews; it is the phrase ‘mancebo,’ or ‘the youth’, as 
applied to the Supreme Being, that at first seems derogatory to his divine nature; the corresponding term for which in the Mexican 
language was ‘ Telpuchtli,’ which Sahagun has translated in Spanish by the phrase “‘mancebo,” and which Torquemada supposes 
in the 128th page of the sixth volume of this Work, to bear allusion to what is said of the Deity in the twenty-seventh verse of 
the hundred and second Psalm, to which passage St. Paul refers in the twelfth verse of the first chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews: 
but the familiar manner in which the Mexicans describe the Deity as frequenting the habitations of men, and visiting his people, is quite 
in accordance with the Jewish traditions of what took place under their theocracy, and with the preference which they believed that God 
manifested for their nation above all other nations of the earth; whilst the Mexicans boasted likewise that they were God’s peculiar 
people, and pleaded in their behalf the same prescriptive right to make war with and exterminate neighbouring and inferior states. It 
agrees likewise with what is said in innumerable passages of Scripture of God’s frequenting the habitations of Mount Sion, and dwelling 
in the streets of Jerusalem: for example, with what is said in the following passage of the sixty-eighth Psalm, where the distinction which 
is made between the heads of God’s enemies and their scalps, and the allusion in another book of Scripture to David’s cutting off a por- 
tion of the skin of the flesh from the dead bodies of the Philistines as a trophy of victory, has induced Adair and some other authors 
equally desirous of discovering analogies between the customs of the Indians and the Jews, to suppose that the American custom of scalp- 
ing prisoners taken in war was derived from the Jews, and originated in the cruel wars undertaken for the conquest of the Holy Land, 
the recollection of which might have rendered their posterity still more ferocious in their wars with the idolaters of another hemisphere. 
“The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels: the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place. Thou hast 
ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts for men; yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might 
dwell among them. Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the God of our salvation. Selah. He that is our God is 
the God of salvation ; and unto God the Lord belong the issues from death. But God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy 
scalp of such an one as goeth on still in his trespasses. The Lord said, I will bring again from Bashan, I will bring my people again 
from the depths of the sea: that thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies, and the tongue of thy dogs in the same. ‘hey have 
seen thy goings, O God; even the goings of my God, my King, in the sanctuary. The singers went before, the players on instruments 
followed after; among them were the damsels* playing with timbrels.” God is, however, more expressly declared to delight in visiting 
the habitations of men in the following passage of the eighth chapter of the Proverbs, where Wisdom is thus supposed to apostrophize her 
mighty parent: ‘* When he gave to the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass his commandment: when he appointed the foun- 
dations of the earth: then [ was by him, as one brought up with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him ; 
rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth; and my delights were with the sons of men;” and in the third chapter of the Book of Baruch, 
which, being a book of apocryphal authority, can only be supposed to contain Jewish sentiments respecting the Deity, without possessing 
any claim to divine inspiration: “ This is our God, and there shall none other be accounted of in comparison of him. He hath found out 
all the way of knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved. Afterwards did he show himself upon earth, 
and conversed with men.” Isaiah likewise alludes in negative terms to the Deity rejoicing himself with the sons of men, in the seven- 

General Epistle of St. James, “ And the tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity: so is the tongue among our members, that it defileth the 
whole body, and sefteth on fire the course of nature; and it is set on fire of hell.” 

a It has been supposed by some authors that women were not dedicated to the service of Jehovah, and did not reside within the pre- 
cincts or sacred inclosure of the temple. That they did not officiate in the ranks of the priesthood, or discharge any of the levitical func- 
tions, will at once be conceded; but the opinion that virgins were not set apart for a certain ministry in the temple, militates against 
probability no less than the sentiments of many learned Rabbis, and is at variance with the express words of Scripture in the nineteenth 
verse of the third chapter of the second book of Maccabees, where the phrase xaraxAsioras maptevor, in allusion to the virgins who were 
shut up either within the walls of the temple or in convents scattered through the city of Jerusalem, must be supposed to refer to reli- 
gious female congregations existing among the Jews. 

VOL. VIII. 222) 

178 NOTES. 

que ya entrada la noche los padrinos llevaban 4 los novios 4 otra pieza separada, donde los dejaban solos, en- 

sus ojos penetran las piedras y los maderos, y no te podrds esconder de él. Mira, que no desees la muger agena; comienza 4 vivir bien : 
con esto que hemos dicho, cumplimos contigo, no mas.” ‘‘ My son, we have now seen and understood thy desire, and what thou 

teenth verse of the ninth chapter of his Prophecies: “* Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men, neither shall have mercy 
on their fatherless and widows.” And the doctrine of his having his chosen friends and his elect, to whom he more particularly revealed 
his will, perpetually recurs in the Old Testament. It would be easy indeed to prove, from a comparison of passages of the sixth book of 
Sahagun’s History of New Spain with parallel passages from Scripture, that a// the attributes which the Jews ascribed to the Deity, 
including his unity, ubiquity, and omniscience, and many other qualities much more characteristic of the peculiar tenets of the Jewish 
faith, were ascribed by the Mexicans to Tezcatlipoca, whose titles and epithets, agreeing with those of Jehovah, whose history of the 
creation of the world, and his taking unto himself a chosen people, being nearly the same, and whose standard of moral rectitude, as dis- 
played in the code of laws which he gave to the Mexicans, which, harmonizing with a scheme of final retribution and a future state of 
rewards and punishments, annexed the same penalties as the Jewish code to the same kinds and degrees of guilt,—thus placing him before 
our eyes in the same light as a moral agent,—constitute such a chain of corroborative evidence as clearly to demonstrate that the God wor- 
shiped by the Mexicans under the name of Yao was the same as the Hebrew Jehovah. It is however in the more mysterious combina- 
tions of the divine attributes, and in their apparent oppositions*, that a perfect resemblance may be traced, without any characteristic 
difference, between the notions which the Mexicans and the Jews formed to themselves of the Deity, who, it need scarcely be observed, 
can only be known to man by his attributes, his essence being alike inscrutable to all. In pursuance, therefore, of this line of argument, 
we shall proceed to point out those attributes in which these oppositions are most strikingly displayed to our view. The Mexicans, for 
example, believed that Tezcatlipoca was the creator of heaven and earth, and that nevertheless the period would arrive when he would 
destroy the one and cast down the other; and that the Jews believed in like manner that God would, previously to the day of judgement, 
destroy his whole work of creation, including the earth and the material heavens, is evident from the prediction of the prophet Joel in the 
third chapter of his Prophecies, and from the sixth verse of the second chapter of the prophet Haggai: “ For thus saith the Lord of hosts; 
Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; and I will shake all nations, 
and the desire of all nations shall come;” to the accomplishment of which prophecy, and to that contained in the fourth verse of the 
thirty-fourth chapter of Isaiah,—“ And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll, and 
all their host shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig-tree,”—St. Peter alludes in the tenth 
verse of the third chapter of his second General Epistle: “ But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in the which the 
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are therein, 
shall be burnt up ;? and St. Paul, in the following passage of the twelfth chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews,—* But now he hath 
promised, saying, Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven. And this word, Yet once more, signifieth the removing of 
those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain. Wherefore we receiving 
a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear: for our 
God is a consuming jire.” The Mexicans believed moreover that Tezcatlipoca tempted men to sin, and yet punished them for sinning ; and 
God is declared in Scripture to have frequently accomplished his designs by means of temptations: for instance, he is said to have 
tempted and proved the Israelites in the wilderness; to have tempted Pharaoh; to have tempted or permitted the temptation of Job; to have 
tempted David; to have sent a lying spirit to tempt Ahab, of which a more particular account will be found in the twenty-second chapter 
of the First Book of Kings ; and to have tried King Hezekiah in the business of the ambassadors of the princes of Babylon, as expressly 
stated in the thirty-first verse of the thirty-second chapter of the Second Book of Chronicles; whilst the clause in the Lord’s prayer, “ lead 
us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil,” shows that Christ himself maintained precisely the same doctrine. It may, indeed, 
appear surprising to some persons that the Deity should, under any circumstances, tempt men to sin, that he should deceive his prophets, 
should cause evil, should punish children for the sins of their parents, or one generation for the crimes of a preceding, should be a stirrer 
up of strife, and should jest at the misfortunes of mankind ; and yet the Mexicans ascribed all these dispositions, whether good or evil, to 

@ St. Paul, to whom the wisdom of the Greeks appeared foolishness, would seem, by his earnest exhortation to Timothy to avoid the 
oppositions of science, falsely so called, dyribeoess tng Yevduvvmou yyaoews, to have entertained a very salutary dread of the effects which the 
study of the Aristotelian logic might produce upon the minds of his converts. Yet certainly, if ever there was a science calculated to 
assist human reason in discriminating between the nature of truth and falsehood, it is that for the invention of which mankind are in- 
debted to the divine genius of Aristotle, who himself first reduced the opposition of propositions to an art (rey), and by the phrase des 
Be ex Tw évavtiwy oxomey, which perpetually recurs in his writings, strove as much as in his power to convince his readers of the importance 
which he attached to the study of the oppositions of science as a means of attaining the certain knowledge of truth. The exhortation 
of St. Paul above alluded to occurs in the twentieth verse of the sixth chapter of his First Epistle to Timothy. 

> The sign of Quecalcoatle was Four Earthquakes, on which sign the Mexicans believed that the world would be destroyed by fire. 
His other sign was One Cane, which the Mexicans supposed was extremely propitious to the temacpalitotique, or thieves who engaged in 
midnight robberies. Of this class of thieves a curious account will be found at page 71 of the Notes forming the Appendix to the pre- 
sent volume. We may further observe, in reference to the phrase “the day of the Lord,” that a day or a sign are synonymous terms when 
understood to refer to the Mexican calendar, since the latter was merely the symbol or representative of the former. 

NOTES. 179 

cerrandolos por la parte de 4 fuera hasta la mafana siguiente que venian 4 abrirles, y todo el concurso les repetia las 

proposest to thyself, which, with tears, thou hast signified to us. We advise thee not to become proud or elated, nor to. despise 
any one. Reverence the old of both sexes, although they be poor; and be compassionate to other poor people of humble station; 

Tezcatlipoca, whom nevertheless they believed to possess every perfection with which human imagination could invest the Deity : they 
represented him as merciful and long-suffering, yet at the same time named him Necocyautl, or the stirrer up of strife, and a God of 
vengeance and of battles: he was the creator of every living thing, and likewise Ipalnemoani, or the giver of life: and yet he required 
that the blood of sacrifices should be continually streaming on his altars: he was just and righteous in judgement, and yet he adjudged 
light offences in erring human estimation to everlasting punishment in hell: he was the acceptor of repentance and the forgiver of sins, and 
yet he required a vicarial atonement and expiation for sin, and pardoned the guilty only in consideration of the blood of the innocent: he 
was a God whose essence was unity, and yet he had associates in divine majesty, and Quetzalcoatl and Tlaloc participated with him in 
the government of the universe. ‘That the unity of Tezcatlipoca formed an essential article of the Mexican creed, is evident from various 
passages in the 354th, the 357th, and the 370th pages of the fifth volume of this Work, of which one will be sufficient to adduce as an 
example here; and yet their belief in that unity was not inconsistent, as it would appear, with their acknowledging, like the Jews, a plu- 
rality of Gods, and sinking into the grossest excesses of idolatry. The above unity is unequivocally declared in the following passage of 
the third chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, where the Mexican high priest thus addresses Tezcatlipoca in 
his character of the God of armies or of hosts, and the bestower of victory: “ En conclusion lo que ruego 4 vuestra magestad, que soys 
nuestro Sefior humanisimo y nuestro Emperador invictisimo, és que tengais por bien que los que murieren en esta guerra, sean recebidos 
con entrafias de piedad y de amor de nuestro padre el Sol, y nuestra madre la Tierra, porque vos solo vivis y reinais, y sois nuestro 
Sefior humanisimo.” “ Lastly, that which I entreat of thy majesty, who art our most gracious lord and invincible emperor, is, that it 
may be thy good pleasure that those who die in this war be received with bowels of compassion and of love by our father the Sun and our 
mother the Earth, for thou alone livest and reignest and art our most gracious lord.” The other attributes which the Mexicans assigned to 
Tezcatlipoca, and which identify him with the God of the Jews, are the following, which, for the sake of brevity, we shall only refer to here 
without inserting the particular passages in which they oceur. A comparison of these attributes with those assigned to Jehovah in Scrip- 
ture affords the most convincing proof of a perfect agreement between the religious notions of the Jews and the Mexicans respecting the 
Deity ; the corollary from all which is, that if the Mexican god Yao was not the same as the Hebrew Jehovah, it must of necessity be 
admitted that the knowledge of the attributes of the Deity, such as they are revealed in Scripture, could be attained by human reason, 
unaided by divine inspiration, and therefore that revealed Scripture was not absolutely necessary for imparting to man the knowledge of 
God; but if this conclusion be at variance with all received doctrine, it necessarily follows that the supposition on which it proceeds is 
false, and that the contradictory proposition will be true, and consequently the conclusion dependent upon it, which is that the God of 
the Jews and the Mexicans were one and the same. The following attributes are inserted, without any particular regard to classi- 
fication, and merely in the order in which they occur. The number of the line, reckoning from the upper margin of the leaf, has been 
added for the sake of reference to that of the page. The belief of the Mexicans in the unity and spiritual nature of the Deity having been 
already pointed out in the present note, with a distinct enumeration of the passages in which this belief is expressed, it is unneces- 
sary to revert again to that important article of their creed, or to attempt to prove that their acquiescence in those general attributes 
which all nations and ages of mankind have ascribed to the Deity, such, for example, as infinite wisdom, goodness, greatness, power, 
glory, excellence, majesty, and duration, followed as a matter of course; but it is more important to point out those attributes 
which the Jews, either exclusively or peculiarly, or in a transcendant sense, ascribed to Jehovah, and in which the Mexicans agreed 
with them; and these are included in the following list, which we shall insert in the form of an index, with a particular reference 
to the page and line in which they occur in the fifth volume of the present Work. The Mexican deity Yao, then, is described 
as The Giver of revealed Scripture, Vol. V. page 488, line 6; as The Ruler of. Kingdoms, pp. 392, 393, ll. 8, 21; as The Re- 
quirer of account for human actions, p. 490, 1.4; as The Forgiver of sins, pp. 368, 369, ll. 30, 35; as The Possessor of an ark of 
mercies, p. 443, 1. 19; as A Just Judge, p. 352, 1. 7; as The Enjoiner of rectitude and justice to mankind, p. 383, 1. 8; as The Trier 
and Prover of hearts, p. 370, |. 15; as The Promoter to dignities from the meanest and most abject condition, pp. 355, 407, ll. 13, 14; 
as The Predestinator of all things, p. 444, 1.17; as The Father of mankind, p. 471, 1. 15; as The Elector of kings, and Bestower 
of kingdoms, p. 409, 1. 29; as The Absolute Disposer of dignities, p. 409, 1.9; as The Holder of all things in his hand, pp. 383, 392, 
ll. 31, 28; as He in whose sight no man is perfect and free from sin, p. 355, 1. 22; as He who takes away from the mighty, and gives 
to the humble and meek, p. 354, 1.29; as The God of a chosen people, p. 359, 1.8; as The only Supreme God, p. 354, 1. 15; 
as He who has power to kill both the body and soul, p. 369, 1. 10; as He who stirs up war against disobedient states, p. 382, 1. 24; 
as The Shelterer of the people beneath his wings, p. 349, 1. 1; as He who chastizes the sins of the multitude by the infliction of great 
national calamities, p. 387, 1.21; as He in whom we live and breathe and have our being, p. 454, 1.15; as The Creator of man in 
his own image, p. 371, 1. 18; as He who ordained that man should live by the sweat of his brow, p. 464, 1. 15; as The Sender of his 
own spirit upon men, and the Giver of inspiration, p. 453, 1. 19; as He who jests at human affairs, and turns men into derision, 
pp. 383, 360, 474, ll. 29, 8, 6 ; as He who has favourites among men, and persons after his own heart, pp. 354, 425, ll. 31,24; as He who 
accounts the good and the virtuous amongst mankind his children and sons, p. 407, 1.10; as The Disposer and Ordainer of all things, 
p- 350, 1.25; as The Confounder of his enemies, and He who makes them to stagger like drunken men, p. 351, 1. 11; as The Be- 
stower of wisdom, p. 477, 1. 20; as The Supreme Lord of the Universe, p. 362, 1.23; as He who requires that men should serve: 

180 NO.T ES. 

enorabuenas, suponiendo yé consumado el matrimonio. En los tiempos posteriores se introdujo una fea costumbre, 

give them what is needful to cover and clothe themselves with, although it be the apparel which thou strippest from thyself; give them 
meat and drink, for they are the images of God; for this God will increase the days of thy life. If thou shouldst live long and fail 

him with all their hearts and with all their strength, p. 411, 1. 16; as He who is an omnipresent God, p. 481, 1. 10; as A severe and 
righteous Judge, p. 370, 1. 21; as The Father, Creator, and Lord of all, pp. 476, 483, ll. 8, 23; as He who bids men hope and trust 
in him, p. 473, 1. 10; as A perfect God, p. 370, 1. 32; as The Ordainer of marriage, p. 428, 1. 34; as The Joiner together of all 
married persons, p. 449,1. 25; as The Appointer in heaven of all marriages which take place on earth, p. 416, ll. 4, 17; as He who 
fashions children in their mother’s womb, p. 449, 1. 8; as The Giver of children, p. 443, 1. 2; as The God of a blameless and chosen 
people, p. 475, 1. 5; as He who has infinite ways of chastising the disobedient, p. 382, 1. 27; as The Punisher of the wicked in a 
lake of everlasting misery, p. 369, 1. 21; as The Sender of the wicked to hell, p. 370, 1. 22; as He who punishes the children for the 
sins of their parents, p. 351, 1. 16; as He who gives length of days, p. 464, 1.15; as The Elevator of kings from the lowest among 
the people, p. 400, 1. 21; as A God of battles, p. 358, 1. 22; as A God of war, and Stirrer-up of strife, p. 356, 1. 24; as The De- 
vourer of his enemies, p. 350, 1. 21; as The Hater of hypocrites, p. 425, 1.28; as The Lover of the meek, p. 425, 1.24; as The 
Abhorrer of haughtiness and pride, p. 425, 1. 18; as The Enjoiner of humility, p. 425, 1. 31; as The Loather of all sensual sins, 
pp- 428, 489, ll. 26, 22; as He who requires an account from men of their thoughts as well as of their actions, p. 487, 1. 25; as The 

God of prayer and supplication, p. 411, |. 33; as The God of psalms and thanksgivings, p. 399, 1. 35; as The Appointer and Knower of 

times, p. 404, 1. 18; as The Former of man from the earth, p. 462, 1. 28; as He who bestowed a body and the breath of hfe upon 
man, p. 398, 1. 17; as The God of sacrifices, p. 371, 1.2; as The Acceptor of meat offerings and drink offerings, p. 489, 1. 260; as 
The Requirer of importunity in prayer, p. 474, 1. 4; as He from whom favours can be extorted by much importunity, p. 400, 1. 2; 
as The God who resides above the nine heavens, p. 483, 1. 22; as He who knows the secrets of hearts, p. 369, 1. 24; as The Ac- 
ceptor of vows, p. 465, 1. 10; as The Acceptor of the intercession of saints and holy persons deceased, p. 462, 1.33; as He who visits 
the sins of the fathers upon the children, p. 351, 1.16; as He from whom proceeds the art of divination, p. 452, 1. 29; as Ipalne- 
moani, or He who breathed into man the breath of life, p. 482, 1.6; as He who punishes the just for the unjust, or the innocent and 
the guilty in a confused mass, p. 432, 1. 17; as He who commands men to honour their parents, p. 438, 1. 6; as He who accepts vows 
made by parents dedicating infants, when they should have attained a fit age, to his service, p. 488, 1. 31; as He who enjoined man- 
kind to practise charity towards each other, and to love their neighbours, p. 371, 1. 12; as The Favourer and Protector of midwives, 
p. 453, 1. 19; as The Forgiver of sins, pp. 368, 369, Il. 30, 35; as The God of confession, and Acceptor of the penitent, pp. 368, 369, 
ll. 11, 34; as The Imposer of penance for the expiation of sin, p. 371, 1. 4; as The Hater of adulterers, pp. 371, 420, ll. 6, 11; as The 
Exactor of the vows of parents from their children, p. 465, 1. 27; as The Lover of children, young men and maidens, p. 426, 1. 12; as 
The Lover of the chaste, p. 427, |. 24; as The Giver of eloquence, p. 378, 1. 17; as The Giver of inspiration, pp. 453, 379, ll. 19,6; 
as The Giver of all gifts to men, p. 390, 1. 13; as He who imparts his word to men, p. 392, 1. 22; as He who sends his peace on men, 
p. 368, 1. 33; as He whose will should be done, and in whom all men should put their trust, p. 473, 1.9; as The Predestinator of 
all things, p. 454, 1. 14; as The God whose vicegerents kings are upon earth, p. 379, 1. 21; as The Decreer of all things both in heaven 
and in hell, p. 381, 1. 12; as He who deems all men unprofitable servants, and imputes no merit to any man, p. 470, 1. 31; as The 
God who awards retribution in another world, for all good or evil actions performed in this, pp. 369, 370, ll. 18, 21; as The God who 
delights in good works, p. 490, 1. 4. Those who have acquired, by an attentive study of Scripture, a general notion of the revealed 
attributes of the Deity, will immediately perceive that in the above list are contained the most material attributes which the Old Tes- 
tament assigns to him, some of which are very peculiar and characteristic of the God of the Jews, and are justly entitled to a comparison 
with the following passages of the Bible, in which the approximation of ideas is very remarkable, although the parallel has not been extended 
as far as the subject itself would have admitted. Jehovah, for example, is represented as a God of unity in the fourth verse of the sixth 
chapter of Deuteronomy, so often cited by the Jews against the Christians who confess the doctrine of the Trinity : “ Hear, O Israel; The 
Lord our God is one Lord.” As a terrible God, in the third verse of the sixty-sixth Psalm, ‘¢Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy 
works! through the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee.” As a jealous God, in the fifth verse of the 
seventy-ninth Psalm, “ How long, Lord? wilt thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like fire ?? As a God of war, in the third verse 
of the fifteenth chapter of Exodus, “The Lord is a man of war: the Lord is his name.” As a consuming fire—which notion the Mexicans 
ascribed to Huitzilopochtli, of whom Sahagun says in the first chapter of the first book of his History of New Spain, “en las guerras era 
como fuego vivo,” “in war he was as it were a living fire,”—in the twenty-fourth verse of the fourth chapter of Deuteronomy, “ For the Lord 
thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God.” As the destroyer of his enemies, in the seventh verse of the third Psalm, ‘ Arise, O 
Lord; save me, O my God: for thou hast smitten all mine enemies upon the cheek bone; thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly.” 
As a God of battle, in the eighth verse of the twenty-fourth Psalm, “ Who is this King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord 
mighty in battle.” As the God of armies or of hosts, in the eighteenth verse of the thirty-second chapter of Jeremiah, “ Thou showest loving- 
kindness unto thousands, and recompensest the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them: The Great, the Mighty 
God, the Lord of hosts, is his name.” As a God who avenges his people on their enemies, in the fortieth verse of the eighteenth Psalm, 
“Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies; that I might destroy them that hate me.” As arock and refuge of his chosen people, 
—a name which the Mexicans emphatically betowed upon Huitzilopochtli,—in the second verse of the ninety-first Psalm, <1 will say of 
the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress: my God; in him will I trust.” As the God of religious warfare, in the sixth verse of the 

NOTES. 181 

de que me es preciso dar noticia, tanto para la integridad de la historia, como porque subsisten en nuestros dias 

to do that: which we advise thee, thou wilt become blind, or lame, or deformed; and thou thyself wilt draw down this upon thee, 
and God will send it, for his eyes penetrate stocks and stones, and thou canst not hide thyself from him. Take care that thou 

hundred and forty-ninth Psalm, “ Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand; to execute ven- 
geance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the people.” As the destroyer of children on account of the iniquities of their parents, 
in the eighth verse of the hundred and thirty-fifth Psalm, “‘ who smote the firstborn of Egypt, both of man and beast.” As the devoter 
of the infants of his enemies to destruction, in the eighth verse of the hundred and thirty-seventh Psalm, “O daughter of Babylon, who 
art to be destroyed; happy shall he be that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us. Happy shall he be that taketh and dasheth thy htile 
ones against the stones.” As the God of saints, and in whose sight the relics of martyrs were precious,—a doctrine of the Jewish religion, 
which the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus supposes, in the 227th page of the sixth volume of this work, might have led the Mexicans 
to canonize the bones of those who had been offered in sacrifice or slain in war,—in the fifteeenth verse of the hundred and sixteenth Psalm, 
«« Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.” As a God to whom belonged the dedication of spoils taken in battle, in the 
twenty-seventh verse of the twenty-sixth chapter of the First Book of Chronicles, “ Out of the spoils won zn batiles, did they dedicate to 
maintain the house of the Lord.” As a God to whom human victims were occasionally devoted and put to death, in the twenty-eighth verse 
of the twenty-seventh chapter of Leviticus, “ Notwithstanding no devoted thing, that a man shall devote unto the Lord of all that he hath, 
both of man and beast, and of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed : every devoted thing is most holy unto the Lord. None 
devoted which shall be devoted of men, shall be redeemed ; but shall swre/y be put to death.” As a God of sacrifice, throughout the chap- 
ters of Leviticus ; as a God of offerings and of vows, in the twenty-seventh chapter of Leviticus; as a God of circumcision, purification, 
and atonement, in the twelfth chapter of Leviticus. As the bestower of children, in the ninth verse of the hundred ‘and thirteenth Psalm, 
“He maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to bea joyful mother of children.” As the fashioner of children in their mother’s womb, 
in the thirteenth verse of the hundred and thirty-ninth Psalm, “ For thou hast possessed my reins: thou hast covered me in my mother’s 
womb.” As the favourer of midwives, who among the Mexicans were under the special protection of Tezcatlipoca, in the twenty-first 
verse of the first chapter of Exodus, “ And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses.” As the God 
who assists women in childbirth, an office which the Mexicans ascribed to Tezcatlipoca, in the sixth verse of the seventy-first Psalm, 
“ By thee have I been holden up from the womb: thou art he that took me out of my mother’s bowels: my praise shall be continually 
of thee.” Asa God who accepts the intercessions of children, a belief which the Mexicans likewise entertained of Tezcatlipoca, in the 
second verse of the eighth Psalm, “ Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength because of thine enemies, that 

2 

thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger.” As the requirer of a clean heart and the renewal of a right spirit in sinners who prayed for 
the forgiveness of their sins, which was likewise affirmed of Tezcatlipoca, in the tenth verse of the fifty-first Psalm, ‘¢ Create in me a clean 
heart, O God ; and renew a right spirit within me.” As the God of the spirits of all flesh, a phrase which agrees with the Mexican 
epithet Ipalnemoani, which was one of the titles of Tezcatlipoca, in the twenty-second verse of the sixteenth chapter of Numbers, “ And 
they fell upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with all the con- 
gregation?” As the God of all flesh, a phrase which agrees with the Mexican epithet Tonacatecutli, which was likewise one of the titles of 
Tezcatlipoca, in the twenty- seventh verse of the thirty-second chapter of Jeremiah, “ Behold, I am the Lord the God of all flesh; is there any- 
thing too hard forme?” As the interpreter of dreams, in the eighth verse of the forueth chapter of Genesis, “ And they said unto him, We 
have dreamed a dream, and there is no interpreter of it: and Joseph said unto them, Do not interpretations belong to God? Tell me them, 1 
pray you.” As the revealer of secrets to his prophets, in the seventh verse of the third chapter of Amos, “Surely the Lord God will do 
nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets.” As the bestower of eloquence, which the Mexicans believed also to be 
a gift proceeding from Tezcatlipoca, in the fifteenth verse of the fourth chapter of Exodus, where God thus familiarly accosts Moses, “ And 
thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth, and I will be with thy mouth and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall 
do.” As the bestower of all necessary things, in which sense the Mexicans styled Tezcatlipoca Teiocoianitehimatini, in the ninth verse of 
the hundred and forty-seventh Psalm, “ He giveth to the beast his food, and to the young ravens which cry.” As a God of rain, in the 
ninth verse of the sixty-fifth Psalm, “ Thou visitest the earth and waterest it: thou greatly enrichest it with the rzver of God, which is full 
of water: thou preparest them corn when thou hast so provided for it.” As a God of fertility, pestilence and drought, in the twenty-eighth 
chapter of Deuteronomy. As a God before whose presence the earth shook, as the Mexicans fabled was the case* on one of the 
festivals of Tezcatlipoca when the blood of the human sacrifice was first poured out on the altar, in the eighth verse of the sixty-eighth 
Psalm, ‘The earth shook; the heavens also dropped at the presence of God.” As a spiritual God, in the twenty-fourth verse of the fourth 
chapter of the Gospel of St. John, “ God is a spirit; and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth.” As the father 
of mankind, or in a more peculiar sense of the Jewish nation,—by which appellation, as well as that of the znfinite God, Tezcatlipoca is 
addressed in the hymn inserted in the 113th page of the present volume,—in the sixteenth verse of the sixty-third chapter of Isaiah, “ Doubt- 
less thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not.” As the scorner of mankind in a more general 
sense, and the lover of the Jewish people in particular, in the fifty-sixth verse of the sixth chapter of the Second Book of Esdras, “ All this 
have I spoken before thee, O Lord, because thou madest the world for our sakes : as for the other people, which also come of Adam, thou 

a The fable recorded by Josephus of the gates of the temple of Jerusalem shaking and miraculously opening during the latter days of 
the siege was a prodigy of this description. 
VOL. VIII. (CEN) 

182 NOTES. 

algunas reliquias de ella, 4 pesar de los esfuerzos con que dos parrocos por su parte, y las justicias seculares por la 

dost not covet another man’s wife: begin to live well: we have discharged our duty by thee in saying what we have done: enough.” 
Its particular application to the poor in contradistinction to the rich, is the more deserving of attention because Christ expressly 
says, ‘ How hardly shall a rich man enter into the kingdom of heaven!” And the sentiment 1o which he there gives utterance might 

hast said that they are nothing, but be like unto spittle, and hast likened the abundance of them unto a drop that falleth from a vessel.” 
As a jester at human affairs, in the twenty-third verse of the ninth chapter of Job, “ If the scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh at the trial 
of the innocent.” As a leader into temptation, which the Mexicans deprecated as a divine scourge in their solemn prayers to Tezcatli- 
poca, in the Lord’s prayer. As the destroyer of promiscuous multitudes without distinction of sex or age, in the twenty-fifth verse of 
the nineteenth chapter of Genesis, ‘ And he overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which 
grew* upon the ground.” As the destroyer of the giants, a fact recorded by the Peruvians of their god Pachacamac, in the seventh verse 
of the sixteenth chapter of Ecclesiasticus, “ He was not pacified toward the old giants, who fell away in the strength’of their foolishness, 
neither spared he the place where Lot sojourned, but abhorred them for their pride.” As the hater of hypocrites, in the sixteenth verse 
of the thirteenth chapter of Job, « He also shall be my salvation, for an hypocrite shall not come before him.” As the knower of thoughts, 
in the twenty-seventh verse of the twenty-first chapter of Job, “ Behold, I know your thoughts, and the devices which ye wrongfully 
imagine against me.” As the seer of hearts, in the fifty-fourth verse of the sixteenth chapter of the Second Book of Esdras, “ Behold, the 
Lord knoweth all the works of men, their imaginations, their thoughts, and their hearts.” Asa God of judgement, in the seventeenth 
verse of the first chapter of Deuteronomy, “ Ye shall not respect persons in judgement; but ye shall hear the small as well as the great; 
ye shall not be afraid of the face of man; for the judgement is God’s: and the cause that is too hard for you, bring it unto me, and I will 
hear it.” As the ruler in conjunction with kings of their kingdoms, in which capacity the Mexicans peculiarly recognised Tezcatli poca, in the 
seventeenth verse of the fourth chapter of Daniel, «‘ This matter is by the decree of the watchers, and the demand by the word of the holy 
ones: to the intent that the living may know that the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and 
setteth up over it the basest of men.” As the exalter and deposer of kings, and the elevator of the lowest persons to the regal dignity, 
in the seventieth verse of the seventy-eighth Psalm, “ He chose David also his servant, and took him from the sheepfolds.” As the 
raiser up of the poor, in the eighth verse of the second chapter of the First Book of Samuel, “ He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and 
lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory; for the pillars of the 
earth are the Lord’s, and he hath set the world upon them.” As the detester of pride, which in the opinion of the Mexicans was a deadly 
sin, throughout the Psalms and the other books of the Old Testament. As a respecter of the vows of the sorrowful and contrite, which was 
also a characteristic of Tezcatlipoca, in the seventeenth verse of the fifty-first Psalm, “The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken 
and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.” As the abhorrer of presumptuous sins, in the thirteenth verse of the nineteenth 
Psalm, “ Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over me: then shall 1 be upright, and I shall 
be innocent from the great transgression.” As he whose majesty no temple could contain,—an attribute which the interpreter of the Codex 
Vaticanus ascribes, in the 198th page of the sixth volume of this work, to the Mexican god Tonacatecotle, who was the same as T'ezca- 
thpoca, and which would rather refer to the omnipresence than to the majesty of the Deity,—in the first verse of the sixty-sixth 
chapter of Isaiah, “Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool: where is the house that ye build unto 
me? and where is the place of my rest?” As the Most High,—an appellation which nearly resembled the title of Chalchiuhtlato, or the 
Lord of Heaven, which the Mexicans bestowed on Tezcatlipoca,—in many passages of the Psalms. As a judge and an avenger, in the 
first verse of the ninety-fourth Psalm, “«O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongeth ; O God, to whom vengeance belongeth, show thy- 
self. Lift up thyself, thou judge of the earth: render a reward to the proud.” As the Lord God, to which the title Teo-Yao-Tlato, 
which the Mexicans gave to Tezcatlipoca, exactly corresponds, in many passages of Scripture. As the accepter of vows and presents, 
in the eleventh verse of the seventy-sixth Psalm, “ Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God: let all that be round about him, bring presents 
unto him that ought to be feared.” | 

4 Garcilasso de la Vega remarks in the thirteenth chapter of the third book of his ‘Comentarios Reales de los Incas’ that the Inca 
Capac Yupanqui commanded that the trees of those towns and villages which he sentenced to utter destruction should be rooted up from 
the soil. The account of the above-mentioned author receives some corroboration from the following passage of the first chapter of the 
first part of Juan de Matienzo’s inedited treatise concerning the government of Peru: “Que gente ha habido en el mundo tan cruel 
como estos Ingas? Pues dicen sus mismos deudos y descendientes, y se halla por sus quipos, que uno dellos maté quinientos hombres 
en un lugar junto 4 Paita, y se les hizo sacar los corazones y cercar la fortaleza dellos, crueldad nunca oida, y Guascar Inga, hijo de 
Guaina Capa, maté junto 4 Xaquilla Guana en los pueblos del Quequoi y Chiles y Ache todos quantos varones en ellos avia, aunque 
estubiesen en el vientre de sus madres, abriendolas los vientres para los sacar dellos, por lo qual aquellos pueblos se Ilaman el dia de hoy 
« pueblos de hembras’ en memoria de tan gran crueldad. Tambien Guaina Capa hizo matar todos quantos varones hubo en Otabalo y 
el Arango, dejando vivos solamente los muchachos, y asi se llaman oi dia Guamaraconas, que quiere decir ‘ahora sois muchachos’, segun 
refiere Cieza en la primera parte de la Coronica del Peru. Finalmente eran tan crueles que 4 los que delinquian no solamente mataban, 
mas aun todos sus parientes, y demas de esto sacrificaban 4 sus idolos muchos muchachos, y enterraban, y consentian enterrar con los 
principales sus mugeres vivas y sus criados, cosa horrenda, y excedieron en crueldad 4 Lucio Silla y 4 Neron, y 4 todos los tiranos de el 
mundo.” 

Bet Sega 

NOTES. 183 

suya, han procurado abolirla*. Quando la novia estaba en reputacion de doncella, 4 la mafiana siguiente del desposorio 
entraban los padrinos 4 la pieza en que habian quedado encerrados los desposados, y requerian la camisa de la 

have accorded with the opinions of the Jews of his own age, since if they understood in a moral and not in a literal sense the 
passage of Genesis declaratory of man’s being created in the image of God,—which conjecture, it must be confessed, involves an 
improbable supposition, from the inclination which the Jews have always manifested to interpret Scripture in a literal sense,—it 
is evident that the claims of the poor to be considered the image of God would have been far greater than those of the rich, 
who did not in an equal degree enjoy the divine favour; and the sense of both the above passages would become quite intelligible, 
while all that shocks us in the discourse of the Mexican priest to the penitent whose confession he had received, and to whom 
he had granted absolution, is, that he should have recommended him, in one and the same breath, to repent of his past sins, to 
lead a new life, to clothe and feed the hungry and the sick, who were the image of God, and to make an atonement for his sins 
by sacrificing a slave to Tezcatlipoca, and, according to the prescription of the Mosaic law, eating the flesh of the sin offering, 
in order to perfect the sacrifice. And yet those who have carefully studied the history of the Jews in the Old Testament, will 
immediately perceive that it presents the same compound of good and evil, of virtue and vice, of humanity and cruelty, and of piety 
blended with the most revolting superstition. 

* A surprising conformity in the manners of the Jews and the Mexicans is discernible not only in their nuptial ceremonies, but in many 
other circumstances incidental to and connected with their marriages. Clemens Alexandrinus remarks of the ancient Jews, in the tenth 
chapter of the second book of his Pedagogus, that their wives, when pregnant, separated themselves from their husbands, in compliance, 
as he supposes, with a particular enactment of the Mosaic law; and it would appear from the eighth verse of the first chapter of the prophet 
Hosea, that this period of separation was sometimes prolonged till after the mother had done suckling her child, since in the passage “ Now 
when she had weaned Loruhamah, she conceived and bare a son,” an effect seems to be explained by assigning its cause, which renders the 
above passage the more conclusive; whilst the long period which the Jewish women were sometimes accustomed to suckle their children, 
is incidentally alluded to in the following passage of the seventh chapter of the Second Book of Maccabees: “ But she, bowing herself 
toward him, laughing the cruel tyrant to scorn, spake in her country language on this manner, O my son, have pity upon me that bare 
thee nine months in my womb, and gave thee suck three years, and nourished thee, and brought thee up unto this age, and endured the 
troubles of education.” The former of these Hebrew customs seems to be inculcated in a rhetorical style of reasoning in the first section 
of the twenty-fifth chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain; and the evidence of the existence of the latter custom 
amongst the Mexicans, will be found in the following passage of Alonzo de Zorita’s inedited treatise concerning the civil government of 
the ancient Mexicans. “ En criar sus hijos, asi de los Sefiores y principales, como de los plebeyos, y doctrinar y castigar, habia gran 
vigilancia y cuidado, y por la mayor parte los hijos de los Sefiores, los criaban sus madres, si estaban para ello, y si no, buscaban quien 
les diese leche, y para ver si era buena, echavan unas gotas en la ufia, y si no corria por ser espesa, tenian por buena. La madre 6 el 
ama que les daba leche, no mudava el manjar con que los comenzaba 4 criar; algunas comian carne, y algunas frutas sanas: dabanies 
quatro anos leche, y son tan amigas de sus hijos y los crian con tanto amor, que las mugeres por no tornarse & emprefiarse entre tanto que 
les dan leche, se escusan quanto pueden de juntarse con sus maridos, y si enviudan y quedan con hijo que le dan leche, por ninguna via se 
tornan 4 casar hasta haberlo criado, y si alguna no lo hacia asi, parecia que hacia gran traicion. A los hijos de los Sefiores los criaban 
con un solo manjar, y habia gran cuidado en ello.” Amongst the ruder American tribes of the Orinoco and the Caribs who inhabited 
the islands adjacent to the sea-coast, a custom prevailed which has been noticed by several ancient writers, and which one Spanish author 
supposes, not without some reason, might possibly have existed amongst the Mexicans, although Spanish authors in general are silent 
respecting it, since it is thought to have had some connexion with Hebrew traditions, and might therefore have been shadowed forth in 
some of the Mexican rites. On the birth of an infant, whether male or female, the father of the child immediately commenced a severe 
fast, and performed many extraordinary acts of penance; and this, in the opinion of some Spanish missionaries, with the intention either of 
expiating the original sin of the infant, or to share, as a matter of religious duty, in the curse pronounced by God in the sixteenth verse of 
the third chapter of Genesis, upon Eve. Unto the woman he said, | will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow 
thou shalt bring forth children.” That the Mexicans were acquainted with the doctrine of original sin, has already been proved in the 
eighteenth page of the Notes forming the appendix to the present volume; and that the prophecy respecting the enmity which was to exist 
between the seed of the woman and of the serpent, was likewise known to them, may be inferred from the painting in the seventy-fourth 
page of the lesser Vatican MS., where a serpent is.represented in the act of biting the heel of a man, who is himself bruising its head 
with a staff. That, like the Jews, they employed water to wash away the defilements of sin from infants as well as from grown-up persons, 
which usage is stated in the fifth verse of the third chapter of St. Matthew to have been very general in the age of Christ, is likewise a 
well authenticated fact, and is an analogy deserving of the most serious attention. ‘There was another custom, however, of which an 
example has been recorded by Diego Duran in the sixth chapter of the First Part of his inedited Historia de la Nueva Espafia, which 
savours in the strongest degree of Judaism, and was so evidently founded on patriarchal precedent, that it is extremely deserving of notice ; 
it was that of a woman, who was herself childless, avoiding the disgrace which, amongst the Jews attached to that particular class of women, 
by practising a device similar to that recorded of Rachel in the thirtieth chapter of Genesis : “‘ And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob 
no children, Rachel envied her sister, and said unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I die; and Jacob’s anger was kindled against Rachel, 
and he said, Am 1 in God’s stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb? And she said, Behold my maid Bilhah: go in unto 
her, and she shall bear upon my knees, that I may also have children by her. And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife, and Jacob 
went in unto her.” The following is the passage of the author above alluded to, and the story it contains is related of Yllancuietl, the 

184. NOTES. 

novia: sila hallaban manchada de sangre, salian con ella con gran jubilo, y puesta en un palo la manifestaban 4 
todo el concurso en testimonio de que era virgen la novia, y luego se formaba un baile que andaba por todo el lugar, 
llevando en el palo la camisa, y 4 esto Ilamaban ‘bailar la camisa.’ Pero si esta no se hallaba manchada, se convertia 
la fiesta en lagrimas y amargura: llenaban de oprobios y injurias a la pobre desposada, y el novio era libre 
para repudiarla*. Despues que entrd la Ley Evangelica se ha trabajado mucho en desterrar esta costumbre, y 

wife of Acamapichtli, the first king of Mexico. “Pero porque no dejemos 4 la principal muger del rey sin hacer mencion de ella, al 
principio tubo tanta tristeza y pesar de verse asi menospreciada, que sus ojos eran fuentes de dia y de noche. EI rey viendo su tristeza, 
teniendola en mucho y amandola estrafiablemente, la consolaba todo lo que podia, y ella viendo que el rey tanto la amaba, pidiole una 
merced, y fué que ya que el Senor de lo criado la habia privado de fructo de bendicion, que para que el pueblo perdiese aquella mala 
opinion que de infecunda della tenia, que aquellos hijos que de las otras mugeres naciesen, que en naciendo, ella los meteria en su seno, y 
se acostaria, fingiendo ser parida, para que los que entrasen @ visitalla le diesen el parabien del parto y nuevo hyo. | rey inclinado 4 su 
ruego mando asi se hiciese, y asi en pariendo que paria alguna de aquellas mugeres, acostabase ella en la cama y tomaba el nino en sus 
brazos y fingiase parida, recibiendo las gracias y dones de los que la visitaban, y aunque en realidad de verdad no era ella Ja parida, que- 
daba en opinion de ello, y el dia de hoy la hay, y contradicen este punto con diferente informacion, la cual no tube por verdadera y cierta, 
por ser muy contraria de la comun opinion, que es la que tengo referida. Pero como quiera que sea, esta Sefiora quedé en opinion del 
vulgo por madre de todos aquellos hijos que dijo referidos, los cuales fueron origen, cepa, y sucesion del sefiorio de Mexico.” 

* The testimony of Echevarria, who here speaks as an eye-witness respecting the existence of the above Hebrew rite amongst the 
Mexicans, is confirmed by Herrera in the 63rd page of the sixth volume of this work; and Oviedo mentions it in the following terms 
in the third chapter of the fourth book of the 'Third Part of his inedited General History of the Indies, where, describing the mar- 
riages of the Indians of Nicaragua, he observes: “Quando se han de juntar en uno, toma el cazique al novio é 4 la novia por los dedos 
meniques 6 auricularios de las manos izquierdas con su mano derecha, é metelos 4 entrambos en una casa chiquita que para ello tienen, 
é dizeles, mirad que seais bien casados, é que mireis bien por vuestra hazienda, é que siempre la aumenteis, é no la dejeis perder: 6 
dejalos alli solos con un fuego pequefio que baste 4 darles claridad de unas astillas de tea; € los novios estan quedos mirando como aqueila 
poca tea se quema; é acabada, quedan casados é ponen en efecto lo demas: € luego el dia siguiente comen con mucha fiesta é plazer los 
parientes é los que alli van, é les dan de lo que tienen. Pero antes desta comida, si el marido hallo virgen la novia, dizen que esta buena, 
y acuden con una gran grita los parientes é del vando de ella, en sefial de vitoria, é si no la hallo tal, sale muy enojado, é embiala a casa 
de su padre, é busca otra con que se case.” To the foregoing testimonies we may add that of Diego Duran, who in the fifth chapter of the 
Second Part of his valuable inedited History of Mexico, which is preserved in manuscript in the Royal Library at Madrid, thus corroborates 
the much later testimony of Echevarria: “ Primeramente el sacerdote toma por la mano 4 los novios y les pregunta si se quieren casar, 
y sabida la voluntad de ambos, tomaban la manta de él y la manta 6 camisa de ella, y atabanlos haciendo un fiudo; y asi atados lleva- 
banlos 4 la casa de ella, donde tenian un fogon de fuego encendido, y 4 ella hacianle dar séete vueltas al rededor de aquel fogon; dadas 
las siete vueltas, sentabanlos juntos en una estera nueva junto al mismo fogon, y dejabanlos alli, donde consumian el matrimonio. Ponian 
la estera nueva y que nunca se hubiese estrenado, por cerimonia del nuevo acceso 4 la nueva muger, y donde se manifestasen las 
muestras de la virginidad de ella, lo cual entre los principales y sefiores era muy mirado y celebrado. Y si parecia no estar virgen, para 
que se conociese su mal recado asi de ella como de los padres*, horadaban todos los cestillos por abajo con los que daban la comida en el 
banquete, y horadaban las escudillas y platos, y asi conocian todos los convidados haber ido no virgen al talamo, lo cual sentian mucho 
los padres y lo lloraban: empero si estaba como habia de estar, habia ofrendas 4 los dioses y gran banquete, uno en casa de ella y otro 
en casa de él, cuando la llevaban 4 su casa, y ponian por memoria lo que él tenia asi de joyas como de provision de casa, tierras y casa, 
y en otra memoria lo que ella traia, las cuales memorias guardaban los padres de los desposados y senorcillos de los barrios, porque si por 
ventura se viniesen 4 descasar, como era uso y costumbre entre ellos en no Ilevandose bien pedir divorcio, hacian particion de los bienes 
conforme 4 lo que cada uno trujo, poniendo 4 cada uno en libertad, dando 4 él los hijos y 4 ella las hijas con todo el recaudo mugeril de 
su casa, dandoles licencia para poderse casar con otro y él con otra, mandandole estrechamente que no tornase 4 juntarse con aquella 
muger mas, so pena de la vida” y asi se guardaba con mucho rigor. Tambien tenian estos sacerdotes otra cerimonia que hacian 4 los 
nifios que eran recien nacidos, que era sacrificalles las orejas y el miembro genital & manera de circuncision, especialmente 4 los hijos de 
los sefiores y reyes* 4 los quales en naciendo, si era varon lo lavaban los mismos sacerdotes, y lavado ponianle en la mano derecha una 

@ It was doubtless with a view of punishing the father’s want of proper attention to the moral education of his daughter, that the 
Mosaic law commanded the damsel with whom the tokens of virginity were not found, to be stoned to death by the men of her city at her 
own father’s door. This aggravation of punishment would, except on the assumption of such a supposition, have been cruel in the extreme, 
and would justify the epithet of sanguinary, which the French philosophers of the last century hesitated not to bestow on the Mosaic code. 

b This extreme severity of the Mexican law in punishing a fictitious rather than a real crime with death, surprisingly accords with the 
old prejudices and opinions of the Jews, as is aptly illustrated in the following passage of the third chapter of the Prophet Jeremiah, who 
there ascribes the pollution of a whole land to the single cause of a wife who had been divorced and married to another man, returning to 
live with her former husband, «They say, if a man put away his wife, and she go from him and become another man’s, shall he return 
unto her again? shall not that land be greatly polluted? But thou hast played the harlot with many lovers; yet return again to me, saith 
the Lord. 

© The Mexican custom of circumcising their children within a few days after their birth was known to the Spanish author Urreta, who 

NOTES. 185 

aunque se ha conseguido estorbar la publicidad de estos bailes, no dejan de hacerse muchos en el secreto de sus 
casas, de que cada dia tienen denuncias los parrocos y los jueces. Pero aunque no hagan el baile, no por eso 
dejan los padrinos y los padres del novio 6 parientes inmediatos de ir 4 reconocer la ropa de la novia al dia 
siguiente del desposorio, y si la hallan manchada, se regocijan y se dan mutuamente los parabienes; pero si no es 
asi, injurian y maltratan 4 la novia, y le ponen 4 la puerta de la casa una olla desfondada, 6 un comali de barro, que 
és una especie de tortera, agujerado por el medio, 6 otras piezas semejantes agujeradas por el fondo, para darla 4 
entender que ya no era doncella, y aunque el dia de hoy no las repudian los maridos, por lo comun pasan muy 
mala vida, siempre maltratadas y injuriadas de ellos, de que tengo larga esperiencia en las ocasiones que hé sido 
juez.” 

Nore XLVI. Page 332. 

The pertinacity with which Acosta denies that the Mexicans were descended from the Jews, and the reasons which 
he assigns for combating the popular opinion, have already been noticed in the 332nd page of the sixth volume of 
this Work; whilst a slight insinuation has been elsewhere thrown out that that celebrated Jesuit did not express his 
own sentiments with all the sincerity which became his learning and sacred profession, but had strongly imbibed the 
spirit of that party which did not think that it was for the interests of religion that the truth should be promulgated 
throughout Europe, that the Jews had for many ages revived the old law in America, introducing amongst the Indians 
all the idolatries of the land of Canaan. Further researches in the wide field of American literature have verified and 
confirmed our previous suspicions to an extent which we should scarcely have deemed probable; and unfortunately 
for the fame of that eminent man, one manuscript, preserved in the Royal Library at Madrid, convicts him of three 
offences, each of no inconsiderable magnitude in the estimation of men of letters, namely, of plagiarism, disingenuous- 
ness as a writer in not avowing the name of the author from whose inedited History of Mexico he might be said to have 
transcribed that portion of his Natural and Moral History of the Indies which related to the ancient history of the 
Mexicans, and, worse than either, of garbling the very history which he servilely followed by passing over in silence 
the contents of the first chapter, which from the beginning to the end advocates the theory which Acosta labours to 
subvert, he doubtless being conscious of the dilemma in which he would have been placed by admitting the premises, 
and yet at the same time denying the conclusion to which that chapter necessarily led, and therefore dissimulating his 
knowledge of its contents. We must here observe, that the name of the author whose original History of Mexico is 
preserved in the Royal Library at Madrid was Diego Duran *, from whose work we transcribe the introductory chapter, 
annexing to it a literal translation. 

“Para tratar de la cierta y verdadera relacion del origen y principio destas naciones Indianas, 4 nosotros tan 
abscondido y dudoso, que para poder poner la mera verdad fuera necesaria alguna revelacion divina 0 espiritual de 

espada pequefia, y en la otra una rodela chiquita. Esta cerimonia hacian al nifio cuatro dias arreo : ofrecian los padres por él grandes 
oblaciones, y si era hija, despues de lavada cuatro veces, ponianle en la mano un aderezo pequefio de hilar y tejer con los dechados de | 
labores ; 4 otros nifios ponian 4 los cuellos carcajes de flechas y arcos en las manos; 4 los demas nifios de la gente vulgar les ponian las 
insignias de lo que por el signo en que nacian: si su signo le inclinaba 4 pintar, ponianle un pinal en la mano, si 4 carpintero dabanle 
una azuela, y asi de los demas.” 

* The following brief notice of the life and writings of Diego Duran is taken from the 814th page of Padilla’s Historia de la Provincia 
de Mexico: “ F. Diego Duran, hijo de Mexico, escrivié dos libros, uno de historia, y otro de antiguallas de los Indios Mexicanos, la 
cosa mas curiosa que en esta materia se ha visto. Vivid muy enfermo y no le luzieron sus trabajos, aunque parte dellos estan ya im- 
pressos en la Philosofia Natural y Moral del Padre Joseph Acosta, 4 quien los dié el Padre Juan de Tovar, que vive en el Collegio de 
la Compafiia de Mexico; murid este padre afio de 1588.” 

in the sixth chapter of the second book of his Historia de la Etiopia, printed at Valencia in 1610, ascribes the invention of that rite to 
the Devil: “ Una de estas fue la circuncision, queriendo el demonio remedar 4 Dios en esta costumbre ; como lo avemos visto en las 
Indias, donde los de Yucatan, los Totones de la Nueva Espafia, los Mexicanos, los de la Isla de Acuzamil, se circuncidayan. Y 
no tengo por verdadero, sino por muy falso, dezir que los Indios vienen de los Judios de aquellos diez tribus que llevo cautivos Sal- 
manasar 4 la Asiria; los quales entrando poco 4 poco por la Tartarea, llegaron 4 Tendue, al mar Oriental, donde travessando el estrecho 
llamado Annian, entraron en la tierra de Quivira, que es tierra firme de Mexico; todo esto es imaginacion.” To the foregoing observa- 
tions we may add, that connected with the above rite, as practised by the Jews and of divine institution, was an ancient mode of swearing, 

VOL. VIII. (GBI) 

186 NOTES. 

Dios, que lo ensefara y diera 4 entender; empero faltando esto, sera necesario llegarnos 4 las sospechas y congeturas 
4 la demasiada ocasion que esta gente nos da con su bajisimo modo y manera de tratar, y de su conversacion tan baja, 
tan propia 4 la de los Judios, que podriamos ultimadamente afirmar ser naturalmente Judios y gente Hebrea; y creo 
no incurriria en capital error él que lo afirmase, si considerado su modo de vivir, sus ceremonias, sus ritos y supersti- 
ciones, sus agUeros y iproquesias, tan emparentadas y propias 4 las de los Judios que en ninguna cosa difieren ; para 
probacion de lo cual, sera testiguo la Sagrada Escritura, donde clara y abiertamente sacaremos ser verdadera esta 
opinion, y en algunas razones bastantes que para ello darémos. Cuanto 4 lo primero, tendremos por principal funda- 
mento el ser esta nacion y gente Indiana advenediza de estrafias y remotas regiones, y que en su venida 4 poseer esta 

tierra hizo un largo y prolijo camino, en el cual gast6 muchos afios y meses para llegar 4 ella, como de su relacion y. 

pinturas se colige, y como de algunos viejos ancianos de muchos dias hé procurado saber, para sacar esta opinion en 
limpio. Y dado caso que algunos cuenten algunas falsas fabulas, conviene 4 saber, que nacieron de unas fuentes y 
manantiales de agua, otros que nacieron de unas cuevas, otros que su generacion es de los dioses, &c. lo cual clara y 
abiertamente se vé ser fabula, y que ellos mismos ignoran su origen y principio, dado caso que siempre confiesen aver 
venido de tierras estrafias, y asi lo hé hallado pintado en sus antiguas pinturas, donde sefialan grandes trabajos de 
hambre, sed y desnudez, con otras inumerables aflicciones que en él pasaron, hasta llegar a esta tierra y poblalla: con 
lo cual confirmo mi opinion y sospecha de que estos naturales sean de aquellos diez tribus de Israel que Salmanasar 
rey de los Asirios cautivé y transmigro de Asiria en tiempo de Ozeas rey de Israel, y en tiempo de Ezequias rey de 
Jerusalem, como se podré ver en el cuarto libro de los Reyes, cap. xvii., donde dice, que fue trasladado Israel de su 
tierra 4 los Asirios, hasta el dia de hoy, &c.; de los cuales dice Esdras en el libro cuarto, capitulo xiii., que se pasaron 4 
vivir 4 una tierra remota y apartada que nunca habia sido habitada, 4 la cual habia largo y prolijo camino de afio y 
medio, donde agora se hallan estas gentes de todas las Islas y tierra firme del mar oceano hacia la parte de Occidente. 
Oira autoridad de la Sagrada Escriptura se puede traer para probar esta opinion, y és, que 4 estos diez tribus, que 
abajo dejo dicho, tenia Dios prometido por Ozeas, cap. i., y ii., y il., hasta el xili., que los avia Dios de multiplicar como 
las arenas de la mar, lo cual clara y manifiestamente se vé cuan grande aya sido el multiplico, pues han ocupado gran 
parte del mundo. Pero dejando lo demas y viniendo a lo que vimos en esta tierra, cuan espantoso y de gran admira- 
cion fué el numero de gente que en ella se halldé, como al principio vieron los que antes de aquella gran mortandad que 
el afio veinte y cinco huvo, donde murié tanto numero de gente, que no quedé la tercia parte de los Indios que en la 
tierra habia, no dejando de contar la inumerable gente de hombres y mugeres y nifios que los Espafioles habian muerto 
pocos afios antes en la conquista della. De la autoridad dicha resultan otras muchas, como el curioso lector podra 
ver y notar en el Deuteronomio,¢ apitulo iv., y xxvill., y xxxii.; Isaias, xx., xxvill., xlil. capitulos; Jeremias, Ezequiel, 
Miqueas, Sophonias, donde se hallara el castigo rigurosisimo que Dios prometié 4 estos diez tribus por sus grandes mal- 
dades y abominaciones, y nefandas idolatrias, apartandose del culto de su verdadero Dios, de quien tantos beneficios 
habian recibido: por pago de la tal ingratitud, les promete Dios en los lugares acotados un azote y castigo rigurosisimo, 
cual le vemos cumplido en estas miserables gentes: conviene 4 saber, que les avia de ser quitadas sus tierras, casas 
y tesoros, sus joyas y piedras preciosas, sus mugeres é hijos, y llevados 4 vender a tierras estraflas, gozando otros de 
sus haciendas. _Pareceme que aunque no diera mas autoridad ni razon, para que entendieramos que estos Indios son 
y proceden de los Judios, que lo dicho bastava, viendo que aviendose multiplicado como las arenas de la mar, siendo 
en su transmigracion numero breve, y los muchos afios de su peregrinacion, despues de haber poblado este mundo 
tan grande cansado Dios de sufrir sus abominaciones y hechos nefandos y idolatrias, trugese Dios gentes estrafias, 
como aguila que viene de los fines de la tierra, que sin tener respeto 4 los viejos ni 2 los mozos, 4 los nifios ni 4 las 
mugeres, los destruy6 y consumi6 sin ninguna piedad, teniendolos en hambre, en sed y desnudez, y en cansancio per- 
petuo, hasta que fuesen apocados. Y es mucho de notar, que sobre los demas males que Dios 4 esta gente promete, 

expressly mentioned in the second verse of the twenty-fourth chapter of Genesis, and the twenty-ninth verse of the forty-seventh chapter 
of the same book, and indirectly alluded to in other passages of Scripture, which Voltaire explaining in a manner which accords with the 
notions of the Rabbis, at the same time drew down upon himself the charge of scurrility against religion. Mendes da Costa, a learned 
Jew, whose family came over from: Holland to this country in the eighteenth century, thus notices it in his Cursory Remarks on Jewish 
Antiquities : «The ceremony mentioned in Genesis, of Abraham’s servant swearing by putting his hand under his master’s thigh, is a 
custom mentioned in no other place: this act of Abraham’s servant laying his hand under his master’s thigh as an oath, was swearmg by 
the covenant of God, i. e. the circumcision; the Rabbins thus elucidate it.” 

NOTES. 187 

es un’ corazon cobarde y pusilanimo y temeroso, para que ellos siendo muchos huyesen de los pocos; cosa cierto de 
notar, que desembarcando el Marques del Valle en esta tierra con solos trecientos hombres, que la mitad dellos eran 
gente de la mar, ejercitada en aquel menester mas que en ardides de guerra, se atreviesen 4 acometer 4 millones de 
Indios que en la tierra habia, encaminado todo por la mano del Supremo Seftor, que fué su divina voluntad:se cum- 
pliese lo 4 estas gentes prometido en la Sagrada Escriptura; y que trecientos hombres acometiesen 4 tantos millones 
de gentes, y que todos aquellos millones de gentes tubiesen un corazon tan asombrado y cobarde, que huyesen de los 
trecientos: el cual oy en dia le tienen tan temeroso y asombrado, que en ninguna cosa osan fiarse de nosotros, ni 
acaban de darnos credito, aun en las cosas de nuestra santa Fé Catolica, y tocantes 4 su salvacion. Pero, Sefor y 
Dios nuestro, ya vemos cumplidos en estas miseras naciones todos los trabajos y aflicciones y castigos, que por sus 
maldades y abominaciones y idolatrias merecieron. Veamos, Sefor, la divina misericordia y verdadera conversion 4 
tu santa Fé Catolica, que en la misma Sagrada Escriptura se les promete con renombre y alabanza delante de todos 
los pueblos, pues con tanta liberalidad y voluntad recibieron la santa Fé Catolica. Desatada esta duda por las auto- 
ridades traidas, de que estas naciones sean Hebreas y de nacion Judaica, por el consiguiente quiero por razones claras 
manifiestamente probar la misma opinion, que no haran menos fuerza que las autoridades referidas de la Sagrada 
Escriptura.. Cuanto 4 lo primero, es de saber, que sobre la relacion que estos dan para venir 4 poseer y habitar esta 
tierra, hallo 4 cada paso gran diferencia entre los ancianos que la dan, de los sucesos, trabajos y aflicciones de su 
camino; de suerte, que contandolo unos de una manera y otros de otra, vienen 4 dar consigo y 4 traer con sus varias 
relaciones aquel largo y prolijo camino que los hijos de Israel anduvieron desde Egipto ala tierra de promision, tan 
al propio y tan al vivo, que bastara trasladar aqui el Exodo, t el Levitico; si el evitar proligidad no me lo estorvara ; 
pero como no pienso seguir el orden conforme 4 la variedad de relaciones, solo quiero recitar lo que para salir con mi 
opinion me fuerza, contando algunos acontecimientos de trabajos y infortunios, hambres y pestilencias, que en su camino 
cuentan que pasaron, en lo cual notaremos que en realidad de verdad no és sino noticia de la Sagrada Escriptura que 
sus antepasados les dejaron; donde és de saber que tratando de un gran varon, de quien no poca noticia se halla sobre 
ellos, me contaron que despues de haber pasado grandes aflicciones y persecuciones de los de la tierra, que junto 
toda la multitud de gente que era de su parcialidad, y que les persuadio 4 que huyesen de aquella persecucion 4 una 
tierra donde tuviesen descanso, y que haciendose caudillo de aquella gente se fué 4 la orilla de la mar, y que con 
una vara que en la mano traia did en el agua con ella, y que luego se abrid. la mar, y entraron por alli él. y sus 
seguidores, y que los enemigos viendo hecho camino se entraron tras él, y que luego se torné la mar 4 su lugar, y 
que nunca mas tubieron noticia dellos.. Que mas clara razon se puede dar de que estos sean Judios, que ver cuan 
manifiestamente y al propio relaten la salida de Egipto, el dar Moises con. la vara en la mar, el abrirse y hacer 
camino, el entrar Pharaon con su egercito. tras ellos, y volver Dios las aguas 4 su lugar, donde todos quedaron en 
el profundo ahogados? Y si esto no satisface, quiero traer otro acontecimiento que dicen habelles acontecido en su 
largo camino, y és, que estando alojados junto 4 unos grandes cerros, vino un grande y.espantoso temblor de tierra, 
y que 4 ciertos hombres de mal vivir que entre ellos venian, se abrié la tierra en aquel lugar y se los tragé; de lo 
cual la demas. gente recibié gran temor y espanto. En viendo que vide yo esta pintura y lo que significaba, se me 
ofrecié el capitulo diez y seis de los Numeros, donde tragé la tierra 4'Core y 4 Datan y Abiron; y porque no es 
justo callar otra potissima y manifiesta razon para probar lo dicho, quiero contar lo que en la misma pintura vide, 
y és, que tenian pintado como llovia sobre ellos una arena 4 granizo muy menudito, y queriendome satisfacer que 
fuese aquello, me digeron que muy gran tiempo les Iovié arena del cielo 4 sus padres en el camino que para esta 
tierra trugeron, la cual, si no me engafio, deve de ser el mana con que Dios los sustent6 en el desierto, como lo 
cuenta el capitulo diez y seis del Exodo: y porque no dejemos nada por contar, quiero empeza 4 contar la Sa- 
grada Escriptura, pues el salir con mi opinion me fuerza, y quiero tomar mi tema desde] primer capitulo de Ge- 
nesis, y decir, en el principio crié Dios el cielo y la tierra, como me empez6 4 contar un viejo natural de Chulula de 
edad de-cien afios, que de puro viejo andaba ya inclinado hacia la tierra, agaz docto en sus antiguallas, al cual 
rogandole me alumbrase de algunas cosas para poner en esta mi obra, me preguntdé, que de que materia queria me 
tratase? Yo como topé con lo que deseaba, le dige, que desdel principio del mundo en lo que 4 su generacion 
Indiana tocaba, y tenia noticia; el cual me respondid, toma tinta y papel, porque no podras percibir todo lo que yo te 
diré; el cual empezé desta manera. En el principio antes que la luz ni el sol fuese criado, estaba esta tierra en 
obscuridad y tiniebla, y vacia de toda cosa criada, toda Ilana sin cerro ni quebrada, cercada de todas partes del agua, 

1388 NOTES. 

sin arbol ni cosa criada, y luego que nacié la luz y el sol en Oriente, aparecieron en ella unos hombres gigantes de 
disforme estatura, y poseyeron esta tierra, los cuales deseosos de ver el nacimiento del sol y su ocasu, propusieron 
de lo ir 4 buscar, y dividiendose en dos partes, los unos caminaron hacia Poniente, los otros hacia Oriente: estos 
caminaron hasta que la mar les atajé el camino, de donde determinaron volverse al lugar donde habian salido, y 
vueltos 4 este lugar que tenia por nombre ‘Yztacculinyneminian’, no hallando remedio para poder llegar al sol, ena- 
morados de su luz y hermosura, determinaron de edificar una torre, tan alta, que llegase su cumbre al cielo; y llegando 
materiales para el efecto, hallaron un barro y betun muy pegadizo, con el cual a mucha priesa empezaron 4 edificar la 
torre, y aviendola subido lo mas alto que pudieron, que dicen parecia llegar al cielo, enojado el Sefior de las alturas, 
dijo 4 los moradores del cielo: Aveis notado como los de la tierra han edificado una alta y soberbia torre para subirse 
aca, enamorados de la luz del sol y de su hermosura? Veni y confundamoslos, porque no es justo que los de la tierra 
viviendo en la carne, se mezclen con nosotros. Luego en aquel punto salieron los moradores del cielo por los cuatro 
partes del mundo, asi como rayos, les derribaron el edificio que avian edificado, de lo cual asombrados los gigantes y 
llenos de temor se dividieron y derramaron por todas las partes de la tierra. Bien creo no serdé necesario advirtir al 
lector que note el capitulo primero y segundo del Genesis, en lo que hemos venido tratando, pues tan manifiestamente 
vemos relatar 4 un Indio la creacion del mundo, y lo que en el capitulo sexto del mismo libro se trata de los gigantes 
y de la torre de Babilonia, y del como la edificaban los hombres codiciosos de llegar al cielo, movidos solo para 
celebrar su nombre, por lo cual fueron confundidos de Dios; y asi me persuado, y deseo persuadir, que los que dan 
esta relacion la oyeron de sus ascendientes y antepasados; y a estos naturales, como son de la linea de aquel pueblo 
escogido de Dios segun mi opinion, por quien Dios obré grandes maravillas, ha venido la noticia y pinturas de mano 
en mano de las cosas de la Biblia y misterios della, para atribuillo 4 esta tierra y que acontecié en ella, ignorando el 
principio: y no niego, ni puedo negar, que aya havido gigantes en esta tierra, pues como testigo de vista lo puedo 
afirmar, pues los connoci en algunos lugares della de disforme estatura; y porque creo habra quien desto se acuerde, 
en Mexico en la procesion del Corpus Christi, vi sacar un Indio de estos gigantes vestido de tafetan amarillo, con 
una partesana al hombro y una celada en la cabeza, que sobre todos sobrepujaba una vara de medir. Tambien creo, 
que en tan largo y proligo camino como para llegar 4 esta tierra trugeron, pasasen grandes trabajos; cuentan ham 
bres, pestilencias, sed, tempestades, guerras, langostas que los afligian, granizos que les destruian sus sementeras que 
por esos caminos venian sembrando, con otros mil maneras de trabajos y angustias que hallo en sus historias. Tam- 
bien es de creer, que traian caudillos y sacerdotes que los guiaban y industriaban en ceremonias ; pero creer que no 
sea cosa sacada de la relacion de la Biblia, viendola tan enparentada y propia a lo de la Sagrada Escriptura, no puedo 
dejar de en alguna manera persuadirme: para probacion de lo cual, y para que clara y manifiestamente se vea, quiero 
que se considere los ritos, las idolatrias, las ceremonias y supersticiones que tenian, el ir 4 sacrificar 4 los montes, 
debajo de los arboles sombrios, 4 las cuevas y cavernas de la tierra obscuras y sombrias, el encender y quemar in- 
cienso, el matar sus hijos y hijas y sacrificallos y ofrecellos por victimas 4 sus dioses, sacrificar niflos, comer carne 
humana, matar los presos y cautivos en la guerra, todo ceremonia Judaica de aquellos diez tribus de Israel dichos, 
todo hecho con las mayores ceremonias y supersticiones que se puede pensar. Y lo que mas me fuerza 4 creer que 
estos Indios son de linea Hebrea, es la estrafa pertinacia que tienen en no desarraigar de si estas idolatrias y super- 
sticiones, yendo y viniendo 4 ellas como se vé de sus antepasados, como dice David en el Salmo evi. que en viendose 
atribulados de Dios clamaban 4 él, y perdonaba los con su misericordia, pero luego olvidados se volvian 4 idolatrar, 
y 4 sacrificar sus hijos y hijas 4 los demonios, derramando la sangre de los inocentes, la ofrecian 4 los idolos de Canan: 
pero porque la noticia que tengo de su origen y principio no es mas, ni ellos saben dar mas relacion sino desde 
aquellas Siete Cuevas, donde habitaron tan largo tiempo, las cuales desampararon para venir 4 buscar esta tierra, unos 
primero que otros, otros despues, y otros muy despues, hasta dejallas desiertas. Estas Cuevas son en Teoculuacan, 
que por otro nombre la Ilaman Aztlan, tierra de que todos tenemos noticia caer acia la parte del Norte, y tierra firme 
con la Florida. Por tanto desde este lugar de estas Cuevas, daré verdadera relacion de estas naciones y de sus suce- 
sos, dado que la que queda dicho de mi opinion de su origen no sea muy dudosa, aunque en todo me someto 4 la 
correccion de la Santa Iglesia Catolica.” 

“To give a true and authentic account of the origin and early history of these Indian nations, so doubtful and 
mysterious to us, would be a task which, duly to be performed, would require special divine revelation rightly to 
comprehend it. In the absence, however, of such aid it will be necessary to recur to suspicions and ‘surmises, availing 

NOTES. 189 

ourselves of the surprising handle afforded to us by this nation, whose extremely vile mode of living and conversation, 
and the style of their dealings in their intercourse with each other, so mean, so like that of the Jews, would warrant 
the assertion that they are descended from the Jews and of Hebrew race; and I believe that he will not commit any 
great error who should assert this to be the case, attention being paid to their manner of living, their ceremonies, 
their rites and superstitions, their signs and omens, so similar and conformable to those of the Jews that they in no 
respect differ from them. The testimony of Holy Scripture shall be adduced in proof of this fact, whence we shall 
draw clear and convincing proofs of the truth of what has been above stated, grounded on just and sufficient reasons. 
And first I shall offer, as a leading argument, that this Indian race was a colony which proceeded from remote and 
foreign parts, and which, previously to its arrival in this territory, performed a long and wearisome pilgrimage, in 
which many years and months were spent on the way, as their traditions and their paintings alike inform us, and as I 
have succeeded in learning from some very old persons of whom I made inquiries, with the intention of relieving this 
question from its present difficulties; and granting that some relate fables, such as that their ancestors were the off- 
spring of fountains and springs of water, or, according to others, proceeded from caves, whilst others say that they 
were descended from the gods, which is evidently all fabulous, and proves that they themselves are ignorant of their 
real origin and lineage, yet they invariably confess that they came from a distant country, as I have found it recorded 
in their ancient paintings, in which they note down the great hardships from famine, thirst, and nakedness which they 
endured on the way, with many other sufferings which befell them until they arrived in this country and fixed their 
habitation in it. The consideration of all which circumstances confirms me in my opinion, and the suspicion which 
I entertain, that the people of this country are descended from the ten tribes of Israel which Salmanazar, king of 
Assyria, led into captivity and transplanted beyond Assyria in the time of Hosea, king of Israel, and in the time of 
Hezekiah, king of Judah, as is recorded in the seventeenth chapter of the fourth book of Kings, where it is said that 
Israel was removed from his own land to that of the Assyrians, where he continues to dwell to the present day; of 
whom Esdras declares, in the thirteenth chapter of his fourth book, that they went to inhabit a land remote and situated 
apart, which had never been inhabited, to which there was a long and tedious way of a year and a half’s journey, 
where at present we find these nations dispersed throughout all the islands and over the whole continent of the ocean 
sea to the furthest west. Another authority may be adduced from Holy Scripture in proof of the same conjecture, 
which is this, that God declared to the ten tribes, already mentioned by Hosea in the first, second, and third chapters 
of his prophecies as far as the thirteenth inclusive, that he would multiply them like the sand of the sea; and it is 
plain and evident how greatly they have been multiplied, since they have peopled a large portion of the globe: but 
omitting all irrelevant matter, and directing our attention solely to that which we behold in this territory, how sur- 
prising and amazing was the amount. of its population, such as the Spaniards beheld it in the beginning, before the 
great mortality which occurred in the year twenty-five, when such multitudes of the natives died, that not even the 
third part of the Indians who before inhabited it survived, without taking into account the infinite number of men, 
women, and children whom the Spaniards massacred but a few years before in the course of the conquest of it. Be- 
sides the authority already quoted, many more passages of Scripture might be adduced, as the curious reader will be 
enabled to perceive by referring to the fourth, twenty-eighth, and thirty-second chapters of Deuteronomy, to the 
twentieth, twenty-eighth, and forty-second chapter of Isaiah, and to Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Micah, and Zephaniah, where 
he will find mention of the rigorous chastisement with which God threatened to visit these ten tribes on account of 
their great iniquities, abominations, and impious idolatries, withdrawing themselves from the worship of the true 
God, from whom they had received so many favours; in return for which ingratitude he threatens them in the chapters 
above mentioned with a scourge and most severe chastisement, such as we see* has been fulfilled upon these miser- 
able nations, namely, that they should be stripped of their lands, houses and riches, their jewels and precious stones, 
their wives and children, and that they should be carried away to be sold in strange lands, and their possessions be 
enjoyed by the stranger. It appears to me that, even if I allege no other authority or grounds to justify the conclu- 
sion that these Indians are Jews and descended from the Jews, those which have been adduced would be sufficient, 
perceiving as we do that they have multiplied like the sand of the sea, being at the period of their migration but few 

* How easy it is to find the seeming accomplishment of prophecy in the annals of all nations, when the interests or wishes of parties 
prompt them to put their own interpretations upon plain historical facts! 

VOL, VIII. C3C.) 

190 — NOTES. 

in number, and also considering the many years which they employed in that migration, and that after having peopled 
this vast continent, God, becoming weary of their abominations, execrable deeds, and idolatries, brought a strange 
nation against them, like an eagle from the ends of the earth, who, paying no regard to the old nor to the young, 
to women nor children, destroyed and consumed them without any pity, keeping them in a state of hunger, thirst, 
and nakedness, and in continual disquietude, until their number was diminished. It is likewise very deserving of 
remark, that one amongst the many evils with which God threatened to afflict them was a faint and trembling heart, 
so that being many they should flee from a few; and it certainly is a fact’ worthy of special notice, that when the 
Marquis of the Valley landed in this territory with only three hundred men, the half of whom were mariners, better 
acquainted with their own profession than with military tactics, they should have ventured to attack the millions of 
Indians who inhabited it, all doubtless being ordered by the hand of the Supreme God, since it was his divine will 
that that which had been denounced in the Holy Scriptures against these nations should be fulfilled, and that three 
hundred men should attack as many millions, and that all those millions should have hearts so timid and so faint as 
to flee from three hundred men; who even still are so much under the impression of fear that in the most trivial mat- 
ters they dare not confide in us, nor can prevail on themselves to credit us even in things relating to our holy Catholic 
faith and appertaining to their own salvation. But, O Lord God! since we now behold all the evils, afflictions, 
and chastisements accomplished upon these miserable nations, which they merited on account of their iniquities, 
abominations, and idolatries, let us also behold, O Lord, the display of thy divine clemency and their true conversion 
to thy holy faith, which is promised to them in the same Holy Scriptures, with honour and applause in the eyes of all 
nations, since they received so freely and with such readiness the holy Catholic faith. All doubt having been re- 
moved by the authorities cited as to whether these nations are of Hebrew origin‘and a Jewish race, I shall proceed 
to demonstrate the truth of that proposition by arguments no less convincing than the authorities cited from Holy 
Writ. With respect to the first point it is fit that I should remark, in reference to the account which they give of 
their coming to possess and to inhabit this land, that it is impossible to advance a step without encountering great 
discrepancies in the accounts which the ancients give of the trials, hardships, and afflictions which they endured on 
the road, which they nevertheless describe in such a manner, that some recounting them in one way, and some in 
another, their different relations all square with each other, and substantially agree with that long and tedious pil- 
grimage which the Israelites performed on their quitting Egypt to proceed in search of the promised land, so exactly, 
indeed, and to the letter, that I need do no more than transcribe Exodus or Leviticus were I not anxious to avoid 
prolixity. Since, however, it is not my intention to notice here the variety of relations, I shall content myself with 
selecting what is absolutely necessary to prove the reasonableness of my conclusion, detailing for that purpose the 
vicissitudes which they say they suffered from famine and pestilence, and other casualties which befell them on their 
journey, of which we may remark, that in point of truth it is nothing more than a confused acquaintance with Holy 
Scripture, which they derived from the traditions of their ancestors, where what is chiefly worthy of observation is, 
that making mention of a certain great man, of whose history they retain no slight recollection, they told me that 
after having suffered great afflictions and persecutions from the natives of the land, he assembled the whole multi- 
tude of his people and persuaded them to fly from that oppression to a land where they might be enabled to 
enjoy repose; and that, becoming their leader, he conducted them to the shore of the sea, and struck the water with a 
rod which he held in his hand, and that the sea immediately opened*, and that both he and those that followed him 

* The following account of a Mexican painting, recording the principal events of sacred history from the creation of the world to the 
deluge, the subsequent building of the tower of Babel, the flight of the children of Israel from Egypt and their passage through the Red 
Sea, and likewise the mysteries of the Incarnation, is extracted from the seventh chapter of the fifth book of Garcia’s ‘ Predicacion del 
Evangelio en el Nuevo Mundo, viviendo los Apostoles.’ This passage will doubtless be read with interest, as it affords the strongest 
corroboration of the authenticity of Diego Duran’s curious relation, and reflects much light on the mysterious nature of some of the 
Mexican paintings. < Otro religioso de mi orden, de cuyo nombre no me acuerdo, mas de que era Vicario del Convento dela Vera Cruz, 
me dio por escrito de su mano la relacion siguiente. Quando entraron los religiosos de la orden de nuestro padre Santo Domingo en la 
provincia de la Zapoteca para aver de convertir 4 los Indios, y predicarles el santo evangelio, llegaron 4 un pueblo que se llama Quic Chapa, 
adonde hallaron en poder del Cacique de aquella tierra una Biblia de solas figuras, y por tradicion se yvan enseflando unos Indios 4 otros 
lo que significavan. Estavan pintadas en aquella Biblia muchas cosas de las qte creemos de la nuestra. Porque alli estava pintada la 
creacion, y el diluvio, la torre de Babel, ed passage de los hijos de Israel, y la anunciacion. Y tenian pintada 4 nuestra Sefiora en habito 
de India, con naguas y huaypil (es vestido de las Indias) sentada y texiendo una tela, de la manera que suelen texer las Indias, y sobre 

NiO TES. 191 

entered into it, and that their enemies, perceiving a way prepared, entered after them, and that the sea immediately 
returned to its place, and that they never more heard of them. What clearer proof could be adduced of these people 
being Jews than to see how plainly and literally they record the flight (of the children of Israel) from Egypt, Moses 
smiting the sea with his rod, and the sea opening and affording them a passage, Pharaoh and his army entering after 
them, and God causing the waters to return to their place when all remained overwhelmed in the deep? Lest, how- 
ever, this proof should be deemed insufficient, I shall proceed to mention another event which they say befell them in 
the course of their long pilgrimage. Having halted, as they affirm, near some high mountains, a great and terrible 
earthquake occurred, and the earth opened in that place and swallowed up certain men of an evil course of life who 
journeyed amongst them, and struck terror and consternation into the rest. On secing, as I did, this painting and its 
signification, the sixteenth chapter of Numbers occurred to my recollection, where the earth is said to have swallowed 
up Korah, and Dathan, and Abiram. And since it would be wrong to pass over in silence another most convincing 
and clear argument tending to the same conclusion, I shall declare what I saw in the same painting, in which was 
represented a shower, as it were, of sand or fine hailstones descending upon them; and, wishing to be informed more 
particularly concerning the meaning of it, they told me that the sky rained sand for a very long period of time upon 
their forefathers when on their pilgrimage to this land, which, if I am not mistaken, was the manna with which God 
fed them in the wilderness, as recorded in the sixteenth chapter of Exodus. And that I may leave nothing unmen- 
tioned, I shall quote the narrative of Holy Scripture, since this is indispensable to the demonstration of my conclusion, 
and shall take my text from the first chapter of Genesis, saying, ‘In the beginning God created the heaven and the 
earth’, as an old Indian, a native of Chulula, a hundred years of age, who from mere old age walked with his body 
bent to the ground, and was learned in the antiquities of his country, began to declare to me, who, on my requesting 
him to give me information on certain points that I might insert them in this my history, desired to know what sub- 
ject I wished to discuss with him. [, on finding that the opportunity had arrived for which I was desirous, replied, 
the history of your Indian race from the commencement of the world as far as you are acquainted with it: to which 
he answered, Provide yourself with ink and paper, for you will not be able to commit to memory all that I shall tell 
you; and having so said, he thus commenced his narrative. ‘In the beginning, before either light or the sun were 
created, this earth was in obscurity and darkness, and void of all created things, entirely plain, without mountain or 
valley, surrounded on all sides with water, without tree or created thing ; and immediately after the light and the sun 
were born in the east, there appeared in it giants of monstrous stature, who, desirous of beholding the rising and the 
setting of the sun, agreed to go in search of it; and dividing themselves into two companies, the one proceeded towards 
the west, the other towards the east. They travelled until the sea impeded their further progress, from whence they ~ 
determined to return to the place from which they had set out; and having returned to that place, the name of which 
was Yztacculinyneminian, having found no means of arriving at the sun, enchanted with its light and beauty, they 
determined to build a tower of such a height that its top should reach to heaven, and searching for materials for this 
purpose, they found clay and pitch of a very glutinous quality, with which they began with great expedition to 
build the tower, and having built it as high as possible, so that according to their account it seemed to reach heaven, 
the Lord of the heights above becoming incensed, said to the inhabitants of heaven, Have you remarked how those 
of the earth have built a proud and lofty tower in erder to ascend up hither, charmed with the light and the beauty 
of the sun? Come and let ws confound them, for it is not fit that those of the earth, dwelling in the flesh, should 
mix with us. Immediately at that instant the inhabitants of heaven rushed from the four quarters of the world 

la cabega en alguna distancia tenian pintada una figura casi como de paloma, de que salian unos rayos. Y preguntado por los religiosos, 
que que entendian por aquello? Respondieron, que aquella muger awa sido una donzella que avia parido al Hijo de Dios. Y 4 aquellos 
resplandores llamaron ‘ Xipijbitao’, que quiere dezir, Espiritu de Dios. Quando los religiosos vieron aquellos caracteres y figuras dieron 
vozes, y dixeron, ‘ Esso que teneys ai pintado y no lo sabeys bien, es lo que nosotros os predicamos.’ Y assi poco 4 poco les fueron 
declarando los mysterios de nuestra redempcion y articulos de la fé, y los convirtieron 4 ella. Uno de los padres que fueron en esta con- 
version, y el que mas trabajé con los Indios de aquella provincia, fue el padre fray Domingo Guigelmo, santo varon, y extremada lengua 
de aquella tierra Zapoteca, y el primero que dixo 4 los Indios: Hijos, lo que aqui teneys pintado, es lo que os predicamos. Y quitando 
algunas cosas apocrifas que tenian pintadas entre aquellas verdades, les corrigieron aquella Biblia, que fue mucha parte para su conver- 
sion. Esto me conté el mismo santo viejo, Fr. Domingo Guigelmo, muchas vezes. Hasta aqui es la relacion de aquel padre Vicario de 

la Vera Cruz.” 

192 NOTES. 

like lightning, and overthrew the tower which they had built; at which the giants, amazed and terrified, separated 
from each other, and scattered themselves over the whole face of the earth.’ Iam quite convinced that it will be 
unnecessary for me to refer the reader to the first and second chapters of Genesis in illustration of the matter of which 
we have been treating, since we so plainly perceive an Indian relating the history of the creation of the world, 
and that which is recorded in the sixth chapter of the same book of the giants and of the tower of Babel, and of the 
manner in which mankind, desirous of ascending up to heaven, constructed it, actuated solely by the ambition of 
making themselves a name, on which account God confounded them; and accordingly I am persuaded, and desire 
to persuade others, that those who relate this history received it from the traditions of their forefathers, and that 
the knowledge and paintings of things recorded in the Bible, and the mysteries contained in it, were transmitted from 
hand to hand to the natives of this country, as being of the race of the chosen people of God, in my opinion, in favour 
of whom God wrought such great marvels, so as finally to be attributed to this land, and referred to the events which 
occurred in it, their true origin having been forgotten. Neither do I, nor can I, deny that giants have existed in this 
country, since I can bear testimony as an eye-witness to the fact, having met with men of monstrous stature in some 
provinces of it, and, as I believe may still be in the recollection of some in Mexico, in a procession of the Host 1 
saw an Indian of these giants led forth, clothed in yellow* taffety, with a scarf{ on his shoulder and a helmet on his 
head, who exceeded in stature all present by three feet. I likewise believe that in the course of so long and tedious a 
journey as that which they were obliged to take to arrive at this land they must have suffered great hardships; they 
mention famine, pestilence, thirst, tempests, wars, and locusts which afflicted them, and hailstones that destroyed the 
crops which they had sown in the course of their journey, with a thousand other hardships and sufferings, which I find 
recorded in their histories. It is likewise to be presumed that they brought chiefs and priests to guide them on the 
way and instruct them in their ceremonies; but to believe for a moment that it is not a history taken from the narrative 
of Scripture, seeing that it so nearly resembles and is so analogous to that which is recorded in the Bibleq, is what I 

* Yellow was the colour of the Inquisition, and it was customary in the age in which Diego Duran lived to cause persons condemned 
by the Inquisition to the flames to be previously exposed to the public gaze, on some great religious festival, attired in yellow garments, 
and wearing on their heads paper helmets in the shape of mitres. 

++ The Spanish phrase which we have here translated ¢ scarf’, from a supposition that it must refer to some part of the costume of the 
giant, is unintelligible, and is, perhaps, an obsolete expression of the sixteenth century. 

{ Itis a singular fact, that the Mexicans, the Peruvians, and the Indians of Yucatan should each have had, if we may be permitted 
to use the expression, their respective Pentateuchs. Of the cosmogony of the Yucatanese, and their history of the formation of man from 
the dust of the earth, some account will be found in the hundred and fourteenth page of the sixth volume of this work ; and the perusal of 
the following extract from the Memorial of Bernardino de Cardenas, addressed to the King of Spain, will clearly show that, in the opinion 
of that learned and experienced ecclesiastic, the laws of the Peruvians and many of their rites bore a striking resemblance to those delivered 
by God to the Jews. “ Hablando la sagrada escritura de los moradores de la ciudad de Dan, dize, que permanecié entre ellos un idolo ; 
pero que no avia entonces rei en Israel: Mansit apud eos idolum omni tempore ; in diebus illis non erat rex in Israel. No me espanto 
que durasse el idolo si no avia rei; pero que teniendo este, reino tan catolico y santo rei, que es el defensor y guarda de la fé, y teniendo 
tantos ministros diputados para esto, esten en pie hasta agora tantos idolos, tantas maldades, tantas afrentas de Dios, tantas traiciones 4 
su Divina Magestad. No ai coracon zeloso que no se parta de dolor. A mi me saca este pensamiento de mis casillas, y aun de mis 
conventos me sacé, no solo esta vez que voi entendiendo en la legacia que he referido, sino tambien otra algunos afios antes, quando sali 
con comission de visitador de idolatrias por el obispo de la Paz, y fui al pueblo de Camata, que es de pocos Indios, y con todo hallé 
millones de idolos, y cosas estupendas contra nuestra fé, y contra los santos sacramentos, hallé mas de quarenta sacerdotes de los idolos, 
que en detestacion de nuestras ceremonias y ritos sagrados, hazian los masmos al demonio, ofreciendole muchos y grandes sacrificios de 
carneros de la tierra, y otros animales, y coca, que es una yerva dafiosissima, bautizando las criaturas con sangre, poniendoles los nom- 
bres de sus idolos ; confessando los Indios, y persuadiendoles que no confessassen la verdad 4 los sacerdotes. Averigué que tenian pacto 
explicito con el demonio, y que le llamavan para las necessidades que se les ofrecian, y le consultavan mui amenudo, y el les respondia. 
Vide en las casas el lugar y assiento que tenian puesto para quando venia el demonio, al qual vian algunas vezes en diferentes figuras, 
otras no le vian, sino le oian hablar. Y entre las cosas que les dezia, averigué como una vez les dixo que él era el Sefior rico, y por esso 
aquellos Indios en su lengua le llaman Capac Iqui, que quiere dezir ¢ rico Seftor, y que el cerro de Potosi era su hijo, y asi le adoran los 
Indios, y que él les dava la plata: y que el Dios de los Espafioles no la tenia, que por esso venian desde Castilla 4 quitarles la que él les 
dava, y que mas valia la plata que las almas ; y que asi los curas y corregidores y visitadores no buscavan almas, sino plata; y que era 
mayor pecado no dar gusto al corregidor y al cura que las hechicerias y borracheras, pues por estas no los castigavan, y por lo primero 
eran tan maltratados : Y que juntamente le podian tener 4 él por su dios en primer lugar, y luego al de los Espafioles, (y asi lo hazen 
muchos de los Indios.) Y vez huvo que les dixo, que la imagen del crucifixo que estava en la iglesia era suya, y que 4 él le avian de 
adorar en ella, y lo hazian asi. Y averigué que no era uno solo el demonio que les hablava, y 4 quien ellos adoravan, sino muchos con 

NOTES. 193 

cannot in any manner persuade myself to do, in proof of which, and in order that it may be clearly and manifestly appa- 
rent, I beg that their rites and their idolatries may be considered, their ceremonies and superstitions, their custom of 
going to sacrifice upon the mountains, under shady trees, and in caves and dark and gloomy caverns of the earth, their 
lighting and burning incense, their killing their sons and daughters, and sacrificing and offering them as victims to 
their gods, their sacrificing children, eating human flesh, killing prisoners and captives taken in war, all Jewish cere- 
monies practised by the above-mentioned ten tribes of Israel, all performed with the greatest ceremonies and super- 
stitions that can be imagined: and what further obliges me to believe that these Indians are of Hebrew descent, is 
the strange obstinacy which they display in refusing to root out from amongst them these idolatries and superstitions, 
going and returning to them as we find was the case with their ancestors, as David declares in the hundred and sixth 
Psalm, who, when they saw themselves afflicted by God, called upon him, and he pardoned them in his mercy, which 
immediately forgetting, they returned to the commission of idolatry, and to sacrificing their sons and their daughters 
to devils, when shedding the blood of the innocent, they offered it to the idols of Canaan. But since my knowledge of 
their descent and origin is no more than what I have stated, nor are they able to give an earlier account of themselves 
than from those Seven Caves which they inhabited for such a length of time, and which they forsook in order to come in 
search of this land, some before others, some afterwards, and some much afterwards, until they left them quite deserted. 
These caves are in Teoculuacan, to which they have given the other name of Aztlan, a country which we all know is 
situated towards the north, and a part of the continent contiguous to Florida. Wherefore, commencing from the site 
of these caves, I shall write a true account of these nations, and of events connected with their history, premising, 

however, that the opinion which I have given of their origin cannot be reckoned very doubtful, although I submit 
myself in everything to the correction of the Holy Catholic Church.” 

Nore XLVII. Page 183. 

Of all the arguments that could possibly be adduced in proof of the Mexicans being descended from the Jews, 
none would be of a more convincing kind than to be able historically to trace the migration of their ancestors, the 

diferentes nombres, los quales nombres toman de los cerros y piedras que tienen por idolos, creyendo aquellos cerros y piedras son los que 
vienen 4 hablarles; y asi adoran 4 estos cerros y los tienen por dioses para diferentes cosas : unos para la multiplicacion del maiz, otro para 
los vestidos, otro para el ganado, &c. Uno destos cerros hablé una vez 4 un Indio, y le ensezd en su lengua unos mandamientos al fin 
diabolicos, contrapuestos artificiosamente & los mandamientos de nuestra santa Lei : y estos mandamientos del diablo cantavan publicamente 
en sus fiestas y borracheras. Y tambien una letania de todos los idolos, al modo que nosotros en nuestra letania vamos invocando los 
santos, asi ellos van nombrando y llamando todos los idolos y cerros, y los tienen por sus santos. Fuera destos hallé otros idolos menores 
de piedra labrada y tosca en las chacaras de todos, de que hize grandes montones, y despues de averles pegado fuego, viendo que era im- 
possible el deshazerlos, por ser de piedras grandes, y que podrian recoger los pedagos, fui poco 4 poco soterrandolos con mi compafiero 
de noche, sin que nos viessen, y echandolos en medio de un caudaloso rio que esté alli, ya que no pude darselos 4 beber como Moyses. 
Otros idolillos hallé mas chicos, pero mas dafiosos, de unas piedrecillas labradas como de cristal, las quales se aparecen 4 los Indios, y se 
tiene por dichoso el que halla una dellas, y les tienen tanta reverencia que les ofrecen su misma sangre, sacandola con pungadas de partes 
de su cuerpo, porque dizen, que en no haziendo esto, se van y desaparecen aquellos idolillos, como me lo confessaron. Una India 
hallé que avia estado diez y siete anos amancebada con el demonio. Una laguna vide en la qual echavan muchas criaturas, ofreciendolas 
aldemonio. Las Bulas de la santa Cruzada vide por mis ojos roziadas con sangre de Cuyes, que son unos animalejos que en Espafia 
llaman ‘ Conejos de las Indias’, que ordinariamente deguellan en sus sacrificios. Y preguntando 4 un gran idolatra porque era aquello, 
me dixo que aborrecia el demonio mucho la Bula, y que porque no huyesse della, hazian aquello como en protestacion de que no querian 
usar della. Finalmente, Sefior, hallé tantas cosas al modo destas, que se podia escrivir mucho, pero he dicho estas pocas, para 
que Vuestra Magestad sepa si ai idolos ¢ idolatrias. Todo el reino temo, que deve de estar asi, also mas 6 menos: y con todo esso los 
que goviernan viven con tanto descuido en esto, que parece que lo tienen por cosa de risa, siendo digna de llorar con lagrimas de 
sangre. O quien pudiera derramarla toda mil vezes por la extirpacion de tales ofensas! 4 pique estuve dello en dicho pueblo, porque 
sin tener quien me ayudasse, hize exemplar castigo en aquellos sacerdotes de idolatria, aunque mezclado con benignidad, porque tienen 
gran descargo y escusa con dezir, que no les han ensefiado la adoracion y conocimiento del verdadero Dios, porque para esto no avian 
tenido mas que un sacerdote, y esse que tratava mas de buscar plata que de darles 4 conocer 4 Jesu Christo, nuestro Sefior; y para sus 
idolatrias avian tenido sesenta sacerdotes, que con mucho cuidado se las avian ensefiado desde nifios. Yo quisiera serlo agora para tener 
mas tiempo que gastar en ministerio tan necessario, y para ir en persona 4 essa corte 4 dar razon destas cosas 4 Vuestra Magestad, y 4 
sus consejeros reales: pero ya estoi Ileno de canas y dolores por los gravissimos trabajos que he passado en esta demanda. Y asi he 
querido hazer esta relacion por escrito, suplicando 4 Vuestra Magestad no se enfade de verla tan larga, que no puede ser menos, y me 
parece que de otra suerte no cumpliria con mi conciencia.” 

VOL. VIII. 32D) 

194. NOTES. 

Aztecas, direct from Judea to some portion of the American continent. In the absence of such proof, however, it is 
necessary to recur to probabilities and conjectures, and carefully to compare the traditions of the Indians respecting 
their own origin. It is asserted by Sahagun, in the preface to his General History of New Spain, that the seven Aztec 
tribes arrived by a sea-voyage at the shores of New Spain; who further adds, that the place which they left was 
named the Seven Caves, or, in the Mexican language, Chicomoztoc, and notices in the following passage of the pro- 
logue to his History the circumstances which led to their change of habitation: “ Del origen de esta gente, la relacion 
que dan los viejos és, que por la mar vinieron de hacia el norte, y cierto és que vinieron algunos vasos de manera no 
se sabe como eran labrados, sino que se congetura por una fama que hay entre todos estos naturales que salieron de 
siete cuevas, que estas siete cuevas son los siete navios 6 galeras en que vinieron los primeros pobladores de esta 
tierra, segun se colige por congeturas verosimiles. La gente que primero vino 4 poblar 4 esta tierra de hacia la Florida 
vino, y costeando vino y desembarcé en el puerto de Panuco que ellos llaman Panco, que quiere decir, lugar donde 
Ilegaron Jos que pasaron el agua. Esta gente venia en demanda del Parayso terrenal, y traian por apellido Tamo- 
hanchan, que quiere decir, buseamos nuestra casa, y poblaban cerca de los mas altos montes en donde se hallaban. En 
venir hacia el mediodia 4 buscar el Parayso terrenal no erraban, porque opinion és de los que scriben que esta debajo 
de la linea equinoccial, y en pensar que és algun altisimo monte, tampoco yerran, porque asi lo dicen los escritores 
que’el Parayso terrenal estaba debajo de la linea equinoccial y que és un monte altisimo que llega su cumbre cerca de 
la luna. Parece que ellos 6 sus antepasados tubieron algun oraculo acerca de esta materia, 6 de Dios 6 del demonio, 
6 tradicion de los antiguos que vino de mano en mano hasta ellos.” “ With respect to the origin of their nation, the 
account which their old men give is, that they came by sea from towards the north, and it is certain that some vessels 
came, of a fashion and construction which they cannot explain; it is conjectured, however, from a tradition still pre- 
served amongst the natives generally, that they proceeded from seven caves; and that these seven caves were the 
seven ships or galleys in which the first settlers arrived is that which is most agreeable to probable conjecture. The 
nation which first came to colonize this land came from towards Florida, and coasting along the sea-shore, arrived 
and disembarked in the port of Panuco, which they name Panco, which signifies ‘the place where those arrived who 
crossed the water’. This nation came in quest of the terrestrial Paradise, and styled themselves ‘ Tamohanchan’, which 
signifies, ‘swe seek our home’ ; and they settled near the highest mountains which they could find in the neighbourhood 
of the district which they then occupied. In proceeding in a southerly direction in search of the terrestrial Paradise, 
they committed no error, for it is the opinion of those who have treated of the subject in their writings, that it is 
situated under the equinoctial line; neither in supposing that it is a lofty mountain were they mistaken, for authors 
describe the terrestrial Paradise as so situated under the equinoctial line, and as being a lofty mountain, whose top 
reaches almost to the moon. It would appear that they or their ancestors were in this affair directed by an oracle from 

? 

God, or from the devil, or by the traditions of the ancients, handed down successively to them.” The above passage of 
Sahagun, however interesting to those who may choose to speculate on the past probabilities of communications having 
taken place between the two continents, proves no more than that the tradition was generally current amongst the 
Mexicans, that their ancestors had crossed the sea in ships, and proceeded to America from a place name the ‘Seven 
Caves’*, or Chicomoztoc, which name in all probability referred either to the number of the ships which arrived at 
Panuco or belonged to the country which the colony who came in those ships had deserted ; which latter supposition 
appears to have been the opinion of Juan de Tobar, who, in an inedited letter to Acosta, says, that the seven caves from 
which the Mexicans affirmed that their ancestors had proceeded, were believed by some to have been a single kingdom 
or province, in which their seven tribes lived separately, each of the seven districts allotted to them being named a 
cave by those who emigrated from thence. The additional circumstance of their styling themselves Tamohanchan, 
and declaring that they came in search of the terrestrial Paradise, would, in whatever sense the term terrestrial Para- 
dise be understood, favour the supposition that this colony were Jews, since it may reasonably be demanded what other 
nation but the Jews, and the Christians in after ages—deriving the notion from them, and equally convinced from 
Scriptural tradition of the real existence of the garden of Eden near the parting of the Euphrates from the three rivers 
—believed in the existence of the terrestrial Paradise? But understanding that phrase in a metaphorical signification, 

* The Israelites are declared, in the second verse of the fourteenth chapter of Exodus, to have encamped before Pi-hahiroth, and it 
deserves to be remarked that Nvnh ‘) signifies in Hebrew ‘the mouth of the caves’. 

NOTES. 195 

merely as a country resembling Paradise, to which the land of Canaan is compared by Isaiah in the third verse of the 
fifty-first chapter of his prophecies, and as a promised land, what nation would have been so likely as the Jews to 
go in search of such a promised land, to name it their home for that very reason, and, speaking in the hyperbolical 
language of the East, to style it the terrestrial Paradise? The very mysterious allusion in the thirteenth chapter of the 
second apocryphal book of Esdras to the ten tribes crossing the Euphrates, which is there said to have miraculously 
opened to afford-a passage to the chosen people of God then in search of a new habitation, where never mankind 
dwelt, that they might serve God apart from the multitude of the heathen, might have instigated the Jews in later 
times, when Palestine became the theatre of wars and dissensions, to attempt to verify the prophetic vision of Esdras 
by crossing the sea in search of a new habitation, and their priests might have persuaded them that, on this occasion, 
the language of the prophet was merely figurative and typical of a prosperous and speedy voyage to more happy shores. 
The entire history of the Jews abundantly proves that they were a people blindly submissive to the suggestions of their 
priests, and that their credulity was such that there was nothing that the former could command, that the latter were not 
ready to obey; and hence the ruin that befel their state, since the Jews, but for their priests, would have accepted the 
conditions proposed to them by the Romans, as the Mexicans would the terms of surrender offered by the Spaniards. 
History warrants us in asserting that the Jews, if it had not been for their priests, would have been a great and flourishing 
nation: they had all the energy requisite to elevate the character of the people to a high rank amongst nations ; they 
were acute in intellect and ingenious in arts ; they enjoyed a happy and salubrious climate ; and were, according to the 
testimony of Tacitus, a fine athletic race of men, hardy, and capable of enduring great bodily fatigue: but all these 
natural advantages were more than counterbalanced by the evil genius of fanaticism, that, like some demon, preyed upon 
the vitals of the land of Palestine, and blighted and destroyed the national prosperity, substituting the observance of 
rites for the genuine practice of virtue. Assuming it, therefore, as an undoubted fact that the ancestors of the Mexi- 
cans came in ships to Panuco, and were therefore a colony, and not the aboriginal inhabitants of New Spain, we shall 
attempt to show, by a train of etymological and scriptural reasoning, that Aztlan, the primitive country of the seven 
Aztec tribes, and which, literally interpreted, signifies ‘ the fair country’, was the land of Canaan ; that Chicomoztoc, or 
the Seven Caves, in which the ancestors of the Mexicans had dwelt for an indefinitely long period of time previously to 
their colonizing New Spain, was the seven provinces into which Joshua is said, in the eighteenth chapter of his book*, 
to have divided the Holy Land, and which, comprehending within their boundary all the tribes on this side of the river 
Jordan, with the exception of the tribe of Judah, that of Ephraim, and the half tribe of Manasseh, would have been 
a very appropriate name for the whole territory of Canaan, and exactly have corresponded with the Mexican term 
Chicomoztoc; that the city of Chichen—from whence, according to the testimony of the Franciscan monk Andresf, 
the first preacher of the Gospel amongst the Indians of Panuco and Tampico, their ancestors derived the appellation 
of Chichimecas, who all agreed that their origin was to be traced to the above-mentioned city, which, if the testimony 

* The following is the passage of the Book of Joshua here alluded to: ‘¢ And the men arose, and went away: and Joshua charged 
them that went to describe the land, saying, Go and walk through the land, and describe it, and come again to me, that I may here cast 
lots for you before the Lord in Shiloh. And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by cities into seven parts in a 
book, and came again to Joshua to the host at Shiloh. And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the Lord: and there Joshua 
divided the land unto the children of Israel according to their divisions.” 

+ The testimony of the Franciscan monk Andres is cited by the Mesican historian Ixtlilxochitl in the following annotation to the first 
chapter of his inedited Relaciones Historicas. “ El P. Fr. Andres, gran siervo del Sefior, segun parece en su vida y los milagros que el 
Sefior obré en el, decia, que como hubiese muchas veces hablado con los Chichimecas de Panuco, Tampico, y otras partes, al tiempo 
que los andaba convirtiendo 4 la fé de Christo, preguntandoles de su origen, le habian dicho lo mismo ser de una ciudad llamada Chi- 
chen, y asi lo mismo tengo dicho; y decia este bien aventurado segun los viejos principales, que muchas veces hablo con ellos, y sin duda 
seria lo que los Chichimecas decian de su origen, y que no quisiesen saber mas, que solo Dios es el sabidor del origen y de las demas 
cosas de este nuevo mundo. Esto es lo que se halla acerca de lo dicho.” Brother Andres, a great servant of the Lord, as appears by 
his life and the miracles which the Lord worked in him, affirmed that, after having frequently conversed with the Chichimecas of Panuco, 
Tampico, and other places, at the time when he was engaged in converting them to the faith of Christ, making inquiries of them respecting 
their origin, they returned him one and the same answer, that they were from a city named Chichen, and accordingly I have said the same 
thing; and this holy man asserted what he did agreeably to the information which he had received from the old and principal men amongst 
them, with whom he had often conferred, and it is doubtless what the Chichimecas told him of their origin, and that they knew no more, 
since God alone knows their origin and the other things belonging to this new world. ‘This is all that we can discover on the above 

subject.” 

196 NOTES. 

of Sahagun respecting the colony which arrived at Panuco and there disembarked may be relied on, must have been 
situated beyond the sea—was no other than the city of Shechem, the ancient capital of Samaria, situated at the foot of 
Mount Gerizim, on which mountain, as we learn from the twentieth verse of the fourth chapter of St. John, the Sama- 
ritans were accustomed to worship in the age of Christ ; that Teoculhuacan, or the Mountain of God, from which place 
the Mexicans likewise affirmed that their ancestors had proceeded, was either Mount Gerizim or Mount Moriah, upon 
which latter mountain Solomon laid the foundations of his famous temple; and, lastly, that Tlapallan—to which proper 
name the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus, explaining the term Huetlapallan, in the 183rd page of the sixth volume 
of this work, assigns the signification of the Red Sea, and, in fact, it is represented in the fifteenth plate of the Codex 
Vaticanus by the symbol of water of a reddish hue, reminding us forcibly of the prediction of Hosea respecting the 
Messiah, “ Out of Egypt have I called my son,” and which term, applied to a kingdom or province, must signify the 
country of the Red Sea, and not the sea itself—was Egypt, the old habitation of the Israelites previously to their con- 
quest of the land of Canaan; and accordingly we find that huehue, the superlative, by reduplication, of the adjective hue, 
old, was frequently added by the Mexicans to Tlapallan, who, in narrating the history of the migration of their ancestors 
from Huehuetlapallan, would seem to copy the Scripture account of the pilgrimage of the children of Israel from Egypt 
and their passage through the Red Sea. On the other supposition, that Huehuetlapallan might have been a phrase by 
which they signified their old country of Palestine, an etymological reason for the name will be found either in the fact 
of Judea bordering on Edom, which signifies in Scripture the red country, or in its being comprehended under the 
general name of Phcenicia, which signifies the land of purple as well as the country of the palm-tree, or in the term 
Huehuetlapallan, or the old red country, having been applied to it in opposition or contradistinction to the new red 
country, a name which the Jews would have been likely to have given to the monarchy which they established in the 
New World, from the striking peculiarity of the red complexion of the Indians, distinguishing them in this manner from 
all the other inhabitants of the globe. The fact of the Mexicans being themselves quite ignorant of the real situation 
of a country which their national traditions identified with the Holy Land, even much more than the various names 
strictly applicable to the Holy Land which they bestowed upon it, affords strong presumptive evidence that the country 
of Aztlan was the land of Canaan, and the city of Tula Jerusalem. That they were ignorant of the situation of 
the land of their forefathers, and had only retained an indistinct recollection that it was very distant from Mexico, and 
was situated to the east, as appears by the discourse of Montezuma to Cortes, already inserted in the 186th page of 
the sixth volume of this work, is evident from the following most curious account of the elder Montezuma sending to 
discover the seven caves, the reputed habitations and dwelling-place of his ancestors. The narrative of that monarch’s 
attempt to discover his kindred tribes in those caves is given at considerable length in the twenty-seventh chapter of the 
first part of Diego Duran’s inedited History of New Spain, preparatory to the insertion of which in this note, and in 
elucidation of the subject-matter contained in it, which is all an allegory, embellished in the true Rabbinical taste with 
tales of witches, necromancers, and enchantments, we must premise a few observations respecting the ancient mode of 
disguising under the veil of allegory the plainest historical facts, the habit of which Scripture has consecrated from 
time immemorial amongst the Jews, who frequently term a city a woman, a state a beast, and a king a horn, thus 
obscuring the language of inspiration with various new and incongruous terms. The prophets in this manner desig- 
nated Jerusalem frequently as the virgin daughter of Mount Zion; more rarely as Aholibah, the adulterous spouse of 
God; or, again, as Rachel weeping for her children, and utterly inconsolable because they were not, varying the 
epithet accordingly as that city chanced to be in a state of grace, of idolatry, or of desolation, bewailing the fate of her 
children, who had been led captives into strange lands, her city spoiled, and her whole territory overgrown with briars 
and thorns, thus verifying the prediction of Isaiah in the twenty-third verse of the seventh chapter of his prophecies. 
Contrasted, however, with this wretched picture of national adversity was the high state of felicity which the Jews 
believed that their countrymen would enjoy in the latter times, when the redeemed of Israel should again possess 
the Holy Land, and, agreeably to ancient prophecy, their youth “ be renewed like the eagle’s,” the age of their children 
extend to an hundred years, their own last as long as trees (Isaiah, chap. Ixv. ver. 20, 22.), their force and vigour 
remain unabated, and in course of time their frames become immortal through eating of the fruit of the tree of life, 
which was to flourish in the centre of New Jerusalem, and to extend its shade on each side of the river of Paradise, 
where, doubtless, on the Sabbath nothing would prevent the regenerate Jews from enjoying the diversion of sailing 
along the stream, as of old had been their custom, on the smooth surface of the Mexican lake. This happy consumma- 

NOTES. | 197 

tion of all things is expressly foretold by Esdras in the twelfth verse of the second chapter of his second book : “ They 
shall have the tree of life for an ointment of sweet savour, they shall neither labour nor be weary,” and it harmonizes with 
the predictions of the more ancient prophets. In confirmation of the truth of the latter part of the argument, we shall 
transcribe from the ninth and tenth chapters of the second apocryphal book of Esdras that prophet’s account of a vision, 
in which he beheld the city of Jerusalem typified under the figure of a woman inconsolable, and grieving for the death 
of her son, with her garments rent, and her face disfigured and blackened with ashes, whose countenance suddenly 
assumed a dazzling brightness, and then gave place to the vision of a city elevated upon foundations similar to those 
described by St. John in the nineteenth verse of the twenty-first chapter of the Revelations, the ground-plan of which 
must have nearly resembled that of the greater temple of Mexico, and presented the imposing spectacle of a city built 
upon the summit of a truncated pyramid, consisting, not of four foundations, like the Mexican temple, but of twelve, 
each distinct, with gems, and glowing with the living colours of the sapphire, the emerald, and the topaz, the whole 
collectively alluding to the precious stones which adorned the breastplate of the Jewish high-priest ; which city, being 
in fact itself a temple of colossal magnitude, of which the temple of Jerusalem was the true archetype, did not require 
a temple in it; each vessel (by which figurative expression of the prophet Zechariah, in the twenty-first verse of the four- 
teenth chapter of his prophecies, is meant every citizen, the people ofa state being frequently assimilated in the language 
of the Old Testament to potters’ vessels,) being HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD; or, in other words, the person of 
every citizen being invested with the same degree of sanctity as that which under the old law belonged peculiarly and 
exclusivelyto the Jewish high-priest, upon whose mitre was engraved, on a plate of gold, the words, HOLINESS TO 
THE LORD, as we are expressly informed in the thirtieth verse of the thirty-ninth chapter of Exodus, and therefore 
accounting for the words of St. John in the twenty-second verse of the twenty-first chapter of the Revelations, “ And 
I saw no temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it,” on the supposition that 
the Sheshinah, or Divine presence, which in the old, or profane, city of Jerusalem was confined to the sanctuary of 
the temple founded by Solomon, would in New Jerusalem be diffused through the entire city. The account which 
Esdras gives of the vision in which he beheld Sion mourning for the loss of her son, is thus allegorically told in the 
above-mentioned chapters of his second apocryphal book: “ And when I spake these things in my heart, T looked 
back with mine eyes, and upon the right side I saw a woman, and behold she mourned and wept with a loud voice, 
and was much grieved in heart, and her clothes were rent, and she had ashes upon her head...... And it came to 
pass while I was talking with her, behold her face upon a sudden shined exceedingly, and her countenance glistered, 
so that I was afraid of her, and mused what it might be. And behold, suddenly she made a great cry, very fearful, 
so that the earth shook at the noise of the woman. And I looked, and behold the woman appeared unto me no 
more ; but there was a city builded, and a large place showed itself from the foundations: then was I afraid, and cried 
with a loud voice and said, Where is Uriel, the angel who came unto me at the first? for he hath caused me to fall 
into many trances, and mine end is turned into corruption and my prayer to rebuke. And as I was speaking these 
words, behold he came unto me, and looked upon me, and lo, I lay as one that had been dead, and mine under- 
standing was taken from me; and he took me by the right hand, and comforted me, and set me upon my feet, and 
said unto me, What aileth thee? and why art thou so disquieted? and why is thine understanding troubled and the 
thoughts of thine heart?” We have judged it necessary to prefix the foregoing remarks to the following chapter of 
Diego Duran’s History of New Spain, in order that the allegory which it contains may be interpreted in a manner 
agreeable to Scriptural analogy and the figurative language of the Old Testament. The chapter itself relates to the 
attempt made by Montezuma, the fifth king of Mexico, to discover the country of Aztlan, the seat of his ancestors, and 
the site of Chicomoztoc, or the Seven Caves. Its title is as follows: “ De como viendose el rey Montezuma primero 
en tanta gloria y magestad, enviod 4 buscar el lugar de donde sus antepasados habian venido, y 4 ver las siete cuevas 
en que habian morado y habitado; y de los grandes presentes que envidé para que ofreciesen alli y los diesen 4 los 

2 

que alli hallasen;” and the interpretation of the allegory requires that we should understand under the image of 
Coatlycue the mother of Huitzilopochtli, the daughter of Sion, inconsolable for the absence of the ten tribes, or for 
some other portion of the Jews, her children, who had been forced to fly their native country; and under that of the 
mountain of Teocolhuacan, the hill of God, or Mount Sion; and by the water which flowed from the mountain, in 
which were persons in canoes, pursuing the apostolical vocation of fishing, the river of God, which it was foretold in the 
forty-seventh chapter of Ezekiel and in the last chapter of the Revelations should flow from the sacred oracles of Sion. 

VOL. VIII. ( 3E ) 

198 NOTES. 

It is extremely probable that the Mexican priests, well knowing the superstitious character of their sovereign, and 
fearing to disobey his absolute commands, feigned the story of their miraculous journey to Chicomoztoc with the express 
view of deceiving him; and impressed with the conviction that Jerusalem must still be inhabited by a remnant of 
their race, with the certain knowledge that numerous colonies of Jews were dispersed through the provinces of New 
Spain, whose descendants, mixed with the native Indians, constituted the population of the city of Mexico, and whose 
absence Sion must still be deploring, invented an allegory calculated to flatter and soothe the pride of their monarch, 
and to preserve at the same time their own credit with the people, whilst to have confessed their inability to execute 
his orders would have been the sure way of falling in public esteem; and here we may observe that, even supposing 
the Mexicans to have retained some obscure traditions that the Virgin of Tula, the mother of Quetzalcoatl, was still 
alive, awaiting on earth the destined period of her son’s advent, the supposition that Coatlycue signified the daugh- 
ter of Mount Sion rather than Chimalmon, notwithstanding the analogy in the two proper names Quetzalcoat/ and 
Coatlycue, would appear still much more probable. The narrative itself is as follows: “ Despues de lo suso dicho, 
cuenta la historia, que viendose Montezuma tan gran sefor, y en tanta gloria y con tantas riquezas, que determin6 de 
enviar 4 saber en que lugares habian habitado sus antepasados, y que forma tenian aquellas siete cuevas de que 
la relacion de sus historias hacian tan particular memoria: y para esto mando llamar 4 Tlacaellel y dijole: Deter- 
minado hé de juntar mis valientes hombres y enviarlos muy bien aderezados y apercebidos, con gran parte de las 
riquezas que el Dios de lo criado, y Sefior por quien vivimos, del dia y de la noche, nos ha comunicado, para que las 
ofrezcan alli, y las den 4 los que hallaren en aquellos lugares: y tambien tenemos noticia que la madre de nuestro 
dios Huitzilopochtli quedo viva, y podria ser que lo fuese todavia, y ofrecerla han lo que Ilevasen, y decirla han que 
gozase de lo que su hijo habia ganado con la fuerza de su brazo y pecho, y con la fuerza de su cabeza. Tlacaellel 
respondidé : Poderoso Sefior, no es gobernado y movido tu real pecho por tu propio motivo, ni se mueve tu corazon por 
negocios humanos ; sino sin ninguna duda por alguna Deidad eterna, causa de todo bien en esta naturaleza criada, 
por cuya providencia, sapientisimo Sefior, te mueves 4 querer imprender una cosa tan grande; 4 lo qual te quiero 
responder ; y perdoname, que parece que siempre te quiero sobrepujar con mis razones. Has de saber, gran Sefior, 
que esto que quieres hacer y determinas, no es para hombres de fuerza ni valentia, ni depende de destreza en armas 
para que envies gente de guerra, ni capitanes con estruendo ni aparato de guerra, pues no van 4 conquistar, sino 4 
saber y ver donde habitaron y moraron nuestros padres y antepasados, y el lugar donde nacié nuestro dios Vitzilo- 
pochtli; y para esto, antes habias de buscar brujos 6 encantadores y hechiceros, que con sus encantamientos y hechi- 
cerias descubriesen estos lugares; porque segun nuestras historias cuentan, ya aquel lugar esta ciego con grandes 
Jarales muy espinosos y espesos, y grandes breriales, y que todo esta cubierto de grandes nedafios y lagunas, y que esta 
cubierto de espesos carrizales y cafiaverales, y que seré imposible hallarla sino es por gran ventura. Por tanto toma, 
Sefior, mi consejo y parecer, y busca esta gente que te digo, que ellos iran y la descubriran, y te traeran nuevas 
della; porque aunque nuestros padres y agiielos la habitaron, estaba muy viciosa y amena y muy deliciosa, donde 
tubieron todo descanso, y donde vivian mucho sin tornarse viejos ni cansarse, ni tener de ninguna cosa necesidad ; pero 
despues que de alli salieron, todo se volvié espinas y habrojos; las piedras se volvieron puntiagudas para lastimarlos, 
y las yerbas picaban, los arboles espinosos. Todo se volvié contra ellos, para que no supiesen, ni pudiesen volver 
alla. . Montezuma viendo el buen consejo de Tlacaellel, acordé de llamar al historiador real, que se Ilamaba Cuauh- 
coatl, viejo de muchos afios; y venido ante é] le dijo: Padre anciano, mucho queria saber que memoria tienes en 
tu historia de las siete cuevas donde habitaron nuestros antepasados, padres y agiielos, y que lugar es aquel donde 
habitd nuestro dios Vitzilopochtli, y de donde sacé 4 nuestros padres. Respondié Cuauhcoatl : Poderoso Seftor, lo 
que yo, tu indigno siervo, sé de lo que me preguntas es, que nuestros padres moraron en aquel felice y dichoso lugar 
que llamaron Aztlan, que quiere decir blancura. En este lugar hay un gran cerro en medio del agua, que Ilamaban 
- Culhuacan, porque tiene la punta algo retuerta hacia abajo, y 4 esta causa se llama ‘ Culhuacan’, que quiere decir 
cerro tuerto. En este cerro habia unas bocas 6 cuevas y concavidades, donde habitaron nuestros padres y agiielos 
por muchos afios: alli tubieron mucho descanso debajo deste nombre Mexitin y Azteca, alli gozaban de mucha can- 
tidad de patos, de todo genero de garzas, de cuervos marinos y gallinas de agua, y de gallaretes ; gozaban del canto y 
melodia de los pajaros de las cabezas coloradas y amarillas; gozaron de muchas diferencias de hermosos y grandes 
pescados; gozaron de gran frescura de arboledas que habia por aquellas riberas, y de fuentes cercadas de sauces y de 
sabinas, y de alisos grandes y hermosos: andabanen canoas, y hacian camellones, en que sembravan maiz, chile, 

NOTES. 199 

tomates, huauhtli, frisoles, y de todo genero de semillas, de las que comemos y aca trageron : pero despues que salieron 
de alli é la tierra firme, y dejaron aquel deleitoso lugar, todo se volvié contra ellos; las yerbas mordian, las piedras 
picaban, Jos campos estaban llenos de abryos y de espinas, y hallaron grandes jarales y espinos que no podian pasar, 
ni-habia donde asentarse ni donde descansar. Todo lo hallaron lleno de vivoras y culebras y sabandijas ponzofiosas, 
y de leones y tigres y otros animales, que les eran perjudiciales y dafosos.. Y esto és lo que dejaron dicho nuestros 
antepasados, y en mis historias antiguas tengo escrito; y esta és la relacion que de lo que me preguntas, poderoso 
Rey, te puedo dar. El Rey respondié que asi era verdad, porque Tlacaellel daba aquella relacion misma; y asi 
mandé luego que llamasen y buscasen por todas las provincias 4 todos los encantadores y hechiceros que pudiesen 
hallar; y fueron traidos ante él sesenta hombres que sabian de aquella arte magica, ya gente anciana, y dijoles: Padres 
ancianos, yo hé determinado de saber donde és el lugar de donde salieron los Mexicanos, y que tierra es aquella, y 
quien la habita, y si es viva la madre de nuestro dios Vitzilopochtli: por tanto apercibios 4 ir alla con la mejor forma 
que pudieredes, y lo mas breve que ser pueda. Y mando luego sacar gran cantidad de mantas de todo genero dellas, 
y de vestiduras de muger, y de piedras ricas, de oro y joyas muy preciosas, mucho cacao y teonacaztly, algodon, rosas, 
de vaynillas negras muchas en cantidad, y plumas de mucha hermosura, las mejores y mas grandes ; en fin, de todas 
las riquezas de sus tesoros lo mejor y mas precioso ; y entregalo 4 aquellos hechiceros, dandoles a ellos sus mantas y 
paga, para que lo hiciesen con mas cuidado, con mucha comida para el camino. Ellos partieron, y llegados 4 un cerro 
que se dice Coatepec, que esté en la provincia de Tulla, alli todos juntos hicieron sus cercos y invocaciones al demonio, 
embijandose con aquellos ungitientos que para esto los semejantes suelen hacer, y hoy en dia usan, porque hay grandes 
brujos entre ellos, y Indios endemoniados. Diranme, pues como no se descubren? Porque se encubren unos 4 otros, 
y se guardan de nosotros mas que nacion en el mundo, y el que en nada no se fian de nosotros, y asi estan los delitos 
encubiertos de nosotros y secretos entre ellos, que por maravilla se aleanza alguna cosa; y si alguna cosa acaso sabe- 
mos, luego no falta quien solicita solapallo y que se calle. Asi que en aquel cerro invocaron al demonio, al cual le 
suplicaron les mostrase aquel lugar donde sus antepasados vivieron : el demonio forzado por aquellos conjuros y rue- 
gos, y ellos volviendose en forma de aves unos, y otros en forma de bestias fieras de leones™, tigres, adives, gatos 
espantosos, llevdlos el demonio 4 ellos, y 4 todo lo que Ilevaban 4 aquel lugar donde sus antepasados habian habitado. 
Llegados 4 una laguna grande, en medio de la cual est4 el cerro Culhuacan, puestos 4 la orilla, tomaron la forma de 
hombres que antes tenian ; y cuenta la historia que vieron alguna gente andar en canoas en pescas y en sus grangerias, 
y que los llamaron. La gente de la tierra, como vid gente nueva y que hablaban su mesma lengua, llegaronse con las 
canoas 4 ver lo que querian, y preguntaronles que de donde eran, y 4 que venian. Ellos respondieron : Sefiores, noso- 
tros somos de Mexico, y somos enviados de nuestros sefiores 4 buscar el lugar 4 donde habitaron nuestros antepasados. 
Ellos les preguntaron que dios adoraban: ellos digeron que al gran Vitzilopochtli, y que el gran rey Motezuma, y 
su coadjutor Tlacaellel, les habian mandado viniesen 4 buscar 4 la madre de Vitzilopochtli, que se llamaba Coatlycue, 
y el lugar de donde salieron sus antepasados que se llama Chicomoztoc, y que le traian cierto presente 4 la Sefiora 
Coatlycue si era viva, y si no 4 sus padres y ayos que la sirvian. Ellos les mandaron esperar, y fueron al ayo de la 
madre de Vitzilopochtli, y digeronle: Sefior venerable, unas gentes han aportado 4 esta ribera, los cuales dicen que 

son Mexicanos, y que los enviaron acd un gran Seftor que se dice Montezuma, y otro que se llama Tlacaellel, y que 

* An attentive perusal of the following extract from the 216th page of Ludolphus’s Commentary on his Ethiopian History will serve to elu- 
cidate this curious history, and prove the Rabbis by their own confession to have-been deeply versed in the mysteries of necromantic lore : 
“ Valdé antiquum incantationis genus est, varia bestiarum genera in unum congregare : de eo verisimiliter verba Deut. xvii. 11., 92m 5a1n 
congregans congregationem, accipienda sunt. Miré variant seque torquent interpretes in expositione maleficiorum, que ibi prohibentur : 
gloriosius fecissent, si fassi essent se illa nescire. Rabbini de congregatione animalium accipiunt in libro Talmudico Sanhedrin ; non malé 
ut puto. Quod verd hanc incantationem dividant in magnam et parvam, id ex subtilitate Rabbinicd provenire censeo; nimirum wt scientes 
incantationum habeantur. Sic enim Kimchius (in Lib. Rad. sub verbo 12m) et ex eo Michlal Jophi: 2am Inseam TayM br ayMay wp 
LDapy pw pad Mx~p myn bw mind yapor wrnd pop dam + mds nin by nina paporwmdw 229M pop 13M TMNT 23 ¢ Explicant Rabbini 
nostri p.m. Et consocians societatem: una consociatio est magna, et altera consociatio est parva. Significatio consociationis magne 
est cum quis incantat et congregat catervas magnorum animalium : et consociatio parva, cum quis incantat et congregat catervas bestiarum 
parvarum, e.g. serpentum et scorpionum.’ Acuta scilicet distinctione, sed nuspiam occurrente. Talem incantationem revera adhuc 
hodie dari ex Tellezio didici, qui in historia electionis regis Africani in regno Gingiro de electoribus sic scribit, ‘ Veniunt descendentes 
cum magno clamore in illum locum ubi electus est, statimque eum adeunt, illumque reperiunt circumdatum leonibus, tigridibus, draconibus 

392 

et pardis, quos tanquam.pretorianos et aulicos, omnes ibi diabolicis suis magicis artibus unum in locum congregant. 

200 NOTES. 

traen cierto oreiehte oe para la madre de su dios Vitzilopochtli, y que les fué mandado se lo diesen ellos pro- 
pios. El anciano viejo les dijo, sean bien venidos, traedlos aca. Luego volvieron con sus canoas, y metiendolos en 
ellas 4 ellos y 4 lo que llevavan, los pasaron al cerro Culhuacan, el cual de la mitad arriba dicen que és de una arena 
muy menuda, que no se puede subir por estar tan fofa y honda; y entrando en una casa que el viejo tenia al pie del 
cerro, saludaronle con mucha reverencia, y digeron: Venerable viejo y sefior, aqui somos llegados tus siervos al 
lugar donde és obedecida tu palabra, y reverenciado el anhelito de tu boca. El les respondié: Seais bien venidos, 
hijos mios: quien os envid acd? Ellos digeron: Sefior, envidnos Montezuma y su coadjutor Tlacaellel, que por sobre 
nombre tiene Cihuacoatl. El viejo dijo: Quien és Montezuma, y quien Tlacaellel? no fueron de aca tales nombres, 
porque los que de aca fueron eran Tezacatetl, Acacitli, Ogelopan, Ahate, Xomimil, Ahuejotl Victon, Tenoch, y estos 
eran siete varones, y estos siete iban por caudillos de cada barrio : sin estos fueron cuatro ayos de Vitzilopochtli mara- 
villosos, los cuales se llamaban Quauchtloquetzqui y Ajoloua, y otros dos. _Ellos le respondieron : Sefior, nosotros te 
confesarémos que no conocemos ya esos sefiores ni los vimos; ya no hay memoria desos que mientas, porque todos 
son ya muertos; oydolos hemos mentar algunas veces. El viejo espantado respondid, haciendo gran admiracion: 
O Seftor de lo criado, pues que los maté! Porque en este lugar todos somos vivos ; los que ellos dejaron ninguno se 
ha muerto: pues quien son los que viven ahora? dijo el viejo. Ellos le digeron que los nietos de aquellos que les 
nombraba. Preguntéles, 4 quien tenian agora por padre y ayo del dios Vitzilopochtli; y digeronle que un gran 
sacerdote, que se Ilamaba Quauhcoatl, al cual hablaba y decia lo que queria, y 4 quien revelaba su voluntad. Visteslo 
vosotros, dijo el viejo, agora cuando partistes, dijo os algo? LEllos respondieron que no, y que los que Jos habian 
enviado eran el rey y su coadjutor; pero que él no les habia mandado ni dicho nada. Dijo el viejo, pues no avisard 
cuando ha de volver por aca, que dejé dicho 4 su madre que dl volveria, y esta la pobre hasta el dia de hoy en espera, 
tan triste y llorosa que no hay quien la consuele? No fuera bien que le vierades y le hablarades? Ellos respon- 
dieron : Sefior, nosotros hizimos lo que nuestros Seflores nos mandaron, y traemos un presente 4 la gran Sefiora, y nos 
mandaron que la viesemos y la saludasemos, y le diesemos 4 ella misma de los despojos y riquezas de que su hijo 
goza. El viejo les dijo: pues tomar lo que traeis y andar aca. Ellos echaronse 4 cuestas el presente y fueronse tras 
el viejo, el cual empezo 4 subir por el cerro arriba con gran ligereza, y sin pesadumbre; ellos tras él, zahondando 
por la arena con gran pesadumbre y trabajo. El viejo volviendo la cabeza, vidolos que la arena les llegaba casi 4 la 
rodilla, y que no podian subir; el cual les dijo: Que haceis no subis, daos priesa? Ellos queriendole seguir, quedaron 
metidos y atascados en el arena hasta la cintura, y no pudiendo menearsé, dieron voces al viejo que iba con tanta 
presteza, que parecia que no tocaba @ la arena. El viejo volvié y dijo: Que haveis habido Mexicanos, que os hd 
hecho tan pesados? que comeis alla en vuestras tierras? Sefior, comemos las viandas que alld se crian, y bebemos 
cacao. El viejo les respondid: Esas comidas y bebidas, hijos, os tienen graves y pesados, y no os dejan llegar 4 ver 
el lugar donde estuvieron vuestros padres, y eso os ha acarreado la muerte, y esas riquezas que traeis no usamos acd 
dellas, sino de pobreza y llaneza; y asi dadlo aca, y estaos ahi, que yo llamaré 4 la Seftora destas moradas, madre de 
Vitzilopochtli, para que la veais: y tomando una carga de aquellas en los hombros, la subié como si llevara una paja, 
y volviendo por las otras las subié con gran facilidad. Acabado de subir todo lo que los Mexicanos traian, salié una 
muger, ya de grande edad segun demostraba en su aspecto, y la mas fea y sucia que se puede pensar ni imaginar : 
traia la cara tan Ilena de suciedad y negra, que parecia cosa del infierno; y llorando amargamente les dijo 4 los 
Mexicanos: Seais bien venidos, hijos mios ; habeis de saber que despues que se fué vuestro dios y mi hijo Vitzilo- 
pochtli deste lugar, estoy en lanto y tristeza esperando su tornada, y desde aquel dia no me hé Javado la cara, ni 
peynado mi cabeza, ni mudado mi ropa, el cual luto y tristeza me turara hasta que el vuelva. Es verdad, hijos mios, 
que os enviaron los Seftores de aquellos siete barrios que Ilevé de aqui mi hijo? Ellos alzando los ojos, y viendo una 
muger tan abominable y fea, llenos de temor se le humillaron y digeron: Grande y poderosa Sefiora, los Seftores de 
los capulles no los vimos ni nos hablaron ; él que nos envia aca és tu siervo el Rey Montezuma, y su coadjutor Tlaca- 
ellel Cihuacoatl, para que te viesemos, y buscasemos el lugar donde habitaron sus antepasados; y mandaron nos te 
besasemos de su parte las manos, y que seas sabidora como él reyna y rige agora 4 la gran ciudad de Mexico, y que 
sepas que no és el primer rey, que el és el quinto, y que el primero que reyné fue llamado Acamapichtly, y el segundo 
Vitzilihuitl, y el tercero Chimalpopoca, y el cuarto Itzcoatl, y que yo, su indigno siervo, soy el quinto, y que me llamo 
Veve Montezuma, y quedo muy 4 su servicio, y que sepas que los cuatro reyes pasados pasaron mucha hambre y 
pobreza y trabajo, y que fueron tributarios de otras provincias, pero que agora ya esta la ciudad prospera y libre, y se 

NOTES. 201 

han abierto ya y asegurado los caminos de la costa y de la mar, y de toda la tierra ; y que ya Mexico es ya Sefiora 
y princesa, cabeza y reyna de todas las ciudades, pues todos estan 4 su mandar; y que ya se han descubierto las 
minas de oro y de plata, y de piedras preciosas; y que ya se ha hallado la casa de las ricas plumas. Y para que lo 
veas, te envia esas cosas y presente, que son los bienes y riquezas de tu hijo maravilloso Vitzilopochtli, el cual con su 
brazo y pecho, cabeza y corazon, ha adquerido; lo cual nos concedié el Sefior de lo criado, del dia, de la noche; y 
con esto damos fin 4 nuestras razones. Ella les dijo, ya algo aplacada de su llanto: Sea norabuena, hijos mios ; yo se 
lo agradezco mucho 4 esos mis hijos : decidme, son vivos los viejos que llevd de aqui mi hijo? LEllos le respondieron : 
Sefiora, no son ya en el mundo, muertos son, y nosotros no los conocimos, no ha quedado mas de su sombra y me- 
moria. Ella tornd 4 su llanto y dijo: Que los maté, pues acd todos son vivos sus comparieros? Y decidme, hijos, esto 
que traeis, es de comer? Ellos le digeron: Sefiora, dello se come y dello se bebe ; el cacao se bebe, y lo demas se 
revuelve con ello, y algunas veces se come. Eso os tiene apesgados, hijos mios, y ha sido causa de que no hayais 
podido subir aca ; pero decidme el trage de mi hijo, es de la manera que muestran estas mantas y plumas y riquezas? 
Ellos le digeron: Sefiora, si, asi se compone y adereza, y asi se atavia con esas riquezas y galanias, porque es sefior 
de todas ellas. Respondié Coatlycue: Est4 muy bien, hijos, mi corazon queda quieto; pero decidle que tenga lastima 
de mi, y del gran trabajo que sin él paso: miradme cual estoy en ayuno y penitencia por su causa; y sabe que me 
dijo cuando se partia : Madre mia, no me deterné mucho en dar la vuelta, no mas de cuanto llevo 4 estos siete barrios 
y los aposento en donde han de habitar y poblar aquella tierra que les és prometida, y habiendoles asentado y poblado 
y consolado, luego volveré y daré la vuelta, y esto seré en cumpliendose los afios de mi peregrinacion y el tiempo que 
me esta seflalado; en el cual tiempo tengo de hacer guerra a todas las provincias y ciudades, villas y lugares, y 
traerlos y sugetarlos 4 mi servicio; pero por la misma orden que yo los ganaré, por esa misma orden me los han de 
quitar y tornar 4 ganar gentes estrafas, y me han de echar de aquella tierra; entonces me vendré aca, y me volveré 
a este lugar, porque aquellos que yo sugetaré con mi espada y rodela, esos mismos se han de volver contra mi, y 
han de empezar desde mis pies 4 echarme cabeza abajo, y yo y mis armas irémos rodando por el suelo. Entonces, 
madre mia, es cumplido mi tiempo, y me volveré huyendo 4 vuestro regazo, y hasta entonces no hay que tener pena; 
pero lo que os suplico és, que me deis dos pares de zapatos, los unos para ir, y los otros para volver; y dadme 
cuatro panes, dos para ir, y dos para volver. Y yo le dige: Hijo mio, id norabuena, y mira. que no os detengais, 
sino que en cumpliendo ese tiempo que decis, os vengais luego. Pareceme, hijos mios, que él se deve de hallar 
bien alla, y estase quedo, y no se acuerda de la triste de su madre, ni la busca, ni hace caso della: por tanto yo os 
_ mando que le digais que es ya cumplido el tiempo, que se venga luego, y para que se acuerde que le deseo ver, y 
que soy su madre, dadle esta manta de nequen, y este braguero 6 cifiidor de lo mismo, para que se ponga. Ellos 
tomaron la manta y braguero, y se volvieron 4 descender del cerro. Estando en la falda del, empezo la vieja 4 
llamarlos y decir: Esperar ahi y vereis como en esta tierra nunca emvejecen los hombres: veis 4 este mi ayo viejo, pues 
dejadlo descender, y vereis cuando llegue alla 4 donde vosotros estais, que mozo llega. Hl viejo muy viejo empezé 4 
descender, y mientras mas bajaba mas mozo se iba volviendo, y cuando llegé 4 ellos llegd mancebo de veinte afios, 
y dijoles: Veisme mancebo, pues mirar lo que pasa; yo quiero tornar 4 subir, y no subiré mas de hasta la mitad del 
cerro, y volyeré de mas edad, y tornéd 4 subir y descender de Ja mitad del cerro, se volvid y vieronle el aspecto 
como hombre de cuarenta afios, y torné a volver y subid muy poquito, cuanto veinte pasos, la halda del cerro, y torndé 
4 volver, y volvié luego muy viejo; y dijoles: Aveis de saber, hijos, que este cerro tiene esta virtud, que el que ya viejo 
se quiere remozar, sube hasta donde le parece, y vuelve de la edad que quiere: si quiere volver muchacho, sube hasta 
arriba; y si quiere volver mancebo, sube hasta un poco mas arriba de la mitad; y si de buena edad, hasta la mitad; 
y asi vivimos aqui mucho, y todos son vivos los que dejaron vuestros padres, sin haberse.muerto ninguno, remozan- 
donos cuando gqueremos. Mirad, todo ese dato os ha venido y se os ha causado de ese cacao que bebeis, y. desas 
comidas que comeis: esas os han estragado y corrompido, y vuelto en otra naturaleza, y esas mantas y plumas y 
riquezas que trugistes y de que usais, eso os ha echado 4 perder: pero porque no vais sin retorno de lo que trugistes 
a vuestros seflores, hizo traer de todos los generos de patos y ansares y garzas y aves marinas que en aquella laguna 
se crian, y de todos los generos de pescados que en ella se crian, y de todos los generos de legumbres que en aquella 
tierra se dan, y de todos los generos de rosas que hay en ella: Y haciendo grandes sartas dellas se las did; y junta- 
mente les did mantas de nequen y bragueros, uno para el rey Montezuma, y otto para Tlacaellel, diciendoles les per- 
donasen que él no tenia mas ni otra cosa que les enviar, y con esto los despidid. Ellos tomaron su presente, y vueltos 
VOL. VIII. (GAN) 

202 NOTES. 

4 hacer los cercos y conjuros, y embijandose como 4 la venida, se volvieron en las mismas figuras y especies de animales 
que 4 la venida: y.caminando en aquella forma llegaron al cerro Coatepec, y alli se juntaron y tornaron en su figura 
racional. Llegando unos antes y otros despues, y contandose mirando los unos por los otros, hallaron veinte menos, y 
admirandose de verse asi dezmados, y que faltaba la tercia parte, digeron algunos que las bestias fieras con que habian 
topado los habian comido, y las aves de rapifia ; y no debié de ser asi, sino que el demonio los tomé y dezmé en pago 
de su trabajo, porque dice la historia que fueron en diez dias, y que volvieron en ocho, camino de trecientas leguas ; 
y aun tardaron mucho, porque en mas breve los pudiera llevar y traer el que trujo 4 otro en tres dias desde Guati- 
mala, por el deseo que una dama vieja tenia de verle aquella buena cara, como se relaté en el primer auto que en 
Mexico se celebré de la Santa Inguisicion. Llegados 4 Mexico todos los brujos y hechiceros, llevaron el presente 
que habian traido delante de Montezuma, y digeronle : Seftor, nosotros hemos cumplido lo que nos mandaste, y tu 
palabra se pagé con haber visto lo que deseabas saber, y hemos visto aquella tierra de Aztlan y de Culhuacan, donde 
habitaron y de donde salieron nuestros padres y agiielos, y traemos de aquellas cosas que alla se dan y crian; y 
sacando las sartas de mazorcas frescas, y las sartas de semillas y rosas de todas diferencias de las que en aquella tierra 
se crian, y tomates, chile, y las mantas de nequen que aquella gente les enviaba, y bragueros, dieronle relacion de 
todo lo que con la madre de Vitzilopochtli les habia acontecido, y con su ayo el viejo, y de como lo habian visto mozo 
y viejo y de buena edad; y de como en aquella tierra eran vivos todos los que sus antepasados habian dejado, y de 
las quejas grandes que Coatlycue tenia de Vitzilopochtli su hijo, y de como le esperaba, y lo que le dejo dicho, que 
en cumpliendose cierto tiempo habia de ser echado desta tierra, y que se habia de volver 4 aquel lugar; porque por 
la misma orden que habia de sugetar las naciones, por esa misma orden le habian de ser quitadas, y privado del 
dominio y sefiorio que sobre ellas tenia. El Rey mandé llamar 4 Tlacaellel, y hizo tornar 4 referir delante del todo 
lo que les habia acontecido, y dar la parte que a él en particular del presente le enviaban, y contandoles la gran ferti- 
lidad de la tierra, y frescura de arboledas, y el modo que de buscar lo necesario para el sustento tenian, y como 
andaban en canoas, y hacian camedlones encima del agua para sembrar y criar aquellas legumbres que comian: la 
gran abundancia de muchos generos y diferencias de pescados que habia, como en el presente que traian podian notar, 
la gran multitud de aves marinas de todo genero, la suavidad y melodia que de cantos de aves habia, de diferentes 
pajaritos grandes y pequefios: la diferencia de sementeras que alli habia, wnas para coger ya sazonadas, otras en 
mazorca fresca y en leche, y otras que entonces empezaban a estar en cierne, y otras que nacian ; de suerte que en aquella 
tierra jamas no podia haber hambre. Contaronles como no habian podido subir a lo alto del cerro, y como habian 
quedado metidos en el arena hasta la cintura, y que el viejo andaba por ella muy diligente, y habia subido todo lo que 
habian llevado, y lo habia dado 4 la sefiora de aquel lugar, y madre de Vitzilopochtli, y que la causa de no haber 
podido llegar alld, les digeron habia sido el haber comido de aquellas cosas pesadas y corrutas de cacao y frutas de 
las que aca se crian, y la pena y espanto que habian recebido en saber la muerte de los viejos que de aquella tierra 
habian venido. Montezuma y Tlacaellel empezaron 4 llorar y hacer gran sentimiento, acordandose de sus antepa- 
sados, y de el deseo que de ver aquel lugar les did; y diciendo 4 los que habian ido que descansasen, que se lo 
agradecian, mandaronles dar 4 todos de vestir y algunas cosas por su trabajo y hacerles mercedes, y llevar la manta 
de nequen y braguero al templo, y que se le diese 4 Vitzilopochtly, pues su madre se lo enviaba.” 

Nore XLVIII. Page 96. 

Various analogies in the rites and ceremonies with which the Jews and the Mexicans celebrated their mournings for 
the dead have already been noticed in the seventeenth and sixty-first pages of the present volume, to which we may add 
that the Peruvians were accustomed to lament over the tombs of their deceased kindred, imitating the plaintive cooing 
of doves. This curious analogy in the customs of the ancient Jews and the Peruvians will more fully appear from a 
comparison of the following passage of the ninth chapter of Balboa’s inedited ‘ Miscellanea Antarctica’, descriptive of 
the grief of Mango Capac for the death of his brother Ayarcache, with the thirtieth verse of the thirteenth chapter of 
the first book of Kings, and the eighteenth verse of the twenty-second chapter of Jeremiah, from which it is evident 
that it was a Hebrew custom to utter the ejaculation “ Ah, my brother!” or, “ Ah, sister!” at funerals: “ En cumpli- 
miento de lo pedido por su hermano Ayarcache, invocaron muchas veces su nombre y Iloraron su perdida: Hay, her- 
mano nuestro! quan corta fue nuestra ventura, pues xo merecimos holgarnos juntos con el crecimiento y hermosura de 

NOTES. 205 

este nuestro heredero nifio! O quan colmada fuera tu alegria, si permitiera nuestro padre el Sol, que hoy te hallaras 
en estas fiestas! De alli comenz6 4 tomar origen entre aquellas gentes el lorar los muertos, imitando al sordo susurro 
de las palomas. Alli comenzaron las ceremonias de los Raimis, y el Quicoechico y Guarachico y Rutuchico, y la fiesta 
del Aviscay (que es celebrar el nuevo nacimiento de los hijos deseados), con beber y baylar quatro dias 6 mas.” “In 
compliance with the request of their brother Ayarcache, they repeatedly invoked his name and bewailed his loss: Ah, 
my brother! how short was our felicity, since we were unworthy to rejoice together with thee at the growth and 
beauty of this our infant heir! O how abundant would have been thy joy if our father, the Sun, had permitted thee 
this day to be present at these festivals! Thence commenced the custom amongst these nations of lamenting the 
dead, imitating the hoarse cooing of doves; thence commenced the ceremonies of the Raimis, and Quicoechico, and 
Guarachico, and Rutuchico, and the festival of Aviscay (instituted for the purpose of celebrating the recent birth of 
desired children), with drinking and dances, for the space of four days or a longer period.” The passages of Scrip- 
ture cited above in confirmation of this singular agreement in the funeral rites of the Jews and the Peruvians are the 
following, of which the first relates to the burial of the man of God, who had been killed by a lion in the highway, by 
the old prophet of Bethel, whose example in approaching the lion and fearlessly taking from him the body of the 
prophet, as recorded in the twenty-ninth verse of the same chapter, might have made the Mexican priests, when 
anointed with the teotlaqualli, or food of God, equally careless of attacks from wild beasts which they might chance 
to meet in lonely woods or forests: “ And it came to pass, after he had eaten bread, and after he had drunk, that 
he saddled for him the ass, to wit, for the prophet whom he had brought back. And when he was gone, a lion 
met him by the way, and slew him: and his carcase was cast in the way, and the ass stood by it, the lion also stood 
by the carcase. And, behold, men passed by, and saw the carcase cast in the way, and the lion standing by the car- 
case: and they came and told it in the city where the old prophet dwelt. And when the prophet that brought him 
back from the way heard thereof, he said, It is the man of God, who was disobedient unto the word of the Lord: 
therefore the Lord hath delivered him unto the lion, which hath torn him, and slain him, according to the word of the 
Lord, which he spake unto him. And he spake to his sons, saying, Saddle me the ass. And they saddled him. And 
he went and found his carcase cast in the way, and the ass and the lion standing by the carcase: the lion had not 
eaten the carcase, nor torn the ass. And the prophet took up the carcase of the man of God, and laid it upon the ass, . 
and brought it back: and the old prophet came to the city, to mourn and to bury him. And he laid his carcase in his 
own grave; and they mourned over him, saying, Alas, my brother!” The second passage contains the prophet Jere- 
miah’s denunciation against Jehoiakim, king of Judah, whom he foretold that he should be deprived for his sins of 
the rites of sepulchre and of the usual mournings for the dead: ‘“ Woe unto him that buildeth his house by unrigh- ~ 
_ teousness, and his chambers by wrong ; that useth his neighbour's service without wages, and giveth him not for his 
work ; that saith, I will build me a wide house and large chambers, and cutteth him out windows ; and it is ceiled 
with cedar, and painted with vermilion! Shalt thou reign, because thou closest thyself in cedar? did not thy father 
eat and drink, and do judgement and justice, and then it was well with him? He judged the cause of the poor and 
needy ; then it was well with him: was not this to know me? saith the Lord. But thine eyes and thine heart are 
not but for thy covetousness, and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence, to doit. Therefore 
thus saith the Lord concerning Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah king of Judah, They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah, 
my brother ! or, Ah, sister! they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah, lord! or, Ah, his glory! He shall be buried with 
the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.” Whether it was an ancient Hebrew cus- 
tom to imitate the cooing of doves on occasions of public or private mourning, to which there may be an allusion in 
the passages of the Old Testament cited below, or whether those passages might have led in later ages to the in- 
troduction of it amongst the descendants of the Jews in the New World, it is impossible with certainty to know; but 
the rejection of the one supposition renders the other so much the more probable. Isaiah, in the fourteenth verse of 
the thirty-eighth chapter of his Prophecies, thus pathetically bewails the disconsolate situation of himself and his 
countrymen : “ I did mourn as a dove: mine eyes fail with looking upward: O Lord, I am oppressed ; undertake for 
me”; and in the eleventh verse of the fifty-ninth chapter of his Prophecies he associates the tenderer with the more 
rugged accents of grief in the following affecting ejaculation: “ We roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves : we 
look for judgement, but there is none; for salvation, but it is far off from us.” Ezekiel, also, in the sixteenth verse of the 
seventh chapter of his Prophecies, predicts that the Jews who escaped from the final desolation of Israel should mourn 

QO4 NOTES. 

like doves in the valleys, which prophecy their descendants who colonized America might have determined to fulfill 
when a fit opportunity should present itself: “ But they that escape of them, shall escape, and shall be on the moun- 
tains like doves of the valleys, all of them mourning, every one for his imquity.” The same prophet declares in a verse 
immediately following, that the Jews should gird themselves with sackcloth, as an emblem of grief, and that there 
should be “ baldness upon a// their heads,” which further leads us to observe, that it was a Mexican custom to shave 
off the hair from the head* as an indication of grief; and it would appear from the attitude of the human figures in 
the eighty-third page of the lesser Vatican MS. and in other Mexican paintings, that to look upwards was amongst the 
Mexicans as well as the Jews an act expressive of extreme despair; that it was so amongst the Jews is evident from 
the words of Isaiah in the twenty-first verse of the eighth chapter of his Prophecies: “ And it shall come to pass, 
that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their king and their God, and look upward;” 
and there cannot exist a doubt but that the same attitude was designedly introduced in the Mexican paintings. To 
revert again to the funeral ceremonies of the Jews and the Mexicans, we must observe, that the ancient Jews were 
accustomed to bury their dead in caves, in fields, and even in their own houses, since it is said of Manasseh in the 
twentieth verse of the thirty-third chapter of the second book of Chronicles: “So Manasseh slept with his fathers, and 
they buried him im his own house}, and Amon his son reigned in his stead.” They were likewise accustomed to anoint 
and attire them in rich dresses, and sometimes to embalm them after the fashion of the Egyptians}, and not unfrequently to 
place them ina sitting posture in their tombs,—in commemoration, as it would appear, of what is said in the thirty-third 
verse of the forty-ninth chapter of Genesis, of the patriarch Jacob gathering up his feet before he died,—and likewise 
to deposit éheir most valuable effects in the sepulchres of their kings, consisting not only of gold and silver, but likewise 
of vests and precious vases. It deserves to be remarked that Josephus notices, in the last chapter of the seventh book of 

* Cieza de Leon, describing in the sixty-third chapter of his Chronicle of Peru the funeral ceremonies of the ancient Peruvians, thus 
expresses himself: ‘¢ Quando los sefiores morian, se juntavan los principales del valle y hazian grandes lloros, y muchas de las mugeres se 
cortavan los cabellos, hasta quedar sin ningunos.” 

+ Ulloa gives a long description, in the 340th page of his Noticias Americanas, of the sepulchres, or ‘ pantheons,’ as he designates 
them, which the Peruvians constructed in their houses: he speaks of them from personal inspection, and although a comparatively recent 
author, his account is very curious. 

That the custom of embalming the dead was very general amongst the Jews in the age of Christ is expressly declared in the following 
‘passage of the nineteenth chapter of the Gospel of St. John, who thus describes the embalming of the body of Christ: “ And there came 
also Nicodemus, (which at the first came to Jesus by night,) and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pounds weight. 
Then took they the body of Jesus and wound it in linen cloths, with the spices, as the manner of the Jews ts to bury.” The same custom 
existed among the Jews at a period prior to the Babylonian captivity, as we learn from the two books of Chronicles and Kings; and it is 
not improbable that the Peruvian Ingas commanded their bodies to be embalmed in imitation of the Kings of Judah and Israel. It is 
likewise evident from the twelfth verse of the twenty-sixth chapter of the Gospel of St. Matthew, that anointing was a common funeral 
rite amongst the Jews, which the admonition of Christ to his disciples, and the exhortation of St. James in the fourteenth verse of the 
fifth chapter of his General Epistle, converted into a sacrament amongst the primitive Christians, who could not, like Protestants, put a 
double construction on a precept delivered in such plain terms as the following: “Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of 
the church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord; and the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and 
the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiwen him.’ We cannot refrain from here observing, that 
some of the Rabbis, with their usual proneness to indulge in a sceptical train of reasoning upon passages of Scripture which they do not 
understand, have thought proper to ask, why, if Nicodemus and the rest of the disciples were acquainted with the leading prophecies 
respecting the Messiah, and believed in his future resurrection from the dead, they should have thought it necessary, or even consistent 
with divine revelation, to embalm the body of him of whom David says, in the tenth verse of the sixteenth Psalm, blending in himself the 
totally distinct characters of his Son and Lord, “Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corrup- 
tion,” and who himself had avowed in the presence of his disciples, that he would destroy the Temple and rebuild it in three days, in allusion 
to his future resurrection. To this objection of the rabbis it may be easily replied, that neither Nicodemus himself, nor any of the disciples, 
believed in the resurrection of Christ during his lifetime, nor even after his death, until, like Saint Thomas, they had the evidence of their 
senses to convince them of a fact of which they had not the previous assurance, when, on going into his tomb and finding that his body was 
not there, they for the first time became aware of his having risen from the dead in the manner related by Saint John in the eighth verse of 
the twentieth chapter of his Gospel, who himself confesses in the following verse the ignorance until then of ald the disciples of this im- 
portant article of the Christian faith, “ For as yet they knew not the Scripture, that he must rise again from the dead.” Another material 
error which the disciples fell into shortly after the resurrection, and which argued on their part an excess of credulity and superstition, was 
their supposing that the end of the world and the day of judgement was close at hand. This error is extremely deserving of notice, since it 
seems to have taken deep root amongst the primitive Christians, and to have passed over with an early Christian colony to America. 

NOTES. 205 

his Jewish Antiquities, the immense riches which Solomon buried with his father David; further adding, in the fifteenth 
chapter of the thirteenth book of the same treatise, that when Jerusalem was besieged by Antiochus, the high-priest 
Hyrcanus opened one of the vaults of the sepulchre of David, and took from thence three thousand talents ; and Cardinal 
Baronius asserts, in the hundred and fifty-eighth page of the first volume of his Ecclesiastical Annals, that the experi- 
ment was repeated some ages afterwards by Herod, who discovered no gold, but a great quantity of costly vestments, 
and that he was deterred from prosecuting his search by a flame which miraculously burst forth from the tomb. That 
burying riches in tombs was a very ancient custom amongst the Jews cannot be doubted, since there are some indica- 
tions of it in the third chapter of the book of Job; and all the Spanish historians who have treated of the ancient 
history. of the Peruvians affirm that they imitated the Jews in depositing immense riches in the tombs of the Incas, 
whose bodies, like those of the patriarchs Jacob and Joseph, were carefully embalmed, whilst the national grief was 
testified for their death by a solemn mourning, which amongst the Mexicans lasted for eighty days. It was not, 
however, alone in the custom of depositing great riches in their tombs and mourning for their kindred a length of 
time that the Indians resembled the Jews, but likewise in the external form of their sepulchres*, which were frequently 
in the shape of pyramids. Cieza de Leon thus describes, in the sixty-third chapter of his Chronicle of Peru, the form 
of some which he beheld in the province of Collao: “ Volviendo pues 4 la materia, digo que he visto que tienen estos 
Indios distinctos ritos en hazer las sepulturas: porque en la provincia de Collao (como relatare en su lugar) las hazen 
en las heredadesf, por su orden, tan grandes como torres, unas mas y otras menos, y algunas hechas de buena labor 
con piedras excellentes. Y tienen sus puertas que salen al nascimiento del sol ; y junto 4 ellas (como tambien dire) 
acostumbran hazer sus sacrificios y quemar algunas cosas, y rociar aquellos lugares con sangre de corderos 6 de otros 
animales. En la comarca del Cuzco entierran 4 sus difuntos sentados en unos assentamientos principales, 4 quien 
llaman ‘ duhos’, vestidos y adornados de lo mas principal que ellos posseyan.” That the sepulchral monuments of the 
Zapotecas resembled those of the Indians of Collao may be inferred from M. Dupaix’s description of them in the four 
hundred and fifty-second page of the sixth volume of this work, and from what he again says, in the four hundred and 
fifty-eighth page, of the groups of pyramids situated in the valley of Oaxaca, which were probably constructed after 
the plan of those erected in remote ages in the plain of Teotihuacan by theTultecas, the ruins of which still exist not far 
distant from the city of Mexico, and are described by Boturini in the forty-second page of his ‘Idea of a New History 
of America,’ whose allusion to the groups of artificial hillocks placed on either side of the two principal pyramids, 
which he supposes were dedicated to the stars, as the latter were to the sun and the moon, reminds us how frequently 
the Jews are accused in Scripture of worshiping the whole host of heaven, and forcibly brings to our recollection 
the following passage of the twelfth chapter of the Prophecies of Hosea, in which express mention is made of the 
number and form of the idolatrous altars of the Jews: “Is there iniquity in Gilead? surely they are vanity{, they 

* Torquemada endeavours to prove, in a very curious chapter of his Monarquia Indiana, that the znternal plan of some of the Mexican 
sepulchres must nearly have resembled that of Christ, as described in the sixteenth chapter of the Gospel of Saint Mark. 

+ We learn from the thirty-first verse of the forty-ninth chapter of Genesis, that Jacob was buried in a cave of the field of his inherit- 
ance; and some Spanish authors have supposed that his gathering up his feet at the moment of dying, might have suggested to the 
Mexicans and the Peruvians the custom of burying the dead in a sitting posture, in the manner represented in the thirteenth page of the 
Codex Borgianus. 

{ The term ‘ vanity,’ in the sense here made use of by Hosea, surprisingly accords with the epithet ‘ nothings,’ which Adair says, in 
the 292nd page of the present volume, is the most favourable name which the American Indians, in their set speeches, bestow on Euro- 
peans, whom at other times they name ‘ hottuk ookproose,’ the accursed people, in contradistinction to themselves, who are ¢ hottuk ore- 
toopah,’ the beloved people. ‘The striking analogy between these two latter terms and the phrase which the Jews employed to designate 
themselves antithetically to the heathen, forcibly presented itself to Adair, who uses itas an argument to prove that the Indians believed, like 
the ancient Jews, that they were immediately under a theocracy, or in other words that the Deity was the head of their state, a fact of which 
the Mexicans were continually reminding him: he does not, however, appear to have been equally aware that the very phrase nothings 
was applied as a term of contempt by the Jews of former ages to the heathen, and to every race of mankind except their own, as is evident 
from the following passage of the sixth chapter of the Second Book of Esdras, who thus familiarly accosts the Deity: “ All this have I 
spoken before thee, O Lord, because thou madest the world for our sakes. As for the other people, which also come of Adam, thou hast 
said that they are nothing, but be like unto spittle: and hast likened the abundance of them unto a drop that falleth from a vessel. And 
now, O Lord, behold, these heathen, which have ever been reputed as nothing, have begun to be lords over us, and to devour us. But we 
thy people, whom thou hast called thy firstborn, thy only begotten, and thy fervent lover, are given into their hands. 1f the world now be 
made for our sakes, why do we not possess an inheritance with the world? how Jong shall this endure?” 

VOL. VIII. (3G) 

206 NOTES. 

sacrifice bullocks in Gilgal, yea, ther altars are as heaps in the furrows of the fields.” It may, however, be here 
observed that the prophet may allude to tombs as well as to altars, or possibly to both, since the custom of eating the 
sacrifices of the dead, of which the Jews are accused in the twenty-eighth verse of the hundred and sixth Psalm, 
would necessarily imply that of placing an offering of food on their tombs, which the Interpreter of the Codex 
Telleriano-Remensis informs us, in the ninety-sixth page of the sixth volume of this work, was also a Mexican rite. 
It is, however, more probable, from Hosea’s allusion to sacrifices of bullocks in the same verse, that the iniquity found 
in Gilead was worshiping the stars, which, from their multitude, would have required many altars, and to which 
they might have sacrificed bullocks and even human victims. We shall observe, in conclusion, that if Baal-peor was 
the same as the Phenician deity Moth, he was probably also the same as Mictlantecutli, the Mexican god of the dead, 
at whose shrine the Mexicans sacrificed infants. 

Nore XLIX. Page 519. 

The merits of Doctor Robertson’s History of America are so differently appreciated by Spanish and English authors, 
that it is difficult to form an estimate of its true value. All, however, who have read that history must admit that 
that learned historian’s inclination to discredit the original accounts of the Spanish historians and early American 
writers, on the score of alleged exaggeration*, led him into great errors; of this Clavigero frequently complains in 
the course of his history of Mexico. In nothing, however, was Doctor Robertson more decidedly mistaken than in 
the estimate which he formed of the population of the various cities of New Spain, and especially of Mexico. It 
is, indeed, surprising to find from a note{, which he has subjoined to the third volume of his History of America, 
that on a question of this difficult nature he should have rejected the testimony of three celebrated Spanish historians, 
and, taking upon himself the task of weighing everything in his own fanciful scale of probability, should have ven- 
tured to pronounce the following severe criticism on their valuable and authentic writings: ‘The early Spanish 
writers were so hasty and inaccurate in estimating the numbers of people in the provinces and towns of America, that 
it is impossible to ascertain that of Mexico itself with any degree of precision. Cortes describes the extent and 
populousness of Mexico in general terms, which imply that it was not inferior to the greatest cities in Europe. Gomara 
is more explicit, and affirms that there were sixty thousand houses or families in Mexico. (Cron., c.78.) Herrera 
adopts his opinion, (Dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 13.,) and the generality of writers follow them*implicitly without inquiry or 
scruple. According to this account the inhabitants of Mexico must have been about three hundred thousand. Tor- 
quemada, with his usual propensity to the marvellous, asserts that there were a hundred and twenty thousand families 
in Mexico, and, consequently, about six hundred thousand inhabitants. (lib. ili.c.23.) But in a very judicious 
account of the Mexican empire by one of Cortes’s officers, the population is fixed at sixty thousand peoplef. (Ramusia, 
iii. 809. A.) Even by this account, which probably is much nearer the truth than any of the foregoing, Mexico was 
a great city”. 

* The extent to which Dr. Robertson carried his scepticism on subjects where the testimony of Spanish historians was the only evidence 
that could safely be relied on, will best appear by reference to Note X XVII. of the first volume of his History of America. 

++ Vide Note XXI., p. 367, Vol. III., of Dr. Robertson’s History of America. 

+ It is very probable, that the phrase made use of by the officer of Cortes, whose narrative Dr. Robertson here refers to, was vecinos, 
which signifies householders, and is synonymous with houses when used in taking a census of the population of a city, and that Dr. Ro- 
bertson erroneously understood it to mean inhabitants. 

§ It is so very obvious that if the city of Mexico had only contained a population of sixty thousand persons, two thirds of whom must 
necessarily have been women and children, and men advanced in years, it never could have made the formidable resistance which it did to 
the Spaniards,—who, besides being acquainted with military tactics and inured to regular discipline, were aided by numerous Indian 
allies, greedy of sharing in the spoils of Mexico, wore iron armour, rode on horses, and employed artillery against the naked and almost 
defenceless bodies of the Mexicans,—that it is unnecessary to insist long upon the force of this argument, or further to remark, that a city 
containing so scanty a population as sixty thousand persons could never have extended its empire over nearly all the provinces of 
New,Spaia, as history informs us Montezuma had done several years before the arrival of the Spaniards in his territory. It hence 
appears, that it would be extremely absurd to suppose, with Dr. Robertson, that the population of Mexico consisted of only sixty thou- 
sand persons ;. and we shall accordingly quote a passage from the fiftieth chapter of the inedited Historia Apologetica of Las Casas, in 
which that learned prelate declares it to be his belief that it greatly exceeded a million; which is a number much more considerable than 
the computation of Torquemada,'who it is evident, from various passages of his Monarquia Indiana, had perused a portion at least of the 

NOTES. 207 

Note L. Page 160. 

Garcilasso de la Vega takes occasion to notice, in the seventh chapter of the first book of his Peruvian Commen- 
taries, a curious theory of the Peruvians respecting dreams, namely, that they believed when the body slept the soul 

Historia Apologetica of Las Casas, and-probably had reason for dissenting from that prelate’s calculation.. Las| Casas, on the other hand, 
it is but right to.observe, is a much higher authority than’ Torquemada because he was an earlier writer by more than half a century, and 
possessed of much better means of ascertaining the number of houses contained in Mexico and the extent of its ancient population. 
«« Dejados los edificios de las otras ciudades para despues, quiero contar de los de la ciudad de Mexico, y sefialadamente de las casas y 
palacios reales del gran rey Montezuma. Aquella ciudad esta fundada en el lago 6 laguna como Venecia esta en la mar: tenia cuando 
los Espanoles primero entraron en ella mas de cincuenta mil casas, y en cada una tres y cuatro y hasta diez vecinos, y de gente mucho mas 
de un millon, porque esto se debe tener por regla general en estas Indias, que donde quiera que hay cien vecinos casados se hallara aver 
quinientas y seiscientas personas. [Las casas eran de adobes comunmente con sus terrados y azoteas muy bien hechas, y encalados por 
encima que no se pueden Ilover, Las casas comunes no son mucho de ver sino bajas y humildes, pero las de los caballeros y sefiores en gran 
manera eran muy cumplidas y bien edificadas, y tenian altos y bajos. Jas comunestenian dos puertas, una sobre la calzada y otra que sale 
al agua; y la ciudad tenia tres maneras de calles, muy anchas y buenas, las unas de agua con infinitas puertas, las otras de tierra, y las 
otras de tierra y agua, conviene 4 saber, parte de tierra 6 canteria, por donde andan en seco, y parte por donde se sirven con sus barquillos 
6 canoas por el agua. Estaba repartida en dos barrios, el uno es y se llama el Tlatelulco, y el otro Mexico, y este era el principal por 
estar alli los palacios y casa real y toda la mas de la nobleza y caballeria.” It will at once be perceived that it is through an error of the 
transcriber that the word cien in the above passage has been omitted before cincuenta mil casas, whose mistake the sentence which imme- 
diately follows sufficiently corrects. The computation of Las Casas, as he expressly says, is founded upon the number of houses which 
the city of Mexico in ancient times contained ; and from the average number of inhabitants of each house is formed the gross estimate of 
the population. It may not be improper to oueive: that other Spanish authors, whose testimony in a matter of this kind is of the greatest 
weight and who had the best opportunity of ascertaining the truth, unanimously declare that before the conquest of Mexico by the 
Spaniards the population of that city was immense, which was perhaps attributable to the early age at which the Mexican youth were 
taken from the temples, or religious seminaries, and married: it deserves likewise to be remarked, that an analogous custom existed in 
Peru, where marriages were contracted by order of the Inga, and a triennial visitation of the provinces was held for the express purpose of 
solemnizing them according to the forms of the Peruvian law. This assimilation in the manners of the Mexicans and the Peruvians, 
who, though separated from each other in very remote provinces of America, approximated in many of their religious rites and civil 
institutions, is extremely deserving of notice. To the objection of those who may feel inclined to suppose that Las Casas and Torquemada 
much overrated the number of houses contained in the city of Mexico, and consequently erred in their census of the population, it may 
be satisfactory to observe, that their approximation in numbers tends to the corroboration of each other’s testimony: nor is the discre- 
pancy between one hundred and twenty thousand and one hundred and fifty thousand houses so great as to allow us to accuse either 
historian of wilful misrepresentation, since it is possible that Las Casas might have included in his estimate the houses contained in the 
towns situated on the principal causeway leading to the city of Mexico, and which as reasonably might have been reckoned a part of 
Mexico as Belgrave Square may be considered a part of London. Of these towns, and the three causeways which formed the approach 
to Mexico, Las Casas gives the following account in the fiftieth chapter of his Historia Apologetica: “ Tiene tres entradas no mas esta 
ciudad, y va por cada una calzada muy bien hecha de tierra y canteria tan ancha que podrian ir por ella tres carretas 4 la par 6 diez 
de caballos; é la una durara media legua desde la tierra firme hasta la ciudad y comienza de la parte del oriente; é la segunda terna una 
legua y viene de hacia el norte; é la tercera de la parte de mediodia que dura dos buenas leguas; y esta es la principal y mas noblecida 
que viene de la ciudad de Yztapalapa, cuyo sefior dejimos ser el heredero del rey Montezuma; va tan derecha 4 la ciudad que no puede 
ser mas un huso: por esto entré Cortes y su compafiia el primer dia que en ella entraron, que fue dia octavo de todos santos, ocho de 
Noviembre de mil y quinientos y diez y nueve afios, E 4 cada lado de esta calzada tan principal estan ciudades algunas muy hermosas 
de muchos templos y torres adornadas todas dentro de la laguna en el agua, que no puede andar el hombre sino mirando 4 una parte y 4 
otra como elevado. Una dellas se llama Mexicalcingo, que tenia quatro 6 cinco mil casas; otra Coyacan, que seria de seis mil; otra 

’ Another argument in favour of the accuracy of Torquemada’s computation is furnished by the following 

Vigilopuchtli, quasi otras tantas.’ 
extract from an inedited history of the conquest of Mexico, composed by Francisco de Aguilar, who was originally a soldier in the army 
of Cortes, and an eye-witness of the scenes which he describes, and afterwards turned monk, and wrote, as he says himself, at eighty years 
of age, a narrative of the principal events of the Spanish conquest! : “ Habiendose rehecho el dicho capitan Cortes de gente venida de las islas 

1 The above-mentioned history is preserved in the library of the Escurial. The author remarks in his preface that he composed it at 
the request of certain friars of his order. It contains a very interesting history of the Spanish conquest of Mexico, written by a soldier 
who had been the companion of Cortes, and who afterwards, as was not unusual with Spaniards of that age, renounced the world and 
retired to a cloister, there to spend the latter end’ of his days.. It may be interesting to add, that Diego Duran speaks in high terms of 
commendation of Francisco de Aguilar in the second part of his History of Ne ew Spain, professing to have received from him a particular 
description of the Mexican temples. — 

208 NOTES. 

quitted its earthly mansion, and that what it beheld whilst wandering through the universe constituted dreams. 
This theory might possibly have been derived from what is said in Scripture of prophets and other holy persons being 
“in the spirit,” and beholding “in visions” events that occurred in the most remote places. It should, however, be 
remarked, that the expression “to be in the spirit” is understood in different senses in various passages of the Old 
Testament; but it is invariably employed in one of three acceptations: it either denotes miraculous locomotion from 
one place to another, as in the case of the prophet Ezekiel, who declares, in the third verse of the eighth chapter of 
his Prophecies, that he was carried by an angel by the hair of the head from Babylon to Jerusalem ; or it signifies 
voluntary locomotion at the suggestion of the spirit; or, thirdly, it means the soul’s being transported out of the 
body whilst the latter slept; to which peculiar mode of being in the spirit there is an apparent allusion in the twelfth 
chapter of St. Paul’s Second Epistle to the Corinthians, where that apostle says, in reference, it would appear from 
the context, to himself: “ I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in the body, I cannot tell ; or 
whether out of the body, 1 cannot tell: God knoweth ;) such an one caught up to the third heaven.” Upon this passage 
of St. Paul we shall only remark, that the plurality and order which he here assigns to the heavens is deserving of 
notice as assimilating in some measure the notions of the Jews to those of the Mexicans, who also believed in a 
plurality and certain order of the heavens, as the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus informs us in the hundred and 
fifty-ninth page of the sixth volume of this work. The phenomena of sleeping and of dreams* have excited the atten- 

como arriba esta dicho, caminé con su gente la via de Mexico y llegé y entré en la gran ciudad de Tezcuco, la cual ciudad y sefiorio casi 
era tan grande como el sefiorio de Mexico; podria tener mas de ochenta 6 cien mil casas, y el dicho capitan y Espafioles se aposentaron alli en 
los aposentos grandes y muy hermosos patios que en la dicha ciudad habia.” It will here be observed that Aguilar describes Tezcuco as a 
city containing eighty or a hundred thousand houses; and since the city of Mexico was, according to the most authentic accounts, consider- 
ably larger than that of Tezcuco, it may reasonably be inferred, that if Tezcuco contained a hundred thousand houses, Mexico did not 
contain less than a hundred and thirty thousand} but the difference between this computation and the calculation of Dr. Robertson is 
certainly very considerable. We shall conclude this note with a brief sketch of the statistics of the Peruvian empire in the middle of the 
sixteenth century, at which period, it should be remarked, the wars of the Spaniards, the small-pox, and working in the mines had 
greatly reduced the amount of the native Indian population. This brief but authentic sketch is contained in the accompanying plate, 
which presents a facsimile of a very curious tribute-roll, taken from a manuscript which formerly belonged to the Count de Olivares. The 
title prefixed to this tribute-roll declares, that the census of the population which it contains was taken in the year 1561, by the order of 
the Marquis of Cafiete, the then viceroy of Peru. Opposite to the names of the several cities in the plate, are ranged, in three distinct 
columns, Ist, the total amount of the Indian population of all ages; 2ndly, that portion of the aggregate population who, not under sixteen 
years of age or exceeding fifty, paid tribute to the Crown of Spain; 3rdly, the value of the tribute which they paid, calculated in Spanish 
pesos. We shall here transcribe the names of the cities in the order in which they occur in the roll: Cuzco, La Plata, La Paz, Are- 
quipa, Guamanga, Truxillo, Los Reyes, Guanuco, Quito, San Miguel, Puerto Viejo, Guyaquil, Loxa, Chachapoyas, Xauxa, and 
Camora, are the cities mentioned, but the task of deciphering the arithmetical abbreviations which accompany them must be left to per- 
sons skilled in Spanish palzography: when that is accomplished it will be an easy thing to calculate the amount of the Indian tribute. 
Of the Spanish peso and its value in the sixteenth century, Dr. Robertson gives the following account in the preface to his History 
of America: “ My readers will observe, that in mentioning sums of money I have uniformly followed the Spanish method of computing 
by pesos. In America the peso fuerte or duro, is the only one known, and that is always meant when any sum imported from America is 
mentioned. The peso fuerte, as well as other coins, has varied in its numerary value; but I have been advised, without attending to such 
minute variations, to consider it as equal to four shillings-and sixpence of our money. It is to be remembered, however, that in the six- 
teenth century the effective value of a peso, i.e. the quantity of labour which it represented, or of goods which it would purchase, was 
five or six times as much as at present. 

* The following detached propositions were intended to form a portion of a separate note; they are inserted here as not wholly irrelevant 
to the present subject, and may be regarded in the light of so many postulates, tending to prove that the functions of the eye are not 
exclusively confined to vision. 1. The sensation of the eye when deprived of light, its power of distinguishing between light and darkness 
being active, is darkness. 2. The perfection of the eye’s sensation, whether of darkness or of light, depends upon attention, which in 
waking persons is involuntary, and the partial withdrawal of which causes a feeling of absence and vacancy, whilst its total removal, which 
begins with inattention and ends in complete abstraction, is sleep. 3. Insleep all sensations, both of light and darkness, are equally absent 
from the mind, whose power of imagination acquires greater force, being no longer impeded by its attention being fixed either wholly or 
in part upon real objects. 4. Reason in sleep is continually subject to delusions, because it is no longer checked and corrected by the 
consciousness of external realities, and cannot therefore judge of the absurdity or fallaciousness of dreams which claim at that period the 
undivided attention of the mind. 5. The imagination in sleep, being freed from the restraint which the connexion between thought and 
the impressions produced by the eye upon the sensorium imposes upon it, exerts new powers—can create ideas of pain, without the 
pressure or intervention of a nerve, or by spontaneously giving an impulse to it—ideas of taste without the presence of food, of sound 
without the percussion of air, of light and day in the midst of darkness, which necessarily precludes the supposition that the eye may 

NOTES. 209 

tion not only of the ignorant and superstitious of all ages, but likewise of the wise and learned, including in the 
number even Alexander the Great, whose extensive knowledge cannot be doubted, when it is recollected he had Ari- 
stotle for his preceptor in early youth. We may observe also that Homer avails himself of the machinery of dreams 
in some of the finest episodes of the Iliad, especially at the commencement of the twenty-third book, where the shade 
of Patroclus appears to Achilles, and pathetically beseeches him to grant him the accustomed rites of burial: nothing 

in the flow of elegiac verse can exceed the inimitable beauty of Pope’s translation of the following descriptive lines 
of Homer: - 

“HO & emt puyn TarpoxdAnos dedowo, 
Tlavr’ avrw, peyeDoc re kat Oupara Kad’ evxuia, 
Kat horny’ kat Tova rept ypou cipara éoro" 
rn o ap vrep Keadnc, Kat puv mpoc pvOov éermev® 
Evdeuc, avtap enero NeAaopevoc émrev, AyiAdev ; 

Ov pev pev Cwovroc axndetc, adda Oavovros. 

It was amongst the Jews, however, as we have already observed in the three hundred and sixty-seventh page of the 
sixth volume of this work, that the greatest attention was paid to the interpretation of dreams and visions, which 

retain a partial sensation of darkness throughout sleep, which would involve the admission of its being possible for the same individual to 
perceive light and darkness at the same moment, the former by imagination and the latter by sensation. The experience of almost every 
person will serve to convince them that the imagination in sleep can form to itself new ideas of the duration of time ; and since time may 
be inconceivably lengthened in dreams, there is nothing so absurd, although there may be much exaggeration, in the story in the Arabian 
Nights, of the man who fell asleep and dreamt in the space of a few short hours that he had been engaged in the occupations of a long life, 
lying down on his bed a young man, and becoming old in his own imagination ere morning. 6. It is evident that sleep cannot be defined to 
be the absence of waking, since the cause is different, although the effect is similar in stupor and fainting ; sleep, likewise, is the sign and the 
general consequence of health, whereas stupor and fainting proceed from bodily injury or disease. 7. It deserves to be remarked, that drunken- 
ness produces an effect similar to that of sleep, both in exalting the imagination and overpowering the reasoning faculties of the soul; the 
effects of which suspension of the intellectual powers, perhaps, might be explained on the supposition that intoxication causes a partial absorp- 
tion of the nervous fluid necessary for the visual energies ; and hence, on the assumption that the nervous action of the eye essential to vision 
is materially affected by the action of fermented liquors upon the stomach,—which appears from the dizzy sensation with which drunkenness 
affects the eye,—and that reason requires the continual promptings of external sensations received through the eye (to which blindness is no 
impediment, the optic nerve still continuing to discharge its remaining functions,) to judge of the difference between fancies and realities 
by the opposition and contrast of the one with the other, a reason for drunkenness producing mental delusion would be apparent. That 
the action of fermented liquors and other fluids on the stomach affects the nervous sensibilities of the eye, is evident from the effects of 
opium in producing drowsiness, and strong astringents in repelling sleep. The celebrated Hernandez and other Spanish authors inform us 
that the Mexicans were acquainted with a certain sort of fungus which produced the most wonderful effects on the eye, and which they ate 
for the express purpose of seeing visions, falling into trances, and acquiring the spirit of prophecy by a sudden seizure, perhaps, of the nature 
of that with which the Hebrew prophets were affected at times and seasons when they found it convenient to lay claim to prophetic inspira- 
tion. This fungus was named in the Mexican language nanacatl, and its extraordinary properties are described in the following passage of 
an inedited MS. preserved in the library of the Royal Academy of History at Madrid : “ Usaban de adivinanzas y suertes, y creian en suefios 
y en prodigios y agueros, porque el demonio se lo hacia encreyer, y les cumplian muchas cosas de las que sofiaban. Ansi mismo tomaban cosas 
y las comian y bebian para con ellas adivinar, con que se adormecian y perdian el sentido, y con ellas veian visiones espantables, y visible- 
mente el demonio con estas cosas que tomaban, que la una cosa se llama Peyotl, y otra hierva que se llama Tlapatl, y otro grano que Ilaman 
Mizsitl, y Ja carne de un paaro que llaman pito en nuestra lengua y ellos lo llaman Oconenetl, que comida la carne de este pajaro provoca a 
ver estas visiones. La misma propiedad tiene un hongo pequeiio zancudo, que llaman los naturales Nanacatl. De estas cosas usaban mas 
los sefiores que la gente plebeya, dejando 4 parte los vinos que tenian, que quando se embriagaban en sus borracheras, veian ansi mismo 
grandes visiones y muy estrafias ; aunque las borracheras eran muy prohibidas entre ellos, y no bebian vino sino los muy viejos y ancianos; 
y quando algun mozo bebia y se emborrachaba, moria por ello; y ansi se daba absolutamente 4 los muy viejos en republica, 6 quando se 
hacia alguna fiesta muy sefialada, se daba con mucha templanza 4 los hombres calificados y viejos honrados y en las cosas de la guerra jubi- 
lados. ‘Tras esto tenian instrumentos de musica que les quadraban segun su modo, tenian atambores hechos de mucho primor, altos de mas 
de medio estado, con otro instrumento que llaman Teponaztle, que es de un trozo de madera concavado y de una pieza, rollizo, y como 
decimos hueco por dentro, que suena algunas veces mas de media legua, y con el atambor hace estrafia y muy suave consonancia; y con 
estos atambores, accompafiados de unas trompas de palo y otros instrumentos 4 manera de flautas y jabebas, accompafiados con estas 
cosas hacen estrafio y admirable ruido, y tan 4 compas sus cantares y danzas y bayles que es cosa muy de ver. En estos bayles y cantares 
sacan las divisas é insinias é libreas que quieren, con mucha plumeria y ropa muy rica de muy estrafios atavios y composturas, joyas de 
oro y piedras preciosas puestas en los cuellos y mufiecas del brazo, y braceletes de oro fino en los brazos, los quales vi yo, y conoci 4 muchos 
caciques que los usaron y con ellos se ataviaban y componian, asi en los brazos como en las pantorillas, y cascabeles de oro en las gargan- 

VOL. VIIT. Gar) 

910 NOTES. 

engrossed the attention of all orders of the state, from the monarch who sat upon the throne, to the peasant who dwelt 
in the clay-built hut. The agreement, therefore, between them and the Mexicans in so peculiar an article of national 
faith, and one so completely identified with the religion of the Jews, cannot fail to add considerable weight to the 
argument already recurred to, in the note subjoined to the fifteenth page of the sixth volume of the present work, in 
proof of the Mexicans being descended from the Jews; and this agreement will more plainly appear from the following 
account of Montezuma commanding his subjects to report to him their dreams, in order that he might presage from 
their import the arrival of the Spaniards in his territory, and by divination avert the danger which he feared impended 
over the state. The account is transcribed from the sixty-eighth chapter of the first part of Diego Duran’s inedited 
History of New Spain, who obtained his information from the original works of the Mexican historians. “ Andaba 
Montezuma tan desasosegado, que no se podia quietar su corazon, y en parte deseaba que se cumpliese ya lo que le 
tenian profetizado para poderse quietar; y con este cuidado mand6 llamar 4 todos los prepositos y mandoncillos de 
los barrios, y preguntéles si acaso habian sofiado alguna cosa acerca de la venida de aquellas gentes que esperaban, 6 de 
lo que habia de acontecer, que se los revelasen, aunque fuesen contra su persona, que no deseaba mas de saber ya la 
certidumbre deste negocio que tan mentado era, y con tantas amenazas de mal se lo habian profetizado, y que no lo 

hacia sino para poner en cobro sus hijos, que eran los que mas le dolian y de quien mas lastima tenia. Los cal- 

pixques le digeron no haber sonado nada, ni haber visto ni oydo cosa acerca desto jamas. El les dijo: Pues ruego os, 
amigos mios, gue encomendeis & todos los viejos y viejas de vuestros barrios, que los que hubieren sohado algo, 6 soharen 
de aqui adelante, que les digais que me avisen de lo que sofaren, agora sea en pro 6 en contra mia; y avisad a todos los 
sacerdotes que en todas las visiones que vieren, asi muertos como de otras visiones que suelen ver de noche en los montes 
6 lugares caliginosos, que les pregunten todos los sueftos que han de acontecer: lo mismo encomendad & todos los que 
tienen por costumbre de andar de noche; y que si toparen & aquella muger* que dicen que anda de noche llorando y 
gimiendo, que le pregunten que es lo que llora y gime, y que se satisfagan de todo lo que acerca destos negocios pudieren 

tillas de las piernas. Ansi mismo salian las mugeres en estas danzas maravillosamente ataviadas, que no habia en el mundo mas que ver, 
lo qual todo se ha vedado por la honestidad de nuestra religion Christiana.” The curious notion which the Mexicans are here said to 
have entertained respecting the bird which they named the Oconenetl, viz. that its flesh when eaten caused them to see visions, deserves 
to be compared with what the learned Maimonides asserts, in the 535th page of the sixth volume of this work, of the bird Jaduah, and 
its use in divination, and with the epithet of jcavad’ épvy, or the phrenzy-stirring bird, which Pindar bestows in his fourth Pythian Ode 
on the Lynx, which, though the species of the bird is not exactly known, is generally supposed to be the water-wagtail : 

... ‘Es Bao © éreir’ év- 
nrvOor, évOa KedXar- 

vwrecot Kodxouowy rar 

Miéar, Ainrg rap’ airy. 

Tlorma 0 dévrarwy Bedewy 
TloukiAay ivyya re- 

Tpaxvauor’ Ovhuprober 

*Ey ddur Cevéaca cucry 
Matvyac dpyviv Kumpoyevera pepev 
Tpwrov avOpwroee, duras 7° érao- 
das éxdidackncey copoy Aicoviday™ 
’Ogpa Mnderas roxewy agedot- 

7 aidw, woOerva 0 ‘EXXas avray 
°Ev gpeoe katopevay 

Aoveot paorryt TlecBovs” ... 

* Tt is extremely deserving of notice that an absurd prejudice existed amongst the Jews, to which Rabbi Tham alludes in the preface 
to his edition of the Jewish History of Ben Gorion, published at Constantinople in the year 1510, that when any great calamity impended 
over their state, n> Lilith, the repudiated wife of Adam, a witch whom they esteemed dangerous to children, or, as a commentator 
observes, “ Deemonissa, infaustum quoddam monstrum, puerperis infestum,” appeared in the streets of their most populous cities, uttering 
wild and terrific shrieks. When, therefore, we find that a similar superstitious belief existed amongst the Mexicans, who, as Sahagun 
informs us in the first chapter of the eighth book of his History of New Spain, recounted amongst the prodigies which portended the 
destruction of the Mexican empire, the apparition of the woman Cioacoatl uttering loud lamentations by night in the streets of Mexico, 
and mourning for the fate of her children, it is impossible to ascribe so extraordinary a coincidence to a mere fortuitous cause. Of the 
personal identity of Lilith and Cioacoatl little doubt can be entertained, on finding, in the sixth chapter of the first book of the above- 
mentioned author’s History of New Spain, that she was the Mexican Eve, and in the second chapter of the eighth book, that she de- 
voured an infant zz the cradle, in the city of Azcaputzalco. 

NOTES. ON: 

saber. Ellos se lo prometieron de lo hacer asi. Idos 4 sus barrios, dieron noticia 4 todos’ los viejos y viejas de lo 
que su rey.y sefor mandaba y deseaba saber, de lo que fueron avisados los sofadores y veladores de las noches, y los 
sacerdotes que tenian por costumbre de ir 4 los montes y cuevas de noche y de dia 4 hacer sus ordinarias peti- 
ciones ; y desde aquel dia andaban todos con aquel cuidado de advertir a los suehos, y hacer memoria dellos y traerlos & 
la memoria para contarselos a su rey, si fuese cosa tocante & lo que Montezuma deseaba saber. Con el cuidado que los 
viejos y viejas, sacerdotes y agoreros tenian sobre el mandato de su rey, en lo que tocaba 4 declaracion de los suefios, 
dieron aviso algunos viejos y viejas 4 los prepositos y techquitlatos que les habian avisado, como algunos dellos 
habian sofiado algunos suefos espantosos y prodigiosos, que les habian puesto mucho temor y cuidado ; de lo cual 
querian fuese avisado su rey, y darle cuenta dellos. Los prepositos fueron 4 Montezuma, y le digeron como en cum- 
plimiento de su mandato real acudian algunos viejos y viejas 4 quererle declarar lo que habian sofiado, que si mandaba 
fuesen traidos ante él. El deseoso de saber lo que habian sofiado, los mando traer 4 su presencia; los cuales venidos 
les mando declarasen lo que habian sofiado, y los viejos puestos ante é1 con mucha humildad y reverencia le digeron : 
Poderoso Seftor, no queriamos ofender tus poderosas orejas, ni poner en tu corazon algun sobresalto que te causase 
alguna enfermedad; pero forzados con tu supremo mandato, pues estamos forzados 4 te obedecer, de fuerza habremos 
de decir lo que hemos sofado ; y has de saber, que estas noches pasadas nos mostraron los sefiores del suefio, como 
el templo de Huitzilopochtly lo viamos arder 4 grandes y encendidas llamas, y que piedra por piedra se deshacia y 
caia, sin quedar en él cosa cierta; y al mismo Huitzilopochtly lo viamos caido y derribado por esos suelos: y esto és 
lo que hemos sohado. Montezuma los mandé apartar 4 un lado, y que se llegasen las viejas para que declarasen el 
sueno que habian sonado ; las cuales sentadas ante él le digeron : Hijo mio, no te inquietes ni desasosiegues tu corazon 
por lo que te queremos decir, porque nos ha puesto grande temor y espanto: has de saber que los suefios que estas 
tus madres han sofiado son, que vian entrar un rio caudaloso por las puertas de tus casas reales, y con ]a mucha furia 
que llevaba, derribaba las paredes de tu casa, y las arrancaba por los cimientos, llevando palos y piedras por delante 
sin quedar cosa en hiesta, y que llegaba al templo, y con el mismo furor lo echaba por tierra; de lo cual los grandes 
y sefores temerosos desamparaban la ciudad y se huian 4 los montes: y esto es lo que tenemos que declararte. 
Montezuma habiendo estado atento a lo que los viejos y viejas habian dicho, viendo que no eran nada en su favor sino 
que antes arguian a los malos pronosticos pasados, con una furia y rabia endemoniada mandé que aquellos viejos y 
vigjas fuesen echados en carcel perpetua, y que les diesen de comer por tasa y medida hasta que muriesen. Los 
sacerdotes de los templos, que tambien habian sido ayisados que hiciesen memoria de los suefios que sofiasen y de las 
visiones que viesen en los montes, en los collados, en las cuebas, en los rios, 6 en las fuentes, viendo lo que pasaba con 
los viejos y viejas, habiendo sohado muchas cosas, y visto y oydo otras en sus oraculos y sacrificaderos, hicieronse de 
concierto entre todos de no declarar cosa ninguna, temiendo no les sucediese lo que 4 los viejos y viejas. El rey viendo 
que no acudian @ decirle cosa ninguna, los mandé llamar, y con palabras blandas les empezé 4 decir: Es posible que 
no habeis sofado ninguna cosa ni visto? Ellos le respondieron que no. Montezuma les torné 4 decir que les daba 
termino de quince dias para que advirtiesen en lo que sofiasen y viesen y oyesen. Ellos hablandose unos 4 otros se 
tornaron 4 contestar entre si de no le declarar cosa ninguna, que aunque mas amenazas les hiciese. Cumplidos los 
quince dias los mand6 llamar, y ellos temerosos parecieron ante él ; el cual les dijo: Haveis advertido lo que os mande ? 
Ellos le respondieron: Seftor poderoso, si por quebrantar tu mandamiento merecieramos muerte y ser aniquillados por 
tu poderosa mano, cuanto mas lo mereceriamos, si ofendiendo tus orejas te digiesemos alguna mentira: lo que te 
sabemos decir y certificar es, que nosotros no hemos visto ni sofiado cosa que toque 4 tu persona de lo que deseas 
saber. El les respondio con rostro enojado y ayrado: No es posible sino que vosotros 6 no me quereis decir verdad, 
6 menospreciais mis mandamientos, 6 que no teneis cuenta con lo que toca 4 vuestros oficios, que es mirar y velar en 
las cosas de la noche: y Ilamando 4 los carceleros los mandé 4 todos echar en jaulas y que muriesen alli de hambre. 
Ellos llorando postrados ante él le pidieron les quitase luego la vida, y no permitiese que su cuerpo fuese atormentado. 
El] apiadandose de ellos los mando soltar, y que estubiesen recogidos en una sala sin salir della hasta que fuese su 
voluntad. Con este temor nadie osaba hablar ni declarar suefio, temiendo Jas muertes crueles y atroces que Monte- 
zuma les daba cuando los suehos no eran a su proposito. Viendo que ya los de la ciudad no le declaraban ninguna 
cosa, mandé llamar 4 sus mensageros, y envidlos a todas las provincias de las costas para que le llamasen 4 los gober- 
nadores de ellas, y juntamente envid a todas las villas y ciudades del Marquesado para que los sefiores dellas pare- 
ciesen ante él: Jos cuales venidos en el tiempo mas breve que pudieron, les mand6 le buscasen todos los hechiceros y 

919 NOTES. 

encantadores y sortilegos que en sus ciudades y villas pudiesen hallar, y que les apercibiesen como su voluntad era 
saber algunos prodigios t pronosticos, 6 adivinanzas entendidas 6 sabidas por estrellas, por agua, 6 fuego, 6 por ayre™, 
por suertes o por cualquier via y ciencia que tubiesen, y principalmente por suefos 6 visiones. Los gobernadores 
y principales de los pueblos volvieron 4 sus ciudades, y buscaron con toda diligencia las gentes que Montezuma pedia, 
y enviandole muchos adevinos, sortilegos, hechiceros y encantadores, venidos ante él le digeron: Seftor, aqui somos 
venidos 4 tu llamado 4 saber tu voluntad y ver lo que nos quieres. El les respondié: Seais bien venidos; haveis de 
saber que la causa para que os llamé, es para saber si habeis visto, oido, 6 sohado alguna cosa tocante 4 mi reynado 
y persona, pues seguis las noches y correis los montes y adevinais en las aguas, y considerais los movimientos de los 
cielos, del curso de las estrellas; ruego os que no me lo escondais, sino que me lo declareis. Ellos le respondieron : 
Gran Sefior, quien sera osado 4 mentir en tu presencia? Nosotros no hemos visto, ni oido, ni sofiado cosa que toque 
4 lo que nos preguntas. Montezuma muy ayrado les respondié: Pues que es vuestro oficio ser embaydores y engaha- 
dores, y fingiros hombres cientificos, que sabeis las cosas por venir, engafiandonos 4 todos, y diciendo que sabeis todo 
cuanto pasa en el mundo, y que os es patente lo que esta dentro de los cerros y en el centro de la tierra, y que veis 
que est4 debajo del agua y en las cabernas y hendeduras de la tierra, y en los agugeros y manantiales de las fuentes; 
Ilamais os hijos de la noche, y todo es mentira y fingido: y llamando con grandisimo enojo 4 sus justicias les mandé 
echar en jaulas, y que les pusiesen muchas guardas para que no se pudiesen huir. Puestos en la carcel estos adevi- 
nos y hechiceros no mostraron ninguna pesadumbre, antes contento y alegria riendose unos con otros, de lo cual fue 
avisado Montezuma, el cual envié sus principales 4 rogarles que le declarasen alguna cosa de lo que les habia rogado, 
que él les prometia de ponerlos en libertad. Ellos respondieron, que pues que tanto insistia en querer saber su des- 
ventura, que lo hallaban por las estrellas del cielo, y por todas las demas ciencias que sabian, habia de venir sobre é1 
una cosa tan prodigiosa y de tanta admiracion cual nunca habia venido sobre hombre; y mostrando enojo y ira uno 

* It would appear from the following passage of the nineteenth chapter of the first book of Kings, that the Jews imagined that the 
Deity occasionally revealed his will to his prophets through the elements, instead of by the more usual mode of inspiration through dreams 
and visions. This passage we transcribe at greater length, because the reply of Ahab king of Israel to Jehoshaphat king of Judah, in 
the eighth verse of the twenty-second chapter of the first book of Kings, expressive of his hatred of Micaiah the son of Imlah, because he 
but evil, deserves to be compared with the following passage of the sixty-eighth chapter of Diego 

never prophesied good concerning him, 
erve to account for the almost total extirpation of the Hebrew prophets by their own 

Duran’s ‘History of New Spain,’ and will also s 
“ Montezuma habiendo estado atento 4 lo que los viejos y viejas habian dicho, viendo que no eran nada en su favor, sino 

native princes : 
con una furia y rabia endemoniada mandé que aquellos viejos y viejas fuesen echados 

que antes arguian 4 los malos pronosticos pasados, 
en carcel perpetua, y que les diesen de comer por tasa y medida hasta que muriesen.” “ Montezuma having heard attentively the words 

of the old men and women, perceiving that they were nothing in hus favour, but that, on the contrary, they confirmed past bad omens, 
ordered with fury and demoniacal rage that the old men and women should be thrown into perpetual imprisonment, and that food should 
be supplied to them by weight and measure until they died.” The following are the words of the sacred penman: “ And he came 
thither unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold, the word of the Lord came to him, and he said unto him, What doest thou here, 
Elijah? And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown 
down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword ; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it away. And he 
said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the Lord. And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the moun- 
tains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind : and after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord 
was not in the earthquake: And after the earthquake a fire; but the Lord was not zn the fire: and after the fire a still small voice. And 
it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the cave. And, 
behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, What doest thou here, Elijah? And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God 
of hosts: because the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword ; and 
I, even I only, am left ; and they seek my life, to take it away. And the Lord said unto him, Go, return on thy way to the wilderness of 
Damascus, and when thou comest, anoint Hazael to be king over Syria, and Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be king over 
Israel, and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah shalt thou anoint to be prophet in thy room ; and it shall come to pass, that him 
that escapeth the sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay, and him that escapeth from the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay. Yet I have left me 
seven thousand in Israel, ald the knees which have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which hath not kissed him.” Upon this pas- 
sage of Scripture we shall only offer two further observations, important as it is in an historical point of view, as proving the extreme and 
almost universal state of idolatry into which the Jewish nation had fallen in the age of their two most famous prophets, Elijah and Elisha; 
viz., that the reiteration in the same sentence of the word every after all, removes the possibility of doubt that the entire number of the 
faithful in Israel was at the period alluded to only seven thousand men ; and, secondly, that it was a Peruvian custom, noticed by Acosta 
in his ‘Natural and Moral History of the Indies,’ to raise the hand to the lips, and kiss it, as a sign of adoration to the sun, to which there 

is an allusion in the twenty-seventh verse of the thirty-first chapter of the book of Job. 

NOTES. 213 

de los mas ancianos que alli estaba preso, dijo que lo oyeron todos : Sepa Montezuma, que una sola palabra le quiero 
decir lo que ha de ser dél, que ya estan puestos en camino los que nos han de vengar de las injurias y trabajos-que 
nos ha hecho y hace, y no le quiero decir mas, sino que espere lo que presto ha de acontecer. Todo lo cual le fue 
contado y oydo a Montezuma, y sin mostrar ninguna pesadumbre, antes rostro sereno y alegre, pretendiendo sacar de 
ellos todo lo que deseaba, dijo a los sefiores: Ruego os que vayais alla y los torneis 4 preguntar que modo de gente 
és la que viene, que via 6 que camino traen, y que es lo que pretenden. Ellos fueron 4 cumplir su mandado, y llega- 
dos 4 la carcel no hallaron hombre en ella. Los carceleros temerosos de la ira de su rey, viendo que los presos se 
les habian ido, dejando las carceles cerradas como se estaban con sus piedras y cerraduras, se fueron 4 postrar delante 
del rey y 4 mostrarle su inocencia, y no haber sido causa de su huida, sino haber sido por sus artes y mafias. Monte- 
zuma los mand6 levantar diciendo, no les diese nada, que él los castigaria; y mandando fuesen 4 todos los lugares de 
que aquellos hechiceros eran naturales, que les derribasen las casas y matasen 4 sus mugeres é hijos, y les guemasen 
los sitios de las casas, hasta que saliese el agua dellos, que todas sus haciendas fuesen saqueadas y robadas de los 
muchachos, y que si ellos pareciesen 6 fuesen hallados en algun tiempo, fuesen apedreados y echados 4 las bestias. El 
cual mandato fue luego cumplido, echando sogas 4 Jas gargantas de sus mugeres y hijos fueron arrastrados por toda 
la ciudad, y sus haciendas saqueadas y robadas de los muchachos y mozos de las ciudades de donde eran vecinos, y 
sus casas derribadas y cavados los sitios hasta descubrirse el agua; de lo cual fue dada noticia y respuesta a Monte- 
zuma. Los hechiceros nunca mas fueron hallados, ni se tubo mas noticia dellos, aunque en buscarlos se puso toda la 
diligencia posible. Desde este dia reyné en el corazon de Montezuma tanta tristeza y afliccion que jamas le vian el 
rostro alegre, antes huyendo toda conversacion se encerraba en su recogimiento y secreto con el Texiptla, comunican- 
dole lo que aquestos hechiceros y sortilegos le habian declarado, mostrando grandisimo pesar y congoja de que se le 
hubiesen huido, creyendo que si algun tiempo mas se detuvieran, sacara de ellos todos los sucesos que esperaba, 
doliendose de la poca culpa que sus mugeres y hijos habian tenido para hacerlos matar, no habiendole ofendido en 

ninguna cosa.” 

Nore LI. Page 272. 

Having traced the resemblance between the laws of the Mexicans and the Jews in the more essential features of 
their criminal code, something remains to be said of their ritual observances, in which the likeness to the ceremonial 
law of the Jews will be found no less striking. This likeness, which principally consisted in the respect which the 
Mexicans displayed for their sabbaths, in their religious observance of vows, in their frequent use of ablutions as a | 
mode of purification from sin, and in their institution of colleges for the public education of youth, in which the 
rites and ceremonies of their religion were the primary object of instruction, has been already pointed out in these 
Notes, and will fully appear from the following extracts from the hundred and seventy-fifth chapter of the ‘Historia 
Apologetica’ of Las Casas: “Todo lo quese ha dicho de los sacrificios y ceremonias en ellos de las gentes de la Nueva 
Espafha y de las provincias contenidas en ella, que comunmente Ilamaban los Indios en su lengua ‘Anauac’, que 
quiere decir, ‘tierra grande cercada y rodeada en agua’, (debianlo decir por estar entre los dos mares, la del Norte 
y la que llamamos del Sur, y es nombre compuesto de ‘atl’, que es el agua, y ‘nauacac’, que quiere decir, dentro 6 en 
rededor,) asi que todo lo dicho de esta Nueva Espafia, que comprende muchas provincias, en especial las del rifion de 
la tierra, sin las que estan hacia las costas de la mar, lo he sabido de los religiosos de San Francisco, que fueron los 
primeros religiosos que en aquella tierra entraron, y supieron muy bien la lengua Mexicana, y han sido curiosos y 
diligentes en preguntar a los Indios viejos despues que se convirtieron y fueron Cristianos, de los ritos, cerimonias, 
sacrificios y religion de su infidelidad; pero ninguna cosa de ello vieron, sino por relacion de los mismos Indios lo 
supieron. Lo que abajo se dira de los ritos y sacrificios, se ha dicho arriba, quando hablabamos de los sacerdotes que 
habia en la provincia de los que llamaban Totones, 6 Totonacas*, que estaban poblados hacia la costa de la mar del 

* The allusion which Las Casas makes in the same chapter to a rite practised in the case of female children by the Totonacas de- 
serves to be compared with what Echevarria says on the same subject in the two hundred and fifth page of the present volume, who 
evidently had not perused the following passage of the seventeenth book of Strabo’s Geography, which converts his apparently valid 
objection into a new argument in favour of the religious rites of the Mexicans and the Totonacas having been derived from the Jews : “ Kas 
Touro Oe Twy Syroupeveny pueAroree mop avTOIS, TO mare. TPEPEly TH yevenprevcer Mein, HOI TO MEepITEmvElY Ha TH InAge ExTEUVELY, omep xa ToIg Tovdceose 
YOMLIMOY, xb OTOL elow Aiyumrios To avexabey xalamep cipyxopey.” ‘Id de maxime laudatis eorum moribus est, quod omnem prolem educant : 

VOL. VIII. (31) 

B14 NOTES. 

Norte, que es la primera que yendo de Espafia hallamos, lo hube de persona que siendo muchacho lo vido por sus Ojos, 
estando solo entre aquellas gentes sin otro Espafol alguno, al principio que en la Nueva Espafia entraron Christianos, 

circumcidunt etiam mares, et foeminas excidunt, quod Judeis est legitimum, qui ut supra diximus, cum de eis loqueremur, origine sunt 
FEgyptii.” The learned Ludolfus likewise makes mention of the existence of a similar rite amongst the Abyssinians, who, as all per- 
sons conversant with history must admit, had derived many of their customs from the Jews, and preserved many of the usages of the 
old law. The same is further attested by Alvarez in the twenty-second chapter of his work on Ethiopia, which he has entitled ‘Ho 
Preste Joam das Indias’: “ Circticisio quem quer lha faz sem nenhiia cerimonia: somente dizem que assi ho acham escrito nos livros 
@ deos m&dou circuncidar. E nf se espate qué isto ler, G tambem circticidam as femeas como machos, ho que ni era ni ley velha.” 
Ludolfus notices the same rite in the two hundred and seventy-third page of his Commentaries on his Ethiopian History, where, how- 
ever, with a degree of unjustifiable scepticism, he prefers the testimony of his obscure friend Gregory the Abyssinian, to that of the 
illustrious Damian a Goes, the celebrated historian of the reign of Don Emanuel king of Portugal, and confessedly one of the most 
learned men of his age, the rival in public estimation with Paul Jovius; and he utterly rejects the testimony of Zagazabo in his Con- 
fession of Faith annexed by Damian a Goes to his treatise ‘ De Fide, Religione, Moribusque Aithiopum’, even going so far as to 
question the reality of Zagazabo’s embassy to the king of Portugal, and defers just as little to the authority of Francisco Alvarez on 
this and some other material questions, whom, nevertheless, he acknowledges to be the only writer on the affairs of Abyssinia on whose 
relation perfect reliance could be placed. It is evident, however, that Ludolfus had never seen the original work of Francisco Alvarez, 
which was published at Lisbon in the year 1540, with the title of Ho Preste Joam das Indias, of which the Spanish translation, 
printed by Padilla at Antwerp in 1557, is not the mere epitome made by an ignorant man, as stated by Ludolfus, but a very fair and 
correct version of the Portuguese original, with the single omission of the prologue or dedication to the king of Portugal, which only 
occupies one leaf in the original work, and in which the author informs the king that he made a journey to Paris for the express purpose 
of procuring the best printing materials for the publication of his manuscript: “ Fu: a Paris buscar estampas caratules de letras officiaes 
& outras cousas convenientes a impressam, has quaes nom sam de menos primor & calidade que has de Italia, Franca & Alemanha, onde 
mais esta arte florece, como vossa alteza pode ver polla obra que tenho assentada nesta cidade.” This concession, may, however, on the 
other hand, be made to Ramusio, that the Spanish version might in some places have been more literal; that a few unimportant passages 
have been omitted in the translation ; that the author’s division of his work into chapters, each with a distinct title, has not been followed ; 
that it wants the prologue or dedication to the king, the place of which has been supplied in the Spanish translation by a long preface, 
entitled ¢ Principio de la Historia de Etiopia’, composed, as it would appear, by Padilla himself; and that the title of the original Portu- 
guese work, Ho Preste Joam das Indias, has been changed in the Spanish translation into that of ‘ Historia de las Cosas de Etiopia’. 
These errors are, however, not the only ones into which Ludolfus has been betrayed by his never having had the opportunity of consult- 
ing the original Portuguese edition of the History of Ethiopia by Alvarez,—which work, from its excessive rarity, is now hardly known to 
exist,—and by his unreasonable suspicions of the fidelity of the Spanish translation of the same work by Padilla, which we here parti- 
cularly notice, since the criticisms of that learned man are calculated to undermine the foundations of Ethiopian history, which, however 
neglected in the present age, must be alike interesting to the scholar and the divine, connected as it is with the existence for many ages 
of a powerful Christian state, in the very heart of Africa, whose traditions mount upwards to the Apostolic times, their rule of faith being 
the Canons of the Apostles, whose rites differed extremely from those of the Catholic Church,—as evidently appears from their admini- 
stering the sacrament of the communion ¢o infants in their mothers’ arms, and refraining from baptizing children, if males, until forty days 
after their birth, and if females, until sixty, alleging that if such children died before they received the baptismal rite, the faith of their 
mothers ensured their salvation,—and whose books, laying aside the exaggerated, but not intentionally false, reports of Urreta!, were very 
numerous, as even appears by the testimony of Alvarez, in the following passage of the ninth chapter of the second part of his Ho Preste 
Joam das Indias: “ Nas igrejas ha muitas imagées pintadas pollas paredes. Imagées de nosso Sfor & de nossa Sfiora & dos apostolos 
& patriarcas & profetas & anjos: & em todas has igrejas sam Jorge. Nam tem imagées de vultu. Muitos livros nas igrejas escritos 
todos em pregaminho, porg nam ha hi papel & ha escritura lingoa tigia que he ha da primeira terra em que se comecou x¥andade;” which 

1 Urreta makes mention, in the ninth chapter of the first book of his History of Ethiopia, of the two monasteries in Mount Amara, 
and the innumerable books contained in the library of the one named Santa Cruz, the list of which was not, as Ludolfus seems to sup- 
pose, a work of Urreta’s own imagination, but, as the author himself declares, “el aranzel que se traxo al sumo Pontifice Gregorio 
decimotercio,” “a transcript of a catalogue which was sent to Pope Gregory the Thirteenth ;” to which again adverting in the same 
chapter he says, “ Esta tabla que he puesto en este capitulo es parte de un indice y aranzel que hizo de todos ellos Antonio Grico y 
Lorengo Cremones, embiados por el Papa Gregorio decimotercio, 4 instancia del Cardenal Zarleto, los quales fueron 4 la Etiopia solo 
para reconocer la libreria, en compafiia de otros que eran embiados para lo proprio, y vinieron admirados de ver tantos libros, que 
en su vida vieron tantos juntos, y todos de mano y en pergamino.” It is evident from this passage that books written on parchment in 
the ancient character of Abyssinia were common when that country was first visited by the Portuguese; and it is probable that many 
of the works of the ancient fathers unknown to the Latin, and long forgotten in the Greek church, were preserved in the monasteries of 
Ethiopia, to which it would appear the early Christians fled in the first instance to seek a place of refuge from persecution, and where 
afterwards, increasing in numbers, they founded an ecclesiastical state, which, whilst the use of firearms was unknown, and the art of war, 
especially in Africa, was in its infancy, was capable of maintaining its independence during many a long and dark age, and of repelling 
the invasions of the Arab and other native African tribes. 

NOTES. 215 

del qual no se guardaron, lo uno por ser muchacho, y lo otre porque estaba solo, y lo otro porque lo tubieron por hijo 

passage is thus translated into Spanish by Padilla in the two hundred and fourth page of his edition of Alvarez: ‘“ Por las paredes de las 
yglesias ay muchas ymagines pintadas de nuestro Sefior y de nuestra Sefiora, y de los apostoles, patriarcas, prophetas, angeles, y en todas 
comunmente tienen a San Jorge. No tienen estatuas de bulto. Por las yglesias ay muchos libros escritos en pargamino, y la escritura 
y lengua comun es de la primera tierra, donde comengo la Christiandad dellos.” Dismissing, however, the exaggerated accounts of the 
missionaries, who seem to have imagined that they had discovered a new Alexandrian library in Abyssinia, and whose credulity perhaps 
finds its best apology in the wonderful novelties which about the same time first displayed themselves to the astonished gaze of Europe, 
causing nothing to be esteemed improbable that came within the range of possibility, we shall proceed to correct some of the fallacies 
into which the celebrated Ludolfus has been betrayed, and especially the false impression under which he laboured respecting the sources 
from which Damian a Goes derived his information concerning the manners of the Abyssinians, and the reality of Zagazabo’s embassy 
from the court of Abyssinia to the king of Portugal, and also respecting the personal character and qualifications of Zagazabo, especially 
his knowledge of various languages, eminently fitting him to discharge the duties of his embassy to Portugal. The errors of Ludolfus 
on these three points will become immediately apparent from a comparison of the following passages of the two hundred and fifty-ninth 
page of his Commentaries on his Ethiopian History, with the hundred and fifteenth chapter of Alvarez’s History of Ethiopia, to which 
we have subjoined Padilla’s translation: “ Legatio istius viri ([zaga-Zaabi) ad Lusitanos etiam dubits sat gravibus laborat. Cum 
rex JEthiopiz illum in Lusitaniam legatum destinasset, interrogavit Alvarezium, Num eum idoneum putaret? quod ille affirmavit, Quia 
ita se gesserit, ut cum illo fuerint contenti. Describit eum Damianus a Goéz, quod fuerit vir senex, nobilis, patrid Habessinus, sacerdos 
sacrorum, et Chaldaice, i.e. Aithiopice lingue peritus, et quod nobilium aulicorum comitatum secum adduxerit. Verum quid in 
Lusitanid egerit et quare Romam non iverit, cum tamen literis non solum ad regem Johannem III. sed et ad Pontificem Romanum 
instructus fuerit, parum compertum habeo. Religio certé in causa esse non potuit, nondum enim tunc temporis Habessini pro hereticis 
habebantur: schismaticorum vero legati, uti Russorum autocratoris, a Pontificibus Romanis admittuntur.” Of the reality of Zagazabo’s 
embassy to the king of Portugal, and his fitness to discharge the duties of his mission, no one can entertain a reasonable doubt who 
attentively peruses the following passage of the hundred and fifteenth chapter of the first part of Alvarez’s Ho Preste Joam das Indias: 
“‘ Neste lugar nestes dias detreminou ho Preste Joa mandar embaixador a Portugal, que ate qui n3 mandaua ninhum : & nos madou chamar a 
ho embaixador & a mi: & disse q detreminaua mandar cé nosco a el rei de Portugal, pera seus deseios mais breueméte hauerem efeito sendo 
la seu requeréte, se nos parecia Zagazabo ser sufficiéte pera este caminho, por quato sabia falar ha nostra lingua, § fora ja a nossas terras. 
Nos lhe respondimos q Zagazabo era bem sufficiente pa este caminho & pera sua alteza madar, porg era homem que se entendia bem com 
nosco & nos com elle, & que ni hauia mester turgima: & que agora fazia sua alteza ho que deuia, porg da vinda mais credito hauia de 
dar a hos seus naturaes do que vissé & ouuissem dos estranhos, que nam a hos estranhos ho que dissesse de si mesmos.” It deserves to 
be remarked that both in this passage of Alvarez’s original history, and in the Spanish translation annexed to it, the king of Abyssinia, as 
well as all the Portuguese who accompanied Alvarez on his mission to Abyssinia, admit that Zagazabo understood the Portuguese language 
well and could speak it fluently, and also that he had been himself before in Portugal, “ Aqui en este lugar de Dara, determiné el empe- 
rador embiar proprio embaxador 4 Portugal en nuestra compafiia, paraque teniendo quien hiziesse sus negocios, estuviesse el mas seguro 
del buen fin dellos. Preguntaron nos, si seria sufliciente para este Zagazabo, pues ya otras veces avia estado en nuestras tierras, y sabia © 
hablar nuestra lengua. Respondiose que era bien pensado aquello, y que Zagazabo era bastante para ello, pues entendia los negocios y sabia 
la lengua, y que assi daria su Alteza mas credito 4 sus naturales de las cosas de los estrangeros, que no a los mesmos estrangeros.” (Elistoria 
de Ethiopia, fol. 155. edit. Antwerp.) To the above testimony of Alvarezas to the fitness of Zagazabo to discharge the duties of his mission 
as an ambassador at the court of Portugal, we subjoin that of Damian a Goes, who, from familiar acquaintance with Zagazabo, thus 
describes the character and qualifications of that eminent man in the concluding chapter of his treatise ‘De moribus Aithiopum’: “ Cum 
perfunctus Germanicis et Sarmaticis legationibus, e Belgica ad regem meum Joannem ejus nominis tertium redeo, cujus plurimam in me 
excipiendo et humanitatem et munificentiam expertus sum, Ulyssipone in colloquium Aithiopici legati incido, viri et episcopali dignitate 
venerabilis, et fide, doctrind, ac eloquentié Chaldaice et Arabice lingue admirabilis, et in summé done, qui a potentissimo Aithiopum 
imperatore ad maximos principes dé maximis rebus mitteretur. Huic autem nomen fuit Zagazabo, cum eo post initam inter nos firmissi- 
mam et constantissimam amicitiam, seepius sermonem miscui, variasque disputationes habui, presertim de moribus et religione Aithiopum 
Christianorum, cupiebam enim eas res non ex verbis interpretantium peregrinorum, sed ab indigena coram et ore tenus cognoscere.” 
He then adds: “ Postmodum vigente inter nos tam vera Christi charitate et amicitid, ausus sum ab eo petere planam et legitimam Aithiopum 
fidei et religionis enarrationem, eamque sud manu describi, quod mihi summa cum alacritate concessit; illamque statim describere 
incepit; sententiam summa fide in Latinam linguam refudi, ut ex sequentibus patebit.” And here we may be permitted to remark, that 
the reason assigned by Damian a Goes for undertaking the laborious task of writing a history of the religion of the Aithiopians, and to 
which he adverts in the following terms in the last chapter of that work: “Id vero, conscientid urgente, eo ardentius aggressus sum, 
quod non ignorem, si hec apud me periissent, a nemine mortalium unquam in lucem proditura fuissent,” is that which has led to 
the publication of the present volumes. To the last objection of Ludolfus, respecting the reality of Zagazabo’s embassy to the king 
of Portugal, which is entirely grounded on his long delay in Portugal without proceeding to Rome to deliver his credentials to the Pope, 
a most satisfactory answer is afforded by Alvarez himself at the commencement of the ninth chapter of the second part of his History of 
Ethiopia, since nothing can be plainer than that the reason which detained Alvarez so long in Portugal, who was most anxious to be 
the bearer to Rome of the letter which the king of Abyssinia had charged him to deliver to the Pope, and which was no other than the 
king of Portugal’s positive refusal to let him depart, would have been an equally powerful motive for detaining Zagazabo in Portugal and 
preventing his going to Rome. “Sendo mos em corte na cidade de Coimbra, nam se tardou muito que el rey nosso sfor se partisse cé 

216 NOTES. 

del Sol* y lo amaban. Este despues siendo hombre de bien y tenido por buen Cristiano, me dio por escrito por mi 
rogado, lo que dire tocante 4 la religion, cerimonias, sacrificios, leyes y costumbres de aquella provincia de los 
Totones 6 Totonacas. De donde podran entenderse muchas particularidades que en los susodichos sac rificios y 
cerimonias y ritos, y en los que de aquellas gentes y reynos de la Nueva Espana y Guatimala se refieren, no se 
espresan. Comenzando pues 4 contar la religion de los Totones 6 Totonacas (supuesto lo que arriba dejimos de su 
sacerdocio, y de los dioses que en la dicha provincia tenian) el ordinario y cotidiano culto y sacrificio que los sacer- 
dotes hacian, era que luego que salia el sol de mafiana, el sumo pontifice, que dejimos llamarse alli Papa, iba delante 
y los otros en renglera detras de él (porque los Indios todos acostumbran ir como grullas tras uno & otro}, aunque 
sean cien mil, sino es en guerra,) y entraban en el templo. Entrados hacian su mesara y acatamiento, abajadas las 
cabezas y corvados algo los cuerpos: alli se encomendaban 4 Dios 6 4 los dioses, 6 al Sol, 6 4 lo que representaban 
los idolos: luego el segundo sacerdote en dignidad de seis que por sus grados eran, traia un incensario de barro, 6 
sahumerio 4 manera de una sarten, lleno de ascuas encendidas, y el Papa 6 sumo pontifice sacaba de un calabazuelo 
que alli tenia, unos olores suaves de ciertas especies aromaticas y copal, que es el ordinario y comun incienso, y 
ponialo en las brasas, tocandolo con la mano como bendiciendolo. Iba luego aquel segundo sacerdote, y poniase 
derecho al cielo, alzando en alto el sahumerio tres veces haciendo reverencia al Sol, de donde segun opinaba y 

sua corte via dalmeirim: onde algiias vezes lébrey a sua alteza q me mandasse céprir ho caminho G @ ho preste Joam pmetera & jurara 
fazer. s. leuar suas cartas & hia cruz douro & obediencia a ho santo padre em Roma. Sua alteza me dezia ¢ era disso bé lembrado, mas 
@ hos caminhos n& daua lugar pollas guerras de Franga. Deste Almeiri se partio sua alteza pera ha cidade de Lixboa cé sua corte, 
onde polla maneira sobredita lembrei a sua alteza de meu despacho pera Roma. Ha reposta acima dita me deu. Em isto Bras Neto foi 
dito embaixador ni se dizédo pera onde. Elle Bras Neto rogaua a mim que requeresse a el rey que me mandasse com elle. Pedi a el 
rey por merce ¢ me mandasse cd Bras Neto, pois hia a Roma: Sua alteza me disse G Bras Neto hia a ho emperador & nam a Roma & 
g era bem lébrado de me mandar, mas que eu nd podia hir seni quado fosse D6 Martinho g cedo ho despacharia. Em isto vagando hit 
beneficio no arcebispo de Braga, sua alteza me fez merce delle & com sua apresentagam me mandou a ho arcebispo q me céfirmasse : 
sendo eu cé sua senhoria jamais cessaua de me preguntar por cousas do preste Joam. Eu lhe respondia na verdade como ho eu muy 
bem sabia & sua senhoria tudo mandaua escreuer, & has preguntas & repostas sam has seguintes.” Padilla’s translation of the above 
passage is as follows: “Estando la corte en la ciudad de Coymbra, no se tardo mucho que el rey se partio via de Almerin, adonde 
algunas vezes acorde a su alteza, gue me embiasse a cumplir lo que yo prometiera y jurara al emperador de Etiopia, que era llevar sus 
cartas y obediencia, con una cruz de oro al Papa: y su Alteza me respondio, que bien se acordava dello, pero que las guerras de Francia 
no davan lugar. De aqui se partio a Lisbona, y alli se lo torne a acordar, y me dio la mesma respuesta. En esto fue nombrado Blas 
Nieto por embaxador, y como se sospechasse que para Roma, torne a suplicar a su Alteza que me embiasse con el, y respondiome que 
lo embiava al emperador, y que yo no podia yr, hasta que Don Martin fuesse a Roma, y que presto lo despacharia.. Entre tanto vaco 
un beneficio en el arzobispado de Braga, y su Alteza me hizo merced del, embiando me al arzobispo para que lo confirmasse: y estando 
yo con su sefioria, nunca dexava de preguntarme mil cosas de Etiopia, a lo qual le respondi con toda verdad segun lo sabia, y escrevi 
aqui las respuestas, que son las siguientes.” 

* This appellation might possibly have been given to the Spaniards from the superior fairness of their complexion, since the Mexicans 
named Alvarado ‘ Tonatiuh’, or the sun, on the same account. It deserves, however, to be remarked, that .Quetzalcoat!, who was 
typically represented by the sun and traditionally described as a man brighter than the sun, had foretold, that in the year of Ce Acatl, 
or One Cane, the Mexicans might expect the arrival of his sons in their territory; and this might have led the Totonacas to bestow the 
epithet of ‘ Children of the Sun’ on the Spaniards. 

+ It is not easy to account for the predilection which the Indians manifested for this singular mode of marching, except on the supposi- 
tion that the narrow and intricate paths of the American forests might have rendered it more convenient for them to follow each other in 
the same track, than by going abreast to run the chance of losing their way in the dreary woods and marshes which they traversed. 
Dr. Boudinot notices this custom in the following passage of the fourth chapter of his Star in the West: “It is remarkable that the 
people, especially the Kamschatkians, in their marches never go but in Indian file, following one another in the same track. Some of the 
nations in this quarter prick their flesh with small punctures with a needle in various shapes, then rub into them charcoal, blue liquid, 
or some other colour, so as to make the marks to become indelible, after the manner of the more eastern nations. Bishop Louth, in his 
notes on the sixteenth verse of the forty-ninth chapter of Isaiah, says: ‘This is certainly an allusion to some practice, common among 
the Jews at that time, of making marks on their hands and arms by punctures on the skin with some sort of sign or representation of 
the city or temple, to show their affection and zeal for it. They had a method of making such punctures indelible by fire, or staining ; 
and this art is practised by travelling Jews all over the world at this day.’ Vide also his note on Chapter xlv. 5th verse. Thus it is 
with our northern Indians, they always go in Indian file, and mark their flesh just as above represented. ‘The writer of this has seen an 
aged Christian Indian Sachem, of good character, who sat for his portrait. On stripping his neck to the lower part of his breast, it 
appeared that the whole was marked with a deep bluish colour in various figures very discernible. On being asked the reason of it he 
answered, with a heavy sigh, that it was one of the follies of his youth, when he was a great warrior, before his conversion to Christianity ; 
and now, says he, I must bear it as a punishment for my folly, and carry the marks of it to my grave.” 

NOTES. ONT, 

creian los otros dioses habian descendido. Acabada esta cerimonia, y reverencia hecha y sacrificio al Sol ofrecido, 
el sumo pontifice tomaba el incensario, é ibase primero al Dios 6 idolo que arriba dejimos estar de los otros en medio, 
como 4 principal, y sahumabalo tres veces : de alli pasaba 4 los otros, 4 cada uno de los quales incensaba 6 sahumaba 
una vez: despues daba el incensario al segundo, que parece que como diacono le servia: y esto bien parece, porque 
luego que lo tomaba, zncensaba 6 sahumaba al sumo pontifice, y despues 4 los otros sacerdotes; uno de los quales, 
tomando el incensario, iba al sumo pontifice, y poniase (como es proprio y comun entre los Indios) en cuclillas* con 
gran reverencia; y el pontifice tomaba de el calabazuelo de aquellas odoriferas especies, y ponialas en el incensario, 
saliendo fuera, y haciendo humildisimo acatamiento al Sol; luego aquella brasa ya tan bendita se repartia, y hechaba 
en quatro partes de los altares, los quales eran redondos: los demas sacerdotes tenian cada uno un incensario lleno 
de brasa, la qual derramaban por los altares dichos. Asentabase luego el sumo sacerdote, y los otros tambien, segun 
los grados de su dignidad y orden. A la hora de las ocho, 6 de las nueve, 6 entremedias, venian el Seftor principal 
y los nobles y caballeros, y con ellos toda la gente principal, y entraban en el templo. Antes que entrasen, quita- 
banse las cotaras 6 cactlis} (que era lo que traian por zapatos, que solo tienen suela hecha de cierto hilo que tienen, 
y con ciertas agujetas 6 lazos de muy bien adovado cuero, con que se las atan, y son muy bien hechas; en la lengua 
de esta isla Espafiola se llamaban cotaras, y cactlis en la de Mexico,) quitados sus calzados, y desnudos los pies, 
entrando en el templo, decian estas palabras en su lengua: Salvete Dios, ayudanos y conservanos en tu servicio. 
Hacian tras aquello wna ignorada oracion, la qual concluida, ibanse para el pontifice y para los otros sacerdotes, y 
abajaban sus cabezas, y decianles: El gran Sol y tu Dios te conserven la vida por muchos afios{; y luego se iban. 

* 1t would appear from the following passage of the second chapter of the book of Job, that to sit upon the ground was a posture of 
humility amongst the ancient Jews. ‘“ Now when Job’s three friends heard of all this evil that was come upon him, they came every 
one from his own place; Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite: for they had made an appoint- 
ment together to come to mourn with him and to comfort him. And when they lifted up their eyes afar off, and knew him not, they 
lifted up their voice, and wept; and they rent every one his mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven. So they sat 
down with him upon the ground seven days and seven nights, and none spake a word unto him: for they saw that his grief was very 
great.” That it was likewise a posture of reverence and supplication, indicative of the respect which the people felt for their priests, is 
evident from what is said in reference to Moses, in the third verse of the thirty-third chapter of Deuteronomy: “ Yea, he loved the people: 
all his saints are in thy hand: and they sat down at thy feet: every one shall receive of thy words.” We learn also, from the twenty-sixth 
verse of the twentieth chapter of Judges, that sitting, rather than kneeling, was the attitude in which the Jews besought the Lord in the 
temple; which singularly agrees with the Mexican custom of sitting before the shrine of Tezcatlipoca to ask forgiveness for their sins in 
the manner represented in the third page of the original Mexican painting which once formed a portion of the historical museum of Bo- 
turini: “Then all the children of Israel and all the people went up and came into the house of God, and wept, and sat there before the 
Lord, and fasted that day until even, and offered burnt-offerings and peace-offerings before the Lord.” And it further appears, from the 
thirty-eighth verse of the fourth chapter of the second book of Kings, that the Hebrew priests sat before their prophets and spiritual 
leaders exactly in the manner in which the Mexican priests are represented as sitting in the Mexican paintings before their idols and 
religious shrines: “And Elisha came again to Gilgal, and there was a dearth in the land, and the sons of the prophets were sitting before 
him: and he said unto his servant, Set on the great pot, and seethe pottage for the sons of the prophets.” 

+ Both the Mexicans and the Peruvians were accustomed to take off their sandals whenever they trod upon holy ground or entered 
the palaces of their kings. This agreement is an arbitrary custom between two Indian nations so remote from each other would seem to 
argue a common acquaintance on their part with the history of God’s appearing to Moses in the burning bush, and commanding him to 
take off his shoes because the place on which he stood was holy ground, as particularly recorded in the third chapter of Exodus. 

{ It is evident from the salutation with which Daniel accosts Darius in the sixth chapter of his Prophecies, that the same or a nearly 
similar form of salutation was in use amongst the Jews and the Mexicans, who both wished many years of life to those whose high station 
commanded their reverence; we consequently read, that no sooner had Darius visited Daniel in the den of lions, than the latter exclaimed, 
“«O king, live for ever!” Wonderful and miraculous as is the entire account in the sixth chapter of the book of Daniel of the den of lions 
and the prophet’s preservation, it would be wrong to suppose that the same chapter records no other extraordinary events, since nothing 
in history is more surprising than the example which it affords of servile adulation from the great men of a state to the person of their 
sovereign, or, on the other hand, of sudden change of sentiment in that very sovereign towards those same men who erred in the first instance 
with his actual approval, than the fact of Darius ordering the accusers of Daniel (who, it would appear, were the presidents and princes 
of Persia,) to be cast into the lions’ den, together with their innocent wives and children. The concluding decree of Darius in the same 
chapter, enjoining the belief in Jehovah throughout the provinces of the Persian empire, is likewise very remarkable, as showing a dispo- 
sition at that early time in the Persian kings to favour the Jewish religion, and to revere in the God who appeared to Moses in the 
flame of the bush, the holy fire to which the Magi offered up their vows, and which we are informed by Adair in the two hundred 
and eighty-sixth page of the present volume, the Indians considered the visible type and immediate emanation of the Deity ; whilst 
it deserves likewise to be compared with the memorable decree of Ahasuerus in favour of the Jews, in the eighth verse of the eighth 

VOL. VIII. G@arkeD) 

918 NOTES. 

Estas cerimonias y reverencia que los Sefores y nobles hacian, dicese no ser de precepto de su religion, sino de su 
yoluntad quando ellos querian; mas el pontifice y los sacerdotes de necesidad y precepto lo habian de hacer cada dia, 
porque en cosa ninguna se ocupaban ni podian ocuparse profana y temporal, sino aquel era su propio y ordinario oficio. 
La otra gente popular y ciudadana tampoco tenia obligacion de hacerlas, sino quando querian. Solamente los Sabados* 

chapter of the book of Esther; rendering it extremely probable that some centuries before the Christian wera the Jewish religion had 
taken deep root in many kingdoms of Asia, and had even penetrated before the age of Confucius to China, which we have other 
reasons, too long for enumeration here, for supposing. And this would explain the fact recorded in the fifth verse of the second chapter 
of the Acts of the Apostles, that “ Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven,” were dwelling at Jerusalem, and witnessed the 
descent of the fiery tongues upon the Apostles. 

* Amongst the many arguments which might be adduced to prove that the religious rites of the Indians were of Hebrew origin, how- 
ever corrupted in the course of ages by tradition, one not of the least convincing is, that they considered it a matter of religious duty to 
abstain from work on all religious festivals, or in other words, had sabbaths which they kept holy, by resting on them from all manner of 
labour. Oviedo takes notice of this curious analogy in the religious customs of the Indians and the Jews in the following passages of the third 
part of his inedited History of the Indies; and Calancha corroborates his testimony in his ‘Chronica Moralizada del Orden de S. Augustin 
en el Peru,’ which work he appears to have written for the express purpose of proving that Christian doctrines had in ancient times been 
preached throughout the provinces of Peru. The passages referred to in the history of Oviedo are the following, which we transcribe 
from the second chapter of the fourth book of the third part of his ‘ Historia de las Indias, Islas é Tierra-firme del Mar Oceano.’ They 
occur in a dialogue between an Indian and Franciscan friar, whose real name was Francisco de Bobadilla. It may be proper to remark, 
that the letters Y and F in these passages signify Indzan and Franciscan. “ F. Teneis tiempo sefialado por venir todos al templo? Y. En 
un afio tenemos veinte y un dias de fiestas, y no juntos estos dias, é privelegiados para no hacer cosa alguna, sino holgar, é emborracharse 
é cantar é bailar al rededor de la plaza, é no han de entrar dentro de ella persona alguna.—F’. En el tiempo de aquellas veinte y un 
fiestas que dezis que teneis cada afio, que fiesta 6 solemnidad hazeis 4 tales dias? Y. En aquellas fiestas no trabajamos, ni entendemos en 
mas de enborracharnos, pero no dormimos con nuestras mugeres, & aquellos dias por quitar la ocasion duermen ellas dentro en casa, é 
nosotros fuera de ella, y al que en tales dias se hecha con su muger nuestros dioses dan dolenzia luego de que muere, é por eso ninguno 
lo osa hazer, porque aquellos dias son dedicados 4 nuestros dioses.” The above extract presents another feature of analogy in the manners 
of the Indians and the Jews, which is curiously illustrated in the speech of David to.the high priest Ahimelech, in the fifth verse of the 
twenty-first chapter of the first book of Samuel. The passage in which Calancha corroborates the testimony of Oviedo, respecting its 
being considered a religious duty by the Indians to refrain from all work on their sabbath days, is the following, which is taken from the fifth 
chapter of the second book of his Chronicle of the religious Order of Saint Augustin in Peru. It deserves, however, to be remarked, 
that Calancha is speaking of the religious customs of the Peruvians, whilst Oviedo is describing those of the people of Nicaragua: 
“‘ Demas de las estatuas de piedra i oro que digimos, en que davan 4 entender tenian noticia del misterio inefable de la Santisima Tri- 
nidad, les quedo noticia del santisimo sacramento del altar, de la adoracion de la cruz, de la confesion de pecador al oido del sacerdote, 
del agua bendita, i las ceremonias del bautismo. Creian la immortalidad del anima, i que avia premios i castigos para los malos i 
buenos despues desta vida, i diferentes sillas i lugares para las animas en el otro siglo. Observavan el orar por los muertos, i tenian por 
virtud ed ofrendar por los difuntos. Ayunavan, i solo era su ayuno no comer cosa con sal ni agi, 1 solo una vez, i tener castidad. Guar- 
davan las fiestas sin hacer obra corporal.” To the foregoing testimonies of Oviedo and Calancha respecting the observance of the Indian 
sabbath, we shall add that of Dr. Boudinot, who referring, in the 165th page of his ‘Star in the West,’ to Mr. William Bartram’s ¢ Journal 
of his Travels through the Creek Country,’ states on the authority of that gentleman, and afterwards on his own, that the Indians kept the 
seventh day religiously sacred to the great spirit. The following is the passage in which this curious fact is recorded: “ Mr. Bartram 
says, while he was at Attasse in the Creek nation on a sabbath day, he observed a great solemnity in the town, and a remarkable silence 
and retiredness of the red inhabitants. Few of them were to be seen, the doors of their dwellings were shut, and if a child chanced to 
stray out, it was quickly drawn in-doors again. He asked the meaning of this, and was immediately answered, that it being the white 
people’s sabbath the Indians kept it religiously sacred to the great spirit. The writer of this being present on the Lord’s day at the 
worship of seven different nations, who happened (accidentally) to be at the seat of government together, he was pleased to see their 
orderly conduct. They were addressed by an old sachem, apparently with great energy; and an interpreter being present, he asked him 
to explain what the speaker had said. The interpreter answered, that the substance of what he delivered was a warm representation to 
his audience of the love the great spirit had always manifested towards the Indians more than to any other people; that they were in a 
special manner under his government and immediate direction; that it was therefore the least return they could make for so much 
goodness, gratefully to acknowledge his favour and to be obedient to his laws, to do his will, and to avoid everything that was evil and of 
course displeasing to him. Just before the service began, the writer of this observed an Indian standing at the window with the inter- 
preter, looking into a small field adjoining the house, where a great many white children were playing with the Indian children and 
making a considerable noise. The Indian spoke much in earnest, and seemed rather displeased. ‘The interpreter answered him with 
great apparent interest. On being asked the subject of their conversation, he said the Indian was lamenting the sad state of those white 
children, whom he called poor destitute orphans. The interpreter asked why he thought them orphans; for he believed it was not true. 
The Indian with great earnestness replied, ‘Is not this the day on which you tcld me the white people worshiped the great spirit? If so, 
surely these children, if they had parents or any person to take care of them, would not be suffered to be out there playing and making such 
anoise. No, no! they have lost their fathers and their mothers, and have no one to take care of them.’” There are few persons, we 

—_ 

NOTES. 919 

era ley preceptiva, que todos grandes y chicos*, habian de ir de mafana 4 los templos, y estar en los patios + 
una hora. Luego comenzaban los sefiores y caballeros principales 4 ir al Dios del medio, que era el mas grande 
de cuerpo y dignidad, ante quien cada uno se sacrificaba de esta manera: traian veinte y cinco pajas, juntas como 
escoba, y con una navaja que cada uno tenia, se cortaba un pico de la lengua, no del todo, sino que devia darse 
alguna heridilla; y hacia un agujero por donde pudiesen entrar las pajas, y hecho, metianlas y sacabanlas, de donde 
mucha sangre les salia. Otro Sabado tornaban al templo, y no de las lenguas ofrecian sacrificio, sino de los muslos, 
y otros de los molledos de los brazos, y otros de los brazos, 4 palmo de la mano, y otros de los pechos, otros de los 
picos altos de las orejas, y asi cada semana se sacrificaban de un miembrof{. Los sacerdotes despues que habian 

believe, who will not, on perusing the above passage, feel inclined to think that there was something extremely Pharisaical in the Indian’s 
displeasure at seeing some children amusing themselves on the sabbath day, whose alleged zeal for the worship of the great spirit on 
that day seems much to have resembled that which was displayed by the Pharisees at seeing the disciples of Christ plucking the ears of 
corn on the sabbath day. It deserves, however, to be remarked, that the New Testament discountenances every attempt to enforce by 
penal enactments a rigid observance of the sabbath. And the apostle St. Paul, probably foreseeing that innovators would arise in the 
later days of the church, who would seek to introduce new doctrines on the subject of the sabbath, expressly says, in the sixteenth verse 
of the second chapter of his Epistle to the Colossians: “ Let xo man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holiday, 
or of the new moon, or of the sabbath days ;” grounding the advice there given on what he had previously declared in the fourteenth 
chapter of his Epistle to the Romans: “ Who art thow that judgest another man’s servant? to his own master he standeth or falleth. 
Yea, he shall be holden up: for God is able to make him stand. One man esteemeth one day above another: another esteemeth every day 
alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. He that regardeth the day, regardeth it unto the Lord; and he that regardeth 
not the day, to the Lord he doth not regard it. He that eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth God thanks; and he that eateth not, 
to the Lord he eateth not, and giveth God thanks.” 

* The Mexicans, young and old, children as well as grown up persons, were obliged to be present at the solemnization of their com- 
munion, or ‘teoqualo’, whence it may be inferred that their attendance at divine worship on their sabbaths was an equally indispensable 
religious duty. 

+ It is evident from many passages of the Old Testament, and especially from the Psalms, that the Jews were accustomed to worship 
in the courts of their temple, and not, as in our churches, in the interior of the edifice. It need scarcely be remarked, that no one temple 
could have been constructed sufficiently large for the religious accommodation of a whole nation. It was a boast, however, of the 
ancient Jews, that as they had but one God, so they had but one temple; and the Samaritans were considered heretics because they did 
not come up to Jerusalem to worship. That religion amongst the Jews was made subservient to political purposes can no more 
be doubted than that the unity of the Jewish monarchy, which the separation of the Jews into distinct and antisocial tribes had 
from the beginning hazarded, intimately depended on the unity of their national faith, on their having but one temple, and on their all 
going up annually to Jerusalem to worship; and so conscious was Jeroboam that the worship of Jehovah in his temple at Jerusalem 
was founded no less in reasons of state than sincere piety, that no sooner had he revolted from Rehoboam, and become himself 
the founder of a new dynasty, than his first care in order to insure the stability of his throne, and to prevent the sceptre reverting to 
Judah, was to destroy the bond of religious unity which till then had subsisted between all the tribes; which he so effectually did by 
appointing a new place of religious worship in Samaria, and setting up golden calves in Bethel, that never again was there any cordiality 
between the rival houses of Israel and Judah, but, on the contrary, the greatest enmity, and continual wars between their respective kings. 
The kings of Judah, on the contrary, were so fully sensible that orthodoxy was the line of policy best calculated to prevent the seat of 
empire being transferred to Samaria, that however inclined the greater number of them were to idolatry, there always arose some Jewish 
king who threw down the houses of the high places, and massacred without mercy the priests and religious votaries of Baal. 

+ The extreme tortures which the Mexicans inflicted upon themselves by way of voluntary penance, might lead one to suppose that 
they understood in a literal sense the words of Christ in the eighteenth chapter of the Gospel of St. Matthew; which, it deserves to be 
remarked, is a reiteration of the command given in the twenty-eighth verse of the fifth chapter of the same Evangelist, which immediately 
following the injunction of Christ to pluck out the eye if that member offended, might occasionally have led the Mexicans to punish the 
crime of visionary adultery with death, rather than resort to a hazardous experiment, which in most instances would have terminated 
fatally to the party accused, although there does certainly occur frequent representations in the Mexican paintings of persons undergoing 
the punishment of loss of sight. When, therefore, we learn from the twentieth verse of the twenty-fourth chapter of Leviticus, that to 
put out the eyes was, under certain circumstances, a Jewish punishment,—to which there is a very remarkable allusion in the fourteenth 
verse of the sixteenth chapter of Numbers,—and find from the words of the interpreter of the Vatican Codex, in the hundred and 
seventy-seventh page of the sixth volume of this work, that the Mexicans believed that Quetzalcoatl, whose name, literally interpreted, 
signifies the green-feathered serpent, was the first institutor of penance, who inculcated, by his example no less than by his precept, the 
doctrine of atonement and propitiation for sin by means of human blood; and further read in the two hundred and eighth page of the 
above-mentioned volume, that the same Quetzalcoatl died upon the cross for the sins of mankind; comparing the account there 
given, not only with the representations of crucifixions in the seventy-second and seventy-fifth pages of the Codex Borgianus, but 
likewise with the six figures engraved in Plate III. of the present volume, in all of which the person represented on the cross has 
the lower extremity of his body terminating in the tail of a serpent, which fully proves the ascendancy that the old superstitions of the 

990 NOTES. 

celebrado sus cerimonias y sacrificio, traiales un sacristan 6 ministro del templo unas escudillas 6 vasos grandes de 
cierto betumen negro, con los quales se untaban las caras y los cuerpos, y quedaban mucho mas negros que muy 

Mexicans maintained over their minds even after they had been converted to Christianity,—we cannot but peruse with increased interest 
the following passage of the above-mentioned chapter of the Gospel of St. Matthew, from which it is possible the Mexicans might have 
derived their doctrines of propitiation and penance. “ Woe unto the world because of offences! for it must needs be that offences come; 
but woe to that man by whom the offence cometh! Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast them from thee : 
it is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into everlasting fire. And if thine 
eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather than’ having two eyes to be 
cast into hell fire. ‘Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, that in heaven their angels do always behold 
the face of my Father which is in heaven.” It deserves to be remarked, that the concluding sentence of this passage might have induced 
the Mexicans to entertain many very extraordinary notions respecting the care which the Deity manifested for children, and the tutelary 
functions which their angels discharged before him as intercessors for mankind, some of which are explained in the five hundred and 
seventeenth page of the sixth volume of this work; whilst the declaration of Christ in the fourteenth verse of the same chapter of 
St. Matthew, “ Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish,” might have 
caused the Mexicans to believe that the souls of ald children who died in their infancy were immediately translated to the garden of 
Tonacaquauhtitlan, which signifies the place of the tree of life, or in other words, Paradise. This belief of the Mexicans is recorded by 
Sahagun in the fifty-fourth page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present volume. We shall elsewhere take occasion to remark, 
that traces of a belief in a millennium or future regeneration of the world, when the’souls of children would reanimate other bodies 
and again repeople the earth, are discoverable amongst the traditions of the Mexicans. And the same notion seems likewise to have 
been entertained by the Peruvians, who, as we have elsewhere observed, held many opinions in common with the Mexicans on this and 
some other curious and important subjects. Reverting again to the religious austerities which the Mexicans inflicted on those members 
of their body which were most likely to give them offence, we shall quote the following passage from the fifth chapter of the second part of 
Diego Duran’s inedited History of New Spain, which will show to what an extravagant pitch such austerities were carried by the Mexicans, 
who would really appear to have endeavoured to attain the kingdom of heaven by a practice which we learn from Christ himself, in the 
twelfth verse of the nineteenth chapter of the Gospel of St. Matthew, was not uncommon amongst the Jews of his age, and which, far from 
condemning, he even would seem rather to have approved: “Tambien hacian estos sacerdotes otras grandes penitencias, como era ayunar 
diez y cinco dias, siete dias arreo antes de algunas fiestas principales 4 manera de cuatro temporas: guardaban continencia, y muchos de 
ellos por no venir & caer en alguna flaqueza se hendian por medio los miembros viriles.y se hacian mil cosas para volverse impotentes por no 
ofender 4 sus dioses: no bebian vino; dormian muy poco, porque los mas de sus ejercicios eran de noche; como era atizar la lumbre, ir & 
los cerros 4 ofrecer sacrificios por los que se encomendaban, y era tan ordinario el acudir 4 ellos que fuesen a ofrecer sacrificios por ellos 4 
los montes, llevando ofrendas de incienso y comida y vino y ollin y caxetillos y escudillejas y cestillos, como lo es agora el traer la limosna 
para que les digan una misa, 6 como lo era en da ley vieja ofrecer becerros, corderos, cabrones, &c., 4 los sacerdotes por los pecados; en fin 
ellos se martirizaban bravisimamente, y con sus penitencias grandes estaban hechos martires del demonio, 4 trueque de que los tuviesen en 
opinion de santos y de ayunadores y penitencieros, y el que mas penitencia podia hacer, mas hacia para ser tenido en mas opinion, y asi 
jos llamaban Tlamaceuhque y Mozauhque, que quiere decir penitentes y abstinentes, de Jo cual recibian gran contento y vana gloria. 
Tambien tenian oficio de ir 4 enterrar los muertos y hacerlos osequias, y 4 unos enterraban en sus sementeras, y 4 otros en los patios de sus 
mismas casas, 4 otros llevaban 4 los sacrificadores de los montes, 4 otros quemaban y les enterraban en los Cues.” That the austerities of 
the Mexican priests were of the same nature, though exceeding in degree those practised by some of the early Christian sects who lived 
nearest to the apostolic age, is evident not only from the story related of Origen, but likewise from the canons of the apostles, which still 
retain the greatest authority in the Abyssinian church since Ludolfus referring to those canons in the fourth chapter of the third book 
of his Commentaries on his Ethiopian History, thus notices some customs which prevailed in the earliest ages of the Christian church ; 
and to which St. Paul alludes in the following passage of the third chapter of his Epistle to the Philippians: ‘ Beware of dogs; 
beware of evil workers; beware of the concision. For we are of the circwmetsion which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ 
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.” “ Quatuor canones hic uno comprehenduntur. Vigesimus primus apud Grecos agit de 
veris eunuchis: at sequentes tres agunt de eo 6 dxpwrypiacas éavroy, de eo qui sibimet amputat roy axpwva, sive ro dxpov, extremitatem 
scilicet membri virilis, i.e. BaAavoy, glandem, quam definit Pollux, lib. 2. Onom. c. 4. tit. 86. ro rou xevaov &xpov; eam enim quilibet sibi 
facilé amputare potest. Dubito num sic intellexerint, qui insufficienter reddunt, qui mutilavit se ipsum, male, qui sibi ipsi virilia 
amputavit; nam que de extremitate dicuntur, de toto accipienda non sunt. Nec exemplum dari puto aut causam, cur quis sibimet 
integra virilia cum vite periculo et dolore maximo abscindere voluerit. Igitur éxpornpiafew, ut verbum sonat, de sola glande accipiendum. 
Id cum apud glossatores canonum apostolicorum non reperissem, addendum hic esse censui.” Of the authority which the canons of 
the apostles have always maintained in the most ancient Christian church of Abyssinia, and the obstacles which those canons presented 
to the introduction of Catholicism amongst the Abyssinians, we have the testimony of Ludolfus in the following passage of the three 
hundred and fortieth page of his Commentaries on his Ethiopian History: “ Habessini igitur serid credentes ab ipsis apostolis canones 
illos profectos fuisse, a patribus societatis nullo modo persuaderi potuerunt, ut ritus Romanos istis canonibus contrarios admitterent : 
autoritatem enim apostolicam pontificia semper opposuerunt, nec unquam moveri potuerunt argumento patrum societatis, pontificem 
Romanum, tanquam universalem Christi in terris vicarium, ista bené mutare et aliter ordinare potuisse. Ut satis constet frustra cum 
illis de ecclesia ordinanda fore omnia colloquia, priusquam de autoritate talium canonum melius informentur. Sed nec hoc fieri poterit, 

NOTES. LI 

negros de Guinea. Y 4 obra de las diez del dia, se iban 4 recoger 4 un aposento grande, que para esto era deputado, 
y arrimado cada uno en su silla, segun la orden y dignidad de cada uno, venian luego los sirvientes, todos tiznados 

-priusquam statum ecclesia primitive, scripta antiquorum patrum et contentiones de ritibus olim habitas, et non nisi in canonibus istis 
decisis, bené percipiant et plané comperta habeant. Id vero quatuor vel quinque annis, quibus patres societatis eos ad ecclesiam Ro- 
manum Alphonzi Mendezii patriarche Lusitanici ope traducere voluerunt, effici non potuit.” Remarkable as the fact must doubtless 
appear,—that traces of a usage which in some measure was allied to circumcision, and which it would appear from St. Paul’s Epistle to 
the Philippians was a distinctive mark of a numerous sect of Jewish or Gentile converts to Christianity in his day, should have been dis- 
covered by the Spaniards, together with circumcision in various provinces of America,—it is no less true than surprising that such traces 
of Judaism blended with Paganism were extremely common amongst the Indians, and existed in many provinces of America very remote 
from each other. That such was the case is attested by the concurrent testimony of Spanish writers of the greatest veracity, and likewise 
by the evidence of original Mexican paintings. The practice of concision, for example, together with the rite of circumcision, was discovered 
by Palacio among the Indians of Honduras, and is expressly mentioned by him in the following passage of his inedited Memorial to Philip the 
Second of Spain, dated Guatemala, March, 1576: “ Hacia la parte que deste lugar van 4 Gracia 4 Dios en Honduras, son Indios Chontales. 
Averigué estando alii un delito contra un cacique del lugar de Gotera, el cual desde su gentilidad tenia el miembro hendido y abierto, que era 
una de las gentilidades que usaban antiguamente los mas valientes, é que el afio 63 en otro lugar cercano que se llama Cezori, ciertos Indios 
idolatraron en un monte en sus terminos, y entre ellos que uno se harpé y hendié su miembro, y que circuncidaron cuatro muchachos de doce ajtos 
para arriba al uso Judaico,y la sangre que salié de ellos Ja sacrificaron 4 un idolo de piedra redondo, llamado Ycelaca, con dos caras atras y 
adelante, y con muchos ojos; decian que este era el dios que sabia lo presente y lo pasado y via todas las cosas: tenia untadas ambas caras 
y Ojos con sangre, y sacrificaronle venados, gallinas, conejos, aji, chian y otras cosas que ellos usaban antiguamente.” The testimony of Palacio 
in the above passage is fully corroborated by that of the English writer Thomas Gage, who expressly says in the note subjoined to the 
one hundred and forty-third page of the Appendix to the present volume, that the Indians of Mixco, a district bordering on the province 
of Honduras, circumcised their children with stone knives exactly in the manner of the ancient Jews; whilst the figure of a sacrificed 
victim in the forty-third page of the original Mexican painting in the possession of M. de Fejervary, for a copy of which we are 
indebted to that gentlemen, may be referred to in proof of the existence of the other rite amongst the Indians. We may further remark, 
that the Janus-headed figure of the idol Ycelaca, whose body was covered with eyes, serves likewise to remind us that eyes in the 
Old Testament are typical of the omniscience of the Deity or of his intelligence, as, for example, in the tenth verse of the fourth chapter 
of Zechariah, in the fourth chapter of the Revelations, and in the first chapter of Ezekiel. And here we may remark in reference to the 
number of eyes, corresponding with that of the planets, which Zechariah assigns to the Deity, and to the belief of some of the Indian 
tribes of the Orinoco that the planets are the eyes of God, that it was an old opinion of the Jews, which their Rabbis deduce from cer- 
tain texts of Scripture, that the stars are rational and living creatures. This is evident from the fifth chapter of the second part of the 
‘More Nevochim’ of Maimonides; and it furnishes us with a clue to the meaning of the interpreter of the ‘ Codex Telleriano-Remensis’, 
where he says, in the hundred and twenty-fifth page of the sixth volume of this work, that “ Ytzlacoliuhqui, the Lord of sin, wasa star in 
heaven, which they believed to proceed in a backward course with its eyes bandaged,” which notion is not more absurd than the supposition 
of the Jews, that the moon appears in the night with the face of a man, a fact which is stated by the author of the apocryphal book of . 
Enoch in the twenty-first verse of the seventy-seventh chapter of that work, and which must serve to remind us that the Mexicans always 
represented in their sculptured images the sun and the moon with a human face, whilst the resemblance of Tonatiuh, the name which the 
Mexicans gave to the sun, to Tomas, the name which the author of the book of Enoch says, in the first verse of the seventy-seventh chapter 
of that book, particularly belongs to the sun, is not altogether undeserving of notice. Terminating, however, this digression, we shall 
conclude this note with pointing out another analogy in the manners of the Jews and the Mexicans, which, however at variance with 
received opinions, is still in accordance with the past usages of the synagogue, is supported by the unimpeachable testimony of one of the 
earliest fathers of the Church, by the collateral evidence of the apocryphal gospel of the infancy of Christ, and by the unequivocal allusion, 
in the fourth verse of the sixteenth chapter of Ezekiel, to a custom which it is highly probable the words of the Deity in the sixth verse 
of the same chapter emphatically addressed to Jerusalem: “ And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, 
I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live; yea, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live;” constituted a rite in 
after ages amongst the Jews, typical of God’s promise of future redemption to Israel. The cutting of the umbilical cord of infants 
would appear, then, to have been a religious rite amongst the Jews, or, which is the same thing, one accompanied with religious 
ceremonies; but when instituted, whether about the time of the Babylonian captivity, or soon after, and continued down to the age of 
Christ, and when abolished, or suffered to fall into disuse, it would be extremely difficult to determine; but this difficulty no more militates 
against the probability of its past existence than the ignorance of the Augustan age of every particular connected with the history of 
Christ can be considered to militate against the truth of Christianity. ' Yet how great is the difference between the ignorance of mankind 
respecting the origin and abolition of this obscure Jewish rite, and their ignorance of that which immediately appertained to their 
salvation; and how different are the conclusions which some persons might feel disposed to draw from these different kinds of igno- 
rance! That in course of time this rite acquired additional importance in the eyes of the Jews, and in the case of female children 
was considered as a substitute for circumcision, is asserted by Origen in his Homilies on the Prophecies of Ezekiel, whose words, as 
cited by Ludolfus in the two hundred and seventy-fourth page of his Commentaries on his Ethiopian History, we subjoin; nothing, 
in fact, can be plainer than the testimony of this ancient father respecting the existence of such a rite amongst the Jews. “Ut in 
viro preputium circumciditur, sic in foemina umbilicus amputatur.” That the same custom was practised by the Jews in the case 
VOL. VIII. (3L) 

299 NOTES. 

como negros, que traian la comida 4 cada uno su plato y manjar de ella. Comian algunas veces carne, y otras 
frijoles, que son cierta especie de habas, guisadas de muchas maneras. Acabando de comer, comenzaba el sumo 

, 

pontifice 4 contar historias pasadas y antiguas, iten de la bondad y excelencia del Sol y de los otros sus dioses. 
Otras veces entendian en poner leyes y orden para la buena gobernacion de los pueblos, y otras en platicas honestas. 
Llegada 6 pasada la hora en que nosotros solemos decir visperas, ibanse 4 pasear por unos montes arriba, donde se 
recreaban y espaciaban, y de alli tornabase cada uno 4 recojer 4 su aposento. Despues de esto, el segundo sacer- 
dote acudia al templo, y mandaba 4 los sacristanes que mirasen bien por sus dioses, y lo tubiesen muy limpio, y asi 
lo tenian. Cada uno de aquellos sirvientes era semanero, teniendo cargo de hacer un gran fuego de gruesa lefia, 
que ardia todo el afio de noche y de dia, por manera que gamas cesaba el fuego y era perpetuo. Estos sacerdotes 
comian de limosnas que los Sefores y principales les hacian y la otra gente, por manera que nunca les faltaba la 
comida. Lo que de ella les sobraba, guardabanlo en unas cajas de tablas delgadas que tenian. Guisabanles de 
comer tres mugeres que pasaban de cinquenta afos cada una.” 

Las Casas proceeds next to observe that the Totonacas circumcised their children on the twenty-eighth or twenty- 
ninth day after their birth, at which period it was customary to present them at the temple, either to the high priest 
or to the second in dignity, who performed the ceremony with a stone knife*. The passage of the ‘ Historia Apolo- 
getica’ in which Las Casas notices the existence of the above-mentioned Hebrew rite among the Totonacas, occurs 
in the one hundred and twenty-second page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present volume ; where also 
will be found some mention of another usage which is likely to have originated in the prejudices which gave rise to 
the sect of Essenes amongst the Jews, of which sect Josephus gives a long and interesting account in the seventh 
chapter of the second book of his History of the Jewish War. The usage to which we more particularly allude, and 
which constituted a peculiar feature in the civil and religious institutions of the Mexicans, was the foundation of 
colleges for the education of youth, in which they were confined until they had arrived at a marriageable age, which 
amongst the Jews was twenty, and amongst the Totonacas twenty-two: and so careful were the Mexicans to pre- 
serve inviolate this feature in their national policy, and to provide for the permanency of those institutions whose 

of male children, in conjunction with circumcision, is attested by the author of the apocryphal gospel of the Infancy of Christ, in the 
following passage of the one hundred and seventy-first page of the ‘ Codex Apocryphus Novi Testamenti,’ published by Fabricius in 
1719: “ Cumque adesset tempus circumcisionis, dies scilicet octavus, quo circumcidendum esse puellum lex precipit, circumciderunt 
illum in speduncd, sumsitque anus illa Hebrea pelliculam istam (dicunt vero ali ipsam sumsisse preesegmen wmbzlic?) eamque in alabastro 
olei nardini vetusti recondidit.” To this passage, which is sufficiently corroborative of the testimony of Origen as to the existence of 
the above-mentioned rite among the Jews, and which is the more conclusive, because wholly unconnected with the doctrines of 
Christianity, or any of the rites of the primitive church, Fabricius adds the following marginal note: “Sed et presegmen wmbilici Christi 
ostenditur itidem Rome in ede S. Marie Populi, et lapis super quo Christus circumcisus est in templo S. Jacobi Scossa cavalli.’” That 
the same rite was practised by the Mexicans in the case of male and female children, and accompanied with many superstitious ceremonies, 
is evident from the thirty-first chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain; and few will deny who respect the 
authority of Origen, that there are strong grounds for supposing that the Mexicans derived it from the Jews. 

* It has already been remarked in the two hundred and seventy-second page of the sixth volume of this work, that the religious uses to 
which the Mexicans applied their stone knives attracted the particular notice of the early Spanish missionaries, who considered that the 
use of such knives furnished a strong argument in favour of the religious rites of the Mexicans having been derived from the Jews. 
Francisco de Bologna, an Italian missionary, who proceeded to Mexico shortly after the Spanish Conquest, thus mentions these knives 
in the following passage of his letter to Clement de Monelia, the superior of his order in Italy, which letter, of considerable length, was 
afterwards printed at Venice by Paul Danza, with the title of ‘ Letera dal R. Padre, frate Francesco da Bologna, dalla Citta di Mexico, 
al R. P. frate Clemente da Monelia,’ but without the date of any particular year annexed: “ Havevano questi sacerdoti un coltello di 
pietra al modo antico, cioe al tempo della circoncisione, & conducevano gli huomini in loco eminente, & gli estendevano sopra una pietra 
grande; poi venivano quelli sacerdoti con quelli-coltelli, & tagliavano il ventre a gli huomini & pigliavano il core, & di quel sangue bagna- 
vano |’ altare di questo idolo; poi tagliavano le braccie & li piedi a quelli huomini, & li mandavano alli gran signori, & quelli con gran reve- 
-rentia & allegrezza li mangiavano, dicendo che quelle erano reliquie de santi; & cosi aquesto idolo li sono stati sacrificati miliara, & 
milioni di creature rationale.” We cannot refrain from here inserting another passage from the same letter, which contains a remarkable 
allusion to a statue of Tezcatlipoca, which the fathers of the company sent to Europe for the express purpose of explaining some mystery 
which they seemed unwilling to commit to writing, to another of their company dwelling in Italy: “‘ Adoravano molti idoli, ma precipue 
quatro, delli quali penso il maggiore de tutti portano questi padri nostri a V. P. del quale il misterio dechiarar anno a quelle accio meglio 
intendete il caso.” That the statue of Tezcatlipoca, the greatest of the Mexican gods, was really the statue here alluded to by Francisco 
de Bologna, is evident from the explanatory paragraph which follows: “ I/ quale si chiama in questa lingua Tescatipocli, che tanto vuol 
dire come ‘ specchio de fumo’, & cosi questi padri lo portano a V. P.” 

Ra 

NOTES. 993 

interests were identified with those of the religion of the state, that not only in Mexico, but in all the towns 
and villages of the empire they were supported at the public expense, whilst the duty of defending their rights 
and privileges devolved particularly upon the high priest. These colleges were of two kinds, and were named 
by the Mexicans Calmecac and Telpuchcalli; in the former of which the sons of the chief men and those in- 
tended for the service of the temples were educated*, and in the latter the children of the poorer classes; all 
being indiscriminately thus placed under the vigilant eye of the law, which imposed upon them the necessity 
of many acts of extraordinary penance, and even after they had married did not entirely dispense with all 
further obligations, since Las Casas informs us in the following passage of the hundred and thirty-ninth chapter 
of his ‘Historia Apologetica, that they were still subject to various legal restraints: “Luego en siendo casados 
eran empadronados y contados en el numero de los casados, y tenian con ellos cuenta ciertos como quadrilleros, 
A quien en ciertos casos y cosas eran sujetos, como en para los tributos y para otras obras y trabajos que entre 
cada colacion y parte del pueblo se repartian. Y puesto que la poblacion y gentes de aquellas tierras era im- 
mensa e infinita, de todos empero chicos y grandes, mugeres y hombres habia memoria y cuentaT, y todos tenian sus 
superiores{ por su orden y grados 4 quien reconocian.” The same learned prelate takes occasion to notice, in the 

* Las Casas observes in the following passage of the one hundred and fortieth chapter of his ‘ Historia Apologetica,’ that it was customary 
for the Mexicans to send their children at a very early age to their temples to receive religious instructions from the priests and professors 
of their laws; and that the same custom existed amongst the Jews must likewise be inferred from the forty-sixth verse of the second 
chapter of the Gospel of St. Luke, since it is not easy to imagine, except on that supposition or the assumption of a miracle, the time for 
which had not yet arrived, that Christ, who was then only twelve years old, and who had no intention for many years to come to enter 
on the duties of his public ministry, or avow himself to be the Son of God, could have got admission to the temple and have been found 
“ sitting in the midst of the doctors both hearing them and asking them questions.” << Deciase que todos (os nijos de seis afios hasta los 
nueve, eran obligados los padres &@ embiarlos al templo; y en aquellos aposentos 6 escuelas, que eran como gimnasios, ozan su doctrina, y 
eran ensefiados 6 imbuidos en buena crianza y costumbres, y en las cosas de la religion que saber segun su edad les competia.” 

+ That it was customary amongst the Jews to keep exact registers of their genealogies is evident from the following passage of the 
second chapter of the book of Ezra, where it deserves to be remarked, that those whose names were not entered in the registry were put 
from the priesthood as polluted. “ And of the children of the priests, the children of Habaiah, the children of Koz, the children of Bar- 
zillai (which took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after their name). These sought their register among 
those that were reckoned by genealogy, but they were not found; therefore were they as polluted put from the priesthood, and the 
Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the most holy things till there stood up a priest with Urim and with Thummim.” 

+ The division of the Peruvians into tens, fifties, hundreds, and thousands is recorded in the following passage of a valuable inedited 
History of Peru, which formerly belonged to the Count de Olivares, and it nearly resembles that recommended to Moses by Jethro, in the 
eighteenth chapter of the book of Exodus: “ Asi mismo mando (el Inga) contar todos los Indios que avia en todo el reyno, y los repartid 
de diez en diez mil Indios, y puso en cada diez mil un cacique principal, que entre ellos llamaban ‘ puno’, que quiere decir el ojo, y de 
cada mil Indios destos diez mil tenia cargo un principal, y con estos diez tenia quenta el mayor, y cada uno de los de 4 diez mil tenia 
quenta con otros diez, que tenian quenta de cada cien Indios, y cada uno destos cientos tenia quenta con dos de 4 cinquenta, y ellos de 
A cinquenta dividian los Indios por diez y por cinco, dando cargo de cada diez y cada cinco, y desta manera era muy facil la governacion, y 
se sabia y entendia con facilidad los que nacian y los que morian.” We may here remark that the ancient Persians, according to Herodotus, 
named one of their great officers of state the eye of the king (tov 82 xov tive adrewy 6gbarpov BaotAsos civas”); and if the Jews at the period 
of the Babylonian captivity borrowed that appellation from the Persians, it might possibly have passed over with some of their colonies to 
America. It is singular, however, that the concluding sentence of the reply of Moses to Hobab the son of Jethro, in the thirty-first verse 
of the tenth chapter of Numbers, might have suggested the choice of the term ‘ puno’ to the Peruvians. “ ‘And he said, Leave us not, I 
pray thee; forasmuch as thou knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderness, and thou mayest be to us instead of eyes.” The same 
analogy likewise presents itself in the civil institutions of the Peruvians, as is evident from the following passage of the eleventh chapter of 
the licenciate Fernando de Santillan’s Reply to the queries proposed “ by the prince on behalf of the emperor” to. the royal audience of 
Lima in the year 1553. The manuscript which contains this valuable information is inedited, and is preserved in the library of the Escurial. 
« Para tener mas particular noticia de la gente que tenia debajo de su sefiorio y govierno, y ordenar que gente habia de servir y tributar 
‘en cada servicio 6 tributo, mandé contar todos los Indios, chicos y grandes, y divididlos en doce edades. La primera es la de los viejos, 
quese llama Punuc loco: en esta edad entran los que son de sesenta aftos para arriba, porque quiere decir, no son sino para dormir, y asi 
con esta edad no se tenia cuenta para cosa de tributo ni servicio, antes el Inga mandaba darles de su hacienda, y los Curacas tenian gran 
cuidado con ellos, y los tenian por consejeros en lo que convenia al govierno de aquella provincia. La segunda edad se llama Chaupiloco ; 
entran en ella de cincuenta afios hasta sesenta: tambien estos eran reservados de tributo, solo se ocupaban en regar y beneficiar las cha- 
caras de coca y axi y otras legumbres. la tercera edad sellamaba Ponc: entranen ella desde veinte y cinco afios hasta cinquenta: estos 
levaban todo el trabajo, porque de ellos sacaban para la guerra, y estos pagaban el tributo y lo llevaban al Cuzco, y labraban las chacaras 
del Inga y las de los Curacas. La cuarta edad se llama Mzauguaina, que dice casi mozo; entraban en ella los de veinte afios arriba : 
estos no tributaban mas que ayudar 4 sus hermanos y parientes 4 llevar las cargas y otras cosas. La quinta edad se llamaba Coca palla, 

QA. NOTES. 

chapter of the ‘Historia Apologetica’ last referred to, that the system of discipline which was observed in the colleges 

of Calmecac and Telpuchcalli was of the most austere kind, the youths being obliged to shun every possible tempta- 
tion to vice, and to guard against even an approach to levity or immodesty in their looks or gestures. “ En los actos 

exteriores eran todos muy honestos, y en viendo mugeres bajaban los ojos, y eran obligados por ley 4 ser en todo cas- 

tisimos hasta que se casasen..... Llegada la edad de que se podian casar, gue era de veinte 6 veinte y dos afos, 

demandaban licencia para buscar muger y dabansela. En otras partes se dice que el sumo pontifice les mandaba que 
se casasen, y sz 20 se querian casar, dende adelante habian de ser continentes toda su vida, y al que no lo hacia, era pre- 
gonado de malo é infame de tal manera, que ninguno despues queria darle su hija para con quien se casase. En la 
provincia de Tlascala se acostumbraba, que si se pasaba el tiempo de casarse, y alguno lo disimulaba, 6 se.descui- 
daba, 6 no se queria casar, tresquilabanlo en pena, que no era chica entre aquellas gentes de la Nueva Espajia, como 
ariba queda dicho, y hechabanlo de la compafiia de los mancebos..... Por maravilla dicen que acaecia no casarse 
quando se lo mandaban. Por el contrario, si alguno se casaba sin licencia, era bien castigado, allende lo qual era 
tenido por desvergonzado y de poco seso y mui notado.” It is, however, in the writings of the modern Rabbis and 
the usages of the Jews of later ages rather than in the books of the Old Testament (although the phrase “ karaxAeorat 
mapQevor’”’ does certainly occur in the book of Maccabees, and mention is made in the tenth chapter of the second book 
of Kings of the seventy sons of Ahab who were brought up by the great men of the city of Samaria,) that traces may 
be discovered of habits and prejudices which were likely to give rise to the institution of colleges such as those of 
Calmecac and Telpuchcalli amongst the Mexicans, which colleges it is highly probable the Jews founded not long 
after their arrival in America; and with the fourfold object of enforcing a rigid regard to public morals; of 
remedying the evil which dispersion was likely to entail on the Hebrew nation, namely depopulation; of realizing 
God’s promise to Abraham, in the seventeenth verse of the twenty-second chapter of Genesis, that his seed should be 
as the stars of heaven and the sand of the sea in multitude, which could not be accomplished, physically speaking, 
“avev raxvyapiac”; and fourthly, of perpetuating the doctrines of the Jewish faith by the establishment of places of 
instruction for the rising generation, which, simultaneously accompanied with an attempt to revive the old law in 
America, and to establish the same order of things as existed in the prophetic and therefore the glorious age of the 
Jewish monarchy, necessarily led to the revival of the same kinds of superstition ; for example, faith in dreams, a 
belief in witchcraft, seeking after the Lord by means of false prophets, a vain confidence in signs and omens, a stupid 
regard for types, and the complete resumption of all the other paraphernalia of a degraded superstition, defiled 
with the blood of human sacrifices ; thus assimilating the manners of the Mexicans* to those of the Jewish popu- 

que es desde diez y seis afios hasta veinte: estos se ocupaban en lo mismo que los de la precedente, y en cojer la coca del Inga y de los 
Curacas. La sexta edad se llamaba Puel/gamara, que es de ocho afios hasta diez y seis. La septima se llama Tutan rezi, que es de 
poco menos de ocho afios. a octava, Macha pori, que es los menores de seis afios. La novena se llamaba Lloc llaguarama, que es 
de menos de cinco afios. Ladecima....... que es de menos de cuatro afios. La oncena se llamaba Layo guamarac, que es de 
menos de dos afios. La docena se Ilamaba Moxo capauc, que dice recien nacido, De estas edades daba el Inga cargo 4 los Curacas 
de Pachaca, de manera que en la Pachaca entraban cien Indios casados de veinte y cinco afios hasta cincuenta, con sus mugeres y hijos, 
que son los tributarios, y demas de ellos los que entre ellos habia de las dichas edades. A estos Curacas tenia encargado el Inga el criar 
y alimentar la dicha gente, y tener cuenta con los que nacian y morian, y de todos le diese cuenta, porque se preciaban los Ingas de 
saber cuantas animas habia debajo de su sefiorio y govierno, y cuantos en cada edad, y cuantos se multiplicaban ; y como iban mul- 
tiplicandose los Indios y entrando en edad para poder ser tributarios les acrecentaba Curacas y Sefores, porque de la dicha edad no 
habia de tener ningun Curaca mas numero de cien Indios tributarios, sino era por via de merced que el Inga hacia 4 algun Curaca en 
darle algunos Indios en lugar de Yanaconas, y estos no entraban en cuenta para tributo, mas de para el provecho de aquel 4 quien 
hacia merced de ellos. Estos Indios de la tercera edad, 4 que llaman Atunlunas 6 Aucapuric, tributaban al Inga cada uno conforme 4 
su oficio y segun les mandaba tributar.” 

* Oviedo thus briefly describes the manners of the Mexicans, in the forty-ninth chapter of the fourteenth book of the second part of 
his inedited History of the Indies: ‘ Aquella gente é sus costumbres es mucho lo que se puede decir de ellos. Comen carne humana, 
hacen sacrificios matando muchos Indios y abriendolos por los pechos, & sacandoles el corazon le arrojan al sol. Los que tienen cargo 
de los Ochilobos se llaman Papat, que quiere decir ‘ persona santa’. Muchos de ellos no comian sino solamente la sangre de los que se 
sacrificavan. Estos aborrecian el coito € no conversavan con mugeres, € mucho mas el pecado de la sodomia: é antes de que tengan 
cargo del Ochilobo, han de tener su afio de aprobacion sin salir del Ochilobo, é al cabo del afio si quieren quedar en aquellos templos, 
les pasavan unas varas por las lenguas, 6 quedaban alli en el templo para siempre; nunca se cortaban ni peinaban los cabellos. Estos 
han de ser hijos de caciques 6 hombres principales ; é los que quieren salirse no entraban mas en el templo para servir en él. Los 
Espafioles despues de haber llegado 4 Temixtitan é poblado alli, embié Cortes 4 Panuco al comendador Pedro de Alvarado é Cristoval 

NOTES. 225 

lace, who are declared in Scripture to have worshiped Moloch ; to have sacrificed their children in the valley of 
Tophet, or the son of Hinnom ; to have built high places, or teocallis, in all the corners of the streets of Jerusalem ; to 
have profaned the sanctuary with the blood of human victims; to have adored all the host of heaven, and principally 
the swn, and the moon, and the evening star; and to have committed idolatry upon every high hill and under every 
green tree; thus converting their boasted institutions of Calmecac and Telpuchcalli into nothing else, to use the 
phrase of an old Spanish missionary, than so many real synagogues of Satan, which, with all their professed regard 
for morality and outward show of sanctity, could only be likened to the whitened sepulchres to which Christ com- 
pared the Pharisees in a memorable verse of the New Testament. This confession is demanded of us by Truth, 
whose voice, like that of the fabled goddesses of the Iliad *, who feebly pursued the chariot of Mars, praying Jupiter 

de Olit, é despues de pacificado poblaron un pueblo que se Ilamé Santiestevan.” That this is no exaggerated picture of Mexican bar- 
barity in the age of Montezuma is evident from the testimony of the Mexican paintings ; whilst the passage in which Oviedo states that 
the Mexicans drank the blood of their human sacrifices is the more deserving of notice, because it is corroborated by the evidence of the 
same paintings, notwithstanding some celebrated Spanish authors, including in the number Gomara, have declared that the Mexicans 
were never seen to taste blood: and this leads to the conclusion that it was only in the interior of their temples that a particular order of 
the priesthood ever drank the blood of sacrifices. The impression which the sight of such dreadful scenes produced on the minds of the 
Spaniards who first witnessed them will best appear from the perusal of the following extract from Francisco de Aguilar’s inedited History 
of the Conquest of Mexico, who himself was an eye-witness of what he here relates, and who thus records what took place when the 
Spaniards killed their prisoners, and threw their bodies, together with the royal corpse of Montezuma, to the enraged citizens of Mexico: 
«« Montezuma herido en la cabeza dié el alma 4 cuya era, lo cual seria hora de visperas, y en el aposento donde él estaba, habia otros 
muy grandes Sefiores detenidos con él, 4 los quales el dicho Cortes con parecer de los capitanes mandé matar sin dejar ninguno: 4 los 
quales ya tarde, sacaron y hecharon en los portales donde estan ahora las tiendas, los quales llevaron ciertos Indios que habian quedado 
que no mataron, y llevados sucedié la noche, la qual venida alla 4 las diez, vinieron tanta multitud de mugeres con hachas encendidas y 
braseros y lumbres que ponia espanto. Aquestas venian 4 buscar sus maridos y parientes que en los portales estaban muertos, y al dicho 
Moteczuma tambien, y asi como las mugeres conocian 4 sus deudos y parientes, lo qual veiamos los que velabamos en lu azotea con la 
mucha claridad, se hechaban encima con muy gran lastima y dolor, y comenzaban una grita y llanto que ponia espanto y temor, y el que 
aquesto escrivid, que entonces velaba arriba, dijo 4 su companero, No haveis visto el infierno y el lanto que ella hay, pues si no lo haveis 
visto, catadlo aqui; y es cierto que nunca en toda la guerra por trabajos que en ella pasase, tube tanto temor como fué él que recibi de 
ver aquel llanto tan grande.” 

* These goddesses were Prayers, whom Homer feigned to be the daughters of Jupiter, and whose functions, as intercessors for man- 
kind with Jove, he thus describes in the ninth book of the Iliad : 

"ANN, ’Axidev, dapacoy Oupoy peyay’ ovce TL GE xen 
Nydees jrop éxewv* orpemrot oe Te Kat Deor adror, 
Tw rep kat perlwy apern, Tyun Te, [Ln Te. 

Kae pey tous Oveecor car evywAns ayavya, 
AoSn Te, KyLcon Te, TapaTpwTwo’ avOpwror 
Atooopevot, Ore Kev Tis UrepBny KaL apaprn. 

Kae yap re Acrat eioe Aros kovpat peyadouo, 
Xwdat re, puooae re, TapaPrwres 7’ dpOadpw* 

Ai pa re kat peroris@’ ’Arns a&deyouor ktovcat. 

‘H 6’ ’Arn oOevapn te Kat apremos’ ovveKa Tacas 
Tlo\Aoy tmrekmpobecr, PPaver de re macay én’ aiay, 
Bnarrovo’ avOpwrous’ ai 0 éEaxeovrat dmisow. 
“Os prev 7° aicecerat Koupas Atos, dacoy ioveas, 
Tov de pey wvncav, kar 7 éxAvov evbapervoto’ 

‘Os de kK ayyvnrat, Kae Te oTEepews aroeirn, 
Avocovrat 0 apa ravye Ava Kpovwyva xiovoa, 

To ’Arny ap ExeaOar, iva BrAagbers arrorion. 

“ Now be thy rage, thy fatal rage, resign’d, 
A cruel heart ill suits a manly mind: 
The gods (the only great, and only wise) 
Are moved by offerings, vows, and sacrifice ; 
Offending man their high compassion wins, 
And daily prayers atone for daily sins. 
Prayers are Jove’s daughters, of celestial race, 
Lame are their feet, and wrinkled is their face ; 

VOL, VIII. (3M ). 

296° | NOTES. 

1o redress the wrongs which that god inflicted on mortals, will, though weak in the beginning, at last prevail over 
Falsehood with all her brazen tongues. With the full expectation that the time is approaching when the sun of 
a much brighter reformation than that which gilded the sixteenth century will beam upon those nations that still ‘ sit 
in darkness’, we shall conclude these remarks with one more observation on an analogy in the manners of the Jews 
and the Mexicans, which requires for its elucidation the insertion of the following passage from the ancient con- 
stitutions of the Talmud, where it is extremely deserving of notice, that the analogy alluded to extends to the clause 
admitting the relaxation of the general rule, without however giving the Mexicans the benefit of the second excep- 
tion. The passage itself is the more remarkable, because it affords incontestible proof of the contrariety of moral 
doctrines which may be deduced from the selfsame texts of Scripture; this we have already observed in allusion 
to the slave trade in the three hundred and ninety-eighth page of the sixth volume of this work, since the Rabbis 
do not scruple to impugn the doctrine of St. Paul, in the seventh chapter of his first Epistle to the Corinthians, who 
erounds his adverse reasoning on the words of Christ in the twelfth verse of the nineteenth chapter of the Gospel of 
St. Matthew : “Primum preceptum est de matrimonio ; hoc preeceptum maxime Hebreei observant, et scribunt in suis 
commentariis, si quis excesserit viginti annos et non duxit uxorem, vel si duxerit uxorem sterilem, zequé peccat ac si 
hominem interfecisset*, et meretur peenam Onan, quem Deus interfecit. Tamen qui addictus est studio legis, ut 

With humble mien and with dejected eyes, 

Constant they follow where Injustice flies : 

Injustice, swift, erect, and unconfined, 

Sweeps the wide earth, and tramples o’er mankind, 
While Prayers, to heal her wrongs, move slow behind. 
Who hears these daughters of almighty Jove, 

For him they mediate to the throne above: 

When man rejects the humble suit they make, 

The sire revenges for the daughters’ sake.” 

%* The Rabbis indulge in the most absurd speculations upon the nature and degree of guilt incurred by this imaginary species of infan- 
ticide, which all resolves itself into the petitio principit that the very reverse of Christ’s declaration, in the tenth chapter of the Gospel of 
St. Matthew, is really the case, or, in other words, that the doctrine which he inculcated in his address to his disciples, “ Are not two 
sparrows sold for a farthing? And one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father; but the very hairs of your head are all 
numbered,” is totally destitute of truth. Reasoning, however, on other than scriptural grounds, we may be permitted to inquire, How 
is it possible that the existence of immortal souls can be a thing so dependent either on precarious chance or the blind impulse of human 
passion as that they should be destroyed, if not generated, at a particular moment in the circle of time, or on the other supposition that the 
human soul cannot be subject to this species of annihilation, but that its origin and existence being quite independent of matter which is 
liable to generation and corruption, it might possibly be born at a later period, or in some other country, whether it would be very 
material to such a soul when or in what country it might chance to be born, provided only that when born its nativity was not cast amongst 
rude and savage tribes? If, however, the reasoning of the Rabbis approximated in any degree to consistency, it would necessarily follow 
that polygamy ought to be encouraged by the laws of every state, and that Clemens Alexandrinus, in referring to Mioses as his authority, 
where he says, “‘O Mwons drayes tov eyxuw tous dvdpac, dxpis dv dwonuyowory,” did notimpute to Moses a law which the Hebrew legislator 
had not some reason for enacting. This remarkable passage of one of the most ancient and learned of the Fathers occurs in the second 
book of his Pzedagogus, which we the more readily transcribe because the Mexicans appear to have retained many of the Jewish prejudices 
on the same subject; and the discourse of the Mexican orator, in the twenty-fifth chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New 
Spain, is strongly tinctured with the same species of Hebrew rhetoric. * Ozias ye ros worpes T¢ Onusouprysxys percrrcbovrets, omepiuc 00x ExpImTEOY, 
obde xabubpioreoy, ovde pny xepucbora omupreov. “O youv atros obros Muwons xo Tos yomercus abrous cemayopever mAyTiabsly, qv Tots Emsenviois rol 
Ouprecw everrywevar Tuxwor 0B yap mw edAoyoy Tw droxalupuars TOV THATS TO YovILWTaTOY TOU GmEpHaTOS Xo per dAvyoy dvipmmoy poruvery, 
ovde puny dmoxaule Tw pumapm tye DAYS peumoTs nor hmonalapuati. Lmepuc de yevereros edpua Toy THS MIT PAS amoTTEpoULLEVOY ADAGKUY. Ov8e tive 
Tov marco “E6pasmy eyxupovs ty avTov yuvains cuvovTe mapyyayey. Wirn yup Hoon, udy ev yopuen TAQAAnDIY, Bapavop.os BOTH, uot AOIXOS, XOLL 
droyos. “Eumadw 82 6 Mwong dmayes tov eyxvav tous dvdpas, dypis dv dxoxuyswow.” A comparison of the above passage with the following 
extract from the third book of the same author’s Stromata, will place this resemblance in a still stronger point of view. “Ors yap cw- 
poveng Govrero reus yamerous xpyoboer tous avSpas 6 Nowuoc, nas eat povy moudomolin, OnAoy 2x Tou xWAUEY MEY TY ain MaAWTD mopar py}Lce emipeiyyuobcs 
tov dyapovr emibupnoavros de drat, tpiexovra mevoew exirpemely Huepas, nelooprevy Kas TAs Tics: eb Oe myd OUTwWS pupasvoITO 7 emibupescty TOTE mes00- 
morro bat, Sedorinocpevns THs dpuys THs xUpLevOUTHs xare THY mpoferpiay Tou ypovoD, cis dpekiv eAoyoy. “Oley od deikelug eyxumows mAyoiaoavTa Toy 
mpecbutepwy tive xara tyv Ipagyy’ dAN dorepoy mera TE THY KVODOPIAY, peTa Te THY TOU TEXOEVTOS yaAuxTOUXIAY, EUpOIS dy mar mpos Tw cvdpwy 
yiverxopevas Tes yuveunas. Adrince TouTOY eUpyoels TOY oxOmOY xat Tov Tou Mavoews marepa dvAuToOYTH, TpIETIcLY OlaArmovTa peta THY TOU *Aapay 
amroxuyoiv, yevvycavra tov Mwvoea. “Hre ad Aevirinyn dudy, TouTov dvaaccouce Tov Ts guoews NOMON "EK @OEOY, 2rarrov tov cdpslwoy moape, 

Tas aAras eis THY mpoxaTnyyeryevyy EionAbe yyy. 00 yao padiws abEaver yevos clo moAUTAfiaY, omeEIpavTmv jrev THY avOpUY TOY XuTH TOUS vopLOUS 

NOTES. 227 

uxorem non curet habere, is nihil peccat; si vero senserit cupiditatem illam invalescere, debet uxorem ducere.” 
Although it would be easy to adduce other arguments to strengthen the conjecture that the Mexican colleges of 
Calmecac and Telpuchcalli were a continuation of those religious seminaries which the Jews founded in many parts of 
Asia after Christian persecution had forced them to abandon the land of Palestine, we shall refrain from prolonging 
this discussion on a question involved in so much obscurity, and one which after all must rest on probable 
foundations, and is not capable of demonstration. Those, however, who may deem the chain of evidence insufficient, 
can easily refer to the Rabbinical authors who have treated of the colleges which the Jews founded in ancient times in 
Syria, Babylon, and on the banks of the Euphrates, the discipline of which it may easily be conceived might in after 
ages, and in another hemisphere, have become much more austere, and been associated with all the revolting rites to 
which the Jews were addicted in the ages antecedent to the Babylonian captivity ; thus realizing, as it were, in the 
case of the Mexican proselytes to Judaism, the denunciation of Christ in the fifteenth verse of the twenty-third chapter 
of St. Matthew, concerning the Jewish converts of his day: “Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ! 
for ye compass sea and land tu make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell 
than yourselves.” How after this unequivocal declaration of Christ in the New Testament, and the confession of St. 
Paul in the first chapter of his Epistle to the Galatians, an able and eloquent advocate for the total abolition of the civil 
disabilities under which the Jews labour in this country, Mr. Macaulay, in whose manly sentiments every friend to 
justice and of his country must coincide, could have asserted in his speech delivered in the House of Commons, that 
the Jewish religion was essentially not a proselyting religion, it is difficult to comprehend, especially since it is an 
undoubted fact that the Mosaic law enjoined proselytism, that the ancient Jews practised it, and that all the Rabbis, 
including in the number even Maimonides, strongly recommended it. The particular passage in Mr. Macaulay’s 
speech to which we here allude is the following, which, as likewise that portion of Mr. Grant’s speech in which he 
referred to the precedent set by the Persian monarch Ahasuerus, who commanded the enemies of the Jews, at 
the instigation, be it observed, of Mordecai and Esther, to be massacred simultaneously throughout the hundred 
and twenty-seven provinces of the Persian empire, as recorded in the ninth chapter of the book of Esther, would 
have furnished his opponents with a powerful argument against himself, as proving that the Jewish religion was 
both proselyting and persecuting. The words made use of by Mr. Macaulay were the following, if reliance can 
be placedon the accuracy of his speech as reported in the public newspapers: “There was not the slightest 
chance that their doctrines would spread. It was notorious that the Jews did mot wish to make proselytes—nay, 
they almost rejected them, and seemed to think it culpable presumption in any one who did not belong to their race 
to aspire to belong to their religion. Under these circumstances it was not at all extraordinary that the conversion of . 
a Jew to Christianity was at least as rare an occurrence as a total eclipse of the sun.” Whatever be the opinions of 
the Jews of modern times, it is quite evident, that such were not the sentiments of their ancestors or the lesson of 
moderation inculcated by the maxims of the Mosaic law, which of all the religious codes that God or man ever 

Yxpov, avadederymevov cvamevovrooy de od THY xuvodoprey movov, aAAM xo THY Yaraxrouxiav. “Obey eixoTws xa 6 Mations nar’ drryoy els eynparesay 
mpobibatwy rous Ioudaious, tpiwv fspwv xara to éfns dmeornwevous Adbpodiasov Hovns mpooerakey emenovery rwv Jewy Aoywy.” It is an undoubted 
fact, that in Mexico, Peru, and New Granada, it was considered extremely calamitous to families for a woman to give birth to twins; but 
whether the custom of not permitting both to live might have originated in a confused tradition of the twin births of Cain and Abel, or 
in Jewish prejudices, and the disgrace which, in the opinion of the Indians, attached to the parents of such infants, for the reason assigned 
by Alonzo de Zamora in the following passage of the hundred and forty-first page of his History of the Kingdom of New Granada, it 
would be extremely difficult to determine. Gumilla, however, alluding to the existence of the same custom amongst the Indians of the 
Orinoco, unhesitatingly ascribes it to the latter cause. ‘No casaban con hijas, hermanas, ni sobrinas, grados de consanguinidad pro- 
hibidos, pero en parentesco de afinzdad jamas repararon ; y aun en los tiempos presentes no reparan algunos en este impedimento. Parir 
dos criaturas de un parto era afrenta, porque no creian que de un ajuntamiento se podian concebir dos hijos, y dezian era demasiada 
luxuria.” To the testimony of Torquemada, in the two hundred and twenty-first page of the sixth volume of this work, respecting its 
being a Mexican custom to put to death one of two twins, from a superstitious fear that if they were both permitted to live they would 
kill one of their parents, we shall add that of Las Casas, in the following passage of his inedited « Historia Apologetica’ : “Si la muger 
paria dos hijos 6 Aaas de un vientre, que asaz en todas estas tierras es muy comun, creian que habia de morir en breve el padre 6 la 
madre. Tenian por remedio que el demonio les habia ensefiado, matar el un hijo de los dos para que no muriese padre 6 madre. A los 
que asi nacian de un vientre, llamabanlos ‘ Cocoua,’ que quiere decir culebras, porque dicen que la primera muger que parié asi dos, se 
llamé Couatl, que quiere decir culebra, y de alli venian y estimaban que los asi nacidos habian de comer 4su padre 6 madre, sino mataban 
el uno de ellos.” 

228 NOTES. 

invented was by far the most persecuting and intolerant. It is sufficient, however, for our argument to have proved 
that the religion of the Jews was proselyting in the age of Christ, to establish the probability that the first Jewish 
colonies who proceeded to America would have strenuously endeavoured to proselyte the Indians to their faith, and 
have instituted schools and seminaries as the most proper means for deeply engrafting the principles of Judaism in 
the hearts of the native population of America; this, we trust, has been satisfactorily done, and we shall accordingly 
proceed to the consideration of the next Hebrew analogy. 

The extreme importance which the Jews attached to vows formed so peculiar a feature in their national creed, and 
led to the performance of so many offerings* and sacrifices, which the law itself did not require, but which it was 
most beneficial to the priests to exact, that this analogy in the ceremonial law of the Mexicans and the Jews is 
exceedingly deserving of notice. We cannot, therefore, refrain from inserting in this place the two chapters of the 

* Diego Duran compares the offerings which the Mexican priests received from the laity, to the sin offerings and oblations given by 
the Jews to the Levites. The above analogy is noticed by that author in the fifth chapter of the second part of his inedited ‘ Historia de 
la Nueva Espafia’: “ Era tan ordinario el acudir 4 ellos, que fuesen 4 ofrecer sacrificios por ellos 4 los montes, llevando ofrendas de in- 
cienso y comida y vino y ollin y caxetillos y escudillejas y cestillos, como lo es agora el traer la limosna para que les digan una misa, 6 
como lo era en la ley vieja ofrecer becerros, corderos, cabrones, &c. 4 los sacerdotes por los pecados.” It would appear, however, from 
the following passage of the third chapter of the same History, that a religious offering of the tenth of certain kinds of seeds, or in other 
words tithe, was paid by the Mexican laity to their priesthood, who gave the custom the most solemn sanction of religion by imposing 
it as a duty on all who ate the body of their god Huitzilopochtli on the solemn festival of the Teoqualo, which was celebrated annually in 
the Mexican month Panquetzaliztli, thus connecting the obligation of paying tithes with their sacrament. And Diego Duran further 
expressly declares, that all persons, of both sexes and every age, including even infants in the cradle, partook of this communion, which, as 
regards the Christian mode of communion, deserves to be compared with an ancient usage of the Abyssinian church, which we have 
already mentioned, in the two hundred and fourteenth page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present volume. “ Este mismo 
dia era precepto muy guardado en toda la tierra, de que no se habia de comer otra comida sino ¢zoales con miel, que era la masa de que 
el idolo era hecho, la cual comida se habia de comer luego en amaneciendo, y no habian de beber agua ni otra cosa ninguna sobre ellos 
hasta pasado el medio dia; lo cual tenian por agiiero y por sacrilegio el beber sobre aquella comida ninguna cosa hasta despues de pasadas 
aquellas cerimonias y sacrificios, y asi escondian el agua 4 los nifios, y avisaban 4 los que tenian uso de razon que no bebiesen, pues 
habian comido tzoales, porque vendria la ira de aquel dios sobre ellos y moririan; lo cual guardaban tan rigurosamente y tan por lo estremo, 
como los Judios el no comer carne de puerco. Acabadas las cerimonias, bailes y sacrificios, entremeses y juegos, que entre los dioses 
habia, digo entre aquellos que los representaban, ibanse 4 desnudar, y los sacerdotes y dignidades de templo tomaban el idolo de masa y 
desnudabanle aquellos aderezos que tenia, y asi @ él como & los trozos que estaban consagrados en huesos y carne suya, hacian los muchos 
pedacitos, y empezando desde los mayores los comulgaban con ellos & todo el pueblo, chicos y grandes, hombres y mugeres, vicjos y nifios, y 
recibianlo con tanta reverencia y temor y alegria que era cosa de admiracion, diciendo que comian la carne y huesos de Dios, teniendose 
por indignos de ello. Los que tenian enfermos pedian para ellos, y se los llevaban con mucha reverencia y veneracion. Todos los que 
comulgaban quedaban obligados & dar diezmo de aquella semilla de que se hacia aquella masa para la carne y huesos de aquel Dios.” We 
have, however, not only the authority of Diego Duran in the above passage, but likewise that of Herrera, for asserting that all persons 
who received the Mexican sacrament paid a contribution to the priests of all the seeds of which the body of Huitzilopochtli was com- 
posed, and that those seeds consisted of all kinds of maize, pulse, and every other kind of grain eaten by the Mexicans, must be inferred 
from the following passage of Cortes’s third letter to Charles the Fifth, which makes particular mention of the manner in which such 
images of paste were compounded. “ Los bultos y cuerpos de los idolos son de muy mayores estaturas que el cuerpo de un gran 
hombre. Son hechos de masa de todas las semillas y legumbres que ellos comen, molidas y mezcladas unas con otras, y amasanlas con 
sangre de corazones de cuerpos humanos, los quales abren por los pechos, vivos, y les sacan el corazon, y de aquella sangre que sale 
de él, amasan aquella harina, y assi hacen tanta cantidad, quanta basta para facer aquellas estatuas grandes.” Upon this passage of 
Cortes’s letter we may be permitted to remark, that the mixture of human blood with the Mexican sacrament might have originated in 
the equivocal sense in which the Gnostics understood the declaration of Christ, «This is my blood,” in the New Testament, and have 
been an attempt on their part to render a literal obedience to the command of Christ to drink his blood, and yet at the same time avoid the 
doctrine of the real presence in the sacrament; in which case we must of necessity suppose two things, first, that some of the Gnostic 
sect had proceeded, together with the Jews, in early ages to America, which would appear to have been the opinion of the interpreter 
of the Codex Vaticanus in the one hundred and seventy-second page of the sixth volume of this work, who, under the name of Manicheans, 
doubtless comprised other sects; and secondly, that they understood the phrase “ This is my blood,” to have been employed by Christ in 
a literal but not in a reflective sense, that is to say, not as blood belonging to his body, but as blood consecrated to and accepted by him; 
and it may easily be imagined to what abuses such a doctrine might in the long course of ages have been corrupted by fanaticism. Enough 
having been said of the Mexican rite of Teoqualo, of which a more particular account will be found in the two hundred and twentieth page 
of the sixth volume of this work, and the forty-seventh page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present volume, we shall only remark, 
that however cautiously the payment of tithes is noticed by the Spanish missionaries of the sixteenth century as a long-established usage 
amongst the Mexicans, the testimony of Diego Duran, but especially that of Alonzo de Zorita, in a passage of his ‘ Breve y Sumaria 
Relacion,? which we shall insert in a subsequent note, is sufficiently corroborative of that fact, whilst the strong probability that such a 

NOTES. 229 

Pentateuch, which treat expressly of vows and their irrevocable nature, even in cases where the sacrifice of human life 
was the necessary condition of preserving a vow inviolate. The first of these chapters is the twenty-seventh chapter 

usage existed will immediately appear from the perusal of the following passage of the one hundred and forty-first chapter of the ¢ Historia 
Apologetica’ of Las Casas’. “ Y porque los templos y sacerdotes y ministros de los dioses, que eran muchos, como parece por lo dicho, 
hacian muchos gastos, necesaria cosa es dar noticia de que 6 de donde se mantenian y proveian. Para sustentacion pues de los sacerdotes 
y ministros, y para refeccion y reparacion de los edificios, y para los otros gastos ordinarios que en los templos se hacian, habia en la 
Nueva Espafia fabrica, habia como en nuestras iglesias mesa capitular, conviene 4 saber, estaban ciertas tierras y heredades dedicadas por 
los reyes y sefiores para propias de los templos. En estas habia muchos vecinos como vasallos de los templos, que tributaban de vestidos 
y ornamentos, maiz que es el trigo de que se hace el pan, y el vino y otras muchas cosas de potajes, y comida que hacen de él, gallinas y 
los mantenimientos necesarios que habian los sacerdotes y ministros menester; y allende los tributos que aquellos pueblos y vasallos 
daban, los pueblos realengos de comunidad hacian grandes sementeras para lo mismo. Habia provision de mugeres ancianas y honestas, 
para que hiciesen el pan y comida y otras cosas de fuera, que 4 las monjas susodichas hacer no pertenecian. Parecian en haber proveido 
de tierras y heredades 4 los templos y sacerdotes y ministros del culto divino, imitar 4 los Egipcios que tenian dedicadas tierras y heredades 
en posesion 4 los sacerdotes, en tiempo del santo patriarca Joseph, para su mantenimiento y sustentacion, segun arriba se dijo, y la 
Escritura quarenta y siete capitulo de Genesis lo testifica: donde parece que no solo tenian los sacerdotes de Egipto tierras donde tenian 
sus heredades y quizas pueblos y vasallos libres de tributos que se pagasen al rey, como alli se dice, pero aun se les daban de las trojes 
publicas del rey 6 de la comunidad los mantenimientos necesarios 4la vida. De donde manifiesto parece que el mantenimiento y el honor 
y reverencia se debe de derecho natural 4 los sacerdotes y ministros del culto divino, pues todas las naciones sin lumbre de fé lo hacian. 
De aqui és que entre los Cristianos de los diezmos que dan las comunidades, proveen las iglesias y mantienen los obispos y sacerdotes y 
ministros del verdadero culto divino, y esto aunque Dios no lo espresara por su ley divina positiva, por la misma ley natural se les debia. 
De las tierras y heredades dedicadas 4 los templos y ministros en tiempo de la infidelidad de estas gentes, vemos ahora en la Nueva Espafia 
muchas, sobre las quales no faltan entre nuestros Espafioles hartos pleitos, por haberse metido en ellas unos y quererlas otros. Los 
sacerdotes iban algunas veces 4 ciertos tiempos, segun estaba por ley ordenado, 4 visitar sus vasallos y considerar como estaban, si 
recibian algunos agravios 6 habian menester administrarles justicia, 6 darles algun favor, y asi los dejaban consolados. Junto a los 
templos habia unas grandes trojes y graneros donde se recogia el trigo y los bastimentos que 4 los templos pertenecian, y de alli sacudo 
lo necesario para los ministros y gastos que para los templos eran menester, se repartia limosna por muchos viejos pobres, casados y 
solteros 6 enfermos que padecian necesidades. En las ciudades principales, como era Mexico y Tlascalla y Cholula y otros grandes 
pueblos, habia hospitales dotados de rentas y vasallos, donde se recibian y curaban los pobres enfermos.” Without inquiring in this 

* The following extract from the one hundred and thirty-second chapter of the ‘ Historia Apologetica’ of Las Casas is extremely inter- 
esting, as not only explaining the true cause of our knowing so little of the history and ancient institutions of the Peruvians, but likewise 
as throwing considerable light on the present question by the opportunity it affords of relatively considering the immense revenues and 
possessions of the Mexican and Peruvian temples, and of thus forming an opinion whether the support of such great ecclesiastical 
establishments did not originate in the Hebrew law of tithes, which the first Jewish colonies may be supposed with great probability to 
have carried over with them to the New World. The commencement of this extract is likewise remarkable, and singularly corroborates 
what we have already said, in the hundred and sixty-ninth page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present volume, of the Jews 
having instituted amongst the Indians the Mosaic ordeal for the detection and punishment of adultery. “Si alguna cometia pecado alguno 
secreto en violacion de la castidad, tenian que sus carnes habian de podrecerse; por lo qual hacian gran penitencia porque los dioses les 
encubriesen su pecado y no fuesen difamadas. Pero si era publico y averiguadala verdad, mataban entrambos. Esto se ha entendido de la 
religion de aquestas mugeres ministras 6 sacerdotisas de los templos, y de los otros ministros y sacerdotes que habia en la Nueva Espafia; y 
segun tengo colegido, lo mismo fue de las provincias de Guatemala, y de la de Nicaragua y Honduras y de otras muchas provincias, por 
mas de ochocientas leguas bien largas, puesto que algo mas y algo menos en ministros, cerimonias y sacrificios haya alguna diversidad en 
diversas partes: y asi podemos juzgar de todas las naciones de este orbe, porque no de todas podemos saber las diferencias 6 variedad 
que tenian en su religion; y aunque las supiesemos todas, no convendria referir tantas, porque seria componer 6 escribir infinita obra. 
Del sacerdocio y ministros de los templos y dioses de los reynos del Peru, no se ha podido colegir su cierta orden, su numero y definicion, 
mas de que habia sumo sacerdote y otro que llamaban en su lengua Vilaoma, y otros sacerdotes 4 aquel sugetos é inferiores, y aun esto no 
se sabe decir muy en particular; los sacerdotes que habia, dicese que no eran casados. La causa creemos fue, que como las riquezas que 
habia en aquellos reynos fueron las mayores que juntas se hallaron en todo el mundo, y estas por la mayor parte poseian los templos y las 
guardaban y conservaban los sacerdotes, como los nuestros entraron tan de subito, y todo su principal negocio era recojer y no dejar punta 
de todo aquelio que fuese y aun que pareciese oro, lo primero que los sacerdotes quando lo pudieron hacer, procuraron, fue transportarlo 
y ponerlo en cobro; por miedo de que no los atormentasen, desaparecieron; y asi se quasi enterraron aquel nombre de sacerdote. 
Sucedié la conversion y el dexamiento y aniquilacion intempestiva celerima y momentaria de toda su republica, que los. nuestros en mas 
breves dias que ninguna de las otras regiones de estas Indias hicieron, con sus mismas que entre si tubieron, discordias.. Y asi como desa- 
parecié tan presto el sacerdocio de la manera que se ha referido, no se ha podido alcanzar en particular la distincion y numero de sus indi- 
viduos nisu orden. Podré tambien haber concurrido alguna inadvertencia de los religiosos que despues supieron sus lenguas, los quales 
como preguntaron y escudrifiaron muchas otras cosas de la religion, no miraron en preguntar lo que tocaba 4 esta del sacerdocio.” 

VOL. VIII. G3Ne) 

950 NOTES. 

of Leviticus, in which particular mention is made of tithe, because tithes were an offering devoted to the Lord. The 
second is the thirtieth chapter of Numbers, which contains the rule of exceptions to the preceding ordinances. “ And 

place, as foreign to our subject, to what uses tithes might have been applied by the ancient constitutions of the church, or whether. the 
arguments of those who maintain that this source of ecclesiastical revenue was originally divided into three parts—one of which was 
appropriated to building and keeping in repair sacred edifices, the other to the support of the clergy, and the third to the maintenance 
of the poor,—are founded in theory or in fact, we shall merely remark, that if it should plainly or probably appear that the Mexicans 
paid tithe, the principle must be conceded that that custom existed amongst the Indians, and its accidental modifications or commu- 
tations are of no importance to the present inquiry. That they paid first-fruits and kept the festival of New Moons is stated by 
‘Torquemada, in the two hundred and eighty-third page of the sixth volume of this work. Reasoning therefore by analogy, we come to 
the inference, even were all other kind of proof wanting, that nonconformity on a point so strongly insisted on by the Mosaic law would 
have been quite unlikely to have constituted the only anomaly in the rites and religious institutions of the Mexicans and Jews. Returning 
for a moment to our previous subject, we may here remark that Herrera’s description of the Mexican Teoqualo in the four hundred and 
seventeenth page of the sixth volume of this work, nearly agrees with that of Acosta, and they both appear to have borrowed their accounts 
from Diego Duran’s inedited ‘ Historia de la Nueva Espafia’, who expressly says, that the virgins who kneaded the dough of which 
they made the body of Huitzilopochtli bore for that day the honorary appellation of ‘ Ypihuan Huitzilopochtli, i. e. the sisters of Huit- 
zilopochtli; which might lead one to suppose that the Mexicans had g tradition of the speech of Christ to his disciples, as recorded by St. 
Matthew in the following passage of the twelfth chapter of his Gospel: “¢ While he yet talked to the people, behold, his mother and his 
brethren stood without, desiring to speak with him. Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring 
to speak with thee. But he answered and said unto him that told him, Who is my mother? and who are my brethren? And he stretched 
forth his hand and said, Behold my mother and my brethren! For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same 
” and in order to verify.it in a literal sense, bestowed the appellation of sisters of Quetzalcoatl upon 
the virgins of the college of Calmecac, which title is particularly mentioned as belonging to them in the following passage of the fortieth 
chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, where a mother thus addresses her daughter, whom she had vowed when 
an infant to place in that religious society: “‘Oye, hija mia, muy amada, quando eras chiquita y tiernecita, aqui estan los que te 
engendraron, tu padre y tu madre, de los quales eres carne y sangre. En tu ternura y tu nifiez te prometieron y te ofrecieron 4 nuestro 
Sefior, el qual esta en todo lugar, para que seas una de las perfectas hermanas de nuestro Sefior, de las hermosas virgenes que son como 
piedras preciosas y como plumas ricas, para que entres y vivas donde estan en su guarda y recogimiento con las religiosas virgines de 
Calmecac ; y agora que ya eres de edad de discrecion, ruegote, que de todo corazon cumplas el voto que ellos hicieron.” ‘ Hearken, my 
dearly beloved daughter, those who begot thee, thy father and thy mother, whose flesh and blood thou art, are here present. In thy tender 
years and infancy they promised and offered thee to our Lord, who is everywhere, that thou shouldest become one of the perfect sisters of 
our Lord, of the beautiful virgins who resemble precious stones and rich feathers, to the intent that thou shouldest enter and live with 
the religious virgins of Calmecac in their dwelling-place and retreat; and now that thou hast arrived at years of discretion I entreat thee 
to fulfill with all thy heart the vow which they have made for thee.” Upon this passage we shall only remark that the epithet sons of God 
is bestowed by St. John, in the twelfth verse of the first chapter of his Gospel, upon those who believed in Christ, which also agrees with 
the appellation of sons of God (hijos de Dios), which is applied by the Mexican orator to the friends of Quetzalcoatl in the following 
passage of the sixteenth chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, and which singularly agrees with the words of 
St. Paul in the fourteenth verse of the eighth chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, and in the sixth verse of the fourth chapter of his 
Epistle to the Galatians: ‘O Sefior, siquiera las migajas de las sobras de lo que se ha dicho han cogido y gozado, y es lo que les ha 

is my brother, and szster, and mother ;’ 

caido de la mesa de los que son ricos y tienen abastanza de bienes, y son nuestros sefiores: donde quiera que estubiere algun amigo y - 

conoscido de Dios sin falta se aprovechara y tomara para si estos beneficios y mercedes, y sera agradecido 4 nuestro Sefor Dios, y 
tomara esta doctrina para hacerse hijo de Dios, conformandose con la voluntad del mismo Dios.” “ O Lord, at least they have gathered 
and benefited by the crumbs which have remained, of what has been said, which is that which has fallen from the table of those who 
are rich and possess abundance of means and are our lords. Wheresoever there is a fraend or acquaintance of God’s he will not fail to 
derive advantage, and to take to himself these favours and acts of kindness, and will be thankful to our Lord God, and will receive this 
doctrine in order to become a son of God, conforming himself with the will of the same God.” The singular metaphor recurred to by 
the Mexican orator in the above passage might tempt one to ask whether the Mexicans could by any possibility have become acquainted 
with the language of Christ in his famous parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus, as recorded in the sixteenth chapter of the Gospel of 
St. Luke, whilst the commencement of the same chapter in which Quetzalcoatl is recognised as the son of man and the father of mankind, 
and is expressly named our Lord and Son, suggests to us a question analogous to that which Christ put to the Pharisees in the twenty- 
second chapter of the Gospel of St. Matthew, namely, How, if the Mexicans called Quetzalcoatl Lord and Father, was he their son? 
The testimony of Diego Duran, so far as it relates to the fact of the tenth of certain kinds of grain being applied by the Mexicans to 
religious purposes, is so explicit that we cannot but feel considerable surprise that Sahagun should pass it over in complete silence in the 
third book of his History of New Spain. There can, however, exist but little doubt that that book has been extremely mutilated by the 
hands of those zealous ecclesiastics who attempted in the first instance to consign the entire of his history to oblivion, since it would be 
reasonable to suppose that he would have discussed at length and investigated with diligence the origin of so singular a rite as the Mexican 
teoqualo, and would not have been guilty of so glaring an attempt at concealment in his definition of the meaning of the term. Teoqualo 
as that exhibited in the following passage of the first chapter of the third book of his History of New Spain: “Cada uno comia un 

a 

NOT HS. 931 

the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When a man shall make a 
singular yow, the persons shall be for the Lord by thy estimation. And thy estimation shall be of the male from 
twenty years old even unto sixty years old, even thy estimation shall be fifty shekels of silver, after the shekel of the 
sanctuary. And if it bea female, then thy estimation shall be thirty shekels. And if it be from five years old even 
unto twenty years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male twenty shekels, and for the female ten shekels. And 
if it be from a month old even unto five years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male five shekels of silver, and for 
the female thy estimation shall be three shekels of silver. And if it be from sixty years old and above; if it be a 
male, then thy estimation shall be fifteen shekels, and for the female ten shekels. But if he be poorer than thy 
estimation, then he shall present himself before the priest, and the priest shall value him} according to his ability 
that vowed shall the priest value him. And if it be a deast, whereof men bring an offering unto the Lord, all that any 
man giveth of such unto the Lord shall be holy. He shall not alter it, nor change it, a good for a bad, or a bad for 
a good: and if he shall at all change beast for beast, then it and the exchange thereof shall be holy. And if it be 
any unclean beast, of which they do not offer a sacrifice unto the Lord, then he shall present the beast before the 
priest: and the priest shall value it, whether it be good or bad: as thou valuest it, who art the priest, so shall it be. 
But if he will at all redeem it, then he shall add a fifth part thereof unto thy estimation. And when a man shall sanc- 
tify his house to be holy unto the Lord, then the priest shall estimate it, whether it be good or bad: as the priest shall 
estimate it, so shall it stand. And if he that sanctified it will redeem his house, then he shall add the fifth part of the 
money of thy estimation unto it, and it shall be his. And ifa man shall sanctify unto the Lord some part of a field of 
his possession, then thy estimation shall be according to the seed thereof: an homer of barley seed shall be valued at 
fifty shekels of silver. If he sanctify his field from the year of Jubilee, according to thy estimation it shall stand. But 
if he sanctify his field after the jubilee, then the priest shall reckon unto him the money according to the years that 
remain, even unto the year of the jubilee, and it shall be abated from thy estimation. And if he that sanctified the field 
will in any wise redeem it, then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto it, and it shall be 
assured tohim. And if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold the field to another man, it shall not be re- 
deemed any more. But the field, when it goeth out in the jubilee, shall be holy unto the Lord, as a field devoted ; the 
possession thereof shall be the priest's. And if a man sanctify unto the Lord a field which he hath bought, which is 

pedagito del cuerpo de Vitzilopuchtli, y los que comian eran mancebos, y decian que era cuerpo de dios que se llamaba Teuqualo, y los 
que recibian y comian el cuerpo de Vitzilopuchtli se llamaban ministros de Dios.” <“‘ Every one ate a morsel of the body of Vitzilopuchtli, 
and those who ate it were young men, and they said that it was the body of a god who was named Teuqualo, and those who received 
and ate the body of Vitzilopuchtli were named the servants of God.” A strong indirect corroboration of the payment of tithe by the 
Mexicans, and of its being imposed as a duty on those who ate the body of Huitzilopochtli, is, however, still afforded by Sahagun in his 
admission in the same chapter of the third book of his History, that those who received the body of Huitzilopochtli were under a particular 
obligation to make large offerings at his temple. Reserving for another occasion some further observations on the Mexican rite of 
teoqualo, we shall conclude this note by observing, that the subject of the interesting painting in the sixth page of the Codes Borgianus 
“is the celebration of the solemn festival which took place in the Mexican month Panquetzaliztli, and which is described by Diego Duran 
with great exactness in the second part of his inedited ‘ Historia de la Nueva Espafia,’ since we there behold the magnificent shrine of 
Huitzilopochtli crimson with the blood of human sacrifices, and the Totectlamacazqui or priest who officiated at those horrid rites 
descending the stairs of the temple with the image of the god Paynalton in his arms, which he is about to present to the prisoners destined 
for sacrifice, who are drawn up in a file at the foot of the oratory named Tzonpantli, which word, literally interpreted, signifies Mount 
Calvary, immediately in front of the temple, at the bottom of which are the eagles preying on human sacrifices, and verifying the language 
of Christ in the following passage of the seventeenth chapter of the Gospel of St. Luke: “Two men shall be in the field; the one shall 
be taken, and the other left. And they answered and said unto him, Where, Lord? And he said, Wheresoever the body is, thither will 
the eagles be gathered together;” which extremely obscure prophecy would seem to allude retrospectively to the more ancient prophecy of 
Isaiah, in the sixteenth verse of the sixty-sixth chapter of his Prophecies, and prospectively to the destruction of Jerusalem by the 
Romans, which city might, figuratively, have been named the body of the Jewish state, as being the metropolis of Judea, and to the 
eagles conspicuously displayed on the Roman standards, which triumphantly waving in the holy of holies, constituted the abomination of 
desolation which happily restored peace to Palestine. It may be right to remark that the seven first’pages in the Codex Borgianus are 
painted in a horizontal position, exactly in the manner represented in the facsimile of that splendid painting, which, together with the 
other facsimiles of the Mexican paintings preserved in the Imperial Library of Vienna, in the Royal Library at Dresden, in the Library 
of the Institute at Bologna, and in the Vatican Library, we have deposited in the British Museum, that in after-years they may attest 
the accuracy and care with which the lithographic plates contained in these volumes have been executed from the correct facsimiles of 
the original Mexican paintings. Facsimiles of the paintings preserved in the Bodleian Library at Oxford have not been presented to 
the Museum, because the originals existing in this country it was deemed unnecessary. 

9359 NOTES. 

not of the fields of his possession; then the priest shall reckon unto him the worth of thy estimation, even unto the 
year of the jubilee: and he shall give thine estimation in that day, as a holy thing unto the Lord. In the year of the 
jubilee the field shall return unto him of whom it was bought, even to him to whom the possession of the land did 
belong. And all thy estimations shall be according to the shekel of the sanctuary: twenty gerahs shall be the shekel. 
Only the firstling of the beasts, which should be the Lord’s firstling, no man shall sanctify it: whether it be ox, or sheep, 
itis the Lord’s. And if it be of an unclean beast, then he shall redeem it according to thine estimation, and shall add 
a fifth part of it thereto : or if it be not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to thy estimation. Notwithstanding no 
devoted thing, that a man shall devote unto the Lord of all that he hath, both of man and beast, and of the field of his 
possession, shall be sold or redeemed : every devoted thing is most holy unto the Lord. None devoted, which shall 
be devoted of men, shall be redeemed; but shall surely be put to death. And all the t2the* of the land, whether of the 
seed of the land or of the fruit of the tree, is the Lord’s: it is holy unto the Lord. And ifa man will at all redeem 
ought of his tithes, he shall add thereto the fifth part thereof. And concerning the tithe of the herd, or of the flock, 
even of whatsoever passeth under the rod, the tenth shall be holy unto the Lord. He shall not search whether it be 
good or bad, neither shall he change it: and if he change it at all, then both it and the change thereof shall be holy; 
it shall not be redeemed. These are the commandments, which the Lord commanded Moses for the children of Israel 
in mount Sinai.” —“ And Moses spake unto the heads of the tribes concerning the children of Israel, saying, This is the 
thing which the Lord hath commanded. Ifa man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his soul with a 
bond ; he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all that proceedeth out of his mouth. If a woman also vow 
a vow unto the Lord, and bind herself by a bond, being in her father’s house in her youth; and her father hear 
her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bound her soul, and her father shall hold his peace at her: then all her 
vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she hath bound her soul shall stand. But if her father disallow her in 
the day that he heareth ; not any of her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she hath bound her soul, shall stand: and 
the Lord shall forgive her, because her father disallowed her. And if she had at all an husband, when she vowed, or 
uttered ought out of her lips, wherewith she bound her soul; and her husband heard it, and held his peace at her in 
the day that he heard it: then her vows shall stand, and her bonds wherewith she bound her soul shall stand. But 
if her husband disallowed her on the day that he heard it; then he shall make her vow which she vowed, and that 
which she uttered with her lips, wherewith she bound her soul, of none effect; and the Lord shall forgive her. But 
every vow of a widow, and of her that is divorced, wherewith they have bound their souls, shall stand against her. 
And if she vowed in her husband’s house, or bound her soul by a bond with an oath; and her husband heard it, and 
held his peace at her, and disallowed her not: then all her vows shall stand, and every bond wherewith she bound 

* The following account of the revenues of the Peruvian temples, and the sources from which they were derived, is taken from the one 
hundred and thirty-first chapter of the ‘Historia Apologetica’. It will be perused with interest when it is recollected that we are indebted 
for the information it contains to so learned and eminent a prelate as Las Casas. “ Aquestas provisiones y reditos propios de los 
templos y sacerdotes de aquellos reynos puesto que no nos conste muy en particular por la razon en el capitulo antecedente asignada, 
quantas ni quales fueron, podemos empero de la gran religion que los reyes alli tubieron y devocion 4 los templos del sol, y de la sefia- 
lada prudencia y solicitud que tubieron en la governacion, congeturar, y que no fueron qualesquieras sino muy grandes, opulentas y 
copiosas mas que ninguna otra parte. ‘Tenian pues los templos de los reynos del Peru, mayormente los consagrados al sol, grandes 
heredades y en las mas fertiles y gruesas tierras para sus trigos 6 maiz y las otras cosas de comida y Jas otras de sacrificar, las quales 
primero que las de los reyes se mandaban labrar y cultivar, cuyo cargo tenian toda la comunidad de la provincia. Para la cosecha y 
guarda y encerramiento de los frutos, habia grandes trojes y graneros reales: de estos se mantenian los sacerdotes y ministros del 
templo, y suplian los otros gastos que se habian de hacer.. Tenian tambien grandes hatos de ganados, carneros y ovejas de todas 
especies, como en el capitulo se refirid, para los sacrificios que se hacian en honor del sol y mantenimiento de los sacerdotes y ministros 
y de las monjas y demas servidores. Estos ganados eran inumerables en cada provincia y pueblo, y si se hubieran de vender, fueran de 
grandisimo valor. Todas las dichas heredades y ganados y pastores que los guardaban, tenian titulo de ser dedicados para servicio del 
sol, y asi se llamaban las heredades, los ganados, los hatos y los pastores del sol. Mas particularidades de lo que esta dicho, no hemos 

podido alcanzar. Por esta quasi generalidad, de esto y de lo demas se podra mucho entender y juzgar. Lo que agora se debia tratar- 

segun la orden que desde arriba se trae larga, era cotejar el sacerdocio de estas nuestras gentes Indianas con él de las otras naciones que 
vivieron sin conocimiento del verdadero Dios en los siglos pasados; pero porque segun ya esta dicho, habemos tenido muy poca noticia de 
las particularidades de la religion y los secretos de ella y de los usos y costumbres que aquestas gentes tenian, por haber todo quast repenti- 
namente cesado con nuestra entrada; y despues de muchos afios hayamos sabido las lenguas, y aun estas en muchos de nosotros no muy 
penetrandolas, y lo que de estas cosas se ha sabido, ha sido no con mucha curiosidad y 4 pedazos; de lo qual parece seguirse ignorar la: 
mayor parte; aunque por poco que hayamos entendido y que avemos escrito, se puede arguir ser mucho mas notable /o ignorado.” 

See as 

NOTES. 233 

her soul shall stand. But if her husband hath utterly made them void on the day he heard them; then whatsoever 
proceeded out of her lips concerning her vows, or concerning the bond of her soul, shall not stand: her husband hath 
made them void ; and the Lord shall forgive her. Every vow, and every binding oath to afflict the soul, her husband 
may establish it, or her husband may make it void. But if her husband altogether hold his peace at her from day to 
day ; then he establisheth all her vows, or all her bonds, which are upon her: he confirmeth them, because he held 
his peace at her in the day that he heard them. But if he shall anywise make them void after that he hath heard 
them; then he shall bear her iniquity. These are the statutes, which the Lord commanded Moses, between a man 
and his wife, between the father and his daughter, being yet in her youth in her father’s house.” 

That the Mexicans attached the same importance as the Jews to vows, and considered them equally binding on the 
people, whether made for the purpose of the recovery of health after sickness, for long life, for children, or victory 
over the enemy, will plainly appear from the perusal of the following passage of the hundred and seventy-ninth 
chapter of the ‘ Historia Apologetica’ of Las Casas, who, although he is treating more particularly of the manners of 
the Indians of Guatemala, takes occasion to observe, that their religious rites and ceremonies differed very little from 
those of the Mexicans. ‘Cuatro cosas principales eran las que con sus sacrificios de Dios, 6 de los dioses, aleanzar 
pretendian, y estas eran las que ellos siempre procuraban. La una Ja vida larga”, la otra la salud y sanidad de los 
cuerpos, la otra hijos, la otra lo necesario{ para sustentar la vida. Para la primera se enderezaban los sacrificios co- 
munes y sus penitencias y observancias que estan dichas; y aunque para conseguir aquella y salud y paz y buenos 
temporales{, tenian mucho cuidado los sacerdotes y los sefiores y reyes por todo el pueblo§, pero en particular cada 
uno con sacrificios y ayunos y otras observancias, trabajaban de pedirlo dentro de sus puertas, en todas sus obras : 
finalmente invocaban el ausilio de aquello que creian ser Dios 6 cosa divina. Para la salud, si alguno enfermaba, 
lo primero que hacia, era hacer sacrificio 6 embiar codornices|| 6 otras aves de tal 6 de tal color aplicada 4 la enfer- 

* It is extremely deserving of notice, that the sacrifices of the old law were in like manner principally directed to the attainment of the 
four things which Las Casas informs us formed the primary object of the vows of the Indians. The promise of long life, for example, 
was particularly held out by Moses to the Jews, as the reward of obedience to the commands of God, in many books of Scripture; and 
Solomon is commended by God himself, in the eleventh chapter of the first book of Kings, for not preferring riches, or honours, or 
length of days, to wisdom and knowledge. “ And God said to Solomon, Because this was in thine heart, and thou hast not asked riches, 
wealth, or honour, nor the life of thine enemies, neither yet hast asked long life, but hast asked wisdom and knowledge for thyself, that 
thou mayest judge my people, over whom I have made thee king, wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee, and I will give thee riches, 
and wealth, and honour, such as none of the kings have had that have been before thee, neither shall there any after thee have the like.” 
How, after this accumulation of inestimable gifts from the Deity, Solomon could, in the latter end of his days, have erected high places to 
all the host of heaven, and worshiped the sun and the moon, is a fact not to be explained on any principle of moral reasoning, since 
Aristotle lays it down, in the tenth chapter of the first book of his Ethics, as an indisputable fact, that the hadzt of virtue and wisdom, 
but especially of the former, when once acquired, is, of all human possessions, the most permanent, and the least liable to change, and 
for the reasons which he assigns in the following passage of the same chapter: ‘* Maprupe: 82 rp Ao xaxs To vuv Oiamopyfey. meps oddev yup 
ovrws Umapryer Tw aylpwmiver BeCasorys, os Meph TAS evepryeias Tas xr” ApPET HV. POVILOTEpE Yop Kab THY emit yoy adTces Ooxcucsy elves TouTOwY 
8 adreov, ai rimsmrerrces xo ovimorrceross, ice TO MaAIoTH xo cUVexeoTaTa xaTatyy ev adTas TOUS PUXUpIOUS. TOUTO yup colxeY aiTIMW TOU Ly yiryveotou 
meps atta Andyy. imapkes dy To Cyrouevoy rq eddccnovi, nets Borer Oice Bsou To1ouros’ der yup, pudloTa mavTwVY, mpuker nour Jewpyoes Ta xut’ apeTyy, 
Xb Tag TUX MS OITE XAAALTTA, Xa MavTy MavTwWS Euperwg by’, ads dAnbws dyabos ou TeTpuyavos dvev Yoyou.” <“« Atque huic rationi testimonio 
est hoc ipsum, de quo prius dubitatum est: nulla.enim in re humana tanta inest firmitudo, quanta in lis actionibus que cum virtute con- 
sentiunt; nam he vel scientiis ipsis stabiliores ac diuturniores esse videntur: atque harum ipsarum ut queque plurzmi est, ita diutissime 
permanet, propterea quod in eis maxime et assidue eztatem agunt beati: que videtur esse causa, cur nulla unquam oblivione deleantur. 
Inerit ergo in beato id quod querimus, talisque in vita futurus est: nam vel semper, vel omnium maxime ea et aget, et animo cernet, que 
cum virtute conjuncta sunt, fortuneeque casus pulcherrime omnique ex parte et plane concinne feret, ut vere vir bonus et sine vitupera- 
tione quadratus.” 

+ It deserves to be remarked that the entreaty for daily bread precedes the supplication for the forgiveness of sins in the Lord’s prayer, 
which prayer, though expressly composed for the use of Christians, might still have nearly agreed with some ancient formula of Jewish faith. 

+ The immediate dependence of the seasons on the Deity, and the direct influence which human conduct exercises over the weather in 
causing showers to be sent or withheld, is particularly pointed out by Moses in the twenty-eight chapter of Deuteronomy. 

§ A sort of representative religious worship was recognised by the code of the Pentateuch, more particularly in the case of the annual 
sacrifice of atonement, where the high priest represented the whole Jewish nation. 

|| The Indians might possibly have sacrificed quails from a tradition of the quails with which God fed the Israelites in the wilderness. 

{ Weare informed in the tenth verse of the fifth chapter of the second book of Kings, that it was the water of the river Jordan, and 
not the water of the rivers Abana and Pharpar of Damascus, that was made applicable to the cure of the leprosy of Naaman, the captain 
of the host of the king of Syria. 

VOL. VIII. (30) 

934 NOTES. 

medad segun sus abusos, al sacerdote para que las ofreciese por él. Si era sehor siempre tenia el medico delanté 
como se dira; la otra gente no: pero luego tomaba la muger si el marido era el enfermo, 6 él si enfermaba ella, una 
manta & otra cosa de valor, é iba con ella al medico y deciale: Fulano vuestro hyo esta malo, ruega os mucho que lo 
visiteis, y sin esperar que le respondiese algo, le ponia lo que le traia delante. El] medico se desocupaba é iba luego 
con el mensagero y visitaba al enfermo, y si era la enfermedad liviana, poniale algunas yerbas y otras cosas que él 
usaba por remedios ; pero si era la enfermedad aguda y peligrosa, deciale: Tu algun pecado has cometido, y tanto le 
importunaba y angustiaba con repetirselo, que le hacia confesar lo que habia muchos afios quizas de antes hecho: y 
esto era teniendo por principal medicina, hechar el pecado de su anima para la salud del cuerpo. De aqui és que 
agora despues de convertidos, es cosa maravillosa la devocion y fé que tienen con los santos sacramentos, en especial 
con él de la confesion, y es increible 4 quien no lo ha visto, con quanta importunidad lo piden, y hasta lo aleanzar 
quan suma es su perseverancia y diligencia. Confesado pues su pecado, hecha suertes el medico sobre que sacrificios 
seran bien ofrecerse; y era el enfermo* al medico tan obediente, que ninguna cosa le mandaba hacer y sacrificar que 
no hiciese, aunque fuese dar para ello toda su hacendeja. Muchos viendose afligidos y puestos en alguna tribulacion, 
hacian votos si sanaban 6 eran librados de ella, harian esto y esto, y cosas muy dificultosas 6 costosas, como eran que 
ofrecerian un esclavo, y algunas veces un hijo 6hyat. Lo mismo hacian quando se veian cautivos 6 en algun gran 
peligro; y nuestros religiosos convirtieron un Indio que en tiempo de su infidelidad viendose cautivo, hizo voto de 
sacrificar un hijo; y desque se solto, vino 4 su casay sacrificdlo. Asi lo hizo Jepta por cumplir el voto que habia hecho 
de su hija, puesto que indiscretamente sacrificando, como parece por el libro de los Jueces. Tenian por el pecado mayor 
de todos no cumplir los votos, y asi los cumplian 6 morian por cumplirlos. Y hay aqui una cosa digna de ser notada, 
que habiendo como hay, muchas 6 diversas lenguas 6 lenguajes que no se entienden unos 4 otros mas que Bizcainos 
y Alemanes, en todas ellas el voto no tiene mas de un vocablo, y es Elah{, y no debe ser sin causa : asi que por alcanzar 
salud y vida hacian todo lo que podian. Para conseguir el beneficio de hijos quando no los tenian, ofrecian muchos 

* Las Casas remarks, in the following passage of the hundred and forty-first chapter of his ‘ Historia Apologetica,’ that there were 
public hospitals in the cities of Mexico, Tlascala, and Cholula, expressly endowed for the relief of the sick. Hence it may be inferred, as 
well as from the fact of surgeons attending the Mexican armies to render assistance to the wounded, that they had attained some skill in 
medicine and surgery ; and if this be considered, as undoubtedly it must, a proof of their advanced state of civilization, the next question 
to be asked is, by whom were they instructed in the rudiments of sciences which the most enlightened men have in every age professed, 
and which the greatest monarchs have felt it a duty to their subjects to protect? And here again, in the absence of certainty, we must 
express it as our decided opinion, that the Mexicans were indebted to the Jews for much of their knowledge in those two arts, and espe- 
cially for the use of the temazcalli, or vapour-bath, so very serviceable in many diseases peculiar to their climate, and for their frequent and 
judicious application of bleeding, with whatever else could be considered scientific in their treatment of the sick, and likewise for their know- 
ledge of the medicinal properties of many herbs which they professed to have derived from their ancestors, the Tultecas, whose knowledge 
of chemistry they likewise extolled, whilst their acquaintance with surgery was probably improved by the facilities afforded to the study 
of anatomy by the human sacrifices, of such daily occurrence in the city of Mexico, The following is the passage of the « Historia Apo- 
logetica’ in which the above-mentioned curious fact is stated: “ En las ciudades principales, como era Mexico y Tlascala y Cholola, y 
otros grandes pueblos, habia hospztales dotados de rentas y vasallos, donde se recibian y curaban los pobres enfermos.” 

+ That the same custom existed amongst the Jews, is evident from the interrogation of the prophet Micah, in the sixth chapter of his 
Prophecies: “ Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my first-born for my 
transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?” And it may further be inferred from the parable of the sour grapes, in the 
eighteenth chapter of Ezekiel, where God himself expostulates with the Jews on the absurdity of their supposing that the sin of the father 
could be expiated by the death of his guiltless child, whose reply, in the nineteenth verse of the same chapter, impeaching the moral jus- 
tice of the Deity for pronouncing a decision so contrary to their prejudices, abundantly proves that the proverb in Israel, “ The fathers 
have eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge,” was understood in the same dire sense by the Jews as by the ancient 
Mexicans and Peruvians, amongst whom Acosta declares it was no unusual thing for a father to atone for zs own sins by putting to death 
an innocent child. We may remark, in concluding this note, that the Jewish doctrine of the atonement, or of a vicarial sacrifice, so liable 
to be misunderstood by anignorant race of men, might have been abused in the New World to the perpetration of the most horrid crimes. 

{ The term Elah, which Las Casas says was the general name for a vow in all the various Indian languages, would seem to be derived 
from El, which in Hebrew signifies God, and from which word is formed Allah, the Mahometan name for the Deity. It occurs, likewise, 
as a Hebrew proper name in the ninth verse of the twenty-first chapter of the first book of Samuel : “ And the priest said, The sword of 
Goliath the Philistine, whom thou slewest in the valley of Elah, behold it is here, wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod.” It would 
hence appear, that after the death of Goliah, his sword had been hung up before the Lord, as a dedicated thing; which reminds us that 
the Mexicans were accustomed to dedicate the spoils which they took in battle to Tezcatlipoca, and to hang them up as trophies before 
his shrine. 

NOTES 935 

-generos de sacrificios ; sacabanse mucha sangre de las partes susodichas de sus cuerpos, sacrificaban muchas aves, 
hacian muchas promesas, llamaban 4 los medicos y sortilegos para que les diesen consejo que debian de ofrecer para 
aleanzar 4 tener hijos: los quales hechadas sus suertes respondianles, que por algun pecado suyo* los dioses no les 
habian dado hijost ; muchas veces se los confesaban, y finalmente les mandaban hacer penitencias, y lo que mas fre- 
cuente les aconsejaban era que apartasen cama de las de sus mugeres quarenta y cinquenta dias, que no comiesen 
cosa con sal, que comiesen pan seco 6 solo maiz, y que estubiesen tantos dias en el campo en alguna cueva que les 
sefalaban, que durmiesen en Ja haz de la tierra para que aplacasen a Dios, que no se bafasen tanto tiempot, que al 

* ‘Thus God is said, in the eighteenth verse of the twentieth chapter of Genesis, to have deprived Abimelech, king of Gerar, of children, 
as a punishment for the sin which he had incurred on account of Sarah, the wife of Abraham, whom that patriarch had denied, pretending 
that she was his sister, and not his wife, whose dissimulation his son Isaac likewise followed, apprehensive that the subjects of the same 
king would deprive him of his wife Rebekah. It is a curious fact stated by Sahagun, in the sixth chapter of the ninth book of his 
History of New Spain, that the Mexican merchants practised a similar sort of dissimulation in denying their goods when they arrived 
amongst strangers, pretending that they were not their own, but merely confided to their care by other merchants. 

++ Las Casas elsewhere observes, that “ I have sinned” was a phrase emphatically expressive amongst the Indians of contrition for the 
commission of sin: that prelate’s account is corroborated by Zorita in the following passage of the first chapter of his inedited ‘ Relacion 
Sumaria de los Sefiores que habia en la Nueva Espafia’: “ De su natural aquellas gentes son muy sufridas, y ninguna cosa basta 4 los 
turbar y alterar; son de suyo muy sujetos y corregibles, y si les reprehenden 6 rifien algun descuido, estan con gran humildad y atencion, 
y no responden mas que pequeé, y quanto mas sefiores son, con mas humildad lo dicen, y algunas veces dicen peque, no te enojes, mira lo 
que quieres que haga. Hablo de los que esten en su simplicidad natural, porque los que han sido esclavos, 6 viven 6 tratan con Espafioles, 
estan muy trocados, y en este auto que hacian los del pueblo con estos nuevos sefiores, se entiende bien su gran humildad y sufrimiento.” 
Three examples from the earlier books of Scripture, and the prayer of Solomon at the dedication of the temple, may be adduced to prove 
that the Indians borrowed this form of speech from the Jews, who were expressly commanded by God to use it in the far land of their 
captivity, and who, it is therefore to be presumed, would have found themselves under a peculiar obligation to do so when they arrived in 
America, which was a part of the world so extremely remote from Palestine. Scripture, for instance, records, in the thirty-fourth verse of the 
twenty-second chapter of Numbers, that Balaam exclaimed, “ I have sinned,” on the angel expostulating with him for beating his ass; and 
Achan makes use of the same form of confession in the twentieth verse of the seventh chapter of Joshua, on being convicted of embezzling 
the spoils of the enemy. David likewise returns a similar reply to the rebuke of the prophet Nathan, in the thirteenth verse of the twelfth 
chapter of the second book of Samuel, whose twofold crime of murder and adultery was accordingly pardoned by that prophet. The 
prayer of Solomon, however, at the dedication of the temple, as recorded in the eighth chapter of the first book of Kings, was the solemn 
act which was most likely to have consecrated the use of this short form of confession in all succeeding ages amongst the Jews, but espe- 
cially amongst those captives or strangers in far lands, who in remote ages had colonized America. We shall here insert a passage from 
that celebrated prayer. ‘If thy people go out to battle against their enemy, whithersoever thou shalt send them, and shall pray unto the 
Lord toward the city which thou hast chosen, and toward the house that I have built for thy name: then hear thou in heaven their prayer 
and their supplication, and maintain their cause. If they sin against thee, (for there is no man that sinneth not,) and thou be angry with 
them, and deliver them to the enemy, so that they carry them away captives unto the land of the enemy, far or near; yet if they shall 
bethink themselves in the land whither they were carried captives, and repent, and make supplication unto thee in the land of them that 
carried them captives, saying, We have sinned, and have done perversely, we have committed wickedness; and so return unto thee with 
all their heart, and with all their soul, in the land of their enemies, which led them away captive, and pray unto thee toward their land, 
which thou gavest unto their fathers, the city which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name: then hear thou 
their prayer and their supplication in heaven thy dwelling-place, and maintain their cause, and forgive thy people that have sinned against 
thee, and all their transgressions wherein they have trangressed against thee, and give them compassion before them who carried them 
captive, that they may have compassion on them: for they be thy people, and thine inheritance, which thou broughtest forth out of 
Egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron: that thine eyes may be open unto the supplication of thy servant, and unto the supplication 
of thy people Israel, to hearken unto them in all that they call for unto thee. For thou didst separate them from among all the people of 
the earth, to be thine inheritance, as thou spakest by the hand of Moses thy servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of Egypt, 
O Lord God. And it was so, that when Solomon had made an end of praying all this prayer and supplication unto the Lord, he arose 
from before the altar of the Lord, from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread up to heaven.” 

{ The Jews were accustomed to abstain from washing and anointing their bodies during the whole period of their religious mortifica- 
tions. This is evident from what Samuel says in the twentieth verse of the twelfth chapter of his second book, of David arising and 
anointing himself when his attendants informed him that his son was dead: “Then David arose from the earth, and anointed himself, 
and changed his apparel, and came into the house of the Lord, and worshiped: then he came to his own house; and when he required, 
they set bread before him, and he did eat.” It deserves to be remarked, that the Mexicans named mourning in dust and ashes, without 
changing their apparel or washing or anointing themselves for a prescribed period of time, duto de puerco, “ the mourning of a hog;” a 
proverbial expression corresponding in some measure with that of “the burial of an ass,” which was a name that we learn, from the 
nineteenth verse of the twenty-second chapter of Jeremiah, was bestowed by the Jews on funerals unaccompanied with the usual solemn 
rites for the dead, and from which it would appear, even were all other proof wanting, that the Mexicans, like the Jews, considered swine 

236 NOTES. 

fin de los dichos dias diesen tanto incienso y tantas codornices y tantos pajaros de tal y tal color: y hecho todo esto, 
mandabanles que tornasen 4 comenzar como deantes vivian. Era tanto el deseo que teman de haber hijos, que nin- 

a highly impure and unclean animal!: and this perhaps is the reason why no representation of the hog occurs in any of the Mexican 
paintings, with the single exception of the figure of a boar in the sixty-second page of the Dresden MS. The above-mentioned curious 
Mexican proverb is preserved by Diego Duran, in the following passage of the thirty-eighth chapter of the first part of his inedited 
« Historia de la Nueva Espafia’, which likewise contains an interesting account of the solemn ceremonies with which the Mexicans 
honoured the memory of those who were slain in war. “ Ponian estas estatuas todas en un pieza que llamaban tlacochcalco, y luego 
entraban las viudas, ponian cada una 4 su estatua un plato de comida de un guisado que Ilamaban ¢lacatlacualli, que quiere decir comida 
humana, y unas costillas, que ellos llaman papalotlaxcalli, que quiere decir pan de mariposas, y una poca de harina de maiz tostado, 
desleida en agua para bebida: luego que ponian esta comida, tomaban el atambor los cantores, y empezaban 4 cantar cantares de luto, 
y dela suciedad que el luto y lagrimas traen consigo, y traian los cantores vestidas unas mantas muy sucias y manchadas, y unas cintas 
de cuero atadas 4 las cabezas muy llenas de mugre: llamaban 4 este canto ¢zacuicatl, que quiere decir, cantar puerco, 6 de porqueria.” 
We must not omit to point out here four striking analogies in the manners of the Jews and the Mexicans, which the above passage 
serves to illustrate; all connected with their solemn mournings for the dead, and all elucidating obscure passages of Scripture. The 
author of the book of the Wisdom of Solomon, for example, observes, in the fifteenth verse of the fourteenth chapter of that book, that it 
was an ancient Jewish custom for fathers afflicted with untimely grief for the death of their sons to make an image of the deceased ; and 
we accordingly find that it was a Mexican custom to make cloth or wooden images of their deceased kings and warriors, and to pay those 
images the greatest honours when consigning their bodies to the tomb; and Ezekiel commemorates, in the twenty-second verse of the twenty- 
fourth chapter of his prophecies, another ancient Hebrew custom, that of eating the bread of men as a mourning ceremony for the dead ; 

1 The extreme aversion which the North American Indians felt for swine, and the opprobrious term of Shukapa, or swine-eaters, which 
they bestowed on Europeans because they perceived that they ate the flesh of that animal, have already been noticed by Adair in the 
twelfth Argument of his treatise on the Descent of the American Indians from the Jews. Whether, however, the fact of no mention 
being made by any Spanish authors of the flesh of the pecar?, or Mexican hog, being eaten by the Mexicans, or of that animal being 
domesticated amongst them or sacrificed in their temples, or even offered as provision to the Spanish soldiers, before whom they placed 
all other kinds of food when on their marches through their country, can be considered a negative proof of the Mexicans entertaining 
the same aversion for swine as the more northern Indian tribes, we shall leave it to others to determine. The following account, however, 
of the indignant manner in which the Cazongin, or king of Michuacan, received a present of hogs from the Spaniards, affords strong 
presumptive grounds for supposing that the Indians of Michuacan considered swine an unclean animal, on which account, but certainly 
not from any outward similarity of form in the hog to the rat, the king of Michuacan compared them to the latter animal, and commanded 
that they should be killed, and their bodies (lest, as it would appear, their flesh should be eaten by any of his subjects,) cast forth on the 
surface of the ground to be devoured by the fowls of the air, which was the Jewish mode of treating such dead bodies as they considered 
accursed and odious in the eyes of the Deity. This account is taken from a valuable inedited ‘ History of Michuacan’ many years 
preserved in the library of the Escurial. « Digeron los Espafioles al Cazongi, que querian rescatar con los mercaderes, que traian 
plumages y otras cosas de Mexico, y dijoles el Cazongi que fuesen, y por otra parte mandé que ningun mercader ni otro sefior comprase 
aquellos plumages, y compraronlos todos los sacristanes y guardas de los dioses, con las mantas que tenian los dioses, diputadas para 
comprar sus atavios; y compraron todo lo que los Espafioles les traian, y dveron al Caxong: diez puercos y un perro, y digeronle que 
aquel perro seria para guardar su muger y llevar sus cargas. Dioles el Cazongi mantas y xicales y cotaras de cuero, y tornaronse 4 
Mexico: Y como viese el Cazongi aquellos puercos dijo: Que cosa son estos? son ratones que trae esta gente, y tomolo por aguero, y man- 
dolos matar y al perro, y arrastraronlos y hecharonlos por los herbazales.” ‘The Spaniards told the Cazongi that they wished to barter 
with the merchants, and that they had brought feathers and other things from Mexico. The Cazongi informed them they had his consent 
to do so; but he gave private orders that no merchant or other lord should purchase feathers of them ; and all the sacrastans and overseers 
of the gods purchased them with the mantles which belonged to the gods, and were applied to the use of buying them ornaments; and 
they purchased whatever the Spaniards brought with them. They gave the Cazongi ten hogs and a dog, and told him that the dog 
would guard his wife and carry burthens. The Cazongi gave them mantles and vases, and leather buskins, and they returned to 
Mexico: when the Cazonci saw the hogs, he said, What are these? they are rats, which this nation brings with them; and he considered 
it ominous, and commanded that they and the dog should be killed, and they were drawn and cast out on the plain.” Upon this passage 
we shall only further remark, that the use of the term sacristanes by the Spanish author, and its association in the same sentence with 
the phrase ‘ guardas de los dioses,’ i. e. the overseers of the gods, or keepers of the holy things, affords a complete illustration of the 
meaning of the word ‘ Parariecha’ in Plate I. of the present volume, which the same author explains by the phrase ‘los sacristanes’ in 
the curious drawing which he has inserted in his ‘ Historia de los Indios de Mechoacan’, and which we have caused to be engraved in 
the above-mentioned plate, because it affords the most unequivocal proof of the Indians of Michuacan resembling the Jews, as Zorita 
declares was the opinion of many, in the hundred and sixty-third page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present volume; since 
nothing could savour more strongly of Judaism than their making use of an ark in war, which is likewise stated by Adair of the Cherokee 
Indians in the three hundred and fiftieth page of the present volume, and also recorded by Las Casas of the Indians of Honduras in the 
hundred and eightieth chapter of his inedited ‘ Historia Apologetica’, who esteemed their ark so sacred, that to profane it by a touch they 
thought would be followed by the instant death of the guilty party. 

NOTES. 237 

gunas cosas les decian los tales medicos por dificilima que fuese, que no hiciesen. De aqui procedia que en teniendo 
qualquier hombre el primer hijo 6 hija, luego perdia el padre su nombre y le llamaban el padre de Francisco*, y lo 

which passage is translated in the Septuagint, “ xa dprov dv8pwy od Guyece,” where the phrase dprov dvdpwv exactly corresponds in signification 
with the Mexican term ¢lacatlacualli, the latter being compounded of ¢lacat/, defined by Molina, in the hundred and fifteenth page of his 
Dictionary of the Mexican Language, to be ‘ hombre’, a man, and of tlaqualli, otherwise spelt t/acualli, defined by the same author to be 
‘comida’, food or bread. That it was a Hebrew custom, likewise, to lament in songs the deaths of warriors who had been slain in battle, 
is evident from the following passage of the thirty-fifth chapter of the second book of Chronicles, which thus describes the death of Josiah 
king of Judah, who was killed in an engagement with Pharaoh Necho king of Egypt. The same passage likewise proves that the dirges sung 
on such occasions were preserved in the recollection of the Jews for many years after the particular occasion for which they were composed. 
« After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Necho king of Egypt came up to fight against Charchemish by Euphrates: and 
Josiah went out against him. But he sent ambassadors to him, saying, What have I to do with thee, thou king of Judah? I come not 
against thee this day, but against the house wherewith I have war: for God commanded me to make haste: forbear thee from meddling 
with God, who is with me, that he destroy thee not. Nevertheless Josiah would not turn his face from him, but disguised himself, that 
he might fight with him, and hearkened not unto the words of Necho from the mouth of God, and came to fight in the valley of Megiddo. 
And the archers shot at king Josiah; and the king said to his servants, Have me away, for | am sore wounded. His servants therefore 
took him out of that chariot, and put him in the second chariot that he had; and they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died, and was 
buried in one of the sepulchres of his fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah : 
and all the singing men and the singing women spake of Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and made them an ordinance in Israel : 
and, behold, they are written in the lamentations.” Notwithstanding the melancholy fate of Josiah, it need scarcely be observed that he 
was one of the Jewish kings most commended in Scripture for his piety, whose zeal for the extirpation of idolatry in Israel actually led 
him, on one memorable occasion, to immolate all the priests of the high places upon those very altars which they had consecrated to Baal, 
and publicly, in the presence of all the Jews, to offer a human sacrifice to the Deity, not unlike those which the Mexicans celebrated in 
honour of Huitzilopochtli. This remarkable fact in sacred history is recorded in the following passage of the twenty-third chapter of the 
second book of Kings, where the manner of Josiah’s putting the priests to death assimilates his act to a sacrifice; since to sacrifice is to 
slay a victim upon an altar in honour of some deity; and Josiah’s act was doubtless in honour of Jehovah. “And all the houses also of 
the high places that were in the cities of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had made to provoke the Lord to anger, Josiah took away, 
and did to them according to all the acts that he had done in Beth-el. And he slew all the priests of the high places that were there upon 
the altars, and burned men’s bones upon them, and returned to Jerusalem.” This immense massacre of human victims by Josiah may be 
compared with Ahuitzotl’s sacrifice of seventy-five thousand men on one occasion at the shrine of Tezcatlipoca, with the intention, as it 
would appear, of doing honour to a religious festival: and in the same manner we learn that after the slaughter of the priests of Baal Josiah 
commanded the Jews to keep their passover, and that such a passover had never before been kept in Israel. The fourth analogy is 
strikingly exemplified in the following passage of the third chapter of Zechariah, where Joshua is described as being clothed in filthy 
garments, undoubtedly because the Jews, like the Mexicans, were accustomed to wear such garments as a sign of contrition for sin; and 
the Mosaic law required that the Jewish high priest should in his official character mourn for the sins of the people. “And he showed 
me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him. And the Lord said 
unto Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan; even the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee: is not this a brand plucked out of 
the fire? Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and stood before the angel. And he answered and spake unto those that stood 
before him, saying, Take away the filthy garments from him. And unto him he said, Behold, I have caused thine zmquity to pass from 
thee, and I will clothe thee with change of raiment.” 

* This confirms what Adair says, in the three hundred and sixty-third page of the present volume, of its being customary with the 
_ Indians to name a father and mother by their children’s names: for example, to call the father Choollingge, or ‘the father of the fox’, because 
his son was named ‘the fox’; and the mother Pakahlishke, or ‘ the mother of the blossom’, because her daughter was named ‘ the blossom’, 
the adjunct syllables zngge and ishke here serving the purpose of affiliation. We may likewise remark, that it savours strongly of an idioma- 
tic form of speech peculiar to the Jews, since all must admit that the difference is slight between the phrases < Moses the son of Maimon’ 
or ‘ Maimon the father of Moses’; and that the use of the former phrase would naturally have led to the adoption of the latter, both be- 
ing intended to distinguish individuals of the same name from each other by adding a patronymic to their usual appellation, and either 
expression being merely the transposition of correlative terms. A similar form of speech occurs in the fourteenth verse of the eighth chap- 
ter of the Gospel of St. Matthew, where we read that Peter’s wife’s mother lay sick of a fever; and likewise in the fifty-sixth verse of the 
twenty-seventh chapter of the same Evangelist, where he says that Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and 
the mother of Zebedee’s children, were present at the crucifixion. Two causes may be assigned for the constant and familiar use of 
such a form of speech among the Jews ; the first in surnames not being used amongst the Hebrews; and secondly, in the extreme partiality 
which that people always manifested for genealogies and pedigrees, to which circumstance the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus alludes 
in the one hundred and seventy-third page of the sixth volume of this work, where he assigns that as a reason for supposing that the 
Mexicans were descended from the Jews. That the Jews were extremely fond of reasoning about genealogies in the age of St. Paul, is 
evident from that Apostle’s admonition to Titus in the ninth verse of the third chapter of the Epistle addressed to that disciple. “But 
avoid foolish questions and genealogies, and contentions and strivings about the law, for they are unprofitable and vain.” When we 
reflect on the theological controversies which from the age of the Apostles to the present time have agitated the peace of states, and 

VOL. VIII. Cai) 

tS 

258 NOTES. 

mismo si era hija perdia el nombre la madre, y llamabanla la madre de Juanica 6 de Velica. Ya se ha dicho que 
ponian los nombres 4 los que nacian de los dias en que nacian. No es de pasar de aqui sin considerar en quanto 
aquellas gentes sin lumbre de fé tenian aquello por malo y dafioso 4 los hombres, que estimaban por pecado, y quanta 
diligencia ponian para limpiarse de él, teniendo por cierto que los malos temporales que les venian eran por los pe- 
eados. Y quanto es de creer que temieran cometer pecados, sabiendo que eran pecados, si alcanzaran conocimiento 
que despues de esta vida se daba premio eterno 4 los que no pecaban y vivian bien, y tormentos 4 los que hacian al 
contrario: y ciertamente parece que pocos pecados cometian, creyendo que eran pecados, antes todo su error en las 
costumbres y en el culto y religion era por ignorancia, 6 por la mayor parte. Al proposito volviendo, en naciendo el 
hijo 6 la hija, luego tomaban una gallina* y la sacrificaban, 6 la embiaban al sacerdote, que por ellos haciendo gra-. 
cias, la sacrificaba. ‘Todo su principal estudio principalmente era dar gracias los dioses por haberles nacido hijo 6 
hija, aunque tubiesen otros hijos. Hacian convites 4 todos sus deudos y amigos y al mismo Sefior supremo, cada uno 
segun la facultad que tenia. Cuando lavaban la criatura, ofrecian sacrificio de incienso y papagayos, el qual hacian 
en alguna buena fuente, y si no la habia, en un rio, y en alguna parte sefialada de él, y donde mas corria 6 si algun 
salto hacia. Todos los vasos y cosas que habian servido en el dia que la criatura nacido habia, y una piedra con que 
solian calentar el vientre de las mugeres paridas, dedicaban todo y ofrecian en la fuente 6 en el rio.” 

Ablutions forming so essential a part of the ceremonial law of the Jews, it becomes important to inquire whether 
any traces of that rite, connected with the belief of water being able to wash away sin}, existed amongst the Mexicans ; 
since it would necessarily follow, that if the Mexican code was derived from the Hebrew, it would have attached the 
same importance to all the Jewish rites and ceremonies, but more especially to those which were scrupulously observed 
by the Israelites whilst they continued zealously addicted to the law of God. We accordingly find that the Mexicans 
laid the greatest stress upon washings and ablutions ; and hence ablutions, consisting of the total or partial immersion 
of the body into water, washing of the hands after meals, rinsing of vessels, &c., entered largely into all their religious 
rites and ceremonies, the due observance of which was particularly enjoined by their priests. Of the great importance 
which the Pharisees in the age of Christ attached to frequent washing of the hands and daily ablutions, we have a 
striking example in the following passage of the seventh chapter of the Gospel of St. Mark, who thus records the 
anger which the Pharisees felt at perceiving the disciples dispensing with that part of their ceremonial law. “Then 
came together unto him the Pharisees, and certain of the Scribes, which came from Jerusalem. And when they saw 
some of his disciples eat bread with defiled, that is to say with unwashen, hands, they found fault. For the Pharisees, 
and ali the Jews, except they wash their hands oft, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders. And when they come 
from the market, except they wash, they eat not. And many other things there be, which they have received to hold, 
as the washing of cups, and pots, brasen vessels, and of tables. Then the Pharisees and Scribes asked him, Why walk 
not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands{?” That the same adherence 
to the law of Moses and blind regard for the tradition of the elders existed to a great extent amongst the Indians of 
New Spain is asserted by Las Casas in the following passage of the hundred and eighty-second chapter of the ‘Histo- 
ria Apologetica’, who declares that the Peruvians, and the Indians generally of New Spain and the islands of St. Do- 
mingo and Cuba, entertained the erroneous belief that water could wash away sin. “Hacian una cerimonia, como 

frequently plunged Europe in warfare, it is much to be lamented that the Apostle, in making use of the expression ‘foolish’ in the above 
passage, did not more particularly define in what sense he intended the term to be understood. 

* The hen on this occasion might have been considered a fit substitute for the pair of turtle-doves mentioned in the following passage 
of the second chapter of the Gospel of St. Luke, both being domestic birds, and the former, from its size, double the value of a single 
pigeon. And when the days of her purification according to the law of Moses were accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem, to 
present him to the Lord; (as it is written in the law of the Lord, Every male that openeth the womb shall be called holy to the Lord ;) 
and to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the Lord, A pair of turtle-doves, or two young pigeons.” 

+ Reference to the eighteenth page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present volume will show that the Mexicans named the 
water which they used in the baptismal rite the mother of the infant. Without discussing in this place the real origin of the Mexican 
baptism, we shall merely observe that a probable reason for the selection of so strange an appellation for water will be found in the fifth 
verse of the third chapter of the Gospel of St. John ; "Amexpity 6 ’Inoouse "Any cuny Asyw oor, av yy tig TENNHOH, 2 ddaros xo mvevparoc, 
ov Suverras sineAlew eis tyv BactAsiav rov @zov. “Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born of water and of the 
Pu he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.” 

+ The Mexican custom of washing the hands after meals has been already mentioned in the fifty-third page of the Notes forming the 
Appendix to the present volume; 

NOTES. 939 

penitencia, quando se hallaban haber ofendido en algun pecado, y esta era que se iban al rio, y se desnudaban*, y 
lavaban todo. Creian, como ya es dicho, muchas naciones que las aguas tenian virtud de quitar 6 lavar los pecados, 
y esta erronia opinion creo que tenian y tubieron todas estas Indianas naciones; pero tan frequentes y espesas veces se 
lavaban todos, no solo quando estaban sanos, pero quando muy enfermos, y como primer remedio y ultimo. Y en esta 
isla islas, fue muy exercitada y frequentada esta cerimonia y uso. Si sentia el pecador que su pecado era grande, 
tomaba por penitencia y remedio guemar{ los vestidos que 4 la sazon tenia quando lo cometio.” 

The ten commandments being that part of the Mosaic law which is held to be equally binding on Christians and 
Jews, it may not be improper to conclude the present note with the following extract from the third chapter of the 
second part of Diego Duran’s inedited ‘History of New Spain’, from which it will appear that an exact similitude 
may even here be traced between the Mexican and Mosaic codes. <‘ Note el lector cuan propiamente esta contra- 
hecha esta cerimonia{ endemoniada 4 la de nuestra Iglesia sagrada, que nos manda recibir el verdadero cuerpo y 
sangre de nuestro Sehor Jesu Cristo, verdadero Dios y verdadero hombre, por Pascua florida, donde notaremos otra 
cosa, que la fiesta de este idolo se celebraba por Pascua florida, digo 4 diez de Abril, que por la mayor parte suele 
caer en el mismo tiempo y mes, que por ser fiesta movible cae 4 ocho & diez dias unas veces mas otras veces menos ; 
de lo cual se coligen dos cosas, 6 gue hubo noticia, como dejo dicho, de nuestra sagrada religion Cristiana en esta tierra; 
6 que el maldito de nuestro adversario el Demonio las hacia contra-hacer en su servicio y culto, haciendose adorar y 
servir, contra-haciendo las catolicas cerimonias de la Cristiana religion como en otras muchas partes notaremos, y muy 
en particular en lo que en este mismo dia y fiesta se hacia, y era, que acabada la solemnidad y cerimonias, se subia 

* It is evident from the fifth verse of the third chapter of the Gospel of St. Matthew, that baptism, or the immersion of the body into 
running streams as a mode of purification from sin, was a Hebrew rite of general adoption among the Jews before the advent, or at least 
the public ministry of Christ. When therefore Christ came to John the Baptist to be baptized, the latter is declared in the fourteenth 
verse of the same chapter of St. Matthew to have at first refused, well knowing that he who was sinless could stand in no need of water 
to wash away sin; but when Christ answered, “ Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness,” in allusion no 
doubt to the righteousness of the law, and the propriety of acquiescing with the usages of his countrymen, then John consented to bap- 
tize him, Christ being at that time, as St. Luke informs us in the twenty-third verse of the third chapter of his Gospel, about thirty years 
of age. 

+ This particular kind of penance would certainly appear to have been prescribed by the priests in obedience to St. Jude in the 
twenty-third verse of his general Epistle : “ And others, save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, hating even the garment spotted by 
the flesh.” 

{ The Mexican teoqualo, or sacramental rite of eating the body of Huitzilopochtli, is that which Diego Duran supposes the devil in- 
stituted to counterfeit the communion, or Christian sacrament. Reference to the two hundred and twentieth page of the sixth volume 
of this work, will show that the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus nearly agreed with him on this curious and mysterious subject. 

§ The following account of a sermon delivered by one of these dignitaries of the Mexican temples, is taken from the ninth chapter of 
the second part of Diego Duran’s inedited ‘ Historia de la Nueva Espafia’: “ Al cabo de estos cwarenta dias tan festejados y solemni- 
zados, tomaban todos los cueros, y en el mismo templo del idolo Xipe, y abajo al pie de las gradas de él, los enterraban en el soterrafio y 
bobeda dicha, la cual tenia una piedra movediza que se quitaba y se ponia. Enterrabanlos con cantos y solemnidad como 4 cosa sagrada, 
al cual entierro acudia toda la tierra 4 sus templos, donde acabado el entierro, habia un sermon muy solemne, el cual hacia una de las 
dignidades, todo de retorica y de metaforas con la mas elegante lengua que él podia ordenalle ; en el cual sermon referia la miseria humana, 
la bajeza que somos, y lo mucho que debemos al que nos dié el ser que tenemos, amonestaba la vida quieta y pacifica, el temor, la reve- 
rencia y verguenza, la crianza y miramiento y buen comedimiento, la sugecion y obediencia, la caridad con los pobres y forasteros pere- 
grinos, vedaba el hurtar, el fornicar y adulterar, y desear lo ageno, finalmente amonestaba todo genero de virtudes, y vedaba todo genero 
de males, como un catolico predicador lo podia persuadir y predicar, con todo el fervor del mundo, prometiendo al que cometiese aquestos 
delitos, que dejaria en esta vida nombre de malo y perverso, y que descenderia al infierno con la misma fama, y que seria alla tenido por 
tal; y 4los buenos amonestaba y persuadia y prometia que permaneciesen en el bien y en su vida quieta y pacifica, que el Sefior de las 
alturas le querria mucho y daria el galardon, y que saldria de esta vida para la otra con buen nombre y que @rza @ ser alla muy honrado. 
Todo esto que he dicho aqui, con lo demas demuestra haber tenido esta gente noticia de la ley de Dios y del sagrado evangelio, y de la 
bienaventuranza, pues predicaban haber premio por el bien y pena por el mal. Yo pregunte 4 Indios de los predicadores antiguos, y 
escribi los sermones que predicaban con la misma retoricay frasis suyo y metaforas y realmente eran catolicos, y que me pone admiracion 
la noticia que habia de la bienaventuranza y del descanso de la otra vida, y que para conseguirla era necesario el vivir bien; pero iba 
esto tan mezclado de sus idolatrias y tan sangriento y abominable que desdoraba todo el bien que se mezclaba; pero digolo 4 proposito 
de que hubo algun predicador en esta tierra que dejé la noticia dicha. Sea Nuestro Seftor y Dios bendito y alabado para secula sin fin, 
que tubo por bien de sacar 4 estos miserables de tan gran servidumbre y ciegos errores, y destruir tan abominable sacrificio como de 
sangre y corazones de hombres se hacia al demonio, lo cual algunos conocen el bien que les vino con la suave ley de Dios, y alaban al 

dador de tan gran beneficio, el cual sea loado por siempre jamas.” 

QAO NOTES. 

un viejo de mucha autoridad de las dignidades del templo, y a voz alta predicaba su ley y cerimonias, juntamente los 
diez mandamientos que nosotros somos obligados 4 guardar; conviene 4 saber que temiesen y honrasen 4 sus Dioses y los 
amasen, los cuales eran tan honrados de ellos y reverenciados que el ofenderles se pagaba con la vida, harto con mas 
temor y reverencia que lo es nuestro Dios de nosotros; tambien el no tomar a sus Dioses en la boca* en ninguna 
materia ni platica, en santificarlas las fiestas con un rigor estraho T cumpliendo las cerimonias y ritos de ellas con sus 
ayunos y vigilias inviolablemente; el honrar 4 los padres y 4 las madres y 4 los parientes y 4 los sacerdotes y viejos; 
no hay gente en el mundo ni la ha habido, que con mas temor y reverencia honrase 4 sus mayores que esta, y asi 4 
los que irreverenciaban 4 los viejos padres 6 madres, les costaba la vida{, y asi lo que mas esta gente encargaba 4 
sus hijos y les ensefiaba era reverenciar 4 los ancianos§ de todo genero de dignidad y condicion que fuesen, de 
donde venian 4 ser los sacerdotes de su ley tan estimados y reverenciados de grandes y chicos, de sefiores y 
populares, de ricos y de pobres, cuanto agora en nuestros infelices tiempos son de abatidos y menospreciados y menos 
honrados. El matar uno 4 otro era muy prohibido, y dado que no se castigaba con muerte natural ||, pagabase 

* We have already observed, in the note subjoined to the one hundred and fortieth page of the Appendix to the present volume, that 
the Peruvians as scrupulously refrained from taking the divine name in vain as the ancient Jews; and their acquaintance with the second 
commandment may reasonably be inferred from the following passage of Mango Ynga’s exhortation to his Peruvian subjects when about 
to flee from Spanish persecution to the Andes, as duly authenticated by his son Don Diego de Castro Titucusi Yupangui, in an official 
document presented by him to the King of Spain, and still preserved in the library of the Escurial. < Lo que mas haveis de hacer es que 
por ventura estos os diran que adoreis 4 lo que ellos (los Espafioles) adoran, que son unos panos pintados, los cuales dicen que es Viracocha, 
y que le adoreis como 4 guaca, el cual no es sino pafio. No lo hagais, sino lo que nosotros tenemos, eso tened, porque como veis, las 
Villcas hablan con nosotros, y al Sol y 4 la Luna vemoslos por nuestros ojos, y lo que esos dicen no lo vemos. Bien creo que alguna vez 
por fuerza 6 con engafio os han de hacer adorar lo que ellos adoran: cuando mas no pudiereis hacerlo delante de ellos, y por otra parte 
no olvideis nuestras cerimonias, y si os digeren que quebranteis vuestras guacas, y esto por fuerza, mostrarles lo que no pudiereis hacer 
menos, y lo demas guardadlo, que en ello me dareis 4 mi mucho contento. Acabadas todas estas cosas arriba dichas, y otras muchas, 
despididése mi padre de los Indios, trayendome 4 mi alli delante para les decir como yo era su hijo, y como despues de sus dias me havian 
de tener en su lugar por sefior de todos ellos, el cual lo hizo y se levanté en pie para partirse de su gente, la cual cuando lo vi6 en pie, 
fueron tales y tan grandes los alaridos que todos comenzaron 4 dar, que parecia que se horadaban los cerros.” 

+ The institution of sabbaths, or stated days of rest from all manual labour, formed so peculiar a feature in the Mosaic law, and was so 
characteristic of Judaism, that it is but reasonable to suppose that the Mexicans, if descended from the Jews, would have retained some 
memorial of this long-established usage of their ancestors. We are accordingly informed by Diego Duran, in the following passages 
of the second chapter of the second part of his History of New Spain, that they religiously refrained from all work on their principal 
festivals, including in the number not only their new moons, but likewise the first sign of their lesser cycles of thirteen days, which, as 
we are assured by Sahagun, constituted the moveable feasts of their calendar: ‘ De estas semanas no he podido hallar otra cosa de 
que hacer relacion, ni de que este numero de dias sirviese de otra cosa mas de honrar y festejar las veinte figuras, y darles dia particular 
en que se solemnizasen una vez en el afio, y digo una vez en el ano, porque aunque el numero uno se cumpliese dos veces con el discurso 
del afio y rueda, la primera que le cabia la celebraban y hacian fiesta, pero la segunda no, aunque holgaban el dia y le guardaban como 
& Domingo y principio de semana, porque eran tan amigos de fiestas que no perdonaban dia que fuese de holgar, y asi todo el afio se les 
iba 4 estos naturales en fiestas, porque ellos tenian las fiestas de sus principales dioses y diosas, luego tenian las fiestas que cada principio 
de mes celebraban que era de veinte en veinte dias, luego celebraban los primeros dias de la semana de trece en trece dias, tan entretejidas 
y continuas que se atropellaban unas con otras, de donde se entiende y se colige ser esta gente tan aragana y enemiga del trabajo y tan 
holgazana y amiga de fiestas y banquetes y areytos como vemos, y el dia de hoy experimentan los ministros que entre ellos en su ministerio 
andan ocupados...... En cada principio de mes en el dia que nombramos Cabeza de Sierpe, celebraban una fiesta solemnisima como 
adelante en el calendario veremos, la cual era tan guardada y festejada, gue ni aun barrer la casa ni hacer de comer no se permitia, todo lo 
cual del dia antes habia de quedar hecho y aderezado. Esta figura primera era como letra Dominical donde celebraban en toda la tierra 
generalmente aquel dia, harto con mas rigor que nosotros celebramos el Domingo, con el mismo celo que los Judios celebraban el sabado y 
le guardaban.” 

{ This was in accordance with the law of the twenty-first chapter of Exodus: “ And he that smiteth his father, or his mother, shall 
be surely put to death.” «‘ And he that curseth his father, or his mother, shall surely be put to death.” The great power which the 
Mosaic law gave Hebrew parents over their children has been already explained in the note subjoined to the fifty-eighth page of the sixth 
volume of this work ; and it deserves to be remarked, in illustration of the law of the twenty-first chapter of Deuteronomy, that Tariacuri, 
the king of Michuacan, is said, in.a manuscript preserved in the library of the Escurial, to have condemned ‘his son Curatame to death, 
“porque se emborrachaba,” because he was a drunkard, which sentence was carried into execution by emissaries secretely dispatched 
by the king. 

§ This corroborates the account of the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus in the two hundred and thirty-first page of the sixth volume 
of this work. 

|| Diego Duran must here be understood to allude to homicide, to which crime the Mexican laws afforded the same degree of impunity 

NOTES. Q41 

por muerte civil, el cual daban por esclavo perpetuo de la muger 6 de los parientes del muerto, paraque les sirviese y 
ganase el sustento de los hijos que dejaba. Tambien se prohibia el fornicar y adulterar*, de suerte que si tomaban 
a uno en adulterio, le hechaban una soga ala garganta y le apedreaban y apaleaban, y le arrastraban por toda la ciudad, 
y despues lo hechaban fuera de la ciudad paraque fuese comido de fieras. Lo mismo del hurtar se guardaba harto 
mas que no se guarda agora, pues al que hurtaba, 6 le mataban 6 vendian por el precio del hurto. Tambien huian 
de no levantar falso testimonio, dando pena al que lo levantaba‘, y asi los que habian caido en estos pecados y que- 
brantado la ley, andaban siempre temerosos y pidiendo 4 estos dioses favor para no ser descubierto ; el. perdon f de los 
cuales delitos era de cuatro en cuatro afios como jubileo, donde tenian remision de ellos en la fiesta de Tezcatlypuca.” 
Having considered at sufficient length the laws and the civil institutions of the Mexicans, and carefully compared 
their ritual enactments with those of the Jews, something remains to be said of the punishments which they inflicted 
on persons accused of a violation of the laws, all of which betray the unequivocal marks of Judaism, and are deeply 
tinctured with the sanguinary features of the Mosaic law; they are thus briefly described by Diego Duran in the 
twentieth chapter of the second part of his inedited ‘ Historia de la Nueva Espafia.’ “ Dicen algunas personas que 

as the ancient Hebrew code. There are few persons, we believe, who on reading the nineteenth chapter of Deuteronomy, and comparing 
its enactments with the ordinance of the twenty-first chapter of Exodus, “ Andif a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he 
die under his hand; he shall be surely punished. Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shall not be punished, for he is his mo- 
ney,” —will not feel disposed to ask two questions ; first, Whether it is not probable that Moses might have legislated with less severity in 
the case of homicides from his recollection of the culpable act which caused his own flight from Egypt, of which a more particular account 
will be found in the twelfth verse of the second chapter of Exodus? and secondly, Whether the slight importance which he attached in the 
Pentateuch to the murder of a slave by his master, might not have induced the Mexicans to consider the life of a slave, especially when 
offered as a human sacrifice, a matter of very trivial moment? That the more Northern American Indian tribes drew the same line of di- 
stinction between premeditated murder and homicide as the Jews, will immediately appear from the perusal of the following extract from 
‘Tanner’s Narrative of his Captivity among the Indians,’ which gives an account of a homicide committed by an Indian belonging to the 
Ottawwaw tribe, under the peculiar circumstances of intoxication. “It was evident to all, that the young man he had wounded could 
not recover; indeed he was now manifestly near his end. When our companion returned, we had made up a considerable present, one 
giving a blanket, one a piece of strouding, some one thing and some another. With these he immediately returned, and placing them 
. on the ground beside the wounded man, he said to the relatives who were standing about, My friends, I have, as you see, killed this your 
brother, but 1 knew not what I did, I had no 27 will against him; and when a few days since he came to our camp I was glad to see 
him. But drunkenness made me a fool, and my life is justly forfeited to you. I am poor and among strangers, but some of those who 
came from my own country with me would gladly bring me back to my parents; they have therefore sent me with this small present. 
My life is in your hands, and my present is before you; take whichever you choose; my friends will have no cause to complain. He 
then sat down beside the wounded man, and stooping his head hid his eyes with his hands, and waited for them to strike. But the 
mother of the man he had wounded, an old woman, came a little forward and said, For myself and my children, | can answer that we 
wish not to take your life, but I cannot promise to protect you from the resentment of my husband, who is now absent: nevertheless I will 
accept your present ; and whatever influence 1 may have with him, I shall not fail to use it in your behalf. I know that it was not from 
design or on account of any previous hatred that you have done this, and why should your mother be made to cry as well as myself?” 

* The changes which time introduces into penal legislation are strikingly illustrated by the contrast exhibited in the punishments which 
the laws of modern nations and those of the Mosaic code adjudge to the same kinds and degrees of guilt; yet no one will contend that 
the nature of justice has undergone any change since the creation of the world, or consequently that the claims of offended justice are at 
all altered within that period. Amongst the ancient Jews, for example, adultery was punished with death, whilst rape committed under 
the most aggravated circumstances, provided the female was neither a married nor a betrothed woman, was only visited with a pecuniary 
fine, with the further condition, it should be observed, annexed that the man should be compelled to marry the woman, and should not be 
empowered afterwards to divorce her, which in other cases the Hebrew law allowed. A slight acquaintance with the Greek language 
will enable the reader to comprehend the meaning of the phrase Biacemevos, and will clear up the apparent ambiguity of expression in our 
authorized English version of the twenty-eighth verse of the twenty-second chapter of Deuteronomy. 

++ Gabriel de Chaves remarks in the following passage of his inedited ‘ Relacion de la Provincia de Meztitlan,’ that the Indians of that 
state punished false witnesses by causing them to undergo the self-same sentence as would have been inflicted on the persons whom 
they accused, if their testimony had been found true. This we learn, from the nineteenth verse of the nineteenth chapter of Deuteronomy, 
was the punishment which the Mosaic law adjudged to false witnesses. ‘ Al testigo falso 6 delator que levantaba testimonio, daban lu 
misma pena que al reo se habia de dar, siendo convencido.” We may here observe that Meztitlan was a small independent state, situated 
to the north of Mexico. Its name, the literal signification of which is ‘the country of the moon,’ De Chaves supposes might have origi- 
nated in the Indians of that province being accustomed to attack their enemies by the light of the full moon or from the figure of the moon 
sculptured on a steep and almost inaccessible rock of their territory. 

{ This confirms what Adair says in the three hundred and twenty-sixth page of the present volume, of the Indian annual expiation 
for sin. 

VOL. VIII. (3Q) 

Q42 NOTES. 

tubieron horca* en que ahorcaban los delincuentes; yo he preguntado é inquirido ¢odo lo posible, y no hallo mas de 
cuatro generos de muertes con que estos castigaban los delitos; el uno era apedrear 4 los adulteros y echarlos fuera 

* Tt would hence appear that hanging was a mode of execution very unusual amongst the Mexicans; and that it was seldom resorted 
to by the Jews was probably owing to some scruple which they felt about permitting their judges to aggravate the punishment of death 
by adding the curse of God to the extreme sentence of the law, or by the fear of a possible defilement of the holy land, the chance of which 
is particularly pointed out by Moses in the following passage of the twenty-first chapter of Deuteronomy. “And if a man have com- 
mitted a sin worthy of death, and he be to be put to death, and thou hang him on a tree; his body shall not remain all night upon the 
tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him that day; (for he that is hanged is accursed of God;) that thy land be not defiled, which the 
Lord thy God giveth thee for aninheritance.” It deserves to be remarked, that St. Paul refers in the thirteenth verse of the third chapter 
of his Epistle to the Galatians to this very passage of Deuteronomy in proof of his particular doctrine of justification, making no distinction 
there between death by hanging on a tree and death by crucifixion. Could it be possible, we shall here take the liberty of inquiring, that 
the Indians of Yucatan, in order more perfectly to prove the fulfilment of the type, and confirm St. Paul’s doctrine of justification, 
invented the story of Bacab having been ¢ied to the cross, and so ‘being made a curse for us’ rather than of his having been nailed to the 
accursed tree, as: the cross is sometimes named in Scripture? to which tradition there is an evident allusion in the sixty-sixth page of the 
lesser Vatican MS., where, however, a free is substituted in the place of a cross, and the two units in the lower compartment of the plate 
may possibly refer to the sign of the Cane, on which sign the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus says, in the hundred and eighty-sixth 
page of the sixth volume of the present work, that Quetzalcoatl was born. This tradition is recorded by Las Casas in the following passage 
of the one hundred and twenty-third chapter of his inedited ¢ Historia Apologetica,’ and it fully authenticates the testimony of Torquemada. 
in the hundred and fifty-ninth page of the sixth volume of this work. ‘En el reyno de Yucatan quando los nuestros le descubrieron, 
hallaron cruces, y una de cal y canto de altura de diez palmos, en medio de un patio 6 cercado muy lucido y almenado, junto 4 un muy 
solemne templo, y muy visitado de mucha gente devota, en la [sla de Cozumel, que esta junto 4 la tierra firme de Yucatan. A esta cruz 
se dice que tenian y adoraban por dios del agua y lluvia, y quando habia falta de agua le sacrificaban codornices como se dira. Pre- 
guntado de donde habia habido noticia de aquella sefial, respondieron que un hombre muy hermoso habia pasado por alli y les habia 
dejado aquella sefial para que de él siempre se acordasen. Otros, dice, que afirmaban que porque habia muerto en ella un hombre mas 
resplandeciente que el sol. Esto refiere Pedro Martir en el capitulo primero de su cuarta decada. tra cosa referire yo harto nueva en 
todas las Indias, y que hasta hoy en ninguna parte de ellas se ha hallado: y esta es, que como aquel reyno entrase tambien por cercania 
dentro de los limites de mi obispado de Chiapa, yo fui alli 4 desembarcar como 4 tierra y puerto muy sano: hallé alli un clerigo bueno, 
de edad madura y honrado, que sabia la lengua de los Indios por haber vivido en el algunos afios, y por pasar adelante 4 la cabeza del 
obispado me era necesario constituirlo por mi vicario, y roguele y encargcle por la tierra adentro anduviese visitando los Indios, y con 
cierta forma que le di les predicase. El qual al cabo de ciertos meses, y aun creo que de un afio, me escribid que habia hallado un 
seiior principal, que inquiriendole de su creencia y religion antigua que por aquel reyno solian tener, le dijo, que ellos conocian y creian en 
Dios que estaba en el cielo, y que aqueste Dios era Padre y Hijo y Espiritu Santo; y que el Padre se llamaba Ycona, que habia criado 
4 los hombres y todas las cosas: el Hijo tenia por nombre Bacab, el qual nacié de una doncella siempre virgen llamada Civirias que esta 
en el cielo con Dios: al Espiritu Santo nombraban Echuac: Ycona, dicen que quiere decir el gran Padre. De Bacab que es el Hijo 
dicen, que lo maté Eopuco y lo hizo azotar, y puso una corona de espinas, y que lo puso tendidos los brazos en un palo, no entendiendo 
que estaba clavado sino atado, y asi para los significar estendia los brazos, donde finalmente murié. Estubo tres dias muerto, y al tercero 
que torné 4 vivir y se subié al cielo, y que alld esta con su padre. Despues de esto luego vino Echuac, que es el Espiritu Santo, y que 
harté la tierra de todo lo que era menester. Preguntado que queria decir Bacab 6 Bacabab, dijo que hijo del gran Padre. Y de este 
nombre Echuac, que significa mercader, trujo el Espiritu Santo al mundo y buenas mercaderias, pues harté la tierra, que son los hombres 
terrenos de sus dones y gracias tan divinas y abundantes. Chivirias suena madre del hijo del gran Padre. Aftidia mas, que por tiempo 
se habian de morir todos los hombres, pero que de la resurreccion de la carne no sabian nada. Preguntado como tenian noticias de 
estas cosas, respondié que los sefiores lo ensefiaban a sus hijos y asi descendia de mano en mano: y que afirmaban mas, que antigua- 
mente vinieron 4 aquella tierra veinte hombres, de los quince sefiala los nombres, que porque es mala letra, y porque no hace al caso aqui 
no los pongo, de los otros cinco dice el clerigo que no hallé rastro. El principal de ellos se llamaba Cocolcan, 4 este llamaron dios de 
las fiebres 6 calenturas, dos de los otros del pescado, otros dos de los cortijos 6 heredades, otro que truena, &c. ‘T'raian las ropas largas, 
sandalias por calzado, las barbas grandes, y no traian bonetes sobre las cabezas. ‘Los quales mandaban que se confesasen las gentes y 
ayunasen, y que algunos ayunaban ed viernes porque habia muerto aquel dia Bacab, y tiene por nombre aquel dia Ymis, al qual honran y 
tienen devocion por la muerte de Bacab. Los sefiores todas estas particularidades saben, pero la gente popular solamente creen las tres 
personas Ycona y Bacab y Echuac, y Chivirias la madre de Bacab, y en la madre de Chivirias llamada Yschen, que nosotros decimos 
haber sido Santa Ana. Todo lo de suso dicho me escribié aquel padre clerigo llamado Francisco Hernandez, y entre mis papeles tengo 
su carta. Digo mas, que llevé aquel sefior ante un frayle de San Francisco que por alli estaba, y lo torné 4 decir todo delante el religioso 
de que ambos quedaron admirados. Si estas cosas son verdad, parece haber sido en aquella tierra nuestra santa fé notificada, pero como en 
ninguna parte de las Indias habemos tal nueva hallado? Puesto que en la tierra del Brasil que poseen los Portugueses se imagina hallarse 
rastro de Santo Tomas, pero como aquella nueva no vol adelante? Todavia ciertamente la tierra y reyno de Yucatan da 4 entender cosas 
mas especiales y de mayor tiempo y antiguedad por los grandes y admirables y esquisita manera de edificios antiquisimos, y le¢reros de 
ciertos caracteres que en otra ninguna parte. Finalmente secretos son estos que solo Dios lo sabe.” The concluding words of this passage 
suggest to us the reflection that nearly three hundred years have elapsed since Las Casas recorded his admiration of the sumptuous 

NOTES. Q43 

de la ciudad @ los perros y auras*: 4 los fornicarios de fornicacion simple con virgen dedicada al templo, 6 hija de 

temples and architectural monuments of Yucatan, and that during the whole of that long period scarcely any European, animated by 
curiosity or a love of science, has visited that sequestered region of America for the express purpose of viewing its ancient edifices, and 
connecting their history with that of some long-forgotten race of men, and that none have published a description of them. When there- 
fore Mr. Waldeck, an individual of high respectability and a gentleman of distinguished talents as an artist, has undertaken the labour of 
exploring its ruins for the sole purpose of making drawings of them on the spot and publishing a correct description of them, it is deeply 
to be regretted that any difficulties should have been thrown in his way by persons who appear infinitely more desirous to have ‘ the sphynx 
at home,’ as Cicero wittily observed of Verres, than anxious that the public should benefit by the contents of that gentleman’s portfolio. 
Passing over that subject, however, we shall merely, observe, that if Mr. Waldeck continues as successfully as he has begun to prosecute his 
researches in Yucatan and Guatemala, it is probable that the public will be favoured with such a work on the architecture and sculpture 
of the Indians, as will not only be unique in its kind but reflect the greatest light on the page of history and the communications which have 
taken place between the two hemispheres in very remote and distant ages. ‘That the information of Las Casas was correct, where he says, 
that Yucatan contained great and superb ruins, exquisitely adorned with architectural embellishments, will immediately appear from the 
perusal of the following extract from the second chapter of the first part of Fuente’s inedited History of Guatemala, a copy of which is pre- 
served in the library of the Royal Academy of History at Madrid, descriptive of the ancient monuments of Guatemala, and whose account 
singularly corroborates what M. Dupaix says, in the four hundred and fifty-ninth page of the sixth volume of this work, of the amazing 
extent and perfection to which the art of subterranean architecture was carried in the New World. “ Que en él habia numerosisimas y 
grandes ciudades con magnificos y decorosos edificios, lo asienta asi la verdad indelible de mi Castillo, Ilamandolos recios pueblos por lo 
numeroso que eran, pues havia poblaciones de ocho y de diez mil casas, siendo de tal calidad lo que hallaron erigido los conquistadores 
gloriosos de ete reyno de Goatemala, que hablando con Alvarado alegres y consolados le decian, que no tenia que hechar menos 4 Mexico 
con lo que havian descubierto. Y hoy se comprueba notoriedad de esta opinion con lo que vemos vestigioso, y en otras partes en pie de os- 
tentativas machinas materiales, en lo que se admira en el Quiche Tecpangoatemala, pueblo antiguo de Mixco, edificios de Gueguetenango, 
de Chialchitan 4 modo de fortalezas, y otros admirablemente ordenados en la provincia dela Vera Paz, y la fabrica maravillosa y subterranea 
del pueblo de Puchuta, que siendo de firmisima y solida argamasa cumina y corre por lo interior de la tierra por distancia prolongada de 
nueve leguas hasta el pueblo de Tecpangoatemala, que es argumento y prueva del soberano poder de aquellos reyes, y numerosidad sin 
calculo de los vasallos que los obedecian, fuera de que asi para esto como para testimonio de sus grandes fabricas, tambien autoriza esta 
opinion la fortaleza de Parrasquin, que se ve bajando de Totonicapa 4 la costa del Sur.” 
dous monunmients of the ancient Egyptians, and especially what Herodotus says of the subterranean architecture of the Labyrinth, which 
glorious pile was built on the banks of lake Mceris by twelve contemporary rulers of Egypt,—recollecting at the same time that what hu- 
man art and labour has accomplished in any one climate may under similar circumstances and with the same means be accomplished in 
another, we may cease to wonder at or at least to discredit the account here given by Fuentes of the subterranean architecture of the city 
of Puchuta. That the Indians should however have been able to work the immense blocks of granite, of which many of their structures 
are composed, into a regular shape and perfect square form without the use of iron, and simply by means of rubbing one stone against 
another, as Dr. Robertson seems to suppose, is what it is utterly impossible to credit; but that it was possible to give a beautiful polish to 
their cut stones by the application of such means is highly probable, since Herodotus, making a distinction between the kinds of stone 
which the Egyptians used in their edifices, informs us that one kind was tyyr0s, or cut, and the other georos, or rubbed. To attempt 
to prove that the Jews were acquainted with all or most of the mechanical arts of the Egyptians is a useless task, since that must have 
been the necessary consequence of their long residence in Egypt and of their being employed in masonry by their Egyptian taskmasterrs 
We may observe, in concluding this note, that Garcia affirms in the note subjoined to the one hundred and ninetieth page of the Notes 
forming the Appendix to the present volume, that paintings were discovered by the early Spanish missionaries in the possession of the 
Indians of Quic Chapa, in which were represented the principal events of the creation, the deluge, the tower of Babel, and the passage of 
the children of Israel through the Red Sea, and likewise the Virgin Mary, with the Holy Ghost painted on her head in the form of a 
dove, encircled with rays of glory, which the Indians named Xipijbitao, which is another confirmation of the account given by Hernandez 
to Las Casas, of the Indians of Yucatan being acquainted with the doctrine of the Trinity and the incarnation, which doctrine Vanegas 
asserts was known likewise to the Indians of California, and which deserves to be compared with what Torquemada says on the same 
subject in the hundred and sixty-third page of the sixth volume of the present work. 

* To be eaten by dogs was a judgement pronounced by Elijah the Tishbite against Ahab king of Israel and Jezebel his wife, who was 
a notorious adulteress, and whose fate was decreed by God himself in the following passage of the ninth chapter of the second book of 
Kings : “Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I have anointed thee king over the people of the Lord, even over Israel. And thou shalt 
smite the house of Ahab thy master, that 1 may avenge the blood of my servants the prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the 
Lord, at the hand of Jezebel. For the whole house of Ahab shall perish : and I will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth against the wall, 
and him that is shut up and leftin Israel: and I will make the house of Ahab like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the 
house of Baasha the son of Ahijah: and the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the portion of Jezreel, and there shall be none to bury her.’ Whether 
this prophecy of Elijah might have led to the decapitation of the seventy sons of Ahab by Jehu the captain of his host and the usurper 
of his throne, as recorded in the tenth chapter of the same book of Kings, can only at this distance of time be matter of surmise; but it is 
a certain fact that Saul, imputing the rebellion of David to a conspiracy sanctioned by the high priest Ahimelech, and to the declaration 
of Samuel in the twenty-eighth verse of the fifteenth chapter of his first book, that God had rent the kingdom from him because he had 
spared the life of Agag the king of the Amalekites, made a most unmerciful massacre of nearly the entire of the Hebrew priesthood, as 

When we recall to our recollection the stupen- 

DAA NiO WD iS, 

honrados parentes, 6 con parienta, apaleado y quemado%, y echadas las cenizas al aire{. Otra muerte habia que era 
arrastrar { los delinctientes con una soga por el pescuezo y hecharlos en las lagunas, y estos eran 4 los sacrilegos que 

recorded by Samuel in the nineteenth verse of the twenty-second chapter of the same book: “ And Nob, the city of the priests, smote he with 
the edge of the sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and oxen, and asses, and sheep, with the edge of the sword. And one 
of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, named Abiathar, escaped, and fled after David.” On this occasion Saul would appear to have 
determined to fulfill the sentence of utter destruction against the priests, which they were indignant at his not having executed against the 
Amalekites, and therefore to have put to death Ahimelech the high priest, who is said in the sixth verse of the twenty-first chapter of the 
first book of Samuel, to have given David the shew-bread, which does not agree with what Christ says to the Pharisees in the twenty-sixth 
verse of the second chapter of the Gospel of St. Mark; whence it is evident that the book of Samuel must have been falsified, or that 
St. Mark must have mistaken the words which fell from the lips of Christ on the particular occasion to which he alludes. 

* We learn from the thirty-eighth chapter of Genesis, that the Jews were accustomed in ancient times to burn women who committed 
fornication, and thereby brought disgrace on their families; since this sentence was pronounced by the patriarch Judah against his own 
daughter-in-law Tamar, in the twenty-fourth verse of the same chapter of Genesis, who nevertheless at the time’ of her supposed guilt 
was an unmarried woman, who had long outlived her husband Onan. 

+ The Jewish custom of scattering the ashes of bodies reputed to be accursed to the winds or the waves of some running stream, has 
already been noticed in the one hundred and fifty-second page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present volume. 

{ The custom of dragging criminals to the place of execution, and embowelling those guilty of high treason, is deduced by a recent 
editor of Blackstone’s Commentaries from Scripture precedent and the ancient usages of the Jews, who particularly instances the two 
cases of Bigthan and Abiathar. We may therefore suppose with equal degree of probability that the Mexican punishments of dragging, 
embowelling, burning, impaling, crucifying, putting out the eyes, flaying alive, cutting in pieces, throwing to wild beasts, running through 
the body, and casting from precipitous heights, were founded on Hebrew precedent and the laws of Moses in the Pentateuch. Of each of 
these modes of punishment, with the exception of impaling, examples might be adduced from Scripture, two of which, however, it will 
be sufficient to refer to here in proof of the truth of this assertion. ‘These two last-mentioned punishments were running through the body 
with a lance (asaetear), and casting from a precipitous height, which latter kind of execution, though speedy in its effects, must, it will be 
confessed, have been a very awful mode of death for even spectators to witness. - Of the first of these punishments we have an example in 
the eighth verse of the twenty-fifth chapter of Numbers, where an adulterer and adulteress were run through the body with a javelin by 
Phinehas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, at which the Lord is said to have been so satisfied, that the plague which had destroyed 
twenty-four thousand men, was immediately stayed, and the promise of an everlasting priesthood, which of course still exists amongst the 
ten tribes—for in the tribe of Judah it cannot be discovered—was made to Phinehas for that very act, or, as it says in the thirteenth verse 
of the’same chapter of Numbers, because he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for Israel, which leads us to observe that 
to no religious rites were the Mexican priests so addicted, and none did they consider so acceptable in the eyes of the Deity, as offerings 
of atonement, by which perhaps they thought to verify in their own favour God’s promise of an everlasting priesthood to Phinehas and 
his seed, by which expression, notwithstanding the evasions of modern commentators on the prophecies, must undoubtedly be meant the 
Levites, the descendants of Aaron, Jews by birth as well as by profession. Of the second of the abovementioned punishments we have 
an example in the twenty-fifth chapter of the second book of Chronicles, where the children of Judah and their king are said to have cast 
ten thousand prisoners, whom they took from the Edomites, from the top of a steep and precipitous rock. This revolting act of cruelty is 
thus recorded by the author of the book of Chronicles in the following passage of the abovementioned chapter, and strange to say not in 
any expressed terms of disapprobation; on the contrary, the title prefixed to that chapter is “ Amaziah beginneth to reign well.” “ And 
Amaziah strengthened himself, and led forth his people, and went to the valley of salt, and smote of the children of Seir ten thousand ; 
and other ten thousand left alive did the children of Judah carry away captive, and brought them unto the top of the rock, and cast them 
down from the top of the rock, that they all were broken in pieces.” ‘This inhumanity of the Jews to their prisoners some will perhaps 
justify in the old way, by saying that these captives were devoted to death by the Lord, and that to cast them from the rock was only to 
fulfill the sentence of utter destruction which ages before had been pronounced against the Canaanites and the other idolatrous nations of. 
the Holy Land. To this specious reasoning we shall only reply by observing, that the Edomites were not included in the sentence of 
destruction pronounced against the other idolatrous nations of Palestine, but were, on the contrary, particularly excepted from it, and for 
the reason assigned in the following provision of the seventh verse of the twenty-third chapter of Deuteronomy: “Thou shalt not abhor 
an Edomite, for he is thy brother,” which alludes to the descent of the Edomites from Esau, the elder brother of Jacob. That the same 
mode of punishment was practised in later ages by the Jews, is evident from the account contained in the following passage of the fourth 
chapter of the Gospel of St. Luke, of the Jews of Nazareth leading Christ up the brow of a hill with the intention of casting him- head- 
long to the ground: “ And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust him 
out of the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might cast him down headlong.” Future 
commentators on Blackstone’s writings who may agree with the learned annotator of the earlier editions, that Scripture precedent and the 
ancient usages of the Jews warrant the introduction of new forms of trial, and new modes of punishment into the English code of law, 
will peruse with interest the following passage of the twentieth chapter of the first book of Chronicles, where a precedent for torturing 
criminals to death is recorded in terms which would not displease the grand master of the Inquisition, or any of the members of that holy 
fraternity: “And he brought also exceeding much spoil out of the city. And he brought out the people that were in it, and cut them 
with saws, and with harrows of iron, and with axes. yen so dealt David with ail the cities of the children of Ammon. And David and 
all the people returned to Jerusalem.” ; 

NOTES. D45 

hurtaban las cosas sagradas de los templos. La cuarta manera era la del sacrificio donde iban 4 parar los esclavos, 
donde unos morian abiertos por medio, otros degollados, otros guemados, otros aspados, otros asaeteados, otros despenados, 
otros empalados, otros dessollados, con los mas crueles* é inhumanos sacrificios inventados por Satanas para vengarse 
aun eneste mundo del genero humano, que se pueden imaginar ni pensar, ni caer en entendimiento humano, por ser 
los mas atroces y endemoniados que en el mundo hombres inventaron para servir y reverenciar 4 sus dioses imagi- 
narios. Estas sentencias ya estaban dadas en la ley} conforme al delito, y asi los jueces oian el delito y hacian la 
informacion, y convencido, iba la causa al teniente real, y él la manifestaba al mismo rey, y el mismo firmaba la ley 
y decia se cumpliese en aquel delincuente, lo cual luego se ejecutaba sim aceptacion de personas, aunque fuese en su 
propio hijo; sobre lo cual podria traer grandes ejemplos de los reyes y grandes sefiores de estos Indios 4 quien 
tenemos por barbaros, que no perdonaron 4 sus propios hijos, ni quisieron que las leyes se quebrantasen en ellos 

* The punishments sanctioned by the Peruvian laws were of a no less cruel description, as will immediately appear from the perusal 
of the following passage of the third part of Oviedo’s inedited ‘ Historia General de las Indias,’ in which the Inga Guaynacapa is said to 
have sentenced the entire population, both male and female, of a certain populous district to be deprived of the teeth of their upper jaw, for 
having committed some crime which provoked his anger. The nature of the crime is not explained ; but if it was for profaning the reli- 
gion of Pachacama, whom the Peruvians believed to be the sole creator of the universe and the one invisible God, or even rebelling against 
the authority of his vicegerents on earth, which the Ingas professed themselves to be, it was not unlikely that this judgement was to verify 
the anathema of David against God’s enemies, in the sixth verse of the fifty-eighth Psalm: “ Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth: 
break out the great teeth of the young lions, O Lord :” to the accomplishment of which imprecation there would appear to be an evident 
allusion in the seventh verse of the third Psalm: “ Arise, O Lord; save me,O my God: for thou hast smitten all mine enemies upon the 
cheek bone; thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly.” Reference to the twentieth verse of the twenty-fourth chapter of Leviticus, 
where it expressly says, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, would render it probable that to draw out the teeth was an exceedingly common 
mode of punishment among the Jews, since the law of retaliation for knocking out teeth must frequently have been put in force amongst 
them, and that law must of necessity have had officers to carry its fiat into execution. We have already observed, in the eighty-second 
page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present volume, that the Ingas borrowed many customs from the Jews, especially that 
of trampling upon the bodies of their captives; to which custom David likewise alludes in the following passages of the eighteenth and 
forty-seventh Psalms: “Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies, that I might destroy them that hate me.” “He shall subdue 
the people under us, and the nations under our feet.” And it must be admitted, that if the Peruvians borrowed one custom from the Jews 
in order to verify the denunciation of David against his enemies, they would have been equally likely to borrow another from them for the 
self-same reason. The following is the passage in Oviedo’s < History of the Indies,’ to which we have above alluded: “Entre la punta 
de Santa Elena é Tumbez hay un rio muy grande y bien poblado, la gente que lo habita andan todos desdentados, que no tienen dientes en 
la mandibula superior, asi hombres como mugeres, que por cierto delito que hicieron, el Cuzco alias Guaynacaba, padre de Atabaliba, 
les impuso aquella penitencia, é al presente la guardan.” ‘Between the point of St. Helena and Tumbez there is a very large and 
populous river, the inhabitants of which are all deprived of their teeth, having no teeth, either men or women, in their upper jaw, who, 
for a certain crime which they had committed, were sentenced by Cuzco, or Guaynacaba, the father of Atabaliba, to that particular 
penance, which they still observe.” Assuming it as ahighly probable fact that the Mexicans recorded in their paintings the denunciations 
of the Hebrew prophets against Jerusalem, which probability is almost reduced to certainty in the three hundred and fifty-ninth page of the 
sixth volume of the present work, the emotion of terror exhibited in the attitude of three of the figures represented in the first page of 
the Codex Borgianus, the position of whose hands upon their loins is very expressive of surprise and horror, might lead one to suppose, 
if the word ‘blackness’ be substituted for ‘ paleness’, that they were acquainted with the exclamation of Jeremiah, in the sixth verse of the 
thirtieth chapter of his prophecies: “ Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth travail with child? wherefore do I see every man with his 
hands on his loins, as a woman in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness? Alas ! for that day is great, so that none is like it: itis even 
the time of Jacob’s trouble; but he shall be saved out of it.” We must atthe same time observe, that “ All faces shall gather blackness,” 
was a denunciation of the prophet Joel in the sixth verse of the second chapter of his prophecies. 

+ We had almost forgotten to mention two usages of the Mexicans, which Zorita classes under the head of laws, and which are so 
characteristic of their national manners that they deserve to be noticed in this place; the first, it may be remarked, singularly agrees with the 
manners of some of the North American Indian tribes, and the second with the Mosaic law against usury, in the nineteenth verse of the 
twenty-third chapter of Deuteronomy: “ Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money, usury of victuals, usury of any- 
thing that is lent upon usury. Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury ; but unto thy brother thou shalt not lend upon usury: that 
the Lord thy God may bless thee in all that thou settest thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to possess it.” These usages are 
noticed in the following passage of that author’s inedited ‘ Relacion Sumaria de los modos y differencias de los Sefiores que hay en la 
Nueva Espafia’: “Si se soltaba algun principal que habian preso los contrarios en la guerra y se iva @ los suyos, lo mandaban luego matar, 
diciendo que pues no habia sido hombre para los suyos y para defenderse y no morir en la guerra, que muriera preso, que era mas honra 
que no volver fugitivo. ‘Tenian asi mismo leyes para hacer esclavos, y en el comprar y vender, y no se usaba entre ellos dar é logro, y 
si algo se prestaba era liberalmente sobre la palabra, 6 sobre prendas. ‘Tenian y usaban muchos oficios mecanicos, y con gran orden y 

concierto, como adelante se dira.” 

VOL. VIII. (Coe 1) 

JAG NOTES. 

pudiendo, ni que el favor de ser hijos de reyes y grandes fuese ejemplo de mal 4 la republica y escandalos, ejecutando 
en ellos las muertes* conforme 4 sus delitos, y con aquello entendian quedar libres de la macula que de tener hijos 
mal criados y desmesurados se les atribuia 4 los padres, de lo cual recibian create afrenta, de que nadie les re que 
castigase 4 su hijo que era desvergonzado y atrevido.” 

* History relates that Nezahualcoyotl, the celebrated king of Tezcuco, put to death his son, the hereditary prince Tetzauhpiltzintli, the 
elder brother of Nezahualpilli, his father’s successor on the throne, because, as Ixtlilxochitl remarks in his inedited ‘ Relaciones Historicas’, 
he was “muy sobervio y demasiado de belicoso,” very proud and exceedingly warlike; and Nezahualpilli likewise put to death his son 
Huexatzicatzin. The example recorded in the tenth chapter of Leviticus, of Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, having been burnt 
by fire from the Lord, and of the severe judgement which befell Eli on account of the wickedness of his two sons Hophni and Phinehas, 
as recorded in the twenty-ninth verse of the second chapter of the first book of Samuel, coupled with the history of Absalom’s rebellion 
against his father king David, might have disposed the Mexican kings not to relax the severity of the law in the case of their own children. 

Kas The denial of Las Casas in a preceding page, that the Mexicans believed in the immortality of the soul and in a future state of 
rewards and punishments, is quite unaccountable; since it is evident from many passages of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New 
Spain, that they believed in hell, but especially from the seventh chapter, which contains the following curious exhortation of a Mexican 
priest to a penitent whom he had confessed, and to whom he was about to grant absolution of his sins. “O hermano, has venido 4 un lugar 
de mucho peligro y de mucho trabajo y espanto, donde esta una barranca precisa y de pefia tajada, que nadie que cae una vez en ella puede 
jamas salir. Has venido asimismo al lugar donde los dazos y redes estan asidos los unos con los otros, y sobrepuestos los unos 4 los otros, 
de manera que nadie puede pasar sin caer en alguna de ellos; y no solamente lazos y redes, pero hoyos como pozos. Tu mismo te arrojaste 
en la barranca del rio, y caiste en los lazos y redes, donde por timismo no es posible que salgas. Estos son tus pecados, que no solamente 
son lazos y redes y pozos en que has caido, pero tambien son bestias fieras que matan y despedazah el cuerpo y el anima. Por ventura 
has ocultado alguno 6 algunos de tus pecados graves y enormes, sucios y hediondos, los quales ya estan publicos’ en el cielo y en la 
tierra y en el infierno, y hieden hasta el postrero del mundo? Ya has agora presentadote de/ante del humanisimo sefor nuestro y ampa- 
rador de todos, al qual ofendistes y enojastes y provocastes su ira contra ti; el qual mafiana 4 esotro dia te ha de sacar de este mundo, y 
ponerte debajo de sus pies, y te embiara 4 la universal casa del infierno, adonde esta tu padre y tu madre, el dios y la diosa del infierno, 
abiertas las bocas con deseos de tragarte 4 ti y 4 quantos hay en el mundo. Alli te serd dado lo que tu merecisfe en este mundo segun 
la justicta divina, y lo que le demandaste con tus obras de pobreza y miseria y enfermedad. De diversas maneras seras atormentado y 
afligido por todo extremo, y estaras zabullido en un lago de miserias y tormentos intolerables. Y agora aqui estas, y llegado es el tiempo 
en que has hecho misericordia contigo mismo en habiar y comunicar con nuestro Seftor, el qual ve todos los secretos de los coraxones; pues 
di agora lo que has hecho, y los pecados gravisimos en que has caido como quien se despefia y se desbarranca en profunda barranca y en 
sima sin suelo. Quando fuistes criado y enviado 4 este mundo, limpio y bueno fuiste criado y enviado, y tu padre y madre Quetzalcoatl 
te formé como una piedra preciosa y como una joya rica de oro muy resplandeciente y muy pulida: pero por tu propia voluntad € albedrio 
te ensuciastes y te amancillastes, y te revolcaste en el estiercol y en las suciedades de los pecados y maldades que cometiste, y agora has 
confesado.” ‘O brother! thou hast approached a place of much danger and of great hardship and terror, where there is a steep pre- 
cipice of hewn rock, from which no one who has once fallen into it has ever been able to escape; thou hast reached likewise a place 
where snares and nets are set thick and laid across each other, so that no one can pass without falling into them; and not only 
snares and nets, but likewise pitfalls resembling wells. ‘Thou thyself hast cast thyself into the gulf of the river, and hast fallen inte 
the snare and the net from which it is impossible that of thine ownself thou canst extricate thyself. ‘These are thy sins, which are not 
only snares and nets and wells into which thou hast fallen, but likewise savage beasts which tear in pieces and hill the body and the 
soul. Hast thou peradventure concealed any of thy great, enormous, foul and loathsome sins, which are already proclaimed in heaven, in 
earth, and in hell, and the pestilence of which reaches to the uttermost ends of the earth? Now thou hast presented thyself before our 
most compassionate Lord, the protector of all, whom thou hast offended and provoked, and whose anger thou hast excited against thee, 
who tomorrow, or the next day, will take thee from this world and cast thee beneath his feet, and send thee to the universal house of hell, 
where are thy father, and thy mother, the god and the goddess of hell, with jaws wide open ready to devour thee, and as many as are in 
this world. There there will be rendered unto thee that which thou hast deserved in this world according to the divine justice, and that 

1 This language surprisingly accords with that of St. Luke in the third verse of the twelfth chapter of his Gospels: ‘There is nothing 
covered, that shall not be revealed ; neither hid, that shall not be known. Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard 
in the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall be proclaimed upon the house tops ;” and it alludes to the publicity 
which the Deity will give to the most secret sins, The acquaintance which the Indians appear to have had with the doctrines contained 
in various chapters of the Gospels is really surprising; and the assertion of Father Hennepin in the thirty-first chapter of his ‘ Voyage into 
North America’, that “If an ancient man should say unto a young man by way of reproach before others, Thou hast no wit, he would 
presently go and poison himself, they are so sensible of ignominy and disgrace,” is not only entitled to credit, but suggests the probability 
that Christ, well knowing the disastrous consequences which the use of the reproachful epithet Raca was likely to be attended with in 
his day among the Jews, from the similarity of their tempers to that of the Indians, pronounced the denunciation of hell fire, in the 
twenty-second verse of the fifth chapter of St. Matthew, against those who indulged in any such vituperative terms. 

NOTES Q4T 

Note LII. Page 271. 

The laws of a state necessarily requiring for their due administration an executive government, the present appears 
the most fit place for briefly describing the constitution of the Mexican monarchy, which in the great outlines of its 

which thou hast asked with thy works of poverty and misery and infirmity. In different ways wilt thou be tormented and afflicted 
in an extreme degree, and thou wilt be plunged in a lake of misery and intolerable torment; and now thou art here present, and the 
time has arrived in which thou hast taken pity on thyself in speaking and communing.with our Lord, who sees all the secrets of 
hearts; declare then what thou hast done, and the great sins into which thou hast fallen, as one who casts himself headlong and 
precipitates himself into a gulf and bottomless pit. When thou wert created and sent into this world, pure and good thou wast created 
and sent into it; and thy father and mother Quetzalcoatl formed thee like a precious stone, like a rich jewel of gold beautiful to 
look upon and of polished lustre, but thou by thine own free will and choice hast defiled and polluted thyself, and hast wallowed in the 
mire of the sins and iniquities which thou hast committed, and now thou hast confessed.” It is impossible on reading this passage not 
to be struck with the Hebrew metaphors with which it abounds, one illustration of which we shall adduce from the seventh verse of 
the hundred and twenty-fourth Psalm, ‘Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers: the snare is broken, and we are 
escaped ;”” and. likewise with the scriptural notions which it presents us of the Deity, who is here represented as a just judge, the 
rewarder and punisher of human actions in another world, according to the deserts of individuals in this life, and as casting the wicked 
beneath his feet; whilst the epithet of father and mother, as applied by the Mexican orator to the god and the goddess of hell, reminds us 
that death and hell are distinguished from Satan in the fourteenth verse of the twentieth chapter of the Revelations, and that they are 
there personified, whilst the idea that they were demons of different serves prevailed amongst some of the early Christian sects, and also 
that Christ emphatically names the devil the father of the wicked, in the forty-fourth verse of the eighth chapter of the Gospel of St. John, 
in contradistinction, as it would appear, to God, who was the father of the righteous. The parable of the rich man and Lazarus, in the 
sixteenth chapter of the Gospel of St. Luke, was probably adapted by Christ to the popular opinion of the Jews of his day, that hell was 
a gulf or lake of fire ; and it is singular that the Mexicans should have entertained the very same sentiments, and that they should have 
evinced some acquaintance with the twenty-eighth verse of the tenth chapter of the Gospel of St. Matthew, where Christ admonishes 
his disciples to fear Him, who could destroy both the body and sou/ in hell, and should have seemed resolved to verify the saying of 
Christ in the thirty-fourth verse of the same chapter of St. Matthew, “ Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to 
send peace, but a sword,” grafting on the peculiarity of the phraseology employed the obvious signification of the thirty-ninth verse 
of the above-mentioned chapter, “ He that findeth his life shall lose it; and he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it ;” 
possibly suggested to the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus the explanation which he gives of the Mexican phrase Tlatzolli T'zonpantli, 
in the two hundred and twenty-seventh page of the sixth volume of this work, and induced the Mexicans to consider it a religious 
duty to die in war, as fully appears from the exhortation of the midwife to the infant, to whom she was about to administer baptism, in 
the following passage of the thirty-first chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain. “ Esta es tu casa y el lugar donde 
reclines tu cabeza, solamente es tu posada esta casa: tu propia tierra otra es, en otra parte estas prometido que es el campo donde 
se hacen las -guerras, donde se traban las batallas: para alli eres enviado, tu oficio y facultad es la guerra: tu oficio es ahora dar de 
beber al sol. con:sangre de los enemigos, y dar de comer 4 la tierra, que se llama Tlatecutli, con los cuerpos de los enemigos. ‘Tu propia 
tierra y tu heredad'y tu suerte es la casa del sol en el cielo: alli has de alabar y regocijar 4 nuestro Sefior el Sol, que se llama Totona- 
metlinmanic. Por ventura mereceras y seras digno de morir'en este lugar y recibir en él muerte florida.” “This is thy house, and the 
place where thou reclinest thy head; this house is only thy resting-place; thy proper country is a different one; thou hast been promised 
elsewhere, namely, on the field of battle, where armies engage, thither thou wert destined; thy business and profession is war, thy duty is 
henceforward to nourish the sun with the blood of thine enemies, and to feed the earth, which is named Tlatecutli, with the bodies of thy 
foes. ‘Thy proper country, and thy inheritance, and thy dot, is the house of the sun in heaven; there thou wilt have to praise and to 
gladden our Lord the sun, who is named Totonametlinmanic. Perhaps thou wilt deserve and be worthy to die in that place, and to 
receive in it florid death.” The concluding sentence of the above passage, in which the phrase ‘florid death’ evidently refers to martyr- 
dom, reminds us of the language of David in the fifteenth verse of the hundred and sixteenth Psalm, “ Precious in the sight of the Lord 
is the death of hzs saints :” whilst the expression ‘to feed the sun and the earth with blood and the flesh of men’ would appear simply to 
allude to the evaporation of the blood of slaughtered hosts by the rays of the sun, and to the earth being manured with the bodies of those 
left dead on the field of battle; in which sense the same phrase is employed by Mencius, the disciple of Confucius. It deserves likewise 
to be remarked, in allusion to the phrase ‘ the house of the sun’, that Christ affirms in the Gospels, that in his Father’s house there are many 
mansions ; and that the sun appears to have been identified by the Mexicans with Quetzalcoatl, or at least typically to have represented him, 
Christ being himself named in Scripture the sun of righteousness. This analogy wiil more plainly appear by reference to the prayer of the 
Mexicans to the sun in the seventieth page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present volume, who offered up that prayer when 
they saw the city of Mexico ready to fall into the hands of the victorious followers of Cortes. It remains to be observed that the Jews 
agreed with the Mexicans in believing that hell was a dake: this curious fact is noticed by Josephus in the following passage of the 
fragment of his treatise Hep: tyg tou mavros aitias, of which but a small portion has been preserved to our days, and which is usually 
printed in the editions of that author after his other works: “ Kas otros jrev 6 meps Sasmovev roms: meps de “Adou ev w cuvexovras Wuyas 

which 

Sixcroy Te eer Aico, cveyxcuoy cimety. “O “Adyc, romos Eoriy ev TH xTICE, &xaTaTxEVATTOS, Yurploy Umoyeloy, EY HW DLS xoopwov odx emiaAruuret, 

Duros Towvy vy Tory TH yupiw jon noTaARUMOVTOS, avayxn TXOTOS Oiyvexws TUyavev. Touro To rwpioy wc dpoupioy amevenrndn Wuyass, ed’ oS 

Q48 NOTES. 

political organization bore a striking resemblance to that of the Jews. The following account of that constitution is 
taken from the two hundred and eleventh chapter of the inedited Historia Apologetica of Las Casas, which, besides its 
value as an historical record, is further interesting from the description which it gives of the royal magnificence of 
Montezuma’s court. 

“ Para tratar del govierno y policia que avia en los reynos de la Nueva Espafia, lo primero que debemos referir como 

xarertabyoay dyyedos ppoupol, mpos Tas Exaotwy mpakers Sicvenovres Tas Tov Tpommy mpooxaspous xoArcucers. “Ey sour Se tw ywpiw romos 
&bupioras t15, AIMNH supos dobecrov ev pev ovderw tive xereppidbeu tmerrndapev’ eoxevacras de cig ry Mpowpiopevyny Huepay Omo Ocov, ey 
yi Sincias xpioems dmopacis pun maosy af teos mpooevex Gey.” < Kt ille est demonum locus. Nunc necesse est dicere de Hade, in quo con- 
tinentur anime justorum et injustorum. Hades locus est in ips creatione inconditus et inornatus. Receptaculum subterraneum, in 
quo lux mundi non splendet. Luce vero in isto loco non fulgente, necesse est tenebras ibi esse perpetuas. Locus ille tanquam carcer 
et custodia destinatus est animabus, in quo constituti sunt angeli custodes, dividentes varias et temporarias poenas secundum cujusve 
mores, actiones et facinora. In isto receptaculo locus quidam separatur, /acus nimirum ignis inextinguibilis, in quem nullum adhuc con- 
jectum et detrusum fuisse suspicamur; preeparatus vero est ad determinatam a Deo diem, cum una sententia justi judicii de omnibus 
juste feretur.” It may be proper to remark that the above fragment of Josephus has long been considered spurious by the generality of 
critics, and chiefly because a Jewish author would, in their opinion, have been very unlikely to discourse in a strain of such Christian 
orthodoxy, of the last day, and of the judgement of the world having been delegated to Christ by the Father ; but still, as it has always been 
ascribed to that author, we are rather inclined to consider this fragment interpolated in that particular passage which relates to the future 
advent of the Messiah, than spurious; for it must be admitted that in other passages it accords well with the ancient opinions of the Jews, 
and admirably illustrates the Mexican doctrine of Hades, already explained in the seventy-fifth page of the Notes forming the Appendix to 
the present volume; fully corroborating the remarks which we have introduced in the sixty-seventh page of that collection of notes, and 
enabling us further to appeal to the following passages of the same fragment, in elucidation of other customs and opinions of the ancient 
Mexicans connected with the celebration of their funeral rites,—their belief in the resurrection of the body ;.in the terrestrial paradise; in an 
allotted place of rest for the patriarchs; in a place of torment for the wicked ; in a chaotic state of insensibility for the souls of infants, or 
limbo, to use the technical language of some of the early Christian fathers; in the place of darkness and the shadow of death ; in the sun’s 
revolution round the earth ; and, finally, injudicial astrology. ‘To these passages we have added the Latin translation of Stephen Le Moyne. 
< Of de dino obx aAAoMMevTA Te TwLaTH, OUdE meous 7 voooU meTaTravTa, Odd EvWoEarbevTa dmorypovras AAA ev ofc voonpaciy eredevTeoy, nour dm0101 
2y dmoria yeyevyre, ro1ouros mots xpilnoovras.” “ Injusti vero non immutata assument corpora, nec Liberata affectibus et morbis, neque 
illa glorificata accipient. Sed 2 avs quibus finierunt vitam morbis, et qui in incredulitate vixerunt, tales certe judicabuntur.”—* Od duc6aros 
Yn» 00d Sueevperos wapaderov adAy,” “non invia terra, non inventu difficilis Paradisi aula.”—* Oig 6 romos ob HApeeTyPopos yiveTcus” ov nave, 
ob xpuos, ov TpiGoros 2y attm, dAN H Tov ITATEPON dixcuwy re dpwmevn Gis mavtore fslOie, cvcyevovrey Tyy MeTe TOUTO TO Ywploy cyemavoLY 
xo cloviay cva6iooiv ev odpevp rourw Se dyoma xinAnoxouey Koamov ’AGpaupy.” ‘Quibus locus ille nullos labores et molestias parit: non ibi 
ardor, non frigus, non tribolus, sed Patrum justorumque vultus subridet, expectantium post istud receptaculum (recogimiento) quietem et 
eternam vitam in coelo. Locum vero istum vocamus ‘Sinum Abrahami’.”—“ Oj d¢ adixos (eis) dpiorepe EAnovTa tno dyyekuv xodaoru, 
ObxETH EXOUTIWS TOPEVOPLEVOL, AAG MET CL Bices vig Seopsos EAxomevor® of of Ehertwres cryyeros Oramewmovress dveiOiCovrec, cts hobepm oumoars emamerdouyres, 
eis ra narwrepe wlouvres cs cryomevars EAnoucty of Edeorwres Ews mAyTiOY ams Feevyys.” “ Injusti vero ad sinistram trahuntur ab angelis tortoribus, 
non sponte incedentes, sed vi et violentia ut vincti rapiuntur; quos, angeli instantes et urgentes comitantur, illos convitiis lacerantes, torvis 
oculis minitantes, et ad inferiora detrudentes: quas animas trahunt urgentes angeli usque ad confinia Gehenne.” —“ Xaog yep Babu ret perce 
da. pscoy ornpixrcs.” “ Nam in medio chaos magnum et profundum extenditur et firmatur.”— Ey ¥ Ox Umvoc, 08 Aum, od Phopa, od dpoyric, 
odde yuk, ovde irene rvQovm, oUNx HALOS cevctryxy xuxAoy oUpetyoU Spomm eAcuYopeVos, Opwy merpe H xevTpa mpos evryyworoy avipumoy Bioy Siaperpoupever 
obpoberouyTos.” «In quo nec somnus, nec dolor, nec corruptio, nec sollicitudo, nec nox, nec dies tempore mensurata, nec sol necessitate 
quadam per circulum cel cursum suum agitans et impellens in horad natali notantis et disponentis terminorum mensuras et cardines com- 
mensuratos ad facile cognoscendam hominum vitam.” On the clear assumption that the Mexicans believed with the Peruvians in the 
resurrection of the body, whose belief is expressly noticed by Garcia in the fifty-second page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the 
present volume, and with some of the Indian tribes of Canada, who, according to Sagard and Father Hennepin, celebrated, on 
certain solemn occasions, a mimic resurrection of the body, when they disinterred from their graves the bones of their most famous and 
yenowned warriors, and committed them again to the earth with many ceremonies, and that they entertained the Jewish notion that 
the body would rise with the same affections and diseases with which it had died, the fact would be explained why the Mexicans were 
so extremely careful to bury the dead in habits which denoted the peculiar diseases of which they had died, or the crimes which had led to 
their execution, since this would have been typical of the day of judgement, and intended to denote the certainty of the resurrection, when 
all would be judged according to the works which they had done in the flesh. This particular usage of the Mexicans is noticed by Las 
Casas in his inedited ¢ Historia Apologetica’, and it likewise is described by Clavigero in the following passage of the thirty-ninth section 
of the sixth book of his History of Mexico: “ However superstitious the Mexicans were in other matters, in the rites which they observed 
at funerals they exceeded themselves. As soon as any person died, certain masters of funeral ceremonies were called, who were generally 
men advanced in years. ‘They cut a number of pieces of paper, with which they dressed the dead body, and took a glass of water, with 
which they sprinkled the head, saying, that that was the water used in the time of their life. They then dressed it in a habit suitable to 
the rank, the wealth, and the circumstances attending the death of the party. If the deceased had been a warrior, they clothed him in the 
habit of Huitzilopochtli; if a merchant, in that of Jacateuctli; if an artist, in that of the protecting god of his art or trade: one who had 

NOTES. QAQ 

fuente de donde la orden y consonancia de los citados de la republica y administracion de la justicia emana; a dar 
noticia de los reyes y sefiores, al menos de los principales que aviaen ella. Porque muchos, é quasi innumerables 
eran los sefiores 6 governadores no principales, como las provincias y pueblos, que comprehendia tanta tierra, fuesen 
tantos. Cinco reyes grandes y principalisimos sobre todos fueron los que huvo en aquella tierra; y el mayor y quasi 
monarca de todos era el rey de la gran ciudad de Mexico, que por otro nombre llamaban Tenuchtitlan. Este rey é 
quasi monarca llamaron Motezuma, y porque esta diccion ¢z significa honrra, dignidad y reverencia, ahidiase al cabo, 
nombrabanlo Moteccumaci, la ultima luenga, que quiere decir todo el vocablo ‘hombre de autoridad, grave y modesto, 
y que se hace temer.’ Significa tambien ‘hombre triste y safudo,’ lo qual se cumplia en este rey; porque segun se 
avia prenunciado por sus adivinos y prophetas 6 agoreros, teniase por cierto, que su grandeza, majestad, triumpho y 
estado real se avian de acabar y fenecer en sus dias, por ciertas gentes que habian de venir de otra parte, y aun de 
hacia donde salia el sol, y asi fue por esta causa dicen, que nunca vivia alegre, sino en continua tristeza. Este rey 
quando llegaron los primeros Espafioles, vivia en la mayor felicidad y prosperidad, alteza y majestad de sefiorio, y 
estimacion de los hombres, y fue mas reverenciado, temido, y amado y adorado, y con mas cerimonias servido, que 
nunca sus pasados, ni aun quien rey del mundo entre los gentiles, aunque entre en ellos el rey Asahuero, jamas lo fue, 
ni parecese poder haver sido: todo esto por su gran valor, capacidad, prudencia, providencia, governacion y admi- 
nistracion de justicia. Arriba en el capitulo..... hablando de los edificios, quedan dichas tantas excelencias y tan 
esmeradas partes y particularidades de los palacios reales de este rey, é de las cosas vivas y muertas, sensibles é 
insensibles, que contenian en si, que qualquiera que las leyere solamente, podra por ellas la prudencia y valor de este 
gran rey conocer, y della no poco se admirar. Nunca rey ni sefor en el mundo asi se supo mandar servir, ni con 
tantas, ni tan diversas y delicadas cerimonias, y porque de muchas y quasi de infinitas algunas digamos, comenzaremos 
por la orden de las que comenzavan, como comienza el dia. Luego que la luz esclarecia, quinientos y seiscientos 
caballeros y sefores principales iban 4 las casas reales y palacio, que ellos llamaban ¢ecpan, y estabanse por las salas 
y corredores paseando, 6 se asentaban y platicaban sobre las cosas que les ocurrian. Ninguno entraba donde el rey 
estaba. Los criados destos, y que los acompafiaban eran tantos, que hinchian dos y tres patios de la casa real, ya 
una gran plaza. Todos estos sefores y criados estavan perseverantes alli todo el dia, hasta que venia la noche. 

been drowned was dressed in the habit of Tlaloc; one who had been executed for adultery, in that of Tlazolteotl; and a drunkard, in 
the habit of Tezcatzoncatl, god of wine. In short, as Gomara has well observed, they wore more garments after they were dead than 
while they were living.” Of the Mexican belief in the terrestrial Paradise enough has been said in the thirty-eighth page of the Notes 
forming the Appendix to the present volume, whilst reference to the seventy-fifth page of the same Notes will show how exactly their 
opinions accorded with those of the Jews, in believing Hades to be a subterraneous region where the light of the day could never pene- 
trate, and a land of darkness and forgetfulness. The interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus makes express mention in the hundred and 
seventy-first page of the sixth volume of this work, of the place to which the Mexicans believed that the souls of children went who died 
before they attained the age of reason, which he compares to that which the Jews assigned to the souls of infants who died without 
receiving the rite of circumcision. The other analogies are so obvious that it is sufficient in this place merely to refer to the sixty-ninth 
page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present volume, and to the fourth book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, for an 
account of their theory of the sun’s motion round the earth, and for their notions on the subject of judicial astrology. We cannot, how- 
ever, refrain from observing that the Mexicans would have been extremely likely to have converted the torturing angels described by 
Josephus into ‘ diablos principalisimos,’ real devils, in their mythological paintings, and to have assigned them a place in their infernal 
hierarchy not far removed from the god and the goddess of hell; in this manner it is probable that many of the traditions and doc- 
trines of Scripture were at first imperfectly represented in their paintings, which, being afterwards variously explained by their priests, 
became grossly corrupted in the long course of ages until the whole was at length reduced into one mass of error and absurdity. Having 
shown that there is sufficient reason for supposing, judging from internal evidence, that the fragment which has been preserved of Jo- 
sephus’s treatise respecting the cause of the universe is the genuine production of that author, though by a pious fraud similar to that 
which made the Cumzan Sibyl attest the prophecies of David, shamefully interpolated by some transcriber of later ages, we shall take 
the opportunity of observing, for the information of those who may feel an interest in the writings of the Jewish historian, that there is 
much probability that a translation of the entire of his works, made at a period when the Greek text of Josephus was much less corrupt 
than it is at present, may still exist in Abyssinia; since the learned Ludolfus, who was by no means inclined to place too much reliance 
on the accounts of the missionaries respecting the existence of many of the long-lost works of antiquity in the monasteries of Abyssinia, 
correcting, as it would appear, from better information an error into which he was aware he had fallen in the earlier part of his Com- 
mentaries on his Ethiopian History, corroborates, in some degree, those very accounts, in the following passage of the three hundred and 
fifty-second page of the above-mentioned work: ‘“ Adhac plerosque libros Greecos primitive ecclesiz versos habent, veluti Johannis 
Chrysostomi opera, Josephum Scriptorem Historiarum Judaicarum,” proceeding to add to his Latin specification of the authors the titles 
of the two last works in the Abysszan language. 

VOL. VIIT. (325i) 

950 NOTES. 

Ninguno entraba en palacio que no entrase descalzo, s entrava 4 negociar con el rey, 6 el rey los llamaba, avian de 
llevar mantas muy bastas 6 gruesas. Y si eran grandes sefiores, 6 en tiempo de frio, sobre las mantas ricas 6 delgadas 
se avian de poner sobre aquellas Jas bastas y pobres. Y entraban con las cabezas muy bajas, y los cuerpos humillados 
6 corvados, mostrando grandisima subjeccion, reverencia y humildad. Hombre viviente no le habia de mirar é la 
card, sino los ojos en tierra; sino eran los sefiores de los cinco que se dird: el uno era el rey de Tezcuco, y el otro 
el de Tlacuba 6 Tlacupan. Si hablava 6 respondia Moteccuma, era tan bajo que apenas parecia mover los labios. 
Y esto era pocas veces, porque las mas respondia 6 hablava por ciertos ministros que alli tenia, que eran como de su 
consejo, 6 como secretarios. Algunos de los reyes y sefores grandes de aquella Nueva Espafa usaban esto en sus 
tierras de hablar y responder por sus secretarios 6 cercanas personas. Este uso de nunca mirar los subditos al rey 
en la cara, y de hablar y responder por terceras personas, introdujo Deyoces, primer rey de los Medos, segun trae 
Herodoto en el primero libro de su Historia; la qual contiene una notable industria que tuvo, para que sin sentir la 
fraude le eligiesen por rey. Quando Moteccuma salia fuera de su palacio real, que pocas veces lo’ hacia, iva delante 
un oficial suyo con tres varas muy delgadas y derechas en la mano, 4 lo que se cree para que todos entendiesen que 
venia el rey. Llevavanlo en unas andas de oro ciertos sefiores, en las manos 6 en los hombros; é iban estos oficiales 
delante quitando las pajas del suelo por finas que fuesen. Todos los que iban cerca dél 6 lejos, ninguno lo habia 
mirar; sino todos llevavan las cabezas y ojos bajos: todas las gentes que estaban en las calles 6 lugares por donde 
pasaba, tenian Jas cabezas y los ojos bajos asi mismo; y en aquel lugar que los tomava la venida del rey, no se habian 
de mudar un canto de real ni moverse, sino estar como flayres en gloria Patri hasta que él pasase: porque la reverencia 
y temor que le tenian todos los chicos y grandes era tanta, porque dicen ser muy severo y riguroso en mandar castigar, 
que quasi lo adoravan y delante dél temblaban. Dicese que quando los Christianos primeros entraron en la tierra, 
pregunté Hernando Cortes su capitan 4 un sefor de una provincia lejana de Mexico, si reconocia sefiorio 4 Mo- 
teccuma, respondio: Quien hay que no sea vasallo y esclavo de Moteccumagi. Las cerimonias que le hacian en el 
servicio de su comida, y la magnificencia y suntuosidad de los manjares, eran muchas y admirables, y aun inexplica- 
bles. Entraban trescientos mancebos 6 pajes, cada uno con su vasija de barro de diversas hechuras, en lugar de 
escudillas y platos, muy bien hechas y muy pintadas, y bien capaces, llenas de manjar, y ponianlas todas en una sala 
muy grande, donde solia comer, toda muy limpia, esterada de esteras muy hermosas, muy delgadas, muy pintadas, 
hechas de palma delicada, que Ilaman petates, la silaba de en medio luenga. Cada una de aquellas vasijas Ilenas de 
manjar, ponian sobre un braserillo muy hermoso de brasa, porque el manjar no se enfriase. El asiento suyo era en 
un cojin 6 almohada de cuero de venado, 6 de otro animal, maravillosamente adornado y pintado. Asi como se asen- 
taba el rey, se asentaban cinco 6 seis venerables viejos en Ja misma sala dél, algo desviados. Estaba un maestre sala, 
que de aquellos manjares servia al rey, los que ya sabia que le agradava. El comia muy poquito de ello, porque era 
de muy poco comer, y muy delicado, y alzado aquel plato y manjar, llevavanlo 4 los viejos el maestre sala. Y asi de 
cada manjar que le servian, por manera que comian los viejos del plato real. Servidos tres 6 quatro manjares, 6 los 
que de aquellos trescientos gustar el rey acostumbraba, sacaban los trescientos pajes todas aquellas vasijas 6 platos 4 
otra sala que junto 4 aquella, y fuera de ella estava; donde habia cien sefiores, los mas principales, asentados, y alli 
ponian aquellos manjares de que aquellos comian. Y comido lo que les bastava, sacavan lo que de aquellos sobrava 
a otra sala junto alli, donde estaban otros doscientos sefiores, no de tanta calidad: y aviendo aquellos comido, sacan 
lo que alli sobrava para otros de menor estado, y en aquestos se acabava. Y todos estos comian con tanta mesura, y 
con tanto compas, que en los servicios que mas se hacian, no havia estorbo alguno, ni en el servicio de la mesa real 
avia ninguna falta, porque en todas las salas y mesas avia sus diligentes servidores. Servian muy 4 menudo de 
pafiezuelos blanquisimos y albisimos de algodon al rey y 4 los demas, en cada unade sus mesas segun sus grados. 
Hecbo este primer servicio, entrava otro de otros trescientos pajes con otra diversidad de manjares, y de la misma 
manera se servian y se gastavan. Despues de este segundo, entrava el tercero, y con este la comida se acabava. A 
su tiempo, en medio 6 en fin de los manjares segun la costumbre que tenian, entravan otros trescientos pajes, cada 
uno con un vaso grande que cabia medio azumbre, y aun tres quartillos de la bebida en el mismo, y servia el un vaso 
al rey el maestresala, de que bebia lo que le agradava. De alli sacavan todas las vasijas 6 tazas de que bebian los 
sefiores de las otras salas. Estas vasijas 6 tazas que llaman «icaras, son de cierta especie de calabazas muy diferentes 
de las de Castilla y mucho mejores, y son tan pintadas por de fuera y por de dentro, que bebera qualquiera sefior con 
ellas como si fuesen de oro 6 de plata. La bebida es agua mezclada con cierta harina de unas almendras que Ilaman 

NOTES. 251 

cacao. Esta es de mucha sustancia, muy fresca, y sabrosa y agradable, y no embriaga. En aquellos tres servicios 
que de manjares hacian, se sirvia comida y manjares de todas las aves, y animales, y pescados y legumbres, de que 
hay muchas, y frutas, y todas las otras cosas comestibles, que en docientas leguas se podrian hallar de Nueva Espafia. 
Lo mismo se hacia, y la misma orden se guardava al cenar, puesto que no devia de ser tanta copia y diversidad de 
manjares, porque todas estas gentes, como ya queda dicho, son de muy poco comer, y muy templadas. Lavabase al 
principio y al fin del comer y de cenar el rey, y creo (por lo que he visto) que tambien los otros sefiores en las otras 
salas, cada uno segun su grado y estado. La toalla 6 pafiezuelo que una vez se le dava, nunca mas la avia él de ver. 
Todos los vasos, platos, escudillas, y los braserillos, y las xicaras 6 copas, y tazas con que bevia, y todas las otras cosas 
con que se servia, no avian de parecer mas de una sola vez en toda su casa. Tenia ordenada otra obra real, mani- 
festativa de su gran liberalidad y magnificencia, conviene 4 saber, que sus despensas donde tenian todas las cosas’ que 
se havian de comer, y las botillerias de la bebida dicha, estavan siempre abiertas para quantos de los yentes y vini- 
entes graciosamente quisiesen comer y beber. Aquesta franqueza y magnanimidad real de pocos reyes del mundo 
antiguos y modernos escripta la hallamos. Muchas otras eran las grandezas y cerimonias que representavan la grande 
autoridad y majestad y sefiorio y sabiduria del gran rey Moteccuma, segun el mismo Hernando Cortes escrivié al 
Emperador nuestro sefior, que en mucho tiempo y mucho papel no se podrian explicar. El segundo rey 6 sefior, 
era él de la ciudad de Tezcuco, que esta frontero de la maxima laguna en medio como seis leguas distante 4 la parte 
del poniente. Adqueste, como fuese despues de Motezuma el mayor sefior de toda la Nueva Espafia, dicen que 
sefioreava quince provincias hasta la provincia de Tucapan, que esta 4 la Mar del Norte; y asi avia en la ciudad de 
Tezcuco unos palacios reales y edificios muy mas sefialados y ricos que en otras partes, despues de los de la ciudad 
de Mexico, como arriba en el capitulo... . queda explicado. Una legua de la ciudad de Mexico, esta la ciudad de 
Tlacupan, 6 segun agora decimos de Tacuba, y en esta y en otros muchos y grandes pueblos y dichas provincias 
sujetas 4 ella, sefioreava el tercero rey de la tierra mas que otros despues de los dichos sefialado. A la parte del norte 
& quatro lesuas de Mexico, esta el pueblo de Quahutitlan, en el qual residia y sefioreava el quarto sefior con otras 
muchas poblaciones.~ El quinto era el sefior de Coyouacan, dos leguas de Mexico hacia el mediodia, senor de 
muchos vasallos. El pueblo grande llamado Azcapucalco, una legua de Mexico, era tambien gran sefhorio, y de 
muchas gentes sujetas 4 él. Otros muchos pueblos y ciudades avia en rededor de Mexico 4 quatro, y 4 ocho, ya 
diez leguas, asi dentro de la laguna, como por la tierra, que hermoseavan y acompafiavan la gran ciudad real de Mexico, 
que contenian infinidad de moradores, cuyos sefiores eran grandes, y como los que llamamos proceres y magnates: pero 
sobre todos, mas principales y como reyes, eran los dos, el sefior y rey de Tezcuco, y el sefior y rey de Tlacupan, 6 
de Tacuba. Estos con todos los demas todo lo demas del tiempo residian en la ciudad de Mexico, haciendo corte y 
palacio al rey, que se pudo llamar rey de reyes, Motecguma; de todos los quales era en supremo grado acatado, 
servido, estimado, temido y reverenciado, y asi se le celebravan fiestas y pasquas; y con tanta autoridad y majestad 
rescibia y gozaba la muchedumbre de los sirvientes, los edificios de sus casas reales, los templos, el immenso numero 
de las gentes que cada dia entravan y salian en la ciudad, que quando nuestros Espafioles todo esto vian por sus pro- 
pios ojos, teniendolo por cosas nunca otras tales vistas ni oidas, y como eran dignas, por admirables, decian unos 4 
otros: Que es esto que con nuestros ojos vemos? Es verdad, dormimos 6 sofamos? finalmente algunos no podian creer 
sino que estavan encantados. Donde tanta prudencia y autoridad avia, y majestad se representava, que asi sabia 
mandarse servir, y con tanta orden de cerimonias varias y muchas, y de tantos sefiores y tan grandes, y de tanto nu- 
mero de sirvientes, y donde van infinitas gentes y cada dia y cada hora concurrian, y tan gran ciudad, y tantas en su 
circuito, y tan gran reyno, manifiesto es aun que mas prueva no trujesemos, que debia tener prudencia y sabiduria 
para establecer leyes, y constituir jueces, y mandar executar justicia, y no qualquiera, sino buena y recta justicia, 
quanto entre infieles que de conocimiento del verdadero Dios carecian, podia justicia hallarse. Era pues asi, que 
fuese ordenado todo aquel reyno y sus tantas provincias por el supremo rey, 6 por sus antecesores, 6 que cada rey é 
sefior de los dichos en su sefiorio huviese la forma del regimiento introducido, 6 que cada pueblo tuviese sus costumbres 
y leyes, como quiera que huviese sido, en toda la Nueva Espafia, en unas partes poco mas, y en otras poco menos. 
El govierno y las leyes quasi no diferian, por manera que por lo que de unas partes dijeremos, y adonde tuvimos 
mayor noticia, se podra entender, y quiza sera mejor, decirlo en comuny generalmente. Avia pues jueces en aquellos 
reynos, y leyes por las quales se conservaban aquellas republicas en el estado politico y temporal, castigando los de- 
linquentes, premiando los que se tenian por buenos, aunque no fuese el premio sino teniendolos por tales, dirimiendo 

252 NOTES. 

y determinando las contiendas y pleytos (que no eran muchas entre gente tan pacifica), dando 4 cada uno lo que era 
suyo, y asi conservandolos en toda paz y conformidad; puesto que todo aquesto con faltas y defectos, pero no con 
tantos segun parecera, como siempre fué, y siempre se hallé en las gentes que carecieron del verdadero conocimiento 
de Dios. De los jueces el supremo despues del rey en el sefiorio Mexicano, era el presidente 6 juez mayor, cuyo 
nombre por el officio era Cihuacoatl. Este oficio ninguno lo podia proveher sino solo el rey de Mexico. Qualquiera 
que este oficio para si usurpara, 6 lo concediera 4 otro, avia de morir por ello, y sus padres y deudos eran desnaturados 
del pueblo donde acaeciese hasta lo quarta* generacion. Allende que todos los bienes avian de ser confiscados, y 
aplicados para la republica. Este supremo juez no se proveia para todos los pueblos, sino para en las ciudades y 
poblaciones grands, y que tenian mucha comarca. Tenia cargo y oficio de proveher en las cosas de la governacion, 
y en la hacienda del rey. Oya de las causas que se devolvian 4 él por appelacion, y estas eran solas las criminosas, 
porque de las civiles no se appelaba dela justicia mayor. Deste presidente no se appelaba para el rey, ni para 
otro juez alguno, ni podia tener algun teniente, sino que por su misma. persona se avian los negocios de determinar. 
‘Avia otro juez despues del presidente superior, que era justicia mayor: el nombre de aquel oficio Tacatecatl, y su 
oficio era conocer de todas las causas civiles y criminales, que tenia por assesores y acompafados otros dos. Uno de 
los quales Ilamavan Acoahunotl, el qual era como alguacil mayor, y al otro Tlaylotlat, que quiere decir, rejidor. Estos 
tres tenian sus tenientes, que juntamente con ellos oyan y libravan las causas; pero en la pronunciacion de las sen- 
tencias, solo el Tacatecatl, que es la justicia mayor, se nombrava. Deste se appelaba para ante el Cihuacoatl, que 
dejimos ser el presidente. En las causas criminales oian ordinariamente 4 la mafana y 4 la tarde; los quales estavan 
muy aderezados con sus mantas, que son sus vestidos, mas ricas que las que traian ordinarias. Avia casas de audi- 
encia para ello dedicadas: tenian sus porteros, oian con grande atencion y gravidad. El audiencia tenia por nombre 
tlacontecoya : la sentencia tlacontelistle ; y asi podemos decir que tlacontecoya, significa ‘el lugar donde se pronuncian 
las sentencias.’ Tenian carceles asperrimas sefialadamente, donde metian los de crimen, y los presos en guerra. 
Estavan en una casa oscura, 6 de muy poca claridad, y en ella hacian una jaula 6 jaulas, y 4 la puerta de la casa, que 
era pequefia como puerta de palomas, cerrada por de fuera con tablas, y arrimadas grandes piedras, y alli sus guardas. 
Y como las carceles eran crueles, los presos que en ellas estavan, en poco tiempo se paraban flacos y amarillos, y la 
comida era no demasiada, por lo qual desde la carcel comenzaban 4-padecer la muerte, que despues los davan. 
Nombraban estas carceles por dos nombres, segun la especie de las prisiones que les echavan: el uno era ¢lelpiloca, 
y el otro guahucalco, que venia de cepo. La justicia executaba el Acoahunotl, que era el alguacil mayor, por sus 
propias manos: el que la manifestava era Tecpoiotl, conviene 4 saber, el pregonero; cuyo oficio era de gran honra 
y autoridad, porque decian al pueblo la voluntad del rey. En cada ciudad de las principales, como Ja Mexicana, 
segun esta dicho, y la de Tezcuco, y la de Tlacopan 6 Tacuba, avia ordinarias audiencias con sus ciertos ordinarios 
jueces. Y despues de la audiencia de Mexico, fue sefialada la de la ciudad de Tescuco, porque huvo en ella un 
rey 6 sefior llamado Negaualcoyogin, abuelo del que agora vive y tiene nombre de sefior; el qual reynéd quarenta y 
dos afios, y fue muy prudente y de gran juicio, y en su tiempo establecio muchas y buenas leyes para el regimiento 
y conservacion de sus vasallos y de todo su sefiorio. A este sucedidé su hijo, padre del que agora es, llamado Nec¢a- 
ualpilcintli, que reyné quarenta y quatro afios, y afiidié leyes y ordenamientos segun le parecio convenir 4 los tiempos 
de su vida. Y destos dos reyes de Tezcuco, por su prudencia y buena governacion y antiguedad, dicese que los 
reyes de Mexico tenian y amavan en lugar de padre. Afiidiase 4 la susodicha causa de los amar, ser como eran sus 
propinquos deudos; y asi enviavan y remitian los reyes de Mexico 4 los de Tezcuco muchas causas y pleytos, para 
que alli los determinasen 6 ellos 6 susjueces. Empero siempre se guard6 la preeminencia suprema en las cosas de la 
guerra 4 la audiencia de Mexico. Y aunque muchas provincias eran las sujetas al seflorio de Tescuco, pero estaban 
reducidas en seis pueblos principales, donde havian como seis chancillerias, en las quales, y 4 las quales iban de todo 
aquel reyno 4 sus pleytos, y alli se cogian los tributos y rentas. En cada uno de aquellos pueblos avia dos jueces, 
personas muy escogidas, tenidas por cuerdas y habiles mas que otras para aquel oficio. Eran muchas veces estos 
deudos del rey. El salario y quitacion que 4 estos jueces se dava, era que el rey les tenia sefialadas las tierras compe- 

* The recollection of God’s promise in the ten commandments to show mercy to the fourth generation of those who feared him and 
kept his commandments, might have suggested to the Mexicans the extension of punishment to the same number of generations in the 
case of those who, in this particular instance, were guilty of a breach of the law. 

NOTES. 253 

tenes, donde sembraban 6 hacian sembrar, y cogian los mantenimientos necesarios para su sustentacion. Dentro de 
las mismas tierras, avia ciertas casas de vecinos, como renteros, que les sembravan y cogian los frutos. Muriendo 
algun juez de aquellos, no se traspasaba la tierra 4 sus hijos 6 deudos, sino al juez que sucedia en aquel oficio. Estos 
jueces en amaneciendo, se asentavan en el lugar deputado y publico para aquello, en sus estrados de unas esteras 
muy lindas, que hay como se ha dicho. Luego acudia toda la gente que alli estava, y venia con sus quejas y con 
sus causas, y ya que habia gran rato que oyan pleytos, traianlos de comer de palacio y comian; despues de comer y 
reposar un poco, tornavan 4 oir 4 los que restaban hasta hora de visperas, y de alli se iban 4 sus casas. De donde 
parece, que por todo el dia residian en las casas de audiencia, 6 publicas para administrar justicia. Destos se apelava 
para ante otros dos jueces, que presidian sobre todos, y aquestos sentenciaban con parecer del rey 6 sefior*. 

Cada diez 6 doce dias, el rey tenia acuerdo con todos los jueces sobre los casos arduos y de mucha importancia, 
concernientes al bien del reyno y de toda la republica. ‘Todo lo que delante del rey se platicaba ya iba examinado 
y probado. Los testigos pocas veces se hallavan falsos, porque no osaban decir otra cosasino la verdad. Lo uno 
por temor de la tierra por la qual juraban como por cosa divina; y la forma del juramento era, poner el dedo en la 
tierra y luego allegarlo 4 la lengua, como si dijeran por la diosa tierra, 6 divina tierra, que nos sustenta y mantiene, 
que diré verdad: lo otro por miedo de los jueces, los quales eran muy solicitos y sotiles en interrogarlos, y quando 
alguno hallavan falso, terriblemente lo castigavan. Cerca de los juramentos que hacian los antiguos, dice Herodoto, 
libro quarto, que los Scythas juraban por la silla del rey, y los Nasamones por los muertos que fueron justisimos, 
poniendo la mano 6 las manos en sus sepulturas. Plinio, (libro segundo, capitulo doce,) dice algunas gentes juraban 
por las manzanas hédiondas. Tornando al proposito, los jueces ninguna cosa recibian de presentes, ni dadivas 
alounas. No eran aceptadores de personas, porque igualmente se avian en el juicio y justicia con el chico y con el 
grande. Si se hallava que algun juez recebia presentes 6 dones, y por ellos 6 por algun otro respecto hacia contra 
justicia en agravio de alguna de las partes, 6 tambien si se sabia que alguna vez se emborrachava, si estos defectos 
acaecian en cosas pequefias, los otros jueces los reprehendian entre si, una y dos y tres veces asperamente, y sino 
se enmendava, 4 la tercera vez lo tresquilaban, y con gran confusion lo privaban de oficio. Estas penas eran de 
grande ignominia y afrenta entre aquellas gentes. Dicese del rey de Tezcuco, que como un juez favoreciese contra 
justicia en cierto pleyto 4 un principal hombre contra un labradorcillo plebeyo, desque supo la verdad, manddlo el 
rey ahorcar, y que se viese la causa otra vez, en la qual revisto, fue sentenciado por el plebeyo. En cada sala 
estava con los jueces un escribano, 6 por mejor decir pintor, que servia de escribano diestro, que con sus pinturas 6 
caracteres, las personas que tratavan pleytos, y las causas y demandas y testigos, y lo que se concluia y sentenciaba, 
ponia por memoria. El sefior y los jueces no daban lugar 4 que huviese dilacion, ni mas juicios de lo que estava 
ordenado. Y 4 lo mas largo, los pleytos de mucha importancia se concluian en la consulta de las ochenta dias, que 
llamaban nappualtlatulli, de que luego se diré. Tenian aquellos doce jueces, otros doce ministros, que eran como 
alguaciles mayores, el oficio de los quales era prender 4 personas principales, y iban 4 los otros pueblos 4 llamar 6 
prender 4 qualesquiera personas que el sefior 6 los jueces los mandavan. Y estos eran como conocidos-en las 
mantas de cierta manera pintadas, que sobre si Ilevavan. A los quales donde quiera que allegavan, se hacia grande 
acatamiento, como 4 principales ministros 6 mensajeros del rey, 6 de su justiciamayor. <A estos llamavan achcauhtli, 
y 4los jueces Tecuitlatoque. Avia otros mandoncillos que servian de emplazadores, y de mensajes, que en man- 
dandoles la cosa iban volando, como gavilanes, fuese de noche, fuese de dia, y 4 qualquiera hora, lloviese 6 ventease, 
6 cayese piedra del cielo, no sabian esperar tiempo, ni dilatar por un momento lo que se les mandava. En las otras 
provincias y pueblos sujetos 4 la principal ciudad, estavan jueces ordinarios, los quales tenian limitada el autori- 
dad para sentenciar pleytos, como de menor quantia, y de poca calidad. Podian empero prender 4 todos los delin- 

* On reading the account which Las Casas gives us in the above chapter of his ‘ Historia Apologetica’ of the state kept up by Mon- 
tezuma in Mexico, of the sumptuous magnificence of his palace, of the manner in which he was served at table, and of other traits of 
regal and Oriental magnificence, we are almost disposed to fancy that he might have had some acquaintance with the following passage 
of the tenth chapter of the first book of Kings, descriptive of the splendour of Solomon’s reign, and have determined to realize in his own 
person the wisdom and glory of that far-famed Jewish king: “ And when the queen of Sheba had seen all Solomon’s wisdom, and the 
house that he had built, and the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel, 
and his cup-bearers, and his ascent by which he went up unto the house of the Lord; there was no more spirit in her. And she said to 
the king, It was a true report that I heard in mine own land of thy acts and of thy wisdom,” 

VOL. VIII. Gar) 

Q54 NOTES. 

quentes y examinar los pleytos y causas arduas, las quales guardavan para los ayuntamientos generales que se tenian 
de quatro en quatro meses de los suyos, que era de ochenta en ochenta dias. Hn este termino venian sin faltar uno 
todos los jueces 4 la ciudad y cabeza del reyno, y alli se ayuntaban todos delante el rey que solo presidia, y se hacia 
consulta general, donde se determinavan y sentenciaban todos los negocios y pleytos arduos y criminales. Llamavan 
esta congregacion nappualtlatulli, que quiere decir ‘la platica y consulta de ochenta en ochenta dias.’ Esta durava 
diez 6 doce dias, dentro de los quales determinados y sentenciados los negocios particulares, se conferia tambien y 
proveia sobre las cosas universales de las republicas, y tocantes 4 todo el reyno, 4 manera de las cortes que se acos- 
tumbran en Espafia y en otras partes. Y todo esto se hacia muy ordenadamente y sin alguna falta en la ciudad de 

Tezcuco. 

Nore LITT. Page 155. 

The interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus informs us, in the hundred and fifty-fifth page of the sixth volume of the 
present work, that the Mexicans believed in the existence of nine different heavens, which they supposed were distin- 
guished from each other by the comets which they contained, from the colour of which they received their several 
denominations. They also supposed that these heavens, acting as secondary causes, exercised a sovereign influence 
over the affairs of the world below, whilst the great first cause, whom they believed to be the Deity, resided in the 
highest heaven, and controlled the effects of all the inferior heavens. We have here a convincing proof of the astro- 
logical notions of the old continent having passed over to the new; since, although analogies in arts and similar 
discoveries in science afford no conclusive evidence of past communications having taken place between nations 
widely apart from each other, because the intellectual faculties of men under every climate are the same, still as the 
dreams of the ancient astrologers have no foundation in natural science and are derived from no fixed principles, 
uniformity of opinion discovered here amongst nations inhabiting different parts of the globe argues a communication 
having at some remote period necessarily taken place between them. When therefore we find that the ancient astro- 
logers believed in the existence of nine heavens, which they severally named after the planets, to each of which they 
attributed a particular colour which they judged most suitable to the nature of that particular planet, (for example, red 
to Mars, white to Venus, a mixed colour to Mercury, and yellow to the moon,) such conformity in a mere matter of 
speculative opinion with the Mexicans, and on a subject so purely arbitrary in its nature, can scarcely be attributed to 
accidental causes; and although the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus does not expressly say that the Mexicans believed 
that their nine heavens were of a spherical form, still little doubt cambe entertained that Homeyoca, their highest heaven, 
corresponded with the calum immobile of the ancient astronomers, which the Jews supposed the more immediate habita- 
tion of the Deity, and that they believed that the other heavens were eight lesser spheres, the lowest of which included 
the earth, whilst the highest was the empyrean heaven, thence in Scripture named the heaven of heavens, or the 
place of the Most High. And here we may remark that it is a smgular coincidence that Ylhuicatl Tunatiuh, or 
the heaven of the sun, should be the fourth in order in the Codex Vaticanus, since the fourth heaven was designated 
by the old astronomers the heaven of the sun; and this leads us to observe that as they had one heaven which bore 
the appellation of a female divinity, so the Mexicans had their heaven of Huixtutla, which they placed immediately 
under Ylhuicatl Mamaluacoca, and which, if the former were the heaven of Venus, might lead one to infer that the 
latter was the heaven of Mars, since an arrow is confessedly a warlike symbol, and four arrows with their points 
resting on as many shields constituted the symbolical representation of the last-mentioned heaven, whilst its name 
Mamaluacoca is evidently derived from Mamaluaztli, explained in the fifty-eighth page of the present volume to be 
an arrow shot forth from a divine bow. For the better understanding of what is here said we shall insert an engraving 
of the nine heavens as represented by the ancient astronomers in their treatises, although it should at the same time 
be remarked that three of the spheres are wanting in the plate, since the elementary portion of the world, as opposed. 
to the etherial portion, or the heavens, is represented by the red, purple, and green circles immediately encompassing 
the earth, which severally denote fire, air, and water; each of these elements occupying that place in regard to the 
others which the laws of gravity assigned to them at the first formation of the universe; as, for instance, the upper- 
most place to fire, because in the opinion of the ancient philosophers fire is the lightest of all the elements, and for 
the same reason the lowest to the earth, as the heaviest. It is of little importance to observe that the ancient astrologers 

NOs: 255 

did not precisely agree as to the number of the heavens, nor on many other points connected with astronomy, yet still 
it appears a somewhat singular coincidence that they, like the Mexicans, should have assigned a double or mixed 
colour to some of the planets, and that the latter should have agreed: with the Jews in naming the South the right 
hand of the earth. The unfortunate zeal of the early Spanish missionaries, who consigned to the flames those Mexican 
paintings which would have made us better acquainted with the astrological notions of the Mexicans, renders the 
knowledge which we possess upon that subject extremely imperfect. We learn, however, from their writings that 
the Mexicans allotted the twenty signs of the Tonalametl, which name they gave to their astrological calendar, to 
various parts of the human body, and professed to cure diseases by reference to those signs. And this leads us to 
insert the following passage from a work published some centuries ago, entitled ‘Margarita Philosophica’, i. e. the 
Philosophical Jewel, in order that the plate which it serves to illustrate may be compared with the seventy-fifth page 
of the ‘Codex Vaticanus’, which contains a similar figure of the human body, with the signs accompanying it which 
were supposed to rule over each particular part, with the properties of which it was requisite for physicians to be well 
acquainted in order scientifically to treat and cure diseases. And here we may observe that it merits more than 
ordinary attention that the scorpion and the serpent, two reptiles so strongly assimilating in their nature to each other, 
are in both figures the signs which correspond with the same part of the body. Amongst the Mexicans the tecziztli, 
or sea-snail, was the symbol of the moon, because, as the interpreter of the ‘Codex Vaticanus’ informs us, in the 
hundred and twenty second page of the sixth volume of the present work, the Mexicans believed that the moon pre- 
sided over human generation, which was also the opinion of the old astrologers, who attributed Cancer, or the sign of 
the crab, to that planet, between which and the tecziztli there are many common features of resemblance. We have 
elsewhere observed that the words of Moses, in the fourteenth verse of the first chapter of Genesis, favoured the 
growth of judicial astrology among the Jews, who assert that the command, “And let them be for signs,” given 
immediately after the creation of the stars, could only refer to judicial astrology; the origin of which invention they 
accordingly fix as early as the age of Seth. It is not, therefore, so surprising that Leah, the wife of Jacob, should 
have invoked Gad, or good fortune, as noticed by Selden in the following passage of his treatise ‘ De Diis Syris’ : 
“ Leam autem, mulierculam scilicet, ad astrologorum placita nascenti puero bene ominatam esse, haud ita est mirum, 
cum etiam de horis, quas vocant planetarias, sydere genethliaco, et que sunt hujusmodi, apud nos etiamnum vetulis 
verba facere ridicula sit solenne.” Terminating, however, this digression, we shall here insert the passage from the 
‘ Margarita Philosophica’ above referred to, which is merely a fragment of a dialogue between a master and his pupil 
on the subject of astrology. The letters JZ. and D. stand for Magister and Discipulus. “ M. Principiorum que 
introductoria pertractat, queedam sunt circa zodiaci partes et earundem naturas, queedam circa planetarum qualitates, 
nonnulla vero circa domorum divisiones et earundem significationes. D. Zodiacum in duodecim partes sive signa, 
et unumquodque ex his in triginta gradus longitudinis et duodecim latitudinis divisum ex praecedentibus liquet. 
M. Sicut circulorum in sphera descriptorum diversitas tantum est imaginaria, ita et divisio zodiaci non est ex natura 
aut primordiali creatione, sed pro arbitrio et astrologorum fictione ut initia et terminos calculandi motus habeant. 
D. Quare igitur zodiacum non in plura aut pauciora quam duodecim diviserunt signa? aut quare signum unum in gra- 
dus triginta; et rursus gradus in sexaginta tantum partiuntur minuta. J/. Quia numerus iste divisionibus et calcu- 
lationibus accommodatior est, ut testantur ipsi astrologi Hali Avendrodan in expositione Ptolomei, et Abraam Abenazra 
in libro rationum astrologicarum. D. Potuissent igitur si voluissent in plures paucioresve partes zodiacum dividere? 
M. Etiam, nam et Chaldei non signis sed imaginibus undecim tantum utuntur, libram et scorpionem simul copulantes. 
D. Memini hoc ultimum dum ccelestes imagines enumerares commemoratum, sed earundem naturas edicito. d. De 
signorum naturis astrologi etsi multa nimis disserant; nobis tamen satis erit pauca admodum commemorare magis 
quam tractasse. Aries, signum primum, calidum et siccum, igneum et cholericum, ex corporis compage caput sibi 
vendicans. Taurus vero, secundum signum, frigidum et siccum, terreum et melancholicum, colla respicit. Gemini, 
tertium in ordine, calidum et humidum, aereum et sanguineum, brachia intuentur. Cancer, quartum signum, frigidum 
et humidum, aqueum et fleematicum, obtinet pectus, pulmonem et stomachum. Leo quintum, in qualitatibus cum 
ariete convenit; cor et epar regit. Virgo cum tauro concordat; sed intestina et fundum stomachi vendicat. Libra 
vero cum geminis congruit, sed renes et nates respicit. Scorpio cum cancro in qualitatibus congreditur, sed pudenda 
intuetur. Sagittarius rursum cum ariete et leone coincidit, et coxas intendit. Capricornus cum tauro item et cum 
virgine concordat, sed genua gubernat. Aquarius cum geminis et libra convenit, sed cruribus et tibiis preest. 

256 NOTES. 

Pisces vero in qualitatibus a cancro non deviant, sed pedes vendicant. Et cum semper tria conveniant, quatuor 
triplicitates ex his fabricant. Primam videlicet arietis, leonis et sagittarii, dicunt orientalem, masculinam, 
diummam et sapore amaram. Alteram tauri scilicet, virginis et capricorni, meridionalem, foemineam, nocturnam, 
et sapore acrem nominant. Tertiam, que est geminorum, libre et aquarii, occidentalem, masculinam et diurnam, 
item et sapore dulcem appellant. Quartam vero, quam cancer, scorpio et pisces integrant, septentrionalem, fcemi- 
neam, nocturnam, et sapore salsam vocant. IJlis quoque trigonis dominatores ex planetis distribuentes, tantum 
inter se pugnant, ut cuivis magis credendum sit, facile non apareat. Amplius autem et signorum alia dicunt 
mobilia, quz sunt aries, cancer, libra, capricornus. Alia fixa, que sunt taurus, leo, scorpio, aquarius. Reliqua 
vero communia sunt. Quedam insuper rationalia, ut virgo, gemini, libra, aquarius et prima medietas sagittaril. 
Quadam preterea sterilia. Queedam fcecunda; et cetera multa id genus figmenta ad gradus usque deducta, 
cum alios dicant gradus masculinos, alios fcemineos, lucidos quosdam, et alios tenebrosos, fumosos, vacuos, 
puteales, et alzemena sive valetudinarios. Preeterea et singula signa in ternas facies dividuntur, in terminos 
autem inequales distinguuntur, quorum dominia planetis distribuunt et multiplices fortitudines ipsis ratione talium 
advenire credunt, nam a triplicitate planetarum fortitudines tres accipere autumant, a termino duas, a facie unam, a 
domo vero quinque, et ab exaltatione quatuor. Verum in ista graduum, facierum, ac terminorum assignatione, 
inextricabilis apud astrologos non infimos invenitur diversitas. D. Domus planetarum que sunt? J/. Signa zodiaci : 
nam Saturno pro domiciliis assignant capricornum et aquarium; Jovi sagittarium et pisces; Marti arietem et scor- 
pionem; Soli leonem tantum; Veneri taurum et libram; Mercurio geminos et virginem; Lune solum cancrum. 
D. Exaltationes vero que sunt? J/. Saturnus exaltatur in gradu 20 libre; Jupiter in 15 cancri; Mars in 28 capricorni; 
Sol in 19 arietis; Venus in 26 piscium; Mercurius in 15 virginis; Luna in 4 tauri. Casus omnium sunt in locis 
oppositis. D. Plane: sed quid tradunt de planetarum qualitate? 17. Saturnum frigidum et siccum, colore nigrum, 
et sapore stipticum dicunt. Jovem vero humidum et calidum, colore cinericium aut viridem, sapore dulcem. Martem 
siccum et calidum, rubewm et amarum. Solem calidum et siccum, in colore peregrinum, et sapore acutum. Venerem 
humidam et frigidam, a/bam et unctuosam. Mercurium varium, et planete cui jungitur in qualitatibus primis se 
conformantem, in colore mixtum, et sapore acetosum dicunt. ‘Lunam frigidam et humidam croceam et salsam perhibent. 
Rursum ex his quidam graves et ponderosi nominantur, ut Saturnus, J upiter, Mars. Alii leves, ut Venus, Mercurius, 
Luna. Sol autem nec ponderosus nec levis est. Quidam etiam fortune sunt, ut Jupiter fortuna major, Venus fortuna 
minor. Alii infortunze sunt, ut Saturnus infortuna major, Mars infortuna minor. Mercurius autem cum bonis bonus, 
cum malis malus. Sol bonus per aspectum, malus per conjunctionem. Luna quasi nuncia per omnes currit, et ab ipsis 
fortunata et infortunata redditur. Venus et Luna fceminini sunt, reliqui omnes masculini. Nocturni sunt Mars, 
Venus, et Luna; diurni sunt alii omnes.” It appears from the above extract that the astrologers made four triple 
junctions of the zodiacal signs, which they severally allotted to the four cardinal points of the compass, in the same 
manner as the Mexicans employed the four signs of their astronomical calendar, named the rabbit, the cane, the flint, 
and the house, to distinguish the four winds, the four quarters of the globe, and, as Boturini asserts in the fifty- fifth 
page of his ‘Idea de una Nueva Historia dela America Septentrional,’ the four seasons of the year. We have already 
observed, in the twenty-third page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present volume, that the Mexicans might 
have borrowed the twelve houses which they assigned to the twenty signs of their calendar from the astronomers of our 
own hemisphere, who named the signs of the zodiac the houses of the several planets, the number of which is seven ; 
which, added to that of the signs of the zodiac, makes nineteen, falling one short of the number of the signs employed 
in the Mexican calendar. Having considered at sufficient length these analogies, we shall further notice a very 
curious agreement in the name which the Jews and the Mexicans applied to the poles of the earth. The Mexicans, 
as we are informed by Sahagun, in the third and eighth chapters of the ninth book of his History of New Spain, 
named the north and south poles the left and right hand of the earth, and the learned Capellus, in his dissertation 
on the ground plan and architecture of the Temple of Jerusalem, which Bishop Walton has prefixed to the first volume 
of his polyglot Bible, affirms that the Jews gave the same name to the poles. The passages referred to in Sahagun’s 
History of New Spain in proof of this striking analogy in the customs and opinions of the Mexicans and Jews are 
the following : “ Hecho esto salian al patio y echaban de su sangre acia al cielo, poniendola sobre la uha del dedo: 
lo mismo hacian acia al Oriente, echando cuatro veces sangre con el dedo, como esté dicho, acia al Oriente: lo 
mismo acia al Occidente: luego se volvian acia al Norte, que dicen ser la mano izgwerda del mundo; y luego se 

NOTES. Q57 

volvian acia al mediodia, que dicen ser la mano derecha del mundo, haciendo lo propio que arriba se dijo, y alli 
acababan de echar la sangre.” “ Having performed this ceremony, they went into the court, and threw some of their 
own blood towards heaven, placing it on a nail of their finger ; they did the same towards the east, throwing blood four 
times, with their fingers, as noticed, towards the east; they did the same towards the west, and then turned themselves 
towards the north, which they affirm to be the /eft hand of the world; and afterwards they turned towards the south, 
which they say is the right hand of the world, each performing their part as has been already mentioned, and then 
they ceased throwing blood.” “ Descabezaba luego una codorniz y echabala en el suelo, y alli andaba revoleteando, 
y miraba 4 que parte iba, y si iba voleteando acia al norte, que es la mano izquwerda de la tierra, tomaba mal aguero, 
y decia esto el dueno de la casa, enfermaré 6 moriré: y si la codorniz voleteando iba acia al occidente, 6 acia la 
mano derecha de la tierra, que es el mediodia, alegrabase y decia, pacifico esta Dios, no tiene enojo contra mi.” “He 
then wrung off the head of a quail and threw the body on the ground, where it continued for a short time fluttering ; 
and he watched the way it went; and if it fluttered towards the north, which is the /eft hand of the earth, he con- 
sidered it a bad omen, and the master of the house exclaimed, I shall fall sick or shall die; but if the quail fluttered 
towards the west, or towards the right hand of the earth, which is the south, he rejoiced, and said, ‘ God is peaceably 
disposed towards me; he is not angry towards me.’ Capellus makes mention of the Hebrew term for the south in 
the following passage of the preface to Bishop Walton’s polyglot edition of the Bible: ‘“ Deinde, si numini locus sive 
positus et situs aliquis in ede sua car’ avOpwrorafeay assignandus est, omnino magis convenit et decet ut is statuatur 
et censeatur esse orienti potius quam occidenti obversus, ab ea enim parte lux, que Deum maximé decet, venit atque 
illucescit. Et sané pars illa cceli in ipsa Scriptura antica censetur, unde est quod meridies }%)» devira, septentrio contra 
bxiw sinistra dicitur. Pontificii et qui primi Christianorum edes sacras ita constituerunt, ut et populus orans et qui ad 
aram sacra peragit sacerdos, obvertantur ad orientalem cceli regionem, videntur consultd voluisse contraire Judzeorum 
consuetudini, qui ad occidentem conversi adorabant, sed sic imprudentes ethnicorum mori sese conformarunt.” We 
may here remark that the reason for the Jews worshiping towards the west, with their backs turned towards the east, 
was because the sanctuary of the temple faced the east, which was doubtless in zmztation of the Hebrew tabernacle, 
the sides of which were adjusted to the four cardinal points of the compass, which fashion the Mexicans scrupulously 
observed in the position which they chose for their temples; whilst the holy of holies, as Cunzeus remarks, looked 
towards the east, having its entrance facing the west. When, however, the Jews worshiped outside of the city of 
Jerusalem, it is to be presumed, from the words of David, in the second verse of the hundred and thirty-eighth Psalm, 
“ | will worship ¢oward thy holy temple,” that they looked towards Jerusalem, as the Mahometans still look towards 
Mecca when they pray. The origin, therefore, of the Jews naming the south the right hand of the earth may be 
referred to the epoch of the flight of their ancestors from Egypt, and to the divine command that the ark of the 
covenant should face the east, which necessarily caused the south to be on the right hand of the holy of holies ; from 
which it is to be presumed that the south received the appellation of the right hand of the earth. It is also probable 
that the origin of the Mexicans naming the south the right hand of the earth may in the same manner be referred to 
the position in which they placed the ark of Huitzilopochtli when on their pilgrimage from Aztlan, since Diego Duran 
affirms, in the following passage of the third chapter of his inedited History of Mexico, that the Mexicans built a taber- 
nacle for Huitzilopochtli the sides of which were adjusted to the four cardinal points, and that the people encamped 
round about it in the manner in which the Israelites are said, in the second * chapter of Numbers, to have encamped 
round the Hebrew tabernacle in the desert. “Los Mexicanos no curando desta mormuracion, edificaron luego como 
solian, el tabernaculo de su Dios con el propiciatorio y sacrificadero, que 4 manera de altar usaban, y al rededor del 
todos los demas dioses de que arriba di noticia. Asentados ya y puestos en orden en sus tiendas al rededor del taber- 

te. 

naculo, por el orden que su Dios y sacerdote les mandaban unos & oriente y otros a pomente, al mediodia y al norte, 

* The third chapter of the book of Numbers explains the order in which the Levites were to encamp in an inner square round the 
tabernacle. The fourth chapter treats of the service of the Levites, from which they became exempt at fifty years of age; and it is 
highly deserving of notice that amongst the Mexicans exemption from servitude was a privilege accorded to persons of both sexes 
who had attained the same age. This curious analogy in the customs of the Mexicans and Jews is thus noticed in a MS. preserved in the 
library of the Escurial: “ Digo, el Indio que llegaba 4 la edad de cincuente y dos afios era libertado de toda carga y servicio y tributo, y 
era tenido y acatado de todos, lo mismo la India.” Whether the above privilege was accorded to all classes of the community, or only 
to persons of both sexes who served in the temples, is not particularly explained; the latter, however, appears the greater probability. 

VOL. VIII. (3U) 

258 NOTES. 

b 

mand6 en suefos a los sacerdotes que atajasen el agua de un rio que junto alli pasaba, para que aquel agua se derra- 
mase por todo el llano, y tomase en medio aquel cerro donde estaban, porque les queria mostrar Ja semejanza de la 
tierra y sitio que les habia prometido.” It deserves to be remarked, that although Diego Duran makes no express 
mention in the above passage of an ark, but merely of a tabernacle and altar of sacrifice, still, as an ark was a very 
essential feature in the history of the migration of the Aztecas, it would be a great omission not to insert here the 
following passage from the second chapter of the same author’s inedited ‘ Historia de la Nueva Espaiia,’ in which 
express mention is made of an ark, with the additional curious fact recorded that the form of the god which it con- 
tained ever remained unknown; whence it is evident that that god could have had no image, which seems to confirm 
what Sahagun says, in the second chapter of the third book of his History of New Spain, of Tezcatlipoca being a spirit 
whose shadow, but not whose form, had been occasionally seen by men: “Traian un idolo, que llamaban Huitzilopochtli, 
el cual traian cuatro ayos que le servian, y 4 quien el decia muy en secreto todos los sucesos de su itinerario y camino, 
avisandoles de todo lo que les habia de suceder, y era tanta la reverencia y temor que 4 este idolo tenian, que otro 
ninguno que ellos no le osaba tocar ni llegar: el cual venia metido en wna arca de juncos, que hasta el dia de hoy no 
hay quien sepa ni haya visto destos naturales la forma de este idolo. A este hacian estos sacerdotes adorar por Dios, 
predicandoles Ja ley que habian de seguir y cumplir, y las cerimonias y ritos con que habian de ofrecer sus ofrendas ; y 
esto hacian en todos los lugares que asentaban real, 4 la misma manera que los hijos de Israel lo usaron todo el tiempo 
que anduvieron en el desierto.” Itis very deserving of remark, that as amongst the Jews the ark was a sort of portable 
temple in which the Deity was supposed to be continually present, and which was accordingly borne on the shoulders 
of the priests as a sure refuge and defence from their enemies, so amongst the Mexicans and the Indians of Michuacan 
and Honduras an ark was held in the highest veneration, and was considered an object too sacred to. be touched by 
any but the priests. The same religious reverence for the ark is stated by Adair to have existed amongst the Cherokee 
and other Indian tribes inhabiting the banks of the Mississippi, and his testimony is corroborated by the accounts of 
Spanish authors of the greatest veracity. The nature and use of the ark having been explained, it is needless to 
observe that its form might have been various, although Scripture declares that the Hebrew ark was of the simplest 
construction. The form of the ark of the Indians of Michuacan has been already described in the three hundred and 
ninety-ninth page of the present volume. The Parariecha, who are there declared to be “los sacristanes y guardas 
de sus dioses”, are represented bearing it in their arms; and they are attired in long and loose robes, with wide sleeves 
reaching to the wrists resembling the surplices worn by our own clergy. It would appear, from many passages of the 
Old Testament, that the Jews believed in the veal presence of God in the ark, as the Roman Catholics believe in the 
real presence of Christ in the sacrament, from whom it is probable the Mexicans borrowed the notion that He, whom 
the heaven of heavens cannot contain and whose glory fills all space, could be confined within the precincts of a narrow 
ark and be borne by a set of weak and frail priests. If the belief of the Mexicans had not been analogous to that of 
the ancient Jews, the early Spanish missionaries would certainly have expressed their indignation at the absurd cre- 
dulity of those who believed that their omnipresent god Huitzilopochtli was carried in an ark on priests’ shoulders*; 
but of the ark of the Mexicans they say but little, fearing, as it would appear, to tread too boldly on the burning ashes 
of Mount Sinai. The following account of the ark of the Indians of Honduras is taken from the hundred and eightieth 
chapter of the inedited ‘ Historia Apologetica’ of Las Casas: “ Arriba queda dicho que la religion de la Nueva Espana 
por mas de ochocientas leguas en torno es toda quasi una; dentro de las quales se comprenden las provincias de Gua- 
timala y de Honduras y de Nicaragua, en unas y en otras poco menos diferencia, ritos, cerimonias y devocion, y por 
eso de las que aqui no trataré en particular, ninguno se maraville. Solo esto quiero de la de Honduras, que vieron 
nuestros Espafioles quando al principio alli legaron, brevemente decir. Tenian en un templo wn arca de madera, y 
en ella un idolillo tamaiio como una mano y quizas mas chico, y embuelto en mas de setecientas 6 ochocientas vueltas 
de algodon. Esta arca entrando los Espafioles en el templo con furor, como suelen en qualquiera que entran en 

* It is impossible to read the last chapter of the apocryphal book of Baruch without being impressed with the conviction that the Jews, 
even after they had been led captives to Babylon, were inclined to retain all their ancient predilection for the worship of idols; since, 
except on such a supposition, it would be absurd to suppose that the prophet Jeremiah would have addressed to them an epistle, con- 
sisting of seventy-three verses, in the long course of which he reasons with them as if they were children on the absurdity of trusting in 
senseless idols and forsaking the worship of the true God. It does not, however, follow that they paid the slightest attention to that 
~ prophet’s exhortation. 

NeO) tf Ers: 259 

aquellas tierras, tomaronla y desbarataronla y sacan el negro del dios. Estaban los Indios llorando con grandes 
lagrimas, suplicandoles que no llegasen 4 la arca ni 4 su dios, y temblando se apartaban, creyendo que se habia de 
caer el templo sobre todos, y la tierra abrirse y tragallos. Llevan el arca y dentro el idolillo los Espafioles, y por 
honrarlo pusieronlo en una pieza donde tenian por caballeriza sus caballos, los Indios llorando y planteando tras ellos, 
rogandoles que le diesen su dios. Puesto el negro dios entre el estiercol de los caballos, no hizo milagro alguno, ni 
derrocé el templo y hundié la tierra para vengarse de su injuria. Finalmente por muchos ruegos é importunidades, 
y derramadas muchas lagrimas, los Espafioles acordaron para ver lo que hacian, darselo. Habida licencia de tomar 
su dios, traian cinquenta 6 sesenta 6 mucha cantidad de incensarios con su brasa, en los quales ponian grandes y 
muchos perfumes: tomaban los sacerdotes su arca con grandisima reverencia y temblor, y los ministros incensando y 
perfumando, andando hacia atras, y otros infinitos sajandose las lenguas y las orejas, muslos y molledos y otros miem- 
bros, y derramando toda aquella sangre por el suelo por donde habia su dios de pasar. Los Espafioles estaban 
mirandolos y admirados y con razon, porque cierto era cosa de admirar.” 

Nore LIV. Page 409. 

Having adduced many arguments in the course of these Notes in proof of Judaism having formerly been the 
established religion of the New World, another mystery no less deserving of attention remains to be explained, 
namely, how it happened that so many Christian rites could have been mixed up with the barbarous superstitions of 
the Mexicans, and such a wonderful knowledge of the facts recorded in the Gospels discovered amongst them. The 
solution of this great historical problem mainly depends on the admission of the probability that America was in very 
early ages colonized both by Jews and Christians who for a length of time maintained an obstinate struggle with each 
other for supremacy ; but that at last the worshipers of Tezcatlipoca, who were the Jews, came to a compromise with 
the disciples of Quetzalcoatl, who were the Christians and inferior in number to their opponents, that if the latter would 
conform to the rites and ceremonies of the Mosaic law, they in their turn would acknowledge Quetzalcoatl to be the 
Messiah who was to redeem Israel, and the star which was to rise up in Jacob. Of the history of Quetzalcoatl, or 
the first propagation of Christianity in America, we unfortunately know but little, owing to the exertions of the early 
Spanish missionaries to destroy and consign to oblivion all the monuments of American antiquity. Some traces, 
however, of that history will be found in the following extract from the first chapter of the second part of Diego 
Duran’s inedited History of New Spain, which chapter is entitled by the author ‘ De quien se sospecha que fue un 
gran varon que hubo en esta tierra, llamado Topiltzin y por otro nombre Papa*, 4 quien los Mexicanos llamaron 
Hueymac, residié en Tulla. “ Antes que empecemos 4 tratar de los dioses, en particular, y de los ritos y cerimonias 

A 

que se les hacian, quiero tratar de un gran varon que aporté 4 esta tierra, de su vida religiosa, del culto que ense- 

La 

fiaba, de donde los Mexicanos teniendo noticia de él se incitaron 4 componer cerimonias y cultos, 4 adorar idolos, 
edificar altares y templos, y 4 ofrecer sacrificios. Este Topiltzin, que por otro nombre Jlamaron estos Indios Papa, 
fue una persona muy venerable y religiosa, 4 quien ellos tubieron en gran veneracion y le honraron y reverenciaron 
como 4 persona santa. La noticia que de él se tiene es grande, el cual vi pintado 4 la manera que arriba parece en 

* The following extract from an inedited letter of Juan de Tobar to Acosta informs us of the curious fact that Topiltzin, besides being 
named Papa, was occasionally represented with a triple crown, like that worn by the Roman pontiffs: “‘ Llamavan 4 este con tres nom- 
bres que eran de dioses y de estima, el primero era Topiltzin, el segundo Quetzalcoatl como queda dicho, el tercero era Papa, y entre las 
figuras que se hallaron de su efigie, /e pintan con una tiara de tres coronas como la del Summo Pontifice, y como tenian noticia de lo que 
dexo dicho de su vuelta, y vieron venir 4 la flota por la parte que el se fue, tuvieron por cierto todos que era el mismo, y que volvia 4 su 
reyno, y assi determinaron de irle 4 recebir y como 4 su sefior, segun que queda dicho.” The writer alludes in the same letter to a 
history of Mexico which had been composed by himself, who thus describes the manner in which it was obtained from him by Dr. Pos- 
tillo, and, as it would appear, surreptitiously sent to Spain: “ Hize una historia bien cumplida, la qual acabada llevé el mismo Dotor 
Postillo, prometiendo de hazer dos traslados, de muy ricas pinturas, uno para el rey y otro para nosotros. En esta coyuntura le sucedié 
el ir 4 Espafia, y nunca pudo cumplir su palabra ni nosotros cobrar la historia, pero como entonces lo averigue y trate muy de espacio, 
quedoseme mucho en la memoria, demas de que vi un libro que hizo un frayle Dominico deudo mio, que estava el mas conforme 4 la 
libreria antigua que yo he'visto, que me ayudé 4 refrescar la memoria para hazer esa historia que V. M. agora ha leido, poniendo lo que 
era mas cierto, y dejando cosillas dudosas que eran de poco fundamento.” 

260 NOTES. 

un papel bien viejo y antiguo en la ciudad de Mexico, con una venerable presencia, demonstraba ser hombre de edad, 
la barba larga entre cana y roja, la nariz algo larga con algunas ronchas en ella 6 algo comida, alto de cuerpo, el 
cabello largo muy llano, sentado con mucha mesura: estaba siempre recogido en una celda orando, el cual pocas veces 
se dejaba ver. Era hombre muy abstinente y ayunador; vivia castamente y muy penitenciero: tenia por ejercicio el 
edificar altares y oratorios por todos los barrios, y poner imagenes en las paredes sobre los altares, é hincarse de 
rodillas ante ellas, y reverenciarlas y besar la tierra algunas veces con la boca, otras veces con la mano: el ejercicio 
del cual era continua oracion: dormia siempre en la punta del altar que edificaba, en el suelo: Iegaba 4 si discipulos 
y los efisenaba 4 orar y predicar, 4 los cuales discipulos llamaban Tulteca, que quiere decir oficiales 6 sabios en algun 
arte. Las hazafias y maravillas de Topiltzin y de sus hechos heroicos son tan celebrados entre los Indios y tan 
mentados, y casi con apariencia de milagros, que no sé que me atreva 4 afirmar ni escribir de ellos, sino que en todo 
me sugeto & la correccion de la Santa Iglesia Catolica, porque aunque me quiera atar al sagrado evangelio, que dice 
por San Marcos, que mandé Dios 4 sus sagrados apostoles que fuesen por ¢odo el mundo y predicasen el evangelio 4 
toda criatura, prometiendo 4 los que creyesen y fuesen bautizados la vida eterna, no me osaré afirmar en que este varon 
fuese algun apostol bendito; empero gran fuerza me hace su vida y obras 4 pensar, que pues estas eran criaturas de 
Dios racionales y capaces de la bien-aventuranza, que no las dejaria sin predicador, y si le hubo fue Topiltzin; el cual 
aporté 4 esta tierra, y segun la relacion que de él se da, era cantero* que entallaba imagenes en piedra, y los labraba 
curiosamente, lo cual leemos del glorioso Santo Tomas ser oficial de aquel arte, y tambien sabemos haber sido predi- 
cador de los Indios, y que escarmentado de ellos, pidio 4 Cristo cuando le aparecié en aquella feria donde andaba, 
que le enviase donde fuese servido, escepto 4 los Indios, y no me maravillo se escusasen los sagrados apostoles de 
venir entonces 4 tratar con gente tan desabrida y tan inconstante y torpe, y tan tarda de juicio para creer las cosas de 
su salvacion, y tan mudables y presta 4 creer los fabulosos agtieros sin ningun fundamento ni apariencia de bien. Que 
hombre de mediano juicio habra en nuestra nacion Espafiola que le persuada que con chupar los cabellos con la boca, 
se quita el dolor de cabeza? ni que le hagan creyente que refregandole el lugar que le duele, le saquen piedras ni 
aguijas 6 pedacillos de navajas, como 4 estos les persuadieron los envaidores, ni que la salud de los nifios dependia 
de tener la cabeza tresquilada de esta manera 6 de otra? Cosa bajisima y corto juicio, terrestre y abominable, y que 
para despersuadirlos de aquello lleguen 4 tresquilar su hijo, y 4 quitarle aquellos pegones de cabellos y cruces que les 
ponian, y ser tanta la fé que en aquello tenian, que se ponian descoloridas y mortales de turbadas temiendo que en 
quitandole aquello 4 su hijo, habia luego de morir. No me espanto que los que agora los tratamos se exasperen y 
huyan de tratarlos, pues Jos apostoles confirmados y llenos de gracia pedian no ir 4 los Indios, aunque no nos ha de 
acobardar eso, pues lo mas esta ya por el suelo. Volviendo 4 nuestro proposito, Topiltzin era un hombre advenedizo 
de tierras estrafias, que casi quieren certificar que aparecio en esta tierra, porque ninguna relacion puede hallar de 
que parte hubiese venido; pero sabese muy de cierto que despues que llegé 4 esta tierra y empezé 4 juntar discipulos, 
y 4 edificar iglesias y altares, que él y sus discipulos salian 4 predicar por los pueblos, y se subian a los cerrost a 
predicar, y que sus voces se oian de dos y tres leguas como sonido de trompeta. Predicaban en los valles y hacian 
algunas cosas marayillosas que debian de ser milagros; que admirada la gente les puso este nombre de Tulteca : 
tambien hacian cosas por sus manos heroicas, que hoy en dia me ha acontecido preguntar quien hizo esta aber- 
tura en este cerro§, 6 quien abrié esta fuente, 6 quien hizo este edificio ; responden que los Tultecas, discipulos del 
Papa; y asi podemos probablemente tener que este varon fue algun apostol de Dios que aporté 4 esta tierra, y los 
demas que llamaban oficiales 6 sabios, eran sus discipulos, que confirmaban su predicacion con algunos milagros, 
trabajando de convertir 4 estas gentes 4 la ley evangelica: y viendo la rudeza y dureza de sus terrestres corazones, 

* The eighteenth verse of the sixteenth chapter of St. Matthew might have given rise in the course of ages to this tradition amongst 
the Mexicans. We may here observe that Abdias affirms that St. Thomas entreated Christ not to be sent to the Indies. 

+ This might have been in imitation of Christ, whose sermon on the mount would naturally have disposed the early Christian mission- 
aries to preach to the multitude from mountains. 

+ Abdias says of St. Bartholomew, “ Vox ejus quasi tuba vehemens est,”—Apostolica Historia, lib. viii. 

§ We are told in the twenty-first verse of the thirty-first chapter of St. Matthew, that faith can remove mountains. The effect of faith 
likewise on hills is particularly alluded to by St. Luke in the fifth verse of the third chapter of his gospel: «* Every valley shall be filled, 
and every mountain and hill shall be brought low, and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be made smooth.” 
It is somewhat singular that the Peruvians should have believed in both these articles of Christian orthodoxy. 

eave SS 

NOTES. 261 

desampararon la tierra y se volvieron 4 las partes de donde habian venido, y 4 donde sacasen algun fruto de sus 
trabajos y predicacion, y la pertinacia grande que tenian en su maldita y descomulgada ley, como hoy en dia espe- 
rimentamos los que entre ellos vivimos, de algunos que tubieron alguna noticia, los cuales son ya muy pocos, cuan 
pertinaces hayan estado en sus antiguos juguetes y en olvidarlos, que siendo cosas tan bajas, y alumbrados con la fé, 
ellos se estan reprobados por ser sin fundamento todos los pasados ritos y cerimonias. Contra Topiltzin y contra sus 
discipulos se levanté gran persecucion, que oi certificar que se levantd guerra contra ellos, porque el numero de gente 
que habia tomado aquella ley era mucha, y los que seguian la predicacion y ejemplo de aquel santo varon y de sus 
discipulos. EJ caudillo de esta persecucion, segun dicen, fue Tezcatlipuca, el cual fingiendo ser bajado del cielo para 
aquel efecto, fingia tambien hacer milagros, juntando discipulos y gente maligna para molestar & aquellos varones de 
buena vida y desterrarlos de la tierra, no dejandolos hacer asiento en pueblo ninguno, trayendolos de acd para aculla, hasta 
que vino a hacer su asiento en Tula, donde repos6 por algun tiempo y afios, hasta que alli los volvieron 4 perseguir, de 
suerte que ya cansados de tanta persecucion, se determinaron de dar lugar 4 la ira de sus perseguidores é irse, y asi deter- 
minados, Topiltzin mand6 juntar el pueblo de Tula 6 toda la gente de él, y agradeciendoles el hospedage que le habian 
hecho, se despidié de ellos, y preguntandole los de Tula la causa de su ida, como pesandoles de verlo ir, les respondié 
que la causa era las persecuciones de aquella malvada gente, y haciendoles una larga platica, les profetizé la venida de 
una gente estrafia que de las partes de Oriente aportarian 4 esta tierra con un trage estrafio y de diferentes colores, 
vestidos de pies 4 cabeza y con coverteras en las cabezas, y que aquel castigo les habia de enviar Dios en pago del 
mal tratamiento que le habian hecho y la afrenta con que le hechaban, con el cual castigo chicos y grandes perecerian, 
no pudiendo escaparse de sus manos de aquellos sus hijos que habian de venir 4 destruirlos, aunque se metiesen en 
- las cuevas de la tierra, y que de alli los sacarian, y alli los irian 4 perseguir* y matar. Estas gentes luego pintaron 
en sus escrituras} aquestas gentes que el Papa les profetizaba, para tener memoria de ellas y esperar el suceso, como 

* This reminds us of the language of Christ in the twenty-first chapter of the gospel of St. Luke, and of his famous prophecy of the 
destruction of Jerusalem and the near approach of the end of the world. “And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with armies, then 
know that the desolation thereof is nigh. Then let them which are in Judea flee to the mountains; and let them which are in the midst of 
it depart out; and let not them that are in the countries enter thereinto. For these be the days of vengeance, that all things which are 
written may be fulfilled. But woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck, in those days! for there shall be great 
distress in the land, and wrath upon this people. And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all na- 
tions: and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. And there shall be signs in the 
sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity ; the sea and the waves roaring ; men’s hearts 
failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth: for the powers of heaven shall be shaken.” 

+ The accounts which we read in Spanish authors of the signs and wonders which preceded the destruction of the Mexican empire, 
most surprisingly agree with those mentioned by Esdras in the fifth chapter of his second apocryphal book. It is deserving however of 
remark that whilst they confirm the authenticity of Josephus’s narrative, they confute the testimony of the Jewish historian by unequi- 
vocally proving that the Hebrew priests in the age of Titus and Vespasian, and the Mexican priests in that of Montezuma, were equally 
conversant with the traditions of the Apocrypha, and had in like manner endeavoured to convert the signs of the end of the world, as fore- 
told by that prophet, into the same-base means of popular delusion. The passage of Esdras to which we more particularly allude is the 
following, which deserves to be compared with the sentences printed in Italics in the accompanying Spanish extract from the eighth chapter 
of the third part of Augustin de Betancourt’s Teatro Mexicano. ‘ Nevertheless as concerning the tokens, behold, the days shall come 
that they which dwell upon earth shall be taken in a great number, and the way of truth shail be hidden, and the land shall be barren 
of faith. But iniquity shall be increased above that which now thou seest, or that thou hast heard long ago. And the land, that thou 
seest now to have root, shalt thou see wasted suddenly. But if the Most High grant thee to live, thou shalt see after the third trumpet that 
the sun shall suddenly shine again in the night, and the moon thrice in the day. And blood shall‘drop out of wood, and the stone shall give 
his voice, and the people shall be troubled. And even he shall rule, whom they look not for that dwell upon the earth, and the fowls shall 
take their flight away together. And the Sodomitish sea shall cast out fish, and make a noise in the night, which many have not known: 
but they shall all hear the voice thereof. There shall be a confusion also in many places, and the fire shall be oft sent out again, and the 
wild beasts shall change their places, and menstruous women shall bring forth monsters. And salt waters shall be found zn the sweet, and 
all friends shall destroy one another; then shall wit hide itself, and understanding withdraw itself into his secret chamber, and shall be 
sought of many, and yet not be found: then shall unrighteousness and incontinency be multiplied upon earth.” “ Las sefias que en 
Mexico precedieron, fueron grandes, porque los viejos decian 4 sus hijos quatro generaciones antes, como avian de venir de el Oriente 
muchos hombres barbudos, que avian de poseer el reyno, y. perecerian sus dioses. El afio de 1505 hubo grande hambre, y en este 
tiempo los cazadores le truxeron 4 Motecuhzuma una ave como grulla, que tenia una diadema como espejo, donde siendo de dia vié las 
estrellas, y volviendola 4 ver segunda vez, vi6 hombres de guerra armados: en el palacio que llamaban Tlilancalmecac, ‘sala teftida de tinta’, 
llamé 4 sus echizeros, que le declarasen aquel pronostico, y mientras -hazian sus juicios desaparecié la grulla. El afio de 1510 se en- 

VOL. VIII. (3 Xue) 

262 NOTES. 

! 

despues lo vieron cumplido en la venida de los Espafioles. Tambien les dijo que la venida de aquellas gentes no la 

cendié el templo de Huitzilopochtli el mayor que tenian, y salian las brasas de las entranas de las vigas, y por mas agua que le 

echaban, crecia mas el fuego. El templo de Xiuhtecutli, dios del fuego, que estaba en el barrio de Tzomolco, que es oy San Sebastian, 

se encendié sin rayo (aunque llovisnaba) y se consumié toda la madera. EJ afio de 1501 aparecieron en el ayre hombres armados que 

peleaban. Aparecié un cometa que cay azia la tierra, que tenia tres cabezas y una cola: Ilevaron unos hombres unidos en un cuerpo, 

y otros con cuerpos de dos cabezas 4 la sala de la tinta negra, que era la sala de los agueros. Dos afios antes de la llegada de los Espa- 

fioles, se ota de noche una voz continua de una muger, que & grandes gritos decia afligida: Hijos mios, ya vuestra destruccion se ha llegado, 

adonde os llevare paraque no os acabeis de perder; duré esta voz dos afios continuos. Y 4 este mismo tiempo salia 4 la media noche por 
el Oriente una llama de fuego piramidal echando centellas, que se iba moviendo con el movimiento del cielo azia la parte del Poniente, y 

al amanecer el sol llegaba al zenihit de Mexico, y perdia su luz hasta que la noche siguiente volvia 4 aparecer: duré por un afio entero 
esta sefial, y los Indios daban vozes al verla salir; dabanse palmadas en las bocas, y con el temor de algun mal suceso multiplicaban 
sacrificios. Y 4 este tiempo se acordaban que la laguna de Mexico el afio de 1499 avia hervido con tal estremo que muchas casas se in- 
nundaron, y golpeadas de las olas cayeron. Juntaron este aguero con aquel que les causaba espanto, y el afto de 1519 quando llegaron 
los Espafioles, aparecid un cometa en el ayre con gran resplandor, que fixo no se movia, y duré por muchos dias. El mas eficaz aviso que 
tubo este rey entre los demas, no fue tanto el que varias vezes le dié Nezahualpiltzintli rey de Tezcuco, 4 quien su padre Nezahualcoyotl 
havia dicho que los idolos no eran dioses, y que el sacrificar hombres no lo consintiese, que avian de venir hombres que dominarian la 

tierra, y que uno y otro prohibirian por malo, como el que tubo de una hermana suya llamada Papan: esta cas6 con el rey de Tlatilulco, 

emviud6, y algunos afios antes de la conquista murié. Assistieron 4 su entierro los reyes y sefiores, y fue en una como bobeda enterrada, 
que cubrieron con una loza, y al segundo dia hallaronla en el jardin donde estaba el sepulchro: embié 4 lamar 4 su tio el rey de Tezcuco 
Nezahualpilli, y 4 su hermano Motecuhzuma, y con grande admiracion fueron @ verla que antes avian enterrado. luego que todos 

llegaron, en voz alta y sosegada les dixo: Sabed, que fui llevada 4 un campo grande, donde vi un rio que corria de aguas, y que alli se 
me aparecié un mancebo resplandeciente como el sol, y de gallardo talle, que llevandome por la mano me dixo: Dios 4 quien no conoces, 
quiere que aun no mueras, para que avises a los tuyos lo que vieres. Vide 4 un lado muchos huecos, y muchas almas gimendo en penas, 
y dixo: Estos son tus antepasados, que penan por no aver tenido fee. Y luego vide muchos navios en que venian hombres mas blancos 
que nosotros, de diferentes trages, y me dixo: Estos han de publicar la verdadera fee, y al verdadero Dios: ha de aver muchas guerras : 
y aquellos que ves con cuernos, y tan feos y negros, preparan aquellas casas donde han de penar los que murieren: despues de apasi- 
guada la guerra, estos forasteros reinaran, y publicaran un lavatorio, y tu has de ser la que los anime para que lo reciban. Vuelve al 
mundo, y da aviso de lo que has visto para que se redusgan avisados. Con atencion y silencio oy6 Motecuhzuma 4 su hermana, pero 
atribuyendolo 4 locura y fantacia, lo redujo 4 desprecio, que tanto puede la ceguedad obstinada. Esta seftora fue baptizada, y se llamé 
Dofia Maria Papan, 4 quien Jos primitivos padres comunicaron, y de quien supieron el suceso: vivid como Christiana, y murié con fama 
de buena vida. Estas son las sefiales y avisos de el cielo, con que pudo disponerse 4 mejor vida este monarca y los suyos; y aun no 
falt6 muy de cerca otro aviso, porque quando venian ya para Mexico los Espafioles, viendo que avia enmudecido el idolo que le daba 
respuestas, determin6 sacrificar quinientos hombres cautivos, y ofrecer quinientos coragones; y entre ellos estaba un Tlazcalteco, que al 
llevarle al sacrificio dixo: Dios que en el cielo vives, y Dios de los que han venido, si tienes poder, librame de aquesta muerte: El sa- 
trapa que lo oyé, le dixo: No ay mas poder que el del Dios 4 quien te sacrifico. Volvié el cautivo 4 repetir su ruego, y al punto aparecio 
un paraninfo, 4 cuya presencia todos cayeron por el suelo atonitos, y se libré el cautivo de la muerte, yendose 4 los Espafioles 4 buscar 
la vida, y despues quando los Indios vieron los angeles pintados, decian que 4 ellos se parecia el que libro al cautivo. ‘Trae este suceso 
Arias de Villalobos, que cita 4 Gomara y 4 otros.” “ The signs which preceded in Mexico were great; for the old men informed their 
children four generations before, that many bearded men would arrive from the East who would possess themselves of the kingdom and 
destroy their gods. In the year 1505 there was a great famine; and about the same time the hunters brought to Motecuhzuma a bird 
like a crane, which had a diadem resembling a mirror, in which he beheld the stars by day, and, turning to look in it a second time, he 
beheld armed hosts. Having summoned his diviners to the palace, called Tlilancalmecac, 7. e. the hall dyed with black, in order that they 
might declare to him the omen, whilst they were delivering their judgement the crane disappeared. In the year 1510 the temple of Huit- 
zilopochtli, the largest of their temples, took fire, and the sparks proceeded from the interior of the beams, and the fire increased in pro- 
portion as they attempted to quench it with water. The temple of Xiuhtecutli the god of fire, which was in the barrier of Tzomolco, 
which is now St. Sebastian, took fire without any lightning, although a mizzling rain fell at the time, and all the timber-work was burnt. 
In the year 1501 there appeared in the air armed men who fought; a comet appeared having three heads* and a tail, which fell in the 
direction of the earth; they brought men with double bodies, and others with bodies having two heads, to the hall dyed with black, which 
was the hall of divination. Two years before the arrival of the Spaniards the voice of a woman was continually heard lamenting by mght, 
who exclaimed with loud cries, My children, your destruction is drawing nigh; whither shall I carry you to save you! ‘This voice lasted 
two entire years, and at that time a flame of fire ascended at midnight in the east in the form of a pyramid darting forth flames, which 
advanced with the motion of the sky towards the west, and when the sun arose in the morning, reached the zenith of Mexico, and lost 
its light until the period of its reappearance on the following night: this sign lasted an entire year ; and the Indians, when they saw it, shouted 

2 This would seem to refer to the prodigy of the moon shining thrice in the same day, or to three moons appearing in the sky at the 
same time ; as likewise would the flame which ascended at midnight in the East, and pursued the course of the sun through the heavens, to 
the sun’s suddenly shining in the night, which was another of the wonderful signs foretold by Esdras in the fourth verse of the fifth chapter 
of his second book. 

NOTES. 263 

verian ellos ni sus hijos, ni nietos, sino su cuarta 6 quinta generacion; estos han de ser vuestros sefiores, y 4 estos 

and clapped their hands on their mouths’, and, apprehensive of some calamity, multiplied sacrifices: they recollected at this time that the lake 
of Mexico had in 1499 been agitated to such an extreme degree that many houses were inundated, and, the waves dashing against them, fell 
to the ground; they coupled this omen” with the other that caused their alarm: and in 1519, when the Spaniards arrived, there appeared a 
comet in the air of great brilliancy, which, without moving, remained stationary, and lasted for many days. The most decided forewarning 
which this king had experienced amongst others was not so much what Nezahualpiltzintli the king of Tezcuco repeatedly declared to him, 
whose father Nezahualcoyotl had said that the idols were no gods, and that he would not suffer human sacrifices, since men would arrive 
who would rule over the country, who would forbid the one and the other as evil, as that which he received from his sister, named Papan, 
who having been married to the king of Tlatilulco, was left a widow, and died some years before the conquest. The kings and nobles 
attended her funeral, and she was buried in a sort of vaulted sepulchre, which they covered with a flag, and on the second day they found her in 
the garden where the sepulchre was situated: she sent to call her uncle Nezahualpilli the king of Tezcuco, and her brother Motecuhzuma, 
and they went with great amazement to see her whom they had before buried. When all had arrived, she said in a loud and composed 
tone of voice, Know that I have been carried to a great plain, where I saw a river swollen with water, and there appeared to me a youth 
resplendent as the sun, and of stately stature, who, taking me by the hand, said to me, The god whom thou knowest not wills that thou 
shouldest not yet die, in order that thou mayest tell thy countrymen what thou seest. [saw on one side many pits, and many souls groaning 
in torments; he said, These are thy forefathers who are punished for not having had the faith. And immediately afterwards Il saw many 
ships in which came men whiter than we are and dressed in a different manner; and he said to me, These have to publish the true faith 
and the true God; there will be many wars, and those whom thou seest with horns so black and frightful have to prepare the houses 
where those who die are punished. After the war is at an end, these strangers shall rule and publish a baptism, and thou art she who 
hast to encourage them to receive it. Return to the world and notify that which thou hast seen, that being admonished they may amend. 
Motecuhzuma listened with attention and silence to his sister, but attributed what she said to madness and a disordered imagination, 
such is the force of obstinate blindness. This lady was baptized and named Donna Maria Papan, whom the first fathers were perso- 
nally acquainted with, and from whom they received the above account. She lived like a Christian and died with the reputation of a 
good life. These are the signs and the warnings of Heaven by means of which this monarch might have disposed himself and his subjects 
to a better course of life: but he failed not to adopt very different counsels; for when the Spaniards were already marching towards 
Mexico, perceiving that the idol who was in the habit of giving him answers had become dumb, he determined to sacrifice five hundred 
prisoners and to make an offering of five hundred hearts; amongst them was a certain Tlazcaltecan, who, when they led him forth to 
sacrifice, exclaimed, O God who dwellest in heaven, the God of those who have arrived, if thou hast power free me from this death. The 
satrap, who heard him, replied, There is no other power than that of the God to whom I sacrifice thee. The prisoner recommenced his 
supplication, when, at the instant, there suddenly appeared a vision, before whose presence all fell on the ground astonished, and the 
prisoner escaped from death, fleeing to the Spaniards to seek life; when the Indians afterwards saw paintings of angels they said that 
he who freed the prisoner resembled them; Arias de Villalobos, who cites Gomara and other authorities, relates this event.” |The 
further fulfilment of the abovementioned signs is alluded to by Nezahualcoyotl in the following hymn, preserved by Ixtlilxochitl, in the 
forty-seventh chapter of his inedited ‘ Historia Chichimeca,’ who says that that hymn was composed by the monarch on the occasion 
of the dedication of the greater temple of Huitzilopochtli, and it is exceedingly deserving of notice, that the allusion in it to trees bear- 
ing fruit before they arrived at maturity, and the earth’s lacking strength and hastening to decay, would seem indirectly to refer to what 
Esdras says in the forty-ninth verse of the fifth chapter of his second book, of the womb of the earth having decayed through age, and 
to be a confirmation of the sentiments expressed in the tenth verse of the fourteenth chapter of the same book, as also to apply to the 
sign of women bringing forth untimely children, which was likewise to be one of the signs indicating that the end of the world was draw- 
ing nigh. To this lastmentioned sign Esdras particularly alludes in the following passage of the sixth chapter of his second book. 
«And when the world, that shall begin to vanish away, shall be finished, then will I shew these tokens: the books shall be opened before 
the firmament, and they shall see altogether. And the children of a year old shall speak with their voices, the women with child shall 
bring forth untemely children of three or four months old, and they shall live, and be raised up. And suddenly shall the sown places ap- 
pear unsown, the full storehouses shall suddenly be found empty. And the trumpet shall give a sound, which when every man heareth, 
they shall be suddenly afraid. At that time shall friends fight one against another like enemies, and the earth shall stand in fear with 
those that dwell therein, the springs of the fountains shall stand still, and in three hours they shall not run. Whosoever remaineth from 
all these that I have told thee shall escape, and see my salvation, and the end of your world. And the men that are received shall see it, 

a We have already observed that this was a Jewish custom, in the three hundred and eighty-seventh page of the present volume. 

» Gomara gives us to understand in the chapter of his ‘ Historia de la Conquista de Mexico,’ which treats of the prodigies which fore- 
told the destruction of the Mexican empire, that one of those prodigies was the earth opening in the vicinity of the lake of Mexico and 
casting out large fish. This sign so exactly agrees with that which Esdras foretold in the seventh verse of the fifth chapter of his second 
book, that it would lead to the inference that the Mexicans were acquainted with all the prodigies foretold by Esdras, and had actually 
transferred the site of the Sodomitish sea to the lake of Mexico. The following is the passage of Gomara’s ‘ History of the Conquest of 
Mexico’ above alluded to. “ Tambien rebenté la tierra el afio de veynte cerca de Mexico, y salian grandes peces con el agua, que lo 
miraron por novidad.” “The earth likewise burst open in the year twenty in the neighbourhood of Mexico, and large fish came forth 
with the water, which they considered something new.” 

264 NOTES. 

habeis de servir, y os han de maltratar y echar de vuestras tierras* como vosotros lo habeis hecho conmigo: y volvi 

who have not tasted death from their birth: and the heart of the inhabitants shall be changed, and turned into another meaning. “ En 
el afio de mil cuatrocientos sesenta y siete que llaman Ce Acatl, se acabé y fue el estreno del templo mayor de la ciudad de Tezcuco del 
idolo Huitzilopochtli, y entonces dijo: ‘ En tal afio como este, se destruira este templo que ahora se estrena. Quien se hallara presente? 
Siseré mi hijo, 6 mi nieto? Entonces ira é disminucion la tierra, y se acabaran los sefiores ; de suerte que el maguey siendo pequefo y sin 
sazon seré talado. Los arboles siendo pequenos darian fruto, y \a tierra defectuosa siempre ira & menos. Entonces la malicia, deleites y 
sensualidades estarén ensu punto, dandose 4 ellos desde su tierna edad los hombres y mugeres ; y unos 4 otros se robar4n las haciendas. Suce- 
deran cosas prodigiosas. Las aves hablaran, y en este tiempo llegaré el arbol de la luz y de la salud y sustento. Por librar 4 vuestros 
»” «Tn the year 1467, which they name Ce 
Acatl, the building of the greater temple of the city of Tezcuco, sacred to the idol Huitzilopochtl, was completed, and the dedication took 
place, and then he (Nezahualcoyotl) said, ‘In such a year as this, this temple will be destroyed which is now dedicated. Who will be then 
present? Willit peradventure be my son or my grandson? Then the land will sensibly decay, and the race of native princes will become 
extinct, so that the maguey will be cut when small, and before it has arrived at maturity, the trees when small will bear fruit, and the earth 
lacking strength will deteriorate. ‘Then will malice, voluptuousness, and sensuality attain their height, men and women abandoning them- 
selves to these vices from their earliest youth, and they will mutually rob each other’s goods. Prodigies will follow, birds will talk, and, 
when this happens, the tree of light and of health and of sustenance will arrive. In order to free your children from your own vices and 
calamities, cause them from their infancy to apply themselves to virtue and industry.’” The following is the explanation which 
Ixtlilxochitl gives us of the prodigies foretold by Nezahualcoyotl in the above hymn, and his application* of them to the events which 
immediately followed the conquest of the Mexican empire by the Spaniards. ‘‘ Todas estas mudanzas aqui contenidas y aumentos de 
vicios se han cumplido 4 la letra, por lo que en aquellos tiempos se tenian por cosas sobrenaturales y prodigiosas, son en este muy pa- 

hijos de vuestros vicios y calamidades, haced que desde nifios se den 4 la virtud y trabajos. 

tentes y ordinarias, y asi no causan admiracion; porque quien veria en aquel tiempo que si por desgracia aparecia un borracho, luego 
al punto de mas de ser afrentado y castigado, le destechaban la casa y saqueaban, no dejandole vivir en poblado; y ahora es tan comun 
que lo tienen por costumbre cotidiana? Las doncellas que tenian veinte y cinco, y treinta afios, no sabian salir de los rincones de sus 
padres; y ahora aun no han cumplido doce, que ya no sean duefias; y asi de lo demas se hechara de ver la diferencia que hay en este 
tiempo 4 aquel, y la mudanza tan grande. Este muy sabio rey mando 4 todos los artifices que cada uno en el que usaba, le retratase, 
porque andando el tiempo, sus descendientes oyendo sus hechos y hazafias desearian verle y conocerle, el qual su deseo se les cumpliria 
en yer su retrato; y asi cada uno en su facultad hizo los retratos. Los plateros hicieron una estatua de oro muy natural. Los plumeros 
en un cuadro dibujaron de varias plumas su retrato tan al natural que parecia estar vivo. Otro quadro hicieron los pintores lo mejor 
que pudieron. Los escultores una estatua de la misma manera y los arquitectos de piedra fueron 4 su bosque de Tezcotzinco y hicieron 
aquel leon que atras queda referido, y no retrataron mas de tan solo el rostro. Hasta los olleros hicieron lo mismo: y por su orden 
fueron presentandole los retratos que habian hecho, excepto el de la pefia que era forzoso él ir 4 verlo; y asi habiendolo visto, solo aquel 
le cuadré, y todos los demas los deseché, diciendo, que el oro y piedras con la codicia se perderian, y los quadros con el tiempo se 
desharian y borrarian; el barro se quebraria y la madera se carcomeria; mas que el de la pefia solo permaneceria, y gozarian de él sus 
nietos y descendientes.” “ All the changes here mentioned with the increase of vice have been fulfilled to the letter, for that which was 
accounted in those times as supernatural and prodigious is in this, plain and capable of easy explanation, and therefore causes no astonish 
ment; for who ever saw a drunkard then whose appearance gave rise to public scandal, who, besides being disgraced and punished, had 
not his house immediately unroofed and pillaged; such a character not being permitted to reside in a civil community, and now drunk- 
enness is so common that it has become a daily habit. Young women then of five-and-twenty and thirty years of age did not stir from 
their father’s roofs, and now they scarcely complete twelve years when they cease to be virgins, and in the same manner in respect to 
everything else, the difference is apparent between this and that time, and the change great. ‘This very wise king commanded every 
description of artist, each in the art in which he was skilled, to fashion a likeness of his person in order that his descendants, who, in after 
ages, should hear of the fame of his exploits, and wish to see and know him, might have their desire gratified; and, accordingly, they 
all made likenesses of him in their respective arts. The goldsmiths made a statue of gold which extremely resembled him; the em- 
broiderers in feathers drew his likeness so exact that it appeared to be alive ; the painters presented him with a portrait, on which they had 
exerted all their art; the sculptors in like manner made a statue, and the architects who wrought in stone went to his country residence 
of Tezcotzinco, and made that lion which has been already mentioned. Even the workers in clay and earthenware made his image. 
When by his command the likenesses which they had made had been presented to him, with the exception of that cut in the rock, which 
he was obliged himself to go to see; that alone pleased him, and he rejected all the rest, remarking, that the gold and precious stones would 

2 The error of Ixtlilxochitl seems to have proceeded from his having confounded the cross with the tree of life, which latter epithet the 
Mexicans bestowed on the Tree of Sustenance, which they likewise named Tonacaquahuitl, and which, it would appear from the words 
of the interpreter of the Codex Telleriano-Remensis, in the 127th page of the sixth volume of the present work, they sometimes repre- 
sented bloody and cracked in the middle, perhaps to verify the sign foretold by Esdras, “ and blood shall drop out of wood.” It deserves 
to be remarked that the tree of Life is particularly mentioned by Esdras in the twelfth verse of the second chapter of his second book; and in 
the last chapter of the Revelations: and in both these places in connexion with the end of the world and the consummation of all things. 

* The dispersion of the Jews seems here alluded to. 

NOTES. 2605 

endose 4 sus discipulos y otra mucha gente que le seguia, llorando les dijo: Ea hermanos, salgamos de donde no nos 

fall a prey to the avaricious, and the portraits be spoiled and defaced by time, that the clay would be broken, and the wood wormeaten, 
but that the image cut in the rock would alone be durable, and that his grandsons and posterity should have that memorial of him.” 
We cannot conclude this note without remarking, as an extremely curious coincidence, that the Mexicans appear to have been as well 
acquainted with the prophecies contained in the fourteenth chapter of the book of Zechariah as they were with the second book of Esdras. 
This however may without much difficulty be satisfactorily accounted for, since the predictions of both these prophets equally relate to 
events which were to befall the Jews in the latter times, and to the signs which were to precede the destruction of their city and 
temple; the greater portion of which would seem to have been transferred by the Mexicans to the posterity of the Jews in another 
hemisphere. The prophecies of Joel have already been referred to in the three hundred and fifty-ninth page of the sixth volume of the 
present work, where also will be found some mention of Ezekiel’s famous parable of the boling pot, and a comparison of that type 
with the representations of boiling pots in some of the pages of the Mexican paintings. If, however, any further proof were wanting 
of the extraordinary acquaintance which the Mexicans possessed of certain books of the Old Testament, and their /iteral interpretation 
of the allegories of Scripture, it would be found in the sixty-seventh page of the Codex Borgianus, which admirably illustrates the plague 
denounced by the prophet Zechariah against the enemies of the Jews in the twelfth verse of the fourteenth chapter of his prophecies: 
And this shall be the plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the people that have fought against Jerusalem; their flesh shail con- 
sume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongue shall consume away in 
their mouth.” The denunciation of Malachi, in the third verse of the second chapter of his prophecies, that the Lord would cast 
abominable filth upon his people, seems likewise to be alluded to in the sixth page of the lesser Vatican MS.; nor should we omit to 
notice here a curious prophecy respecting the cleaving asunder of the Mount of Olives, which is situated on the east of Jerusalem, 
and a vast valley being left in the midst caused by the rolling apart of the two halves of the mountain in a northern and southern 
direction, which occurs in the fourth verse of the fourteenth chapter of Zechariah. This prophecy related to the destruction of 
Jerusalem and its sudden salvation by the miraculous appearance of the Lord; and there seems to be an allusion to it in the speech of 
the Mexican noble, inserted in the eighty-ninth page of the Notes annexed to the present volume in the mysterious passage: “ Dost 
thou heed or take account of eclipses of the sun, of earthquakes, tempests at sea, or the bursting asunder of mountains?” With respect 
to the prodigy of birds talking, which was one of the signs which Nezahualcoyotl foretold would immediately precede the destruction of 
the Mexican empire, that sign appears to be unequivocally alluded to in the following passage of the twelfth chapter of the book of 
Ecclesiastes, where Solomon himself thus foretells the signs which would precede some great calamity which, in the latter times, would 
befall the Jews. “In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders 
cease because they are few, and those that look out at the windows be darkened, and the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the 
sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of music shall be brought low; also when 
they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper shali be 
a burden, and desire shall fail: because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets: or ever the silver cord be 
loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern.” The prodigy of 
stones crying out and beams answering them is foretold by Habakkuk in the eleventh verse of the second chapter of his prophecies, 
whose denunciation, in the sixteenth verse of the same chapter, of a judgement against the Jews for their shameless debaucheries, would 
seem to be alluded to in the eighty-fifth page of the lesser Vatican MS. That the same class of prodigies were familiar to the minds of 
the Mexicans is evident from the curious account given us by Sahagun in the fifty-sixth page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the 
present volume, of a beam crying out from a wall, which the Mexicans believed was one of the signs which portended the destruction 
of their empire. The sign of a stone speaking is likewise noticed by an anonymous Spanish author, in the following passage of an 
inedited manuscript preserved in the library of the Escurial: “ Este mismo afio trayendo los Indios una piedra muy grande 4 Mexico, 
para esculpir y pintar en ella 4 Motezuma, y ponerla en Chapultepeque, donde estan las figuras de los sefiores que han sido en Mexico 
desde que le fundaron; al pasar de una puente que estaba en el azequia junto 4 donde son agora las casas de Don Pedro de Alvarado, 
se les cayé la piedra de la puente abajo, y al caer, oyeron una voz que decia Yaizquichi, que quiere decir, ‘ya es acabado* ;’ tambien 
lo tomaron por aguero, y otras muchas cosas, y esta fue la causa por donde Motezuma recibié al principio de paz al Marques y 4 los 
Espafioles, y les envié 4 Cempoualla los rescates de oro y otras cosas.” “This same year, as the Indians were bringing a very large stone 
to Mexico for the purpose of sculpturing a statue of Montezuma out of it, which was to be placed in Chapultepecque, where are the 
statues of the kings who have reigned in Mesico from the foundation of that city, on passing a bridge, which is on the causeway near 
the spot where is now the house of Don Pedro de Alvarado, the stone fell from the bridge, and when falling they heard a voice which 
exclaimed Yaizquichi, which signifies ‘now it is finished; this they likewise considered an omen, as they did many other things; and 
that was the reason why Montezuma received the Marquis and the Spaniards amicably in the beginning and sent them a present of gold 
and other things to Cempoualla.” The last prodigy deserving of notice is that of “ wild beasts changing their places,” and “ fowls 
taking their flight away together?,” both of which are enumerated by Esdras, in the sixth and eighth verses of the fifth chapter of his 

a This reminds us of the words MENE MENE TEKEL UPHARSIN, inscribed on the walls of the Babylonian palace: the 
meaning of which words, that is to say, of the first two of them, as interpreted by Daniel in the fifth chapter of his prophecies, exactly 
agrees with that of Yazzquichi, “ It is finished.” 

b The interpreter of the Codex Telleriano-Remensis says, in the hundred and forty-eighth page of the sixth volume of this work, that 
a flight of birds which darkened the sun was one of the signs which preceded the destruction of the Mexican empire. 

VOL. VIII. CG3X)) 

—— 

266 NOTES. 

quieren, y vamonos donde tengamos mas descanso, y asi empez6 Topiltzin 4 caminar pasando por todos los mas pueblos 
de la tierra, dando 4 cada lugar y cerro su nombre apropiado, y 4 la hechura del cerro, siguiendole de cada pueblo 
mucha gente, y tomé la via hacia la mar, y que alli abrié con sola su palabra un gran monte, y que se metio por alli. 
Otros dicen que eché el manto encima de la mar, y que hizo una sefal con la mano encima, y que sentado empezé 
4 caminar por el agua*, y que nunca mas le vieron; aunque preguntado 4 otro Indio viejo la noticia que tenia de la 
ida de Topiltzin, me empez6 a relatar el capitulo catorce del Exodo, diciendo que el Papa habia llegado 4 la mar con 
mucha gente que le seguia, y que habia dado con un baculo en la mar, y que se habia secado y hecho camino, y que 
entré por alli él y su gente, y que sus perseguidores habian entrado tras él, y que se habian vuelto las aguas 4 su lugar, 
y que nunca mas habian sabido de ellos; y como vi que habia leido donde yo, y donde iba 4 parar, no me di mucho 
por preguntarle, porque no me contase el Exodo, de que le senti tener noticia, y tanta que fue 4 dar en el castigo 
que tubieron los hijos de Israel de las serpientes por la murmuracion contra Dios y Moisen. Pasando Topiltzin por 
todos estos pueblos que he dicho, dicen que iba entallando en las pefas cruces y imagenes: y preguntandole’ donde se 
podrian ver para satisfacerme, nombraronme ciertos lugares donde lo podia ver, y uno en la Zapoteca: y preguntando 
4 un Espafiol que se habia hallado por alli, si aquello fuese verdad, me certificd con juramento que él habia visto un 
crucifijo entallado en una pefla en una quebrada. Tambien me dijo un Indio viejo, que pasando el Papa por Acui- 
tuco, les habia dejado un libro grande de cuatro dedos de alto, de unas letras; y yo movido con deseo de haber este libro, 
fui 4 Ocuituco, y rogué 4 los Indios con toda la humildad del mundo me le mostrasen, y me juraron que habra seis 
afios que le quemaron, porque no acertaban & ver la letra, ni era como la nuestra, y que temiendo no les causase algun 
mal, le quemaron; lo cual me dio pena, porque quiza nos diera satisfecho de nuestra duda, que podria ser el sagrado evan- 
gelio en lengua Hebreat \o cual no poco reprehendi 4 los que lo mandaron quemar. Andaban los discipulos de este 
santo varon con unas ropas largas hasta Jos pies: traian en sus cabezas coberteras de pafios, 6 bonetes, lo cual quisi- 
eron pintar los Indios, cuando por poner las tocas 6 bonetes que traian, pintaron caracoles. ‘Tambien eran las ropas de 
diversas colores; traian algunos de ellos el cabello largo, 4 las cuales cabelleras llamaron despues estos Indios papat: 
hallé la pintura como la veran pintada en esta lamina, junto 4 la pintura de Topiltzin, no menos vieja y antigua que 
esotra, que para prestarmela el Indio de Chiauhtla que la tenia, me hubo primero de conjurar que se la habia de 
volver; al cual dandole mi palabra que en sacandola se Ja volveria, me la presté con tantas cerimonias y zalemas, y 

second book, amongst the signs which portended the end of the world, which catastrophe, it is extremely deserving of notice, the 
Mexicans expected at the expiration of every toxiuhmolpilli, or period of fifty-two years, deriving, as it would appear, that notion from 
Esdras, who expressly says in the eleventh verse of the fourteenth chapter of his second book, and on the authority of God himself, that 
ten of the twelve parts into which the duration of the world.was divided had expired’ in his own age, viz.—at the period of the Baby- 
lonian captivity, according to which computation the end of the world ought to have taken place soon after the Christian era, and the 
world’s continuation for a longer date could only be ascribed to an act of divine grace, which reversed the decree that fixed its doom at 
an earlier period ; and this will explain why the Mexicans thought it probable that the world would be destroyed at the end of each cycle 
of fifty-two years; and when they beheld the stars moving in the midnight sky, and Nature continuing her former course after the awful 
minute of the night which divided the old from the new xiuhmolpilli, they returned thanks to Tezcatlipoca, congratulating each other on 
the certainty that the world would be spared for another age of fifty-two years. It is not at all improbable that the doctrine of the near 
approaching end of the world and its preservation for a further limited period by the special grace of the Deity, in consideration of the 
prayers of the faithful, was introduced by the first propagators of Judaism in the New World with the view of infusing a spirit of 
superstition into the breasts of their Indian converts. That the end of the world was considered by the early Christians, as well as by 
the Mexicans, an event likely to take place at some hour of the night, is probable from Christ’s comparing his advent to the coming of 
a thief in the night; which simile, if it did not originate in the previously received opinions of the Jews, might have laid the foun- 
dation for that opinion amongst the primitive Christians, whose extreme credulity disposed them to adopt whatever wore the appear- 
ance of novelty in faith or doctrine; thence giving rise to the innumerable heresies which sprung up in the first three centuries of the 
Christian era. 

* This miracle recalls to our recollection what is said in the gospels, of Christ walking on the waves.and stilling a storm at sea; and 
Torquemada supposes, with much probability, that it might have obtained for Quetzalcoatl the title of ‘the god of the winds’, whose sign 
in the Mexican calendar was Ehecatl, or ‘ the wind’. i : 

+ The loss of the original Gospel of St. Matthew in Hebrew is one of those mysterious facts that cannot be accounted for except by 
a supposition most discreditable to the early Christians; who possibly, from the enmity which they bore to the Jews, might have inten- 
tionally lost the Gospel intended for their salvation. 

{ It hence appears that Papa was a proper name and that ‘hair’ was a signification which it afterwards acquired, derived from those 
strangers who first introduced the custom of wearing the hair in that peculiar fashion amongst the Mexicans. 

NOTES. 267 

con tanto secreto, que me admiré lo mucho en que la tenia, y sé afirmar que creo no se quitd de con el pintor hasta 
que la hube sacado, del cual procuré tener alguna noticia, y me relaté todo lo que atras dejo dicho, salvo que se aven- 
taj6 en decirme que todas las cerimonias y ritos, el edificar templos y altares, y el poner idolos en ellos, el ayunar y 
andar desnudos, y dormir por los suelos, el subir 4 los montes 4 predicar alla su ley, el besar la tierra y comerla con 
los dedos, y el tafier bocinas y caracoles y flautillas en las solemnidades, todo fue remedar 4 aquel santo varon%, el 
cual encensaba los altares y hacia tafier instrumentos en los oratorios que edificaba. Queriendome confirmar en si esto 
era verdad, pregunté 4 un Indio viego que me le vendieron por letrado en su ley, natural de Coatepec, el cual murié 
de esta enfermedad, que me dijese si aquello era asi que alli tenia escrito y pintado, y como no saben dar relacion sino 
es por el libro de su aldea, fue 4 su casa, y trajo una pintura, que 4 mi me parecieron ser mas hechizos+} que pinturas ; 
el cual tenia allt cifrada por unos caracteres ininteligiblest toda la vida del Papa y de sus discipulos y me la relaté como 
el otro, y mejor, de que no poco contento quedé, y se aventajO un poco, con mas ensefiandome la figura de Topiltzin, 
que cuando celebraba las fiestas se ponia aquella corona de plumas que en la pintura vimos, 4 la manera que se ponen 
la mitra los obispos en la cabeza cuando dicen misa. La pintura de los discipulos es esta§. La figura de atras son 
los discipulos que trujo el Papa, 4 los cuales llamaban ‘Tulteca’ y ‘hijos del sol’: hay de sus hijos grandes cosas y 
obras memorables: tubieron su principal asiento en Cholula, aunque discurrieron por toda la tierra: tubieron aquel 
asiento antes que los Cholultecas poblasen||: fueron predicadores de los serranos de Tlaxcala, que Ilamaban Chichi- 
mecas, y de los gigantes, andaban vestidos con ropas de colores, 4 los cuales Ilamaron los Indios Xicolli, y por razon 
de las tocas que traian en las cabezas, los llamaron ‘ Quatecziseque’{[ que quiere decir cabezas con caracoles. Rogaron 
los sefores de esta tierra 4 este santo varon Hueymac que se casase, y respondié que ya tenia determinado de casarse, 
pero que habia de ser cuando el roble echase manzanas, y el sol saliese por esta otra parte contraria, y cuando la mar se 
pudiese pasar 4 pie enjuto, y cuando les ruisefiores criasen barbas como los hombres. En una pintura le vi pintado 
con una loba larga, y un sombrero grande puesto en la cabeza 4 este varon Hueymac, y un rotulo que decia ‘ Padre de 

los hijos de las nuves**.’ Queriendome satisfacer mas y sacar algun puntillo del Indio que he dicho, para con una 

** This confirms what the interpreter of the Codex Vaticanus says in the hundred and seventy-eighth page of the sixth volume of the 
present work. 

+ This description agrees so exactly with the appearance of the Mexican paintings which have been preserved to our days, that it affords 
the most unequivocal proof of the veracity of Diego Duran’s relation. 

{ We learn from the following very curious passage of the two hundred and thirty-fifth chapter of the edited ‘ Historia Apologetica’ 
of Las Casas that the Mexicans could apply their picture-writing to all the purposes of a syllabic alphabet. This indeed we should have 
been led to infer from the facility with which they expressed in phonetic painting the most complex proper names of persons and places in 
the Mexican language, and from the exact recollection which they retained of the speeches spoken on remarkable occasions by their 
kings and other great men. If this were the place for discussing that question, it certainly would not be difficult to show that the use of 
syllabic writing was not likely to have led to the invention of an alphabet, although it might certainly have led to that result; but that the 
discovery of letters originated in that analysis of the properties of the human voice which the first inventors of music found necessary for 
the improvement and perfection of their art. It need scarcely be observed that by the term coronistas Las Casas alludes in the following 
passage to the Mexican painters. “Estos coronistas tenian cuenta de los dias, meses y alos: y aunque no tenian escritura como nosotros, 
tenian empero sus figuras y caracteres que todas las cosas que querian, significaban; y destas sus libros grandes, por tan agudo y sotil 
artificio, que podriamos decir que nuestras letras en aquello no les hicieron mucha ventaja. estos libros vieron algunos nuestros religi- 
osos, y aun yo vide parte; los quales se han quemado por parecer de los frailes, pareciendoles que por lo que tocava a la religion en este 
tiempo y principio de su conversion, quiza no les hiciese dafo. Si acaece algunas veces olvidarse algunos de algunas palabras 6 particu- 
laridades de la doctrina christiana, y no sabiendo leer nuestra escritura, escriven toda la doctrina ellos por sus figuras y caracteres muy 
ingeniosamente, poniendo la figura que correspondia en la voz y sonido dé nuestro vocablo. Asi como si dijesemos Amen, ponian pintada una 
como fuente, y luego un maguey, que en su lengua corresponde con Amen, porque llamanlo Ametl, y asi de todolo demas. Yo he visto 
mucha parte de la doctrina christiana escrita por sus figuras é imagenes, que la leian por ellas, como yo la leya por nuestra letra en una 
carta, y esto no es artificio de ingenio poco admirable.” 

§ The annexed is the engraving of the disciples of Topiltzin, mentioned in the text; it was copied by Diego Duran from the original 
Mexican painting above alluded to. 

|| Henee it is evident that the epoch of the arrival of Topiltzin and his disciples amongst the Indians was anterior by many ages to the 
conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards, and not merely four or five generations prior to the reign of Montezuma. 

{ This proper name is compounded of qua, the head, and ¢ecziztl, a snail-shell, evidently in allusion to the turbans worn by the disciples 
of Topiltzin, whose twisted form resembled snail-shells. 

** An anonymous Spanish missionary asserts that Quetzalcoatl was named Mixcoatl, or the ‘serpent of the clouds’; which appellation 
might have been given to him for the abovementioned reason. 

268 NOTES. 

palabra de aqui y otra de alli cumplir mi escritura, le pregunté de nuevo la causa de la salida de aquel santo varon 
de esta tierra, el cual me respondié haber sido la persecucion de Quetzalcoatl* y de Tezcatlipuca. 

* A particular account of the persecution of Quetzalcoatl, or Topiltzin, by Tezcatlipoca, will be found in the two hundred and fifty-ninth 
page of the sixth volume of the present work. Without recurring to facts already previously mentioned in the course of these Notes, we 
may here remark that it is highly probable that the gospel was in early ages preached in America, and that Quetzalcoatl was the name 
which the Mexicans gave to Jesus Christ. The analogy perceptible between these two proper names may not at first appear very obvious ; 
but when it is recollected that the Mexican language excludes from its alphabet the letters b, d, f, g, r, and s, as Molina remarks 
in the following passage of the Preface to the second part of his Mexican and Spanish Vocabulary, “Esta lengua Mexicana (como 
consta 4 todos los que bien sienten) carece de algunas letras de nuestro abece, que son las siguientes: b. d. f. g. r. s. y 4 esta causa en el 
orden alphabetico de este vocabulario, no se hallardn las sobredichas letras, sino que despues de la a, se sigue la c, y tras ella la e, y luego 
lah. i. 1. m. n. 0. p. q. t. v. x. porque la y griega tampoco la ha menester esta lengua, pues le basta una 1, 4 lo menos para comenzar los 
vocablos en el orden que aqui se pone de las letras,’—the approximation in sound of Jesus Christ to Quetzal-Coatl will appear as near an 
attempt at the assimilation of these two proper names as the genius of the Mexican language will admit, and certainly does not display a 
greater anomaly in orthoepy than is commonly the case with words introduced into the Chinese language from any other foreign dialect, 
since the Chinese, in adapting to they pronunciation European proper names, are for the same reason under the necessity of resorting to 
approximate and analogous sounds, and scarcely can pronounce in a manner intelligible to Huropeans the name of a single country in 
Europe. To illustrate more fully what is here meant, let us for a moment suppose that a native Mexican wished to pronounce the letter j, 
which forms the initial letter of the proper name Jesus Christ, that letter pronounced harshly having no existence in the Mexican language, 
he would find himself unable to express a consonant so strange to his ear; and although the substitution of the consonant y, with which 
many words in the Mexican language commence, might appear to a Huropean a more fit letter than q to form the initial letter of the word 
Jesus, in the same manner as the Turks change the pronunciation of the proper name Joseph into Yussutf, still the ears of the Mexicans 
being quite unfamiliarized to the new consonant might not be capable of so nicely discriminating which letter in their own alphabet most 
resembled j, and they might accordingly have given a preference to the letter q, with which the vowel e of Jesus would readily coalesce, 
whilst the letter s by an easy transition into tz would complete the formation of the syllable Quetz, and the Latin termination us of the 
proper name Jesus being changed into al, a final syllable better adapted to the termination of nouns in the Mexican language, the entire 
word Jesus would thus become Quetzal in the Mexican language, which term—signifying a plume of green feathers, and derivatively 
anything very precious, in which latter signification the interpreter of the Vatican MS. understood the compound word Quetzalcoatltopiltzin 
to signify ‘our dearly beloved son’ (which name is a combination of the two epithets, Quetzalcoatl and Topiltzin),—was represented in the 
Mexican paintings by its corresponding symbol of a bunch of green plumes, thus suggesting to the Mexican converts to Christianity the 
selection of the word quetzal as the most suitable appellation for Jesus, who probably would have preferred that to any other word even 
more nearly agreeing with Jesus in sound which did not convey so appropriate an image to the eye or so fit a signification to the ear. The 
substitution of Coatl for the proper name Christ may be explained on the same principles of verbal analogy, while at the same time it may 
be right to take into consideration the formal address of Christ to his disciples, “Be ye wise as serpents and harmless as doves,” which 
admonition from their Divine Master might have induced the first preachers of the gospel in America to assume the appellation of Coatl, 
or in other words, to designate themselves serpents, and to turn to their advantage the superstitious reverence which the Mexicans 
appear to have imbibed from the Jews for the serpent, bestowing in like manner the epithet of Quetzalcoatl or the ‘precious serpent’ 
upon Christ, which epithet deserves to be compared with Votan’s tradition of his serpent origin as recorded in the manuscript in the 
Tzendal language, in the possession of Don Ramon de Ordofiez y Aguiar, and communicated by him to Doctor Cabrera, of which a more 
particular account will be found in the four hundred and eighth page of the sixth volume of the present work, m reference to which 
tradition we shall only further observe that the maps of the old and new continent, which are there said to have occupied two small squares 
in the opposite angles of the title-page of the above MS., with an intervening blank left for the insertion of the words, “ Proof that I am 
Culebra,” i. e. a serpent, which formed the title of the work, must, from the description of the transverse bars which formed a point of 
union in the centre of the page, have been contained within two crosses of the kind usually named St. Andrew’s, exactly in the manner 
represented in the map of the city of Meaico in the first plate of the Collection of Mendoza, and which might either have been intended as 
a symbol of the religion professed by Votan and his disciples or have been a geometrical figure invented by the Mexicans, the better to 
mark the relative position of places and to preserve regularity in their maps, with some regard also to the square figure of the earth and its 
four corners, to which there is such frequent allusion in the Old Testament, as likewise to the adjustment of its sides to the four cardinal 
points of the compass. That the brazen serpent was a famous type of Christ, acknowledged as such by Christians of all ages, deserves 
likewise to be borne in remembrance, since it is impossible to know to what purposes fanaticism might have converted that symbol when 
once superstition had acquired uncontrolled power over the minds of the Mexicans. The genius of the Mexican language not permitting 
the combination of the initial letters, cr or chr, of the proper name Christ, or in other words, the Mexicans bemg unable to pronounce 
those consonants in conjunction, as will more plainly appear by reference to page 25 of the second part of Molina’s Mexican Vocabulary, 
where the only word beginning with er is cruztitech, a word evidently of Spanish origin, and signifying ‘upon the cross,’ en la cruz, they 
would have been obliged either to reject the letter r or to try the experiment of imitating its sound by substituting in its room other letters 
nearly resembling r pronounced in conjunction with the succeeding vowel i of the proper name Christ, and for that purpose they might 
have selected the letters oa, which are analogous in sound to the diphthong oi, and changing the two final letters of Christ into tl, a 
termination more suitable to Mexican proper names, have so formed the word Coatl, which with Quetzal affixed to it would express in the 
Mexican language the compound proper name Jesus Christ. 

ae 

eae 

PREF AC E. 

Tuts SuppLemENT consists of Extracts from the works of Torquemada, Acosta, 
and Garcia. The object of annexing it to the present work is to illustrate the 
last portion of the Mexican Paintings contained in the Collection of Mendoza, 
and to show the correspondence which exists between many of the Mexican and 
Hebrew laws. ‘The order in which the various subjects follow each other is the 
same as that preserved in those Paintings :—the baptism of children, their education, 
the marriage ceremony customary amongst the Mexicans, the austerities practised 
by their priests, and the arts in which they chiefly excelled, are successively 
described. Next follow many Chapters taken from the works of Garcia and Tor- 
quemada, in which the ordinances of Leviticus and Deuteronomy are compared 
with the ritual observancies and moral laws of the Mexicans. These last chapters 

_are very curious, and deserving of attentive consideration. 

oe oe 

"-"* 

a a 

Pe 

i ae 

fi 

Pe Pee Se re 

Pee! ee © ee ee, 

A 

SUPPLE M EN TA RY, EXTRA © TS 

FROM 

SPANISH AUTHORS. 

Caritruto XVI. 

DEL LIBRO TRECE DE LA MONARQUIA INDIANA DE TORQUEMADA. 

Donde se trata de la Costumbre, y Ceremomas, que hacian estos Indios, en los Nacimientos de sus 
Hijos ; y se dice de un cierto Bautismo, 6 Labatorio, con que los lababan, 0 bauticaban. 

Muy comun, y usado, ha sido entre Naciones del Mundo, quando nacen las criaturas, cortarles el ombligo, y hacer 
algunas ceremonias, segun lo mas, 6 menos de supersticiones, que sentian. De estos fueron estas Gentes de esta 
Nueva-Espafia, los quales, luego que les nacian los Hijos, lo primero que hacian, era cortarle el ombligo, y enter- 
rarlo; y luego la Partera lababa 4 la criatura, diciendo estas palabras: Recibate el Agua, por ser tu Madre la Diosa 
Chalchihuitlycue, Chalchiuhtlatonac, y pongate el Labatorio, para labar, y quitar las manchas, y suciedades que 
tienes de parte de tus Padres, y limpiete tu coracon, y dé. buena, y perfecta Vida. Bien cierto estoi, que estos ciegos 
idolatras estaban mui apartados de el conocimiento de el Pecado original; porque como no es cosa positiva, sino 
carencia de Gracia, y esto todo es invisible, es manifiesto, que los que no tienen lumbre de Fé, no es posible, que lo 
sepan. Porque el Pecado original es el que contraemos, por venir de Adan, en el qual fue contaminada, y maculada 
toda la‘masa de la Naturaleca Humana: y esto, por aver traspasado el Mandamiento de Dios: y esto no lo conocian 
los Gentiles, ni nadie de estos postreros Hombres de el Mundo, sino era por noticia, 6 revelacion, que de ello 
tuviesen, lo qual les faltaba 4 estos Indios. Y asi digo, que estaban lejos de este conocimiento, y mui apartados de 
conocer esta mancha. Pero no obstante lo dicho, sabemos, que la Partera, luego que cortaba, y enterraba el om- 
bligo de la criatura, la lababa, y acompafaba el labatorio, con estas palabras dichas. Luego bolvia su oracion 4 
la Diosa de el Agua, y la decia: Sefiora excelentisima Chalchihuitlycue, Chalchiuhtlatonac, ia nacid esta criatura, 
en el Mundo, embiada de los Dioses Ometecuhtli, y Omecihuatl, que viven, y reinan en el Doceno Cielo, para que 
le labeis, y limpieis de las manchas, y suciedades, que trae, heredadas de su Padre, y Madre. Y esto os suplico, por 
racon de estar cometido 4 vos, de parte de los Dioses, el quitar, labar, y limpiar todas las malas fortunas, y todas 
las manchas de los que vienen a la vida mortal. Sefiora mia, quede esta criatura limpia, pues teneis virtud, y poder 
para ello. Otra vez tornaba a repetir estas palabras, diciendo: Sefiora, Diosa de el Agua, recibid la criatura, ve- 
nida, y nacida en este triste Mundo. Y tomando el Agua en la mano derecha, soplaba, y poniasela en la boca, 
pecho, y cabeca, y deciale: Recibe, Nifio, a tu Madre Chalchihuitlycue, que es Diosa del Agua, y ella te reciba, 
para sustentarte en el Mundo. Hecha esta ceremonia lababale todo el cuerpo, y decia: Descienda en el labatorio, 
en que te labé, el Dios invisible, y limpiete de las malas fortunas, que antes que nacieses te dieron los Dioses, y 
quitete, y apartete de ti los pecados, y suciedades que tomaste de tus Padres. Hecho esto, embolvia la criatura en 
sus pafiales, diciendo : Nifio, mas precioso que todas las cosas, Ometechtli, y Omecihuatl, te criaron en el Cielo 
Doceno, para venir al Mundo, y nacer en él; pues sabete (Nifio mio) que este Mundo donde has venido, es triste, 
y doloroso, y lleno de trabajos, y miserias, y es un Valle de lagrimas, y creciendo en él, has de comer pan, con 
B ; 

g SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

dolor trabajado de tus manos: y remataba estas ceremonias la partera, con decirle: Dios te guarde, y libre de 
tantos estropiecos, como has de hallar, viviendo. Esto decia en voz baja*. 

Luego se bolvia 4 la Parida, y dandola el parabien, la alababa de la fortaleca, que havia mostrado en el parto, 
haciendola semejante 4 la Diosa Cihualcohuatl (Quilaztli por otro nombre) y animabala a las esperancas de haver de 
gocar del nuevo Hyo. Y buelta 4 los Deudos, y Parientes, que estaban presentes, les decia: Sefores, y Seforas 
mias, Dias ha que vivis, con cuidado del alumbramiento, y parto de vuestra Hija, y en este cuidado haveis tenido 
pena; pero ia podeis vivir con gusto del buen suceso: quieran los Dioses de conservarlo, como pueden, y de que 
lo goceis, con muchos Aftos de vida. ‘Todos respondian, agradeciendole el cuidado, y diligencia que havia puesto, 
en el parto, por el riesgo grande, que ai en semejante trance. Y con esto cerraba este acto, y se conclula esta 
ceremonia. 

Las Mugeres de la Isla de Santo Domingo, no se curaban de tantas ceremonias, por la facilidad de sus partos, 
las quales parian tan sin riesgo, que casi no lo sentian; y 4 los dolores que les venian, quando mucho los recibian, 
torciendo un poco los labios, y de la manera que se hallaban, ora fuese acostadas, ora en pie, ora sentadas, traba- 
jando, 6 en otra qualquier manera, parian los Hijos. Luego tomaban en sus bracos la criatura, y la levaban a labar 
al Rio, y ellas se bahaban juntamente, para limpiarse de la sangre, y pares del parto. Despues de haverse labado, 
y dado el pecho, a la criatura, se bolvian a proseguir el trabajo, en que estaban ocupadas. Por cierto, el caso es 
harto estraho, pero mui verdadero; y porque no haga maravilla 4 los que se persuaden poco, 4 semejantes cosas, y 
luego las atribuien a Jardin de flores, digo, que tambien fue esta costumbre de las Mugeres Ginovesas, como lo dice 
el Filosofo, en el Tratado de las cosas maravillosas de la naturaleca. Lo mismo dice Estrabon en su Geografia: y 
de algunas Provincias de Espaifia (entre las quales se cuenta Cantabria) alaba lo mismo. Y sin él, dicen otros, los 
quales callo, por estar remediada ia esta bestialidad, que quando parian las Mugeres se iban 4 la Cocina a guisar la 
comida, para los que venian a dar el parabien de el Hijo nacido; y el Padre se acostaba en la cama, y con el Hijo 
al lado, recibia los huespedes, y se comia las torrijas (si acaso entonces se usaban.) De manera, que la parida 
servia, y el engendrador representaba los dolores del parto, acostado en la cama. Los Tibarenos, Pueblos de Scitia, 
segun Tolomeo, usaban de esta costumbre, asi lo dicen’ Ninfodoro, y Xenodoto, en sus Colectaneas; y antes de 
ellos Apolonio Rodio; y la misma costumbre fue de los de la Isla de Corcega, como lo dice Diodoro. Las Mugeres 
de la Provincia de Paria, paren los Hijos, con pocos dolores, -y felicisimamente, y no se regalan, ni hacen cama, ni 
curan de alguna delicadeca. Ponenles a las criaturas, que paren, dos almohadillas, una en el celebro, y otra en la 
frente, para hacerles levantada la forma de la cabega, y ancha la frente; y la racon de parir facilmente, y sin trabajo, 
es por el exercicio grande, que siempre hacen, porque jamas cesan de trabajar, y de ir con los Hombres & las 
Guerras, y 4 otra qualquiera parte, que se ofrece. 

Caritruto XVII. 

De como entre estas Gentes acostumbraban los Senores, y Mercaderes, dar el parabien del 
nacimento de los Primogemtos ; y se dice el modo, que usaban en este acto. 

Los Reies, y Sefores, que en todas sus cosas son particulares, tambien lo eran en el regocijo, que mostraban 
todos aquellos, que le tocaban en sangre, y tambien los Amigos, y otras Gentes, que les tenian conocimiento, 6 
reconocian con Feudo, y Vasallage; y lo primero que hacian, para cumplir con esta obligacion, era escoger una 
Persona anciana, y bien hablada, que de su parte fuese 4 darles el Parabien del recien nacido. Este Hombre viejo, 
acompafiado de otros, iba & la Ciudad, 6 Pueblo donde levaba su embajada, y entrando por la Casa del Sefior, cuio 
Hijo le havia nacido, daba aviso de su venida, y del caso a que havia venido. Mandabanle entrar, el qual era reci- 

* Gomara says that the Mexicans were accustomed to put a little quick lime on the knees of the infant, which ceremony Torquemada sup- 
poses signified emblematically “Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return.” ‘‘ Ponenle luego un poco de cal viva en las rodillas, como quien 
dize, vivo eres, pero morir tienes, 6, por muchos trabajos as de ser tornado polyo, como esta cal que piedra era.”—La Conquista de Mexico, 
fo. cxxv. 

> 
% 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 3 

bido con mucha cortesia; y dando un mui buen presente, que traia por delante, para su mejor recibimiento, y 
despacho, se sentaba. La Madre de el Nifio, que estaba acostada, y lo tenia 4 su lado, en la cuna, que ellos usan, 
descubriale la cabeca, y cara, para que el viejo le viera. Al qual hablaba el embajador, en lenguaje mui amoroso, 
y tierno, y lleno de mil dixes. Esto hacian por dar gusto, y contento 4 sus Padres, y Deudos, que siempre se hal- 
laban presentes. 

Entre otras cosas, que Je decia, con lenguaje mui suave, y dulce, concluia con estas: Nifio mio, mas precioso, 
que quantas Piedras preciosas ai, los Sefores Dioses Ometecuhtli, y Omecihuatl, y el Dios Quetzalcohuatl, junta- 
mente se sirvieron de criaros, en el doceno Cielo, y os embiaron 4 este Mundo miserable, y triste. Venistes, pues, 
Sefior, 4 sufrir trabajos, miserias, y aflicciones, veo que traeis con vos, el don que os dieron los Dioses en el 
principio. (En esto, pienso io, que queria decirle, que se estimase en mucho, por la Nobleca, que traia, heredada 
de sus Padres, y Antepasados) y pues tanta merced se os ha hecho, sabedla conocer en los Tiempos venideros, si 
tuvieredeis vida para gocarlo, la que los Dioses os concedan por muchos Afios. Luego buelto a la parida, la daba 
el parabien de su buen parto, y la animaba a pasar, con animo, y rostro alegre los dolores, y la exortaba a la crianca 
del Nifio. A los demas circunstantes decia: Sefiores, dad gracias 4 Dios, que en vuestro Tiempo ha nacido un 
Hijo, tal, y tan precioso: por cierto, Sefiores, que no ha sido poca vuestra ventura, en averlo visto con vuestros 
ojos, porque esto es cierto, que.muchos de los Reies, y Sefores antepasados, desearon recibir este beneficio, y no 
lo merecieron ; y si por ventura vieran este Hijo de vuestro linage, fuera posible, que supieran estimar merced tan 
grande, y que se alegraran, teniendolo por milagro. Gogad, Sefores, esta merced de Dios, y sabedla conocer, y 
quedais obligados, por ella, de servirla 4 los Dioses, que tan favorables se han mostrado, por la qual debeis dar 
gracias 4 Dios, que es Criador de todo, y pedirle, que no nos quite el Nifio, tan deseado, y tan necesario, para el 
Govierno de su Pueblo, y bien de nuestra Republica. Al Padre del Nifio, decia: Excelente, y Gran Sefior, pues lo 
sois del Pueblo, en lugar de Dios, en el qual regis, y governais, no es racon que os sea molesto (que bastan 
vuestros cuidados, y ocupaciones) y asi concluio con daros este parabien, de parte de el Seftor Fulano, que me 
embid 4 vuestra Corte, y Palacio: iendo mui alegre de haver visto un Hijo, que Dios os ha dado, para que os 
suceda en vuestro Sefiorio, y Casa; a la qual conserve Dios; dandole muchos Afios de salud, y vida. 

A estas racones dichas, no respondian el Padre, ni la Madre, sino otro por ellos, agradeciendo con voz baja, y 
grave la embajada, y decia (entre otras) estas palabras: El Amor, y cuidado del Seftor Fulano, que aca te embio 
es mui estimado de estos Sefiores Padres de este Nifio, y lo agradecen mucho, y 4 ti el trabajo, que has tomado, en 
venir 4 visitarlos por él, y tambien el discreto modo, con que has procedido, y buelvo agradecerle en nombre del 
Nifio tu venida, y el deseo que has mostrado, de que viva; pero no sabemos, ni Hombre nacido sabe los secretos 
de Dios, ni tampoco si este Nifio vendra 4 edad de poder suceder en los Sefiorios de sus Padres, 6 si havra de morir, 
antes de poder ser electo, porque esta determinado, que de Dia, y de Noche mueran los Hombres, asi chicos, como 
grandes. El Mictlantecuhtli (que es el Dios de el Infierno) manda, que todos vaian 4 servirle. No concierta esta 
racon, con la pasada, porque aquella es verdad, y esta mentira; y bien parecen desatinos del Demonio, que como 
tal, habla 4 tiento, y como desvariado. Pero esto es verdad, en quanto todos los adultos, que mueren sin Fé, y 
en el servicio del Demonio, y religion falsa de la Idolatria, vin al Infierno, no & servir al Mictlantecuhtli, sino a ser 
atormentados con él, en aquellas penas eternas. Decia mas: A este Nifio no le tenemos seguro de la muerte, sino 
como quien vé visiones entre suefios; pero de qualquier manera estamos mui agradecidos 4 la merced, y beneficios 
de Dios, y io en nombre de estos Sefiores, agradezco tu buen comedimiento. 

A esto respondia el embaxador, pidiendo perdon de su corto ragonar, y licencia para partirse. Despedianlo 
cortesmente, y él se iba A la presencia del Sefior que lo havia embiado, y daba su respuesta. Esto mismo, casi, 
sucedia 4 los Mercaderes, que por ser gente rica podia usar de ceremonias de Sefiores: que el dinero todo esto 
puede, entre todos. 

A SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

CarituLo XVIII. 

De las Ceremonas, que hacoan los Guatimattecos, en los Nacimientos de sus Hiyos. 

Los Guatimaltecos, y mucha parte de aquellas Provincias, acostumbraban muchas ceremonias, en los partos de las 
Mugeres, y nacimiento de sus Hijos: de las quales era la primera, que es, naciendo, que nacia la criatura, tomaban 
una Gallina, y la sacrificaban, 6 la embiaban al Sacerdote, para que él, en su nombre, la ofreciese, y sacrificase, en 
hacimiento de Gracias, por el beneficio, que los Dioses les havian hecho en haverles dado un Hijo, y de alli adelante, 
por algunos Dias, era su principal intento ocuparse, en este hacimiento de Gracias, por este Hijo, 6 Hija nacida, ora 
fuese Primogenito, ora Segundo, 6 Tercero ; porque aunque tuviesen muchos, no dejaban de reconocer, por merced 
el nacimiento de qualquiera. Hacian combites 4 todos sus Deudos, y Amigos; y si era Sefior, 6 Hombre Principal, 
el que hacia este combite, combidaba al mismo Sefor Supremo, segun era la calidad de su Persona. 

Quando lababan la criatura, hacian Sacrificio de Incienso, y Papagaios: este hacian en alguna Fuente, y 
manantial, la mejor que hallaban ; y sino la havia, se iban a un Rio, y en alguna parte mas sefalada, y acomodada, 
de sus corrientes (en especial 4 la que hacia algun salto, 6 tumbo) hacian este Sacrificio. Todos los Vasos, y cosas, 
que havian servido el Dia, que nacio la criatura, y juntamente una Piedra, con que solian calentar el vientre de la 
Muger parida. Todo lo dedicaban para aquel Sacrificio, y lo ofrecian 4 las Aguas de la Fuente, 6 Rio, donde el 
Sacrificio se hacian. Hechaban suertes, para escoger el Dia, en que le havian de cortar el ombligo, escogido el Dia, 
ponian la tripilla sobre una espiga, 6 macorca de Maiz, y con una navaja aguda, y nueva, que no se huviese estrenado 
en otra cosa, le cortaban, y con ella hechaban la navaja en la Fuente, 6 Rio, como cosa, que les parecia ser bendita. 
La macorga del Maiz desgranaban ; y si era tiempo, la sembraban, y sino, guardaban el grano, para quando lo lo fuese. 
Despues que nacia, cuidaban de él, como de cosa sagrada, y asi lo escardaban, y aporcaban, con mucha diligencia, y 
cuidado ; y cogido, hacian de ello dos partes, de la vna, hacian ciertas puchas, 6 poleadas, que daban al Nino (que 
era lo primero que comia) la otra, daban al Sacerdote, 6 4 la Persona, que mandaba el Adivino, que havia hechado 
las suertes, el Dia que se le cortd el ombligo; y de estas dos partes escalfaban algunos granos, para que el Nifio 
sembrase, quando llegase 4 edad de poder hacerlo. Para que hiciese de ello Sacrificio 4 sus falsos, y mentirosos 
Dioses. 

Quando destetaban al Nifto, hacian grandes combites (como luego verémos) El mismo Sacrificio hacian, quando 
el Nino comengaba 4 andar, y quando comengaha a hablar, hacian maiores combites, y regocijos, y eran maiores los 
Sacrificios de Incienso, y Aves de diversos colores. El Dia que le cortaban los cabellos, hacian las mismas Fiestas, 
y 4 bueltas del Incienso, quemaban los cabellos cortados. Cado Afio hacian la Fiesta de su Nacimiento, hasta que 
cumplia los siete, y en él comian mui cumplida, y abastecidamente. Dabanle el nombre del Dia, en que havia 
nacido, 6 segun lo que precedié en su Nacimiento (como dirémos en otra ocasion) que lo mismo sucedia A los 

Antiguos. 

Cariruto XIX. 

De como levantaban Figura los falsos Astrologos de esta Nueva-Espana, acerca de la ventura 

de el Nino, 0 Nina, que nacia. 

Despuss de haverles nacido Hijo, 6 Hija, 4 estos Indios, de esta Nueva-Espafia (en especial 4 los Mexicanos) y 
despues del primer labatorio, y antes del segundo, llamaban sus Padres algun Astrologo, 6 Adivino, para que 
declarase la ventura futura, y venidera, de la criatura, y dijese el Dia en que havia de ser baftado, 6 labado, si acaso 
no era bueno, el quarto, que era el ordinario, en que usaban un genero de bautismo (como luego dirémos.) Despues 
que el Nifio nacia, el Astrologo, 6 Adivino, con mucha gravedad, y reposo, preguntaba la hora de su nacimiento (que 
es lo mismo, que hacen nuestros Astrologos, quando quieren levantar Figura) si le decian, que 4 tal hora de la 
Noche, antes de su mediacion, atribuian la hora al Signo del Dia antecedente ; y si era despues de media noche, al del 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 5 

Dia, que entraba; y si era 4 media noche, atribuian el Nacimiento al Signo del Dia pasado, y al que reinaba en el 
Dia por venir. 

Sabido, pues, el Dia, y hora, tomaban sus Libros, y Pinturas, y respondian segun las condiciones del Signo, que 
reinaba; y si era el Signo bueno, decian con grande alegria: Bendito sea el Sefior, Criador de los Cielos y de la 
Tierra, que fue servido, que este Nifio naciese, en buen Dia, y mejor hora; porque el Signo principal, que pre- 
domina en él, y los otros sus Coadjutores, son poderosos, piadosos, misericordiosos, y clementes: Este Nifio sera 
venturoso, alcancara Dictados, y Dignidades, sera rico, hard valentias en la Guerra, para alcancar nombre de Gran 
Capitan ; y si era‘Hijo de Mercaderes, anunciabanle mucha prosperidad, en la mercancia ; y si Labrador, que tendria 
ventura en todos los sembrados; y mandaban, que no le bauticasen, 6 labasen hasta el quarto Dia. Si la criatura 
nacia en Dia; 6 hora de mal Signo, segun su falsa opinion, y en ocasion, que predominaban Dioses impios, y crueles, 
decian los Adivinos, que era mala la Fortuna, y ventura del Nifio; porque 4 la hora, que havia nacido, reinaban 
Dioses crueles, impios, y tiranos, y que havia de ser pobre, y miserable, sujeto 4 grandes desventuras, lacerado, y 
mal inclinado, y que por sus malos resabios havia de ser castigado, y afrentado. Pero, para remedio de esto, man- 
daban, que no se bauticase al quarto Dia; y diferianlo para otro, que fuese de buen Signo. Decia otras cosas, 4 
este tono, y que moriria presto la criatura, 6 duraria por largo tiempo, segun el favor, disfavor, que hallaba en 
el Signo, que le aplicaba. Pero tambien erraban estos, como ierran los nuestros (como en otra parte dirémos) y 
aun estos Indios, si acertaban en algo, era acaso, porque su ciencia, 6 presuncion, nacia solamente de unos Carac- 
teres, y Pinturas, que no tenian fundamento, en ningun Astro, ni Aspecto Celeste, sino solo en las Pinturas dichas ; 
aunque en esto se les diferencian los nuestros, que lo que dicen lo fundan en los Movimientos, y Estrellas, que por 
esta ocasion eran estos Astrologos, y Adivinos mui estimados, en la Republica, y mui reverenciados de todos, y 
ganaban largamente de comer con este oficio ; porque en sola una ocasion de estas, que entraba en casa de un Seftor, 
© Rei, quedaba rico, para toda su Vida. La Gente, que era de menor estimacion, se lo pagaba moderadamente, y los 
pobres le daban una Gallina, 6 cosa semejante; y como eran tantos los partos, y pocos los Adivinos, tenian siempre 
que hacer, y la ganancia, y caudal crecia ; pero todo era burla, quanto anunciaban. 

CariruLto XX. 

Del segundo labatorio, que estos Naturales hacian, al quarto Dia del Nacimiento de la criatura, y de 

todas sus ceremonias. 

Quatro Dias despues del Nacimiento de la criatura, ordenaban un fingido bautismo estos Naturales, con el qual la 
bauticaban en esta manera: Primeramente aparejaban muchas viandas, para un solemne Combite, que hacian este 
Dia, al qual combidaban muchos Ninos, para que al recien nacido, le dijesen las cosas, que despues se siguen. Y si 
era Varon, el que se bauticaba, hacian una rodelilla pequefia, y un Arco, y quatro Flechas, todo pequefio, y chiquito, 
y una mantilla. Si era Nia, hacian unas Nahuas, y Huipil, que son sus faldetas, y camisa, y una petaquilla, y un 
huso, y su rueca, y todos los demas aderentes, y aparejos para texer. Todo esto acomodado 4 la tierna edad de la 
Nina. : ; 

Luego hacian convocacion de todos los Deudos, y Parientes de los Padres, y de todos los Amigos, y Vecinos, 
que para este acto se juntaban; llamaban 4 la partera, porque era el Ministro de este labatorio, y sin ella no se 
hacia. Todo esto era antes de amanecer, y 4 la salida del Sol ponian un lebrillo nuevo de Agua limpia, y clara, en 
el patio de la casa, y desnudaba la partera, a la criatura, y llevabala, con las cosas referidas, & aquel lugar. Levantaba 
con dos manos, en alto, 4 la criatura, y deciale: Hijo mio, el Seftor Dios Ometecuhtli, y Omecihuatl, Sefiores del 
doceno Cielo, te criaron, para embiarte 4 este Mundo triste, y calamitoso; toma, pues, el Agua, que te ha de dar 
Vida, para que con ella vivas en este Mundo, la qual se lama Ja Diosa Chalchihuitlycue Chalchiuhtlatonac. 
Diciendo estas palabras, tomaba el Agua con la mano derecha, y poniasela en la boca, y luego bolvia 4 repetir 
Tomo Nifio el Agua, que te ha de dar vida en este Mundo. Luego se la ponia sobre los pechos, y decia lo mismo ; 
luego se la hechaba sobre la cabeca, y repetia ciertas palabras ; porque 4 este Dios del Agua, le es dado limpiarlas, 

Cc 

6 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

en todos los que con Agua se laban. Luego lababa todo el cuerpo de la criatura, y estregandole todos los miembros, 
decia: Donde estis mala Fortuna? En qué miembro estas? Apartate, ventura mala, de esta criatura. 

Dicho esto, y hecha esta ceremonia, alcaba acia el Cielo a la criatura, y decia, hablando con su falso Dios, Sefor 
Ometecuhtli, Omecihuatl, Criador de las Animas, esta criatura, que criaste, y formaste, y embiaste 4 este miserable. 
Mundo, te ofrezco, para que infundas tu virtud, en ella. Luego bolvia segunda vez a levantarla, y hablando con la 
Diosa del Agua, la decia: A ti llamo, Sefiora, 4 ti te suplico, Diosa, Madre de los Dioses, que espires en esta 
criatura tu virtud. Y tercera vez la decia: Vosotros, Celestiales Dioses, soplad 4 esta criatura, y dadla la virtud, 
que teneis, para que sea de buena Vida. Otra quarta vez la confrontaba con el Sol, y decia: Sehor Dios Sol, 
Padre de todos; y tu, Tierra, Madre nuestra, esta criatura os ofrezco, para que, como vuestra, la ampareis, y pues 
nacid para la.Guerra (si era Nifio) muera en ella, defendiendo la causa de los Dioses. Dicho esto, tomaba el 
Escudo, Arco, y Flechas, y ofrecialo al Dios de la Guerra, en nombre del Nino, diciendo: Recibid, Sefior, este 
pequefto Don, que os ofrezco, con que me doi a vuestro servicio. Plega a ti, Sefior, que este Nino vaia a los Cielos, 
donde se gocan los deleites celestiales, y los Soldados, que murieron, en las ‘Guerras. 

A todas estas ceremonias estaban encendidos muchos, y grandes manojos de Teas, que llaman Ocote, y entonces 
le ponian el nombre, y repitiendolo tres veces, dabanle las Flechas, Arco, y Rodela, y decianle : Toma estas Armas, 
que son para el servicio de el Sefior Dios de la Guerra. Embolvia la criatura en sus pafiales, y dabala 4 la Madre: 
Luego venian los Nifios, y muchachos, que fueron combidados, y arrebataban toda la comida, y vianda, que se havia 
puesto, en el lugar del bautismo, 6 labatorio, y con grandes ruidos, y grita, se lo llevaban, y comian, y medio mas- 
cando el Pan, decian al Nifio: Mucho te conviene, que vaias 4 la Guerra, y mueras, como valiente, en ella, para que 
goces de los gocos celestiales, y entres con los servidores del Dios Guerrero, en los altos Cielos, que por ser valientes, 
y esforcados, merecieron este premio. Las Teas encendidas no las apagaban, hasta que ellas se acababan, y consumian. 

A la Nifia se le decian estas palabras, poniendole el Agua en la boca: Hija, abre la boca, y recibe 4 la Diosa 
Chalchihuitlycue, que da Vida, para vivir, en el Mundo; y al ponersela en el Pecho, decia: Toma el Agua clara, 
que limpia, y refresca el coracon, y lo desprerta; y quando se la ponia en la Cabeca, decia: Toma, y recibe el Agua 
Chalchihuitlycue, que te hara vigilante, para que nunca seas tocada del demasiado suefio: ella te abrase, y te avise, 
para que seas vigilante, y no dormilona, en este Mundo. Labandole las manos, decia: Apartate hurto de la Nifia ; 
y labandole las ingles, afiadia: Donde estas mala fortuna? Apartate de la Nifia con la virtud del Agua clara. Hecho 
esto, hechaban la criatura en el Cocol, que es su.cuna; y deciale la partera: Sefiora Yohualticitl, Diosa de las Cu- 
nas, y Madre general de los Ninos, el Dios de los Cielos crié a esta criatura, y la embid 4 este Mundo, en el qual te 
esta cometida su guarda, y asi te la ofrezco, para que la defiendas, y guardes, en tu seno, calientes, y ampares ; y tam- 
bien suplico al Sefior de la Noche Yohualtecuhtli, que le dé buen suefio. Todo esto decia en voz baja, que apenas se 
oja; y luego, levantando la voz, decia 4 la cuna: Madre de las Criaturas, defensora de los Nifios, recibe este, y guar- 
dalo como tuio; y con esto acababan este Labatorio, y bautismo idolatrico. 

Carrruxo V. 

De la manera, que tenian los Antiguos de contraer los Matrimonios ; y se declara la que tuvieron 

estos Indios Occidentales. 

Topas las Gentes del Mundo, y entre ellas, los Hebreos, celebraron sus Matrimonios, y Contratos naturales, con ce- 
remonias, y actos, que manifestaban la voluntad de los contraientes ; porque de otra manera, no fuera contrato de 
Gente Racional, sino solo aiuntamiento de bestias; y asi, dice el Tostado. Siempre fue costumbre en el Mundo, 
que el verdadero Matrimonio se contraia, y contrae por consentimiento, de presente, y afecto conjugal. Y a este 
consentimiento de los dos contraientes, se juntaban algunas ceremonias : y la que sabemos haver sido antigua, 
es, cubrir el Varon ala Muger con su capa, como en demostracion de recibirla,. por suia, debajo de su abrigo, 
y amparo. Esto vemos en el Libro de Ruth, donde dice la Sagrada Escritura, que metiendose en la cama de 
Booz, y despertando & la media noche el Viejo, y preguntandole, quien era? le dijo: Yo soi Ruth, tu sierva, suplicote, 

. FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. Ze 

que me cubras con tu Palio; en las quales palabras le quiso decir, que la recibiese por Esposa. Y aqui, dice Lira, 
que le pidid el Matrimonio con estas palabras disfracadas, por ser costumbre de aquellos Tiempos, que el Esposo, 
que contraia Matrimonio, ponia la extremidad de sus vestiduras sobre la Muger, que recibia por Esposa, y con 
esta ceremonia se desposaban, de manera, que este era el modo de desposarse. 

Tambien fue costumbre Antigua. travar de las manos 4 los desposados, entregando la Esposa al Esposo, 
por este modo; lo qual se halla en el Libro de Tobias, quando el Bendito moco pidid 4 Raguel, que le diese por 
Muger 4 su Hija Sara, dice el Sagrado Texto, que otorgando su peticion, tomo la mano derecha de su Hija, y 
asiendola con la derecha de Tobias, se la entrego, diciendo: Dios de Abrahan, Dios de Isaac, y Dios de Jacob sea 
con vosotros, y os junte en uno, y Ileneos de su Bendicion. De manera, que el tomarse las manos era ceremonia 
Antigua, y de esta manera se entregaban las voluntades el uno, al otro. A este Contrato natural afiadieron las 
Gentes otras‘muchas supersticiones, de las quales fue una, consultar los Agoreros, y Adivinos, sin cuio parecer, 
jamais se efectuaban los dichos Matrimonios. Y aunque fue universal esta supersticiosa ceremonia, fuelo mui 
particular de los Romanos, los quales no hacian Casamiento, ni lo trataban, sin que procediese la consulta diabolica 
de los Hechiceros, y Magos, 5 Encantadores, y falsos Adivinos. Asi lo dicen Valerio Maximo, Laurencio Valla, y 
Tulio. Y de aqui es, que ninguno se casaba en el mes de Maio, segun Plutarco, en sus Problemas, porque lo 
tenian por mes de mal aguero, y hado, y por otras causas, que alli sefiala. De aqui nacid la costumbre, que 
tuvieron de tener Dioses abogados de las Bodas, como tambien los tenian, para otras cosas, los quales creian, que 
era Himeneo, Jupiter Adulto, Juno Adulta, Venus Suadela, 6 Lepos, que es la Diosa de persuadir, 6 de hablar 
elegante, y curiosamente, como dice Quintiliano, y principalmente Diana; y 4 estos invocaban, quando querian 
casarse ; y por cer cinco los Dioses, ponian en su honor, y memoria, cinco cirios, 6 hachas encendidas, sin acre- 

centar jamas este numero, ni disminuirlo. 

Las Gentes de estas Indias, asi como las otras del Mundo, tenian sus ceremonias en sus Contratos, y Matrimonios. 
La primera de las quales era esta, que quando aleuno queria casar 4 su Hijo, especialmente los Sefiores, y Gente 
Principal, tenian todos memoria del Dia, y Signo, en que el mogo havia nacido (como luego veremos) y porque no 
todos sabian la significacion de ellos, ilamaban a los Astrologos, y Adivinos, 6 Hechiceros, los quales interpretaban, 
y exponian por su cuenta, © ceremonias, que hacian, la virtud, y efecto, malo, 6 bueno, feliz, 6 infeliz, del Dia, y del 
Signo. Lo mismo trabajaban de inquirir acerca del Signo, y Dia del nacimiento de la Doncella, que querian recibir, 
por nuera, y de alli conjeturaban, si havian de ser bien, 6 mal casados; y si entendian, que no eran Dias, y Signos fa- 
vorables, no se juntaban, ni casaban; pero si conformaban los Dias, y Signos de entrambos, mostrando prosperidad 
y buena fortuna, trataban el Casamiento. 

Td que estaban satisfechos de las Personas, y de los Signos, segun sus Agorerias, los Padres, y Parientes mas cer- 
canos del Mancebo, que eran los que siempre movian (y de presente mueven los Casamientos, porque no tienen por 
honesto, que se traten de parte de la Muger) estos embiaban algunas viejas, de las mas honradas, y discretas, de su 
misma parcialidad, y parentela, las quales llaman Cihuatlanque, que quiere decir: Demandadoras de Muger, 6 Nego- 
ciadoras de Casamientos. . Estas llevaban la embajada 4 los Padres de la Doncella, 6 4los Deudos mas cercanos en 
cuio poder estaba. Proponianles su demanda con un discreto, y elegante ragonamiento ; Ilevabanles algun presente, 
y hacian esta visita, despues de media noche, y aun aora lo acostumbran, aunque no lo entienden, de los nuestros, los 
que no lo saben. La respuesta de la primera vez era, que no se podia dar la Doncella por entonces, paralo qual 
daban algunas racones, que lo persuadian. Y esta costumbre de negarla la primera vez era infalible, aunque lo desea- 
sen ellos mas que los que traian el recado. Bolvianse las Matronas con aquesta respuesta. Pasados algunos Dias, 
tornaban a ir las buenas viejas con otro maior presente, y rogaban a los Padres, 6 Parientes de la Doncella, que con- 
sintiesen en aquel Casamiento, dandoles racones, porque debian hacerlo, y declarabanles las calidades, y hacienda del 
Mancebo. Declaraban la Dote, que se le havia de dar de su parte a la desposada, y tomaban racon de lo que havia ella 
de traer & poder del Moco; y esto era una manera de Carta de Dote, que el uno, a el otro hacia; la qual costumbre 
ha sido mui antigua entre otras Naciones ; en especial leemos haverse usado este modo, en el Casamiento de Tobias, 
que quando le entregaron 4 su Muger, dice el Sagrado Texto, que hicieron la Carta de Dote, y en ella declararon las 
condiciones del Matrimonio; la qual declaran los Expositores, que fue sellada, y con Testigos; y esta costumbre 
guardan oi los Turcos, como dice Euthimio. A esta segunda embajada respondian los Padres, que darian parte de 

ello & sus Parientes, y.A la Moca, 6 Doncella. Ia que convenian los Padres, y Deudos, y la-Hija, en que el Casami- 

8 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

ento se efectuase, y hiciese, amonestabanla todos mucho, a que fuese buena Muger, y sirviese, bien 4 su Marido; y 
que advirtiese, no los afrentase, haciendo alguna cosa, que no debiese. 

Bueltas las Casamenteras 4 los Padres, y Deudos del Varon, esperaba el final consentimiento, de parte de ella; el 
qual embiaban con otras viejas honradas de las de su casa, y parentela. Dado, pues, el consentimiento de parte de la 
Doncella, daban tambien luego noticia de ello al Mancebo, que havia de casarse. Concertadas las Bodas, iban sus 
Deudos, Amigos, y Vecinos a la entrada, y puerta, el qual llevaba un braserillo, con brasa, 4 manera de Incensario ; y 
a ella le daban otro, y con ellos se incensaban el uno, a el otro: y esta era la primera ceremonia, que hacian; luego el 
desposado la tomaba de la mano, y la metia en el aposento, que 1a le tenia aderecado, para el efecto de su desposorio, 
y alli cerca del Fuego se sentaban sobre una estera nueva, mui labrada, y pintada, que llaman Petate ; toda la otra 
Gente se quedaha en el patio, cantando, y bailando, con mucha alegria. 

Sentados los desposados, atabanles las puntas de las mantas. con que estaban cubrertos, que era como tomarles 

las manos,* segun aora se usa, 6 como la ceremonia antigua de cubrirse con el Palio, 6 Capa (segun 18 vimos) dabale 

® Gomara gives a similar account of the Mexican marriage ceremony in the chapter of his History of the Conquest of Mexico, entitled “ Los 
Ritos del Matrimonio,” which he clearly shows to have been a religious rite, and not a civil contract. In Mixtecapan, the hands of the married 
couple were joined together, as well as their garments knotted to each other; and in Nicaragua, the priest taking each party by the little finger, 
addressed an admonitory discourse to them before some blazing fire, which having been suffered to burn out, the rites were held to be perfected 
and the marriage legal. A second marriage on the part of the husband, during the life of the wife, was punished by the laws of Nicaragua with 
banishment and confiscation of his property, to which in that case the first wife became entitled. ‘En Mixtecapan, que es una gran provincia, 
blevavan cierto trecho a cuestas al desposado quando se casa, como quien dize, por fuerca te as de casar aun que no quieras, para aver hijos. 
Danse las manos los novios, en fe y sefial que se an de ajudar, el uno al otro. tan les assi mismo las mantas con un gran nudo, para que sepan 
como no se an de apartar.”—La Conquista de Mezico, fo. cXxvi. ‘‘ Todos toman muchas mugeres empero una es la legitima, y aquella con la 
ceremonia siguiente : Ase un sacerdote los novios por los dedos mefiiques, mete los en una camarilla que tiene fuego, hazeles ciertas amones- 
_ taciones, y en muriendose la lumbre quedan casados. Si la tomo por virgen y la halla corrompida, deshecha la, mas no de otra manera. No 
duermen con ellas estando con su ‘costumbre, ny en tiempo de las sementeras y ayunos, ny comen entonces sal ny axi ny beven cosa que los 
embriague, ny ellas entran teniendo su camisa en algunos templos. Destierran al que casa dos vezes ceremonialmente, y dan la hazienda a la 
primera muger. Si cometen adulterio, repudianlas bolviendoles su dote y herencia, e no se pueden mas casar.”—La Istoria de las Indias, fo. cxi. 
The authority of the most celebrated historians might be adduced to show, that in none of their laws and customs did the Indians, both of Peru and 
Mexico, more nearly resemble Jews and Christians, than in those relating to marriages. As the Jews were permitted by Moses to have many 
concubines, and those kept by David and Solomon were infinite in number, so this alloy to the domestic peace of families was sanctioned by the laws 
of Mexico and Peru. Notwithstanding that in the Mosaic history reasons are found which no other nation ever thought of, except the Mexicans 
and Jews, for rendering the marriage contract firm and indissoluble, viz. that woman was formed out of the bone of man, (for the Mexicans believed 
likewise that the first woman was created from the same bone as man, although not out of his rib after he had been already created, but that both 
were formed from a bone “de los muertos pasados,” of the long before dead, as Torquemada asserts,) still no nation ever gave such facilities to 
divorce as the Jews and Mexicans, and none punished adultery more severely ; both which circumstances are as remarkable as they appear to be 
inconsistent. The rights of primogeniture and of legitimate descent were equally respected by the Jews and Indians ; and laws protecting marriages, 
by regulating in their favour the inheritance of property and titles, existed in Mexico and Peru, as amongst the more civilized states of Europe, of 
which the history of Peru, and the letters of Cortes to Charles the Fifth, furnish two striking examples: the first, in the succession of Guascar to 
the throne of Peru on the death of the Inga Guainacapa ; and the other, in the appointment by Cortes of a chief over the state of Yzzucan, which 
he thus mentions in writing to the Emperor. “Todos los sufraganeos 4 ella vinieron 4 se ofrecer por vasallos de Vuestra Alteza, e quedo toda 
aquella provincia muy segura y por nuestros amigos y confederados con los de Guacachula. Porque hubo cierta diferencia sobre 4 quien perte- 
necia el sefiorio de aquella ciudad y provincia de Yzzucan, por ausencia del que se habia ido 4 Mexico; E puesto que hubo algunas contradicciones 
y parcialidades entre un hijo bastardo del sefior natural de la tierra que habia sido muerto por Muteczuma, y puesto el que a la sazon era, y 
casadole con una sobrina suya, y entre un nieto de el dicho sefior natural, hijo de su hiya legitima, la qual estaba casada con el senor de Guaca- 
chula, y habian habido aquel hijo nieto de el dicho sefior natural de Yzzucan, se acordo entre ellos que heredasse el sefiorio aquel hijo del sefior 
de Guacachula, que venia de legitima linea de los sefiores de alli; E puesto que el otro fuesse hijo que por ser bastardo no debia de ser sefior, 
assi quedo. E obedecieron en mi presencia 4 aquel muchacho que es de edad de hasta diez afios, 4 que por no ser de edad para gobernar, que 
aquel su tio bastardo y otros tres principales, uno de la ciudad de Guacachula, y los dos de la de Yzzucan, fuessen gobernadores de la tierra, y 
tubiessen el muchacho en su poder hasta tanto que fuesse de edad para gobernar.” Cardinal Lorenzana Archbishop of Toledo, who published in 
Mexico an edition of the Letters of Cortes, has added as a note to the above passage the following observation, in which he assimilates the laws of 
the ancient Mexicans to those of Spain. ‘Aqui se advierte que reconocian legitimo matrimonio y excluian 4los bastardos de la sucesion, como se 
manda en las leyes de Espafia.” ‘Torquemada remarks in the twenty-seventh chapter of the eleventh book of his Indian Monarchy, that legitimacy 
of birth was always regarded in the succession to the throne of the Chichimecan or Acolhuacan empire ; and that the only writer who denied it, was 
Juan Bautista de Pomar, who had an interested motive in so doing, being himself an illegitimate descendant of Nezahualpilli king of Tezcuco, and 
claiming the greater portion of the patrimony: which that king had left to his lawful heirs. In Mexico, which was an elective monarchy, it was an 
established usage that the successor to the crown should be of the reigning family, and that the preference should be given, first, to the brothers of 
the deceased sovereign according to priority of birth, and then to his sons, and in failure of them to his nephews. If this usage appears singular, 
it must be recollected that amongst other nations fraternal consanguinity imposed extraordinary duties on the brothers of the deceased. Amongst 
the Jews they were obliged, in case of the death of the elder, all successively to become the husbands of the widow, should she happen to have no 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 9 

el Varon vestidos de Muger, 4 ella, y ella, hacia el retorno, dandole de vestir 4 él. Esta ceremonia, aunque no el 
mismo acto, se usa aora, embiandose el uno 4 el otro las ropas, con que vienen vestidos, y ataviados los desposorios. 

children. Whether the marriage of Tecuichpotzin the daughter of Montezuma, first with Cuitlahuitzin his successor, and on his death with 
Quauhtemotzin the last king of Mexico, the brother, or, as others say, the nephew of her former husband, was in consequence of any such 
custom existing amongst the Mexicans, is uncertain: but Garcia informs us, that throughout the vast dominions of the Inga, the Peruvians con- 
formed to the Hebrew law ; for that Pachacuti Inga ordained and commanded that a widow should marry the next of kin to her first husband. 
He also affirms, that amongst the Indians of New Spain brothers were obliged to maintain and to marry brothers’ widows, and that in Guatemala 
the widow married her husband’s brother, and if he had none, his next of kin. Peter Martyr likewise says in the tenth chapter of his Seventh 
Ocean Decade, describing the religious rites and ceremonies of the Indian islanders, that in some places a widow married the brother of her 
former husband or his kinsman, especially if he left any children. It is well known that marriages within certain degrees of consanguinity were 
forbidden to the Jews, and the same degrees were observed by the Indians. 'Torquemada says that the Mexicans named marriage with a mother- 
in-law Totetzauh, which signifies abomination, and Peter Martyr relates in the same chapter of the Ocean Decade before referred to, the following 
superstitious fable of the Indians of Haiti or the island of Saint Domingo. ‘ They childishly affirm that the thick spot seen in the globe of the 
moon at the full, is a man; and they believe he was cast out to the moist and cold circle of the moon, that he might perpetually be tormented 
between those two passions in suffering cold and moisture, for mcest committed with his sister.” This quotation from the writings of Peter Martyr 
is taken from the English translation of the Ocean Decades, contained in the fifth volume of the last edition of Hakluyt’s Collection of Early 
Voyages,—a copy of the original Latin text, in which these Decades were composed, being very difficult to procure. The customs and prejudices of 
the Indians respecting marriages and the rights of primogeniture which have already been pointed out, and the concubinage rather than polygamy 
which was permitted by their laws, the practice of which was almost solely confined to the rich and noble amongst them, strongly assimilate 
them to the Jews; but the estimation in which lawful marriage was held by them, the rite of solemnizing it by joining the hands and the apparel of 
the parties,.the ignominy and punishment which was awarded to the crime of adultery, (which the laws of antiquity, notwithstanding the reproaches 
cast upon its morals, considered a much graver offence than modern codes,) give a tincture of Christianity to the laws and usages of the New World, 
by annexing to them that part and parcel of it which is as old as the creation, and which Solon and Lycurgus taught as well as the Apostles. It 
will not be denied, except by the extremely ignorant, that polygamy and unbounded concubinage were much more sanctioned by the laws of 
Moses, and the examples contained in Holy Writ, than by those of Greece and the early precedents of the Grecian history. The Patriarchs for- 
mally married many wives ; and David, the man after God’s own heart, kept innumerable concubines besides Bathsheba the wife of Uriah the 
mother of Solomon, whom he married, Michal the daughter of Saul being already his wife. Of Solomon his son, it is said in the third verse of 
the eleventh chapter of the First Book of Kings, ‘“ And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines ; and his wives turned 
away his heart.” The custom therefore of having but one lawful wife must be considered Pagan and Christian in opposition to Jewish ; and the 
Indians, amongst whom this custom prevailed, it is probable either instituted it of their own choice, or were taught it by the early Christians who 
passed over to colonize America. Peter Martyr says in the fourth chapter of his fourth Decade, that amongst the Indians of Coluacana (the name which 
the Spaniards gave to one of the first large portions of the continent of America with which they became acquainted,) marriage was so honourable, 
that “it was not lawful for any that was unmarried to sit at table with such as were married, or to eat of the same dish, or drink of the same cup, 
and make themselves equal with such as were married.” In the province of Duhare, according to the same writer, “Princes were permitted to have 
two wives, the common people but one only.” He further remarks, that there “ it was not lawful for widows to marry any more if the husband died 
a natural death; but if he were put to death by sentence of the judge, she hath liberty to marry. This nation loveth chastity in women and hateth 
lewd and dishonest women, and banisheth them from the company and society of the chaste.” In the island of Haiti, the Caciques were accustomed 
to keep many women, as Gomara remarks, but had only one lawful wife. Instancing the Cacique of Behechio, he says, “tenia tremta mugeres: 
una empero es la principal y legitima para las herencias.” We have the incontrovertible testimony of Acosta for knowing that in the populous 
empire of Peru, (the antiquity and civilization of which may be inferred from the road constructed by the Ingas along the Andes, which, 
viewed as a work of human labour, Gomara judges to surpass the Pyramids,) polygamy was not permitted ; and that although the law sanctioned 
~ concubinage, it recognised only one wife. The same was probably the case in most of the other Indian states which had established forms of 
governinent, the laws of which were generally moral, and the religious rites sanguinary and cruel in the extreme, without any mixture of levity or 
indecency. The Peruvian marriage ceremony is described by Acosta, and it is very remarkable that it consisted in fastening a sandal called an Otoia 
on the foot of the bride. What the ancient Hebrew ceremony was, learned men have been very much perplexed in trying to discover, since it is 
nowhere mentioned in Scripture ; but from the silence of Moses in the Pentateuch on the subject of marriage rites,—when other ritual observances 

comparatively of an indifferent nature are there stamped with the seal of the Divinity, and the great facility which he gave to divorces,—it is to be 
supposed that it was purely a civil contract unaccompanied nith any religious forms. How, we may inquire, except on this supposition, can such an 
omission be explained? Whoever reads and studies the Pentateuch, and Prophecies, and other parts of the Bible, must feel convinced that repe- 
tition and prolixity are nowhere avoided in the promulgation of the ritual laws and ceremonies of the Jews, or even in the interlocutions which so 

often take place between the Deity and particular persons, such as Abraham, Lot, Moses, and the prophet Ezekiel, who in the fourth chapter of 
his book of Prophecies, argues with Jehovah until he had induced him to rescind a command which he had previously given to him. It is there- 
fore the more surprising that although marriage is so often mentioned in the Old Testament, not a single ordinance relating to the celebration of its 
rites should be found in the whole course of it. Two passages, however, of Scripture considered in connection with each other, afford just grounds 
for believing that, like the Peruvian, the Hebrew marriage ceremony consisted anciently in fastening a sandal on the foot of the bride. The first of 
these passages is the ninth verse of the twenty-fifth chapter of Deuteronomy ; and the other, the seventh verse of the fourth chapter of Ruth: and 
the purport of both is to show the ancient Hebrew usage of redeeming a pledge, or changing the articles of a covenant which one of the parties was 
loth to fulfil, by the ceremony of pulling off the shoe. It says accordingly in the verse referred to of Deuteronomy, that if a brother refused to 

raise up seed to a brother by marrying his widow, “ Then shall his brother's wife come unto him in the presence of the elders, and loose his shoe 

from off his foot, and spit in his face, and shall answer and say, So shall it be done unto that man that will not build up his brother’s house.” And 
in Ruth, “ Now this was the manner in former time in Israel, concerning redeeming, and concerning changing; for to confirm all things, a man 

D 

10 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Traianles luego la comida, y elunoa el otro se daban los bocados, y de esta manera comian todos los Deudos, 
Amigos, y Vecinos, como en gran Fiesta, y regocijo, comencando muchas veces la comida 4 Visperas, y acabandola 

plucked off his shoe, and gave it to his neighbour, and this was a testimony in Israel.” If plucking off the shoe was the testimony in Israel of 
dissolving an obligation, or redeeming a pledge and changing a contract; what can be more probable than that putting on the shoe was the ceremony — 
or symbol which ratified an agreement, gave assurance to a pledge, and held out security to the opposite party in a contract. If, moreover, pulling 
off the shoe was a kind of repudiation or. divorce which took place between the brother of the deceased and his widow, who had no further claims 
on him after the performance of this ceremony, (for it would appear from Scripture, that until then, without even any preliminary legal forms, she 
claimed to be considered in the light ofa wife,) it would seem to refer to putting on the shoe as the act by which marriages were in the first instance 
solemnized, the contrary act to which would appear most meet to be the sign and testimonial of divorce ; for it would be a great mistake to suppose . 
that the ceremony of pulling off the shoe, which was the mere symbol of a legal release from an obligation, was intended to affix a stigma on the 
character of the man, since that consisted in the woman’s being authorized to spit publicly in his face in the presence of the elders, and in the 
perpetual nickname which Moses commanded that he should bear in Israel. The following is Acosta’s account of the Peruvian mode of solem- 
nizing the marriage contract. ‘‘ In homicidas et fures capitalis poena decernebatur ut et in adulteros incestuososque, sive in lined ascendente sive 
descendente, aut recta, peccatum commissum esset. Apud ipsos tamen adulterium non erat ut nec incestus, si quis pluribus concubinis perfrieretur. 
Tum nec foeminis aliis permixtis inventis poena ulla irrogabatur, sed id saltem adulterii vimque nomenque habebat, quoties quispiam cum alterius 
legitima conjuge congressus deprehendebatur. Harum verd quivis maritus unicam tantum habebat quam peculiaribus quoque ceremoniis hoc feré 
modo pactoque sibi jungere solebat. Sponsus ad sponsze des eam secum domum ductum contendens, otoiam ipsius pedibus innectebat ; otoia verd 
peculiare calcei genus est istis locis famihare, ac Hispanicos alpargates desuper retectos et hiantes czemulans. Sponsze vero virgini otoiam ex lana 
induebant ; si virgo non esset ex sparto paratam otoiam injiciebant. Ipsi vero omnes alize foeminze ministrabant et honorem exhibebant. Hoc 
apparatu in sponsi zedes recipiebatur. Quibus maritus obiisset hee integro anno pullis vestibus amiciebantur, nec ante anni elapsum cuiquam alium 
virum inducere licebat. Et foeminee quidem maritis plerumque juniores erant; gubernatoribus ac preefectis suis Inga propriis manibus sponsas 
adductas jungebat; cacique vero czteri in civitatibus suis tum juvenes, tum puellas uno loco cogebant, et eosdem quos vellent ibidem publicis 
ritibus jungebant. Hoe modo viro adducta mulier, si post in adulterii crimine deprehenderetur, una cum adultero suo capitali poena citra moram 
plectebatur. Et licet ipse quidem maritus mulieri crimen remitteret ac donaret, nihilominus tamen vindicta publica in eam observabatur, que 
ipsam tamen vitam non attineret. Idem rigor erga incestuosos quoque intendebatur, quoties quis vel cum matre, vel avia, vel filia, vel filiorum 
’ liberis nefarié permisceretur. Czeteros quidem cognationis gradus quod attinebat, hi omnes nullo probro mutuo copulari solebant, primo saltem 
gradu excepto. Sororem suam ducere nulli licebat: nee hoc matrimonium apud quenquam Jaudatum erat. Peruensium quamplurimi turpiter 
hallucinati sunt, dum arbitrarentur, Ingis ac primatibus aliis proprias sorores ducere uxores licere, etsi quidem tam sponsus quam sponsa, ab 
jisdem parentibus in uno matrimonio prognati essent. Sed indubitatis ex rerum indiciis constat, hane permixtionem omni tempore foedam ac 
incestuosam habitam fuisse, ac conjugium hujusmodo ad ea usque tempora severé vetitum ac interdictum extitisse, dum tandem Topa Inga 
Yupanguy pater Guaviacape, et avus Atagualpze, cujus regnantis tempore Hispani in Indiam primo irruerunt, rerum potitus esset. Is Topa Inga 
Yupanguy veterum statutorum religione excussa, legitimam suam ex utroque parente sororem Mamoello sibi uxorem fecit: et hance insuper 
perditam legem condidit, ne quisquam alius preeter Ingas sororem pro uxore haberet. Huic natus filius Guainacapa erat: ut et filia Coya Cussi- 
limay. Hi ut und matrimonio jungerentur, jam moriturus severé mandabat, jubebatque, ut hoc exemplum magnates reliqui quoque imitarentur. 
Quod tamen conjugium, veluti cum ipsa naturee lege pugnabat: sic disponente Deo vicissim fiebat, ut ex eo qui susciperentur filii, quales erant 
Guascar Inga, et Atagualpa Inga, cum universo regno ipsimet quoque brevi tempore post interirent et excinderentur. Czeterum, de Indorum 
Peruensium matrimoniis, qui uberius institui volet, is tractatum illum, quem Polus postulanti Don Hieronymo de Loaysa condidit, hujusmodi 
quam plurima complexum evolvat. Eo enim edito, multorum hominum errores detecti sunt, qui, que Indorum legitimee conjuges, vel concubine 
saltem essent, internoscere non poterant, adeo, ut baptisatis deinde Indis perseepé genuinas conjuges auferrent, et concubinas relinquerent. Ex 
eodem quoque tractatu, nec eos quicquam fundamenti habere liquet, qui censent, conjugium, vel a fratre ac sorore semel initum ac confirmatum, 
perpetuo deinceps ratum manere debere: cujus tamen contrarium in Synodo Limensi decretum est: cum et ipsis Indis hujusmodi conjugium non 
valdé probaretur, aut honestum videretur. 

As Acosta proves that the laws of Peru only recognized one wife, so Torquemada shows, in the twenty-fourth chapter of the sixteenth book 
of his Indian Monarchy, that this was the case likewise in Mexico: “ Llegada 4 Mexico y vista la Bula de el Sumo Pontifice Paulo Tercero, el 
Obispo higo Junta en su Casa, de los Religiosos Doctos de las tres Ordenes, y de los Lietrados, que avia en Mexico(y no una vez, sino muchas) 
y con lo que alli se consult, y altercd, fueron todos 4 Casa de el Virrei Don Antonio de Mendoga, y en ambas partes se did entera noticia, y 
larga Relacion, de los Rites, y Ceremonias, que usaban estos Indios en sus Casamientos, en tiempo de su Infidelidad, y los que mas noticia tenian 
de las Ceremonias, y Ritos de otros Infieles (entre los quales ai Matrimonio) tambien lo declararon, y mirado todo, y pensado: bien con mucho 
acuerdo, se determin6 alli, que sin ninguna duda los Naturales de la Nueva-Espania, tenian legitimo Matrimonio, y como tal usaban de él, y con 
esto quedd quitada la duda, que antes se tenia. Ja maior dificultad, que se hallaba para venir 4 determinar esto, y la objecion, que los de la 
opinion contraria ponian, era averse visto por experiencia, que muchas veces estos Indios dexaban las Mugeres, que primero ayian recibido, y no: 
con mucha causa, sino como se les antojaba; y lo mismo hacian ellas, que los dexaban 4 ellos. Para respuesta, y solucion de este argumento, 
se vino a averiguar, que este modo tan facil de repudio, que se experimento en los Indios, solamente lo avian usado, despues que fueron sujetos 
4 los Hspafioles, porque entonces comengd a perderse entre ellos el concierto, y policia, y el rigor de la Justicia, que antes tenian (como dexamos 
mas largamente dicho en él Libro de Costumbres, y Capitulo de el Matrimonio) y perdido el temor, cobraron atrevimiento, para alargarse, y 
estenderse 4 su voluntad, en lo que antes pocas veces se les permitia, quando se les daba permiso en el repudio, 6 lo toleraban, y esto por grande 
causa (como en otra parte decimos.) Otra ragon alegaban de su parte, los que decian, que entre estos Indios, no avia Matrimonio, que era decir, 
que el Matrimonio ha de ser entre legitimas Personas (es 4 saber) que no estén impedidas por Parentesco, en los grados prohibidos, y que estos 
no hacian diferencia de Parienta, 4 no Parienta, porque se hallaban alounos, que hacian vida con sus proprias Hermanas, y otros con sus Ma- 
drastras, y aun quisieron decir, que con sus Suegras; mas los que esto alegaron, no tuvieron racon, lo uno, porque querian obligar a estos Indios, 
en su Infidelidad, 4 la Lei Divina positiva, como fue en su tiempo la Mosaica, y en este de Gracia la Evangelica, de que ellos nunca tuvieron 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. a 

de noche. Despues de la comida (de la qual salian todos borrachos, 6 casi borrachos) comencaban sus Cantares, y 
Bailes, si no eran los desposados, que estaban en su talamo con mucha gravedad, y autoridad, sin mostrar liviandad 

alguna. 

noticia, no estando obligados los Infieles, 4 mas que a la Divina Natural, que es entre los Ascendientes, y Descendientes ; de suerte, qué si estos 
Indios tuvieron por costumbre licita, y usada, casarse con sus Hermanas, fuera licito, y legitimo su Matrimonio, y venidos a la Fé, no los 
apartaran, sino que los dexaran juntos, como antes lo estaban, porque este Matrimonio entre Hermanos, fue valido en el principio de el Mundo, 
y no contradecia a la Lei Natural; y todo lo que 4 Ja Lei Natural no contradice, es licito, quando por Lei Contraria, Divina, 6 Humana positiva, 
no se prohibe, y no estando estos Indios ligados por Ja Mosaica, ni Evangelica, que no sabian, ni avian oido; tampoco les era contradicho este 
Matrimonio, si ellos no tuvieran costumbre contraria, que lo prohibia. Ni tampoco tuvieron racgon de alegar esto, para probar,. que no tenian 
verdadero Matrimonio, porque de los singulares (dice el Filosofo) no ai ciencia, porque las ragones concluientes, han de tener principio de 
principios universales; y asi no se han de traer & consequencia los casos particulares, que no hacen costumbre. 

“Si se hallaron algunos Indios casados con sus Hermanas, fueron solos quatro, 6 cinco, y 4 estos los apartaron, porque en ninguna Provincia de 
la Nueva-Espatfia, se hallo tal costumbre de poderse casar Hermano, con Hermana, ni el tal aiuntamiento se tuvo por licito, ni permitido, sino por 
malo, y reprobado, y digno de castigo. Y si alguno tal se permitia, 6 disimulaba, era por defecto de justicia, 6 porque era Sefior, 6 mui 
Principal, 4 quien muchas veces no tocan las Leies, conforme al dicho vulgar, que quando quieren los Reies. Quanto a la Madrastra, es tambien 
verdad, que entre los Sefiores, y Principales Personas, que usaban de muchas Mugeres, avia una manera de costumbre, que muerto el Padre, el 
Hijo Maior, y Principal, que quedaba con el Sefiorio, 6 con la Casa, y Herencia, tomaba por suias las Mugeres, 6 Mancebas, que dexaba. Y esta 
costumbre era mas, 5 menos en unas Provincias, que en otras, y en las Principales, y Cabeceras de otras, como era Mexico, y Tetzcuco, poco se 
usaba. En otras Provincias, donde mas se usaba, era de esta manera: Que el Hijo, Sucesor de el Padre, tomaba aquellas Mugeres de su Padre, 
en quien no avia avido Hijos, casi como para despertar, levantar, 0 renovar la Generacion, que avia faltado en el Padre, como entre los Hebreos, 
se acostumbraba, que el Hermano Viwo, entrase en el Matrimonio, y Lugar de el Hermano Difunto. Y esta costumbre, aunque se usaba entre 
algunos de estos, no se tenia por buena, ni licita, como tampoco lo fue el Acto, que Absalon tuvo con las Concubinas de su Padre el Rei David 8 
mas antes quanto mas cerca de la Cabega (que son Mexico, y Tetzcuco) tanto mas se tenia por ilicita. Y asi le decian en su Lengua (como en el 
Capitulo de el Repudio, y Libro de Costumbres decimos) Totetzauh, que quiere decir, nuestro Prodigio, 6 Asombro, como quien dice, Prodigio 
es para nosotros, y cosa espantosa. Y estas Mugeres, que asi recibia el Hijo, dexadas de el Padre, no eran para legitimas, sino para Mancebas, 
y usaronlo como Personas Principales, y Poderosas, que no tenian quien les fuese a la manos y no fueron muchos los que de estos se hallaron, y 
estos venidos A Ja Fé, fueron apartados, porque aquel uso, no fue costumbre, sino abuso. 

“Cerca de las Suegras, aunque se inquirid en todo lo de Mexico, y Tetzcuco, no se hallo tal cosa, mas solamente en la Provincia de Mechoacan, 
que es otro Reino distinto, y de por si, se dixo era costumbre de casar con la Suegra, y tambien, que si casaba con Muger Maior en Dias, y la tal 
tenia Hija de otro Marido, por contentar al que entonces tenia, y porque no la desechase por Vieja, le daba la propria Hija; y asi tenia 4 Madre, 
y a Hija, mas no se juzgaba lo uno, ni lo otro por licito, ni honesto, sino por cosa vergoncosa, y que ponia admiracion, y escandalo. 

“ Otra dificultad huvo harto refiida, y ventilada ; y fue, que como algunos casaron en haz de la Santa Madre Iglesia, con la segunda Muger, por 
no acordarse quando se casaban, qual era la primera, despues se vino averiguar, y saber, que fue otra, y no aquella, con quien casaron, si avian de 
recibir la primera, 6 quedarse con aquella, que era segunda, en el tiempo de su Infidelidad, y estaba ya casado con ella en el Christianismo. Esta 
segunda parte tenian algunos, diciendo, que ya que estaba hecho, era mejor dexarlos asi, porque seria escandalo apartar a los que ya eran casados, 
con otras racones, que en defensa de su opinion alegaban. Otros tuvieron lo contrario, diciendo, que antes se ha de permitir, que suceda escan- 
dalo, que dexar la verdad ; porque como dice el Apostol, no se han de hacer cosas malas, aunque de ellas eran de resultar otras buenas ; y si se 
pretendia estorvar el escandalo exterior, maior dafio era el que se seguia en lo interior, pues se repudiaba sin causa la Muger legitima, y quedaba 
la Manceba, y que por ningun Derecho podia ser su Muger, porque sabiendose qual era la primera Muger, se sabia, que aquella era la legitima, y 
viviendo aquella, qualquiera otra era Manceba, como lo era de el Rei Herodes, Herodias, por vivir su Hermano Felipe, que era su legitimo 
Marido. Esta verdad, fue la que prevalecié, y asi a los tales los apartaban de la segunda, y los hacian bolver a la primera. De estas dificultades 
huvo tantas en los Matrimonios de los Indios, que excedieron el numero de los casos, que todos los Doctores, Teologos, y Canonistas escrivieron, 
con que los Ministros de esta nueva Iglesia anduvieron bien afligidos, y congojados, especialmente desde el Afio de 1530. hasta el de 1540. y los 
Clandestinos por su parte, les dieron harto en que entender, hasta que se publico en esta Tierra, el Sacro Concilio Tridentino, que fue el Afio de 
WSBN6” 

The testimony of Acosta, Torquemada, and Garcia, haying been frequently had recourse to, as authorities on which the greatest dependence 
can be placed in every thing relating to the laws and institutions of the Indians, we may be excused inserting here the eulogy which Garcia has 
pronounced on the former writer, wherein he takes occasion to mention the extreme diligence with which he himself had compiled his History ; so 
that if any suspicion be entertained of the sources from which the information contained in this work has ‘been obtained, it may be immediately 
laid aside, since nothing has been asserted except on the authority of the most accredited historians. Of Torquemada it is unnecessary to say 
more, than that every page of his Indian Monarchy affords fresh proof of his merits as an historian; whilst the Mexican Paintings which have 
escaped the ravages of time, confirm the veracity of his accounts even where they appear most improbable. “Otros han escrito, fuera de los 
Autores nombrados, como son Ortelio, el P. Roman, Augustino ; Antonio de Herrera, Coronista del Rei N. S.iel P. M. Maluenda, que aunque 
refieren lo que vieron, 6 leieron, no hace tanto a nuestro proposito; porque no nos dicen cosa, que otros no la aian dicho, i escrito primero : 
aunque como de Autores tan graves, confieso, que me he aprovechado de lo que refieren, que hace a mi proposito. Pero quien con maior cuidado 
curiosidad, i estudio se ocupo en escrivir de las Indias, fue el P. Joseph de Acosta, de la Compania de Jesus, el qual, desde que llego a ‘Tierra- 
firme, i Peri, se did 4 la consideracion, i especulacion de las cosas naturales de aquella Tierra; para lo qual le aiudd mucho ser Provincial de 
aquella Provincia; porque tuvo ocasion, para andar casi todo el Peru, i notar lo que en este Reino ai: conviene a saber, Cielo, Aire, Agua, 
Tierra, Temple, Plantas, Animales, Aves, i Hombres: de lo qual escrivid dos Libros en Latin, viviendo en aquel Reino, i despues, haviendo, 
venido a el de Espafia, los tradujo en Lengua vulgar, i Castellana, dilatando su Historia, con otros Libros de las cosas, que notd, vid, i contemplé, 

asi en el Pirt, como en la Nueva-Espafia, 4 do vino, segun entiendo, para poderlas referir como Testigo de vista. 

‘12 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

La Ceremonia de traer en andas 4 la Moca, aunque los primeros Religiosos la vieron muchas veces, en diversas 
partes de este Reino, a los principios, io tambien la vi, en estos tiempos, en un Pueblo Iamado Miacatlan, de la 

“ Yo, aunque indigno de ser contado entre Autores tan graves, i honrados, estuve tambien en aquellas Partes; vivi en el Perti nueve Aftos, 
adonde todo este Tiempo tuve grande curiosidad en ver, preguntar, oir, i sabir casi infinitas cosas, que en aquella Tierra ai. -Pero en tres cosas 
particularmente reparé mas que en otras. la primera, qué Reies governaron aquel Remo, qué Guerras tuvieron, i qué sucesos, hasta que en- 
traron los Espafioles? La segunda, de qué parte fueron a aquella Tierra, i las demas de las Indias los primeros Pobladores? La tercera, si se 
predicd el Evangelio en estas Partes en Tiempo de los Apostoles? De todo lo qual tuve proposito de hacer tres Libros, contenidos en un mismo 
volumen, i asi comencé a trabajar en lo primero: sino que despues, por haver venido 4 la Nueva-Espaiia, i visto en ella muchas cosas, juntamente 
con la informacion vocal, i escrita de cosas que importaban para lo segundo, i tercero, mucho, consideré que la Historia se aumentaba, i crecia 
tanto, que no podia sacarla toda junta a luz, i asi mudé parecer, llegado a Espafia, i me determiné de sacar primero a luz el segundo intento, que 
es de el Origen de los Indios, dexando el primero, 1 tercero, para despues, con el favor, i aiuda de Dios, trabajar en ellos, 1 sacallos en publico, si 
el que tengo entre manos diere gusto, i contentamiento. 

“Lo que, pues, en este Libro pretendo tratar es, del Origen, i principio de los Indios que habitan en las Indias Occidentales, que es la quarta 
parte del Mundo, de nuevo descubierta, 4 quien: los Cosmografos Modernos Haman America. Refiero muchas opiniones, con sus fundamentos, 
i racones, i pongo las objeciones, i dudas, que contra ellas se pueden ofrecer, con su respuesta, i solucion. Acerca de todo lo qual ha de notar, i 
advertir el Lector, que aunque algunas Opiniones que refiero, tienen Autores que realmente fueron de aquel parecer, pero les anado Yo muchos 
fundamentos, i dudas, con sus soluciones, i replicas, i otras cosas, que con grandisimo trabajo, cuidado, i costa he visto en el Peru, Nueva-Espaiia, 
Tierra-firme, i Islas de aquel parage, de que tomé motivo, i ocasion, para fundar otras Opiniones, de las quales puedo decir, con verdad, que soi 
Yo el Autor ; hablando particularmente como tal, en cada una, no obstante mi sentencia, opinion, i parecer, que despues de todas ellas pongo: para 
todo lo qual me aiudo mucho lo que he leido en Libros impresos, i Relaciones escritas de mano, que tratan de aquellas Partes, i de la China, i 
Indias Occidentales. Y finalmente, la Relacion vocal que tuve de los Indios, i Espafioles, asi Seculares, como Religiosos, i Clerigos, que viven en 
aquellas Tierras, 1 doctrinan a los Indios. Yo holgaria, que de tal manera fuesen fundadas aquestas Opiniones, que cada qual de los Lectores 
hallase alouna que quadrase 4 su entendimiento, convencido de las racones, i fundamentos, que en ellas pongo; porque siendo asi, daré por bien 
empleado mi trabajo, cansancio, i costa, i sera asimismo golosina, sefiuelo, i cebo, para moverme & trabajar, i cobrar nuevo animo, i brio en la 

S 

composicion de los otros dos Libros, que arriba prometi.” 
“ Others have written, besides the authors already named, such as Ortelius, the Augustine Father Roman, Antonio de Herrera the histo- 
riographer of the King our Lord, and Father Maluenda, who, although they relate what they have seen or read, have not rendered us any great 
assistance ; since they say nothing which others have not said and written before them: being however such grave writers, I confess that I have 
availed myself of whatever was to my purpose in their works. But he who bestowed the greatest care, research, and diligence, in writing of the 
Indies, was Father Joseph de Acosta, of the Society of Jesus, who on his first arrival in Tierra-firme and Peru, devoted himself to the con- 
templation and consideration of the natural productions of those regions, enjoying many facilities from his situation of provincial of that province ; 
for he took the opportunity of exploring nearly all Peru, and of observing whatever that kingdom contains ; namely, its climate, air, water, soil, 
temperature, plants, animals, birds, and population, of which he wrote two books in Latin, while residing in that kingdom: and having after- 
wards returned there from Spain, he translated them into Spanish, and augmented his History with the addition of other books, treating of what 
he remarked, saw, and contemplated as well in Peru as in New Spain, where he went, as I understand, for the sake of qualifying himself to 
speak as an eye-witness. I, although unworthy of being reckoned amongst such grave and-esteemed authors, have been likewise in those coun- 
tries; I lived nine years in Peru, during the whole of which period I felt great curiosity to see, inquire, hear, and know an infinite variety of 
things connected with that territory; but my attention was directed to three particular subjects above all others; the first of which was, what kings 
governed that kingdom, what wars they waged, and what political events occurred before the arrival of the Spaniards: the second was, from 
whence the first settlers in that kingdom and the other Indian provinces had proceeded: the third was, whether the Gospel had been preached in 
those parts in the age of the Apostles,—all which matters I intended to discuss in three books, which were to be comprised in the same volume ; 
and accordingly I commenced my labours on the first: but afterwards having gone to New Spain, and there having seen many things besides 
the oral and written information which I obtained on subjects of much importance to the second and third books, I reflected that the History 
had received such accessions that I should not be able to publish it all at the same time. I therefore altered my intentions on my arrival in 
Spain, and determined first to publish the second treatise, which relates to the origin of the Indians, omitting the first and second, in order after- 

wards, with the favour and assistance of God, to bestow my labour upon them and present them to the public, if that which I now offer should — 
prove agreeable to the taste of the reader. What I intend then to treat of in this book is the origin and descent of the Indians who mhabit the 
West Indies, which is the fourth and newly discovered part of the globe, to which modern cosmographers have given the name of America. I 
enumerate many opinions, with the grounds and reasons on which they are founded, and I add the objections and doubts which others may advance 
against them, with their answers and solutions. In respect to all which, the reader should be admonished and advised, that although some of the 
opinions which I enumerate are those of writers who really professed them, I still advance many grounds and doubts with their solutions and 
answers, besides other things which, with excessive labour, care and cost, I have seen in Peru, New Spain, Tierra-firme, and the islands 
situated thereabouts, which have furnished me with the opportunity of laying the foundations for other opinions, of which I can affirm with truth 
that Iam the author, speaking particularly in that character in each of the opinions to which I advert. Notwithstanding the private conclusions 
that I have been led to adopt, which I have added after the rest,—in all which I have been much assisted by the printed books and manuscript 
histories which I have read which treat of those countries and of China and the West Indies, and by the oral information which I have received 
from the Indians and Spaniards, as well laymen as ecclesiastics, regular and parochial, who live in those parts and teach the Indians,—it would 
give me much satisfaction if these opinions were so well grounded, that every reader might discover one which corresponded with his own views, 
convinced by the reasons and grounds which I add to them; for I should then consider my time, trouble, and cost well expended; and it would 

likewise be a temptation, motive, and encouragement to induce me to labour and to rally fresh force and spirit for the composition of the other 
two books which I have promised above.” 

A marginal note by the editor of the last edition of the Origin of the Indians, printed at Madrid in the year 1729, says at page 21, that. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 13 

jurisdiccion de Quauhnahuac, Cabeca del Marquesado, cuio Seftor es el Marqués del Valle, donde el Governador del 
Pueblo casaba un Hijo suio, con Hija de otro Governador de Atlacholoayan, tres leguas el un Pueblo del otro, y 
como Sefiorcetes (que al fin lo eran) usaron de la Ceremonia antigua, traiendo la Moca, en andas, con mucha 
Magestad, acompafiada de mucho Gentio, asi de Parientes, y Deudos, como de otras Personas de el mismo Pueblo, & 
la qual estaba aguardando el desposado, y la salid a recibir, con Trompetas, y Musica, y la recibid en su casa, siendo 
casi las ocho de la noche, y con esta Magestad la trajeron a la Iglesia, donde los vide desposar. De manera, que 
esto, que no es pecado, paso alli en publico ; si huvo otra alguna ceremonia supersticiosa, y que contradiga & nuestra 
Santa Lei, no la vimos, ni entendimos, y por sin duda tengo, que no la havria, por estar id mui informados, en la Fé, 
sino que harian esto como Hombres, que podian, y no ser ceremonia vedada, pues en si no es mala. 

Algunos, que se havian enamorado, y aiuntado secretamente, y haviendo sido algun tiempo amancebados, si se 
querian casar, concertabanse, mostrando su consentimiento matrimonial 4 algunas Personas, y Deudos; y si eran 
ricos, usaban las ceremonias dichas ; pero si eran pobres, acortabanse en los gastos, midiendose con el posible, y con 
pocos combidados celebraban sus Bodas, y quedaban casados, y tenidos de alli adelante por vecinos de el Pueblo. 

En Ja Provincia de Paria, demas de otras ceremonias, la que tenian por mas principal, era carearse el uno al otro ; 
y aunque despues de casados, segun la opinion de todos, estuviesen juntos mucho tiempo, si el uno de los dos no 
miraba al otro, por algun disgusto, 6 descontento, no se tenian por casados, y se dejaban, diciendo: Nunca lo mire. 
Si bien se considera esta ceremonia, es la misma, que usaban las Doncellas de los Talcheas, que havian de reirse, y 
mirarse, para recibirse por esposos, como vimos en el Capitulo pasado. 

En la Provincia Mixteca, entre otras, usaban de esta ceremonia, cortabanle al desposado una guedeja de Cabellos, 
y otra 4 la desposada, y tomabanse las manos, y atabanles las puntas de las ropas, y por remate de las esponsalias 
traia el desposado a cuestas, por un breve espacio, a la desposada ; queriendo deciren esto (Alo que me parece) la 
pesada, y nueva carga, que se hechaba a cuestas, que en realidad de verdad lo es, y mas si la Muger sale aviesa, y no 

‘es la que debe. En otras muchas partes los trasquilaban, en sefial del primer Matrimonio. 

En la Provincia de Paria usaban juntarse todos los vecinos, para celebrar las Bodas; y las Mugeres combidadas? 
tralan consigo de sus viandas, y comidas, y de los Vinos, que beben, y de esto en mucha cantidad, todo lo que podian 
traer 4 cuestas. Los Hombres llevaban haces de cafias, y de Ierva, para armar la casa de la nueva Novia (segun lo 
acostumbran en aquellas Costas.) Hecha la casa, luego el Novio, y la Novia se adornaban conforme su caudal, y 
posible, ataviandose con vestidos, y joias de Oro, Cuentas, y Piedras de valor, y estima. Pero si no tenian estas 
cosas para su adorno, y fiesta, los vecinos se las prestaban. Sentaban la Novia entre las Doncellas, y al Novio entre 
los Mancebos, apartados los unos de los otros; luego cercaban a la Novia todas las Doncellas, y otras Mugeres, 
bailando, y saltando; y lo mismo hacian todos los Mancebos, en la presencia del Novio: luego venia un Hombre, y 
cortabale los Cabellos por el cabo de las orejas; y a la Novia se los cortaba una Muger, por la frente. WVenida la 
noche, tomaba por la mano la Esposa, al Esposo, y se iban juntos al lugar, donde consumaban su Matrimonio, y de 
esta manera quedaban casados. Algunos mui pobres labradores, que no se hallaban con suficiente caudal, concer- 
taban sus| Bodas conforme a su pobrega, y recibian 4 la Muger, con afecto conjugal; y despues trabajaban algun 
tiempo, y llegaban algun caudal, para celebrar las Bodas ; y llegado, y junto lo necesario, combidaban 4 sus Deudos, 
y Parientes, y con ciertas ceremonias de pobres, solemnicaban la Boda*. 

Si algun Mancebo se enamoraba de alguna Moca, y se aiuntaban los dos, sin el consentimiento, y noticia de sus 
Padres, aunque con afecto matrimonial, pasado algun Tiempo, en que ganaban lo necesario, para ‘la celebracion de 
sus Bodas, iba el Moco a los Padres de la Muger, y deciales: Io digo mi culpa, y conozco, que os he ofendido en 
haveros llevado 4 vuestra Hija, y haverme casado con ella, sin vuestro consentimiento, havemos errado entrambos, en 
havernos aiuntado, sin vuestra licencia; pero sabed, que de consentimiento de ambos se hico, y vivimos los dos, 
como casados; si aora sois contentos de que hagamos la solemnidad, y ceremonias de casados, vedlo, y si no, veis 
aqui vuestra Hija, recibidla; pero advertid, que queremos de aqui adelante trabajar, y vivir bien, y buscar de que nos 

Garcia published the result of his researches on the third subject, which he proposed to investigate, in a work entitled “ Predicacion del Evangelio 
en el Nuevo Mundo, viviendo los Apostoles,’ which was printed in the year 1625. The title seems to indicate that his inquiries were very 
successful ; but all our exertions have failed to procure a copy of it. 
* Tt was a Jewish custom also to invite guests to marriage feasts, to which Christ refers in the parable of the marriage of the king’s son.— 
_ Matthem, chap. xxi. 
E 

14 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

podamos sustentar, y criar 4 nuestros Hijos, y vuestros Nietos, y asi os rogamos, que nos perdoneis, y que nos con- 
cedais lo que osrogamos. A Caso ia hecho, y que el remedio no era apartarlos, respondian los Padres, y Deudos, 
que tenian por bien, que fuese rato, y pasase el Matrimonio, amonestandoles, 4 que fuesen buenos, en lo por venir, 
y futuro; pero que pues lo havian hecho, sin su licencia, y ellos mismos lo havian concertado, que sufriesen qual- 
quiera adversidad, y trabajo, que les viniese, si de algun delito fuesen, en algun tiempo, acusados, y no les hechasen 
a ellos la culpa; pues la queja no era de los Padres, contra cuia voluntad se casaron, sino suia, en haverse concertado 
clandestinamente. Esto decian, porque, segun sus agorerias, y malos abusos, crelan, que por haverse casado clan- 
destina, y subrepticiamente, les havia de venir algun mal suceso, y havian de cometer algun otro pecado, de que 
huviesen de ser gravemente castigados. Y esto dicho, y hecho, celebraban sus Fiestas, segun lo toleraba, y permitia 

su caudal, y posible, y quedaban en Gracia los unos, de los otros, 

Caritruto VI. 

Que prosigue las Ceremonias de los Matrimonios Antiguos, y Modernos, ast de los pasados, como de 
los presentes Indios de esta Neuva-Espana ; y se dice ser en ellos mui ordinaria la Oracion, y 
Abstinencia en este Acto, y Contrato, y no menos haver sido costumbre antigua. 

Hecuas las Ceremonias dichas en el Capitulo pasado, y saliendose A bailar los combidados, quedabanse los despo- 
sados haciendo penitencia,.la qual comunmente les duraba tiempo de quatro dias; no consumaban el Matrimonio, 
ni salian de su aposento, sino para las necesidades naturales; porque en salir para otra qualquier cosa, temian 
haverles de suceder algun mal infortunio ; en especial crelan de la Doncella, que havia de ser liviana, y deshonesta, 
si no se abstenia de salir fuera de su recogimiento todos los quatro Dias. Para la quarta noche, que era quando se 
havia de consumar el Matrimonio, venian dos Viejos, que eran de las Guardas del Templo, y aparejabanles una cama, 
la qual era de dos petates, 6 esteras mui pintadas, y enmedio ponian unas Plumas, y una Piedra, que llaman Chalchi- 
huitl, de color de Esmeralda, aunque no fina: ponian tambien un pedaco de cucro de Tigre, debajo de las esteras, y 
sobre ellas tendian wnas mantas, & manera de sabanas, y a las quatro partes de esta cama ponian unas caias verdes, 
y unas puas, 6 espinas de Maguey, para que se sacasen sangre los Novios de la lengua, y de las orejas, y la sacrifi- 
casen, y ofreciesen 4 sus Dioses. Las puas ensangrentadas, ponian sobre la cama. Nunca se lababan, ni baftaban 
en estos quatro Dias, que aiunaban*, y hacian penitencia, que en algunas Tierras, en especial en las calientes, que 
lo tienen de costumbre, era mui grande la que hacian en esto; y es ceremonia antigua, en actos penitenciales, y 
de aiuno, ni labarse, ni ungirse la cabeca, como lo acostumbraban los de Palestina. Vestianse para estos Dias de 
su abstinencia unas vestiduras nuevas, con ciertas insignias, y sefiales de los Idolos, 3 quien tenian mas devocion. , 
A la media noche, por el discurso de este tiempo, salian de su aposento para ofrecer Sacrificio, quemando Incienso 
sobre el Altar, que tenian en su Oratorio, que les es mui ordinario, aun aora en el Tiempo de su Christianismo : 
incensaban tambien las cafias, que estaban sobre la cama; y asimismo ponian aquellos quatro Dias comida, por 
ofrenda, en honor de los Dioses sus Abogados. Pasados los quatro Dias, en la manera dicha, consumaban el Ma- 
trimonio, y tomaban las esteras, y ropas, que havia sido cama para aquel efecto, y las cafias, y comida, que havian 
ofrecido, y todo junto llevabanlo al Templo, como en hacimiento de Gracias. 

Otra ceremonia, casi como esta, usaban los del Pueblo de Israél, acerca del acostar los Novios, la primera 
noche de sus Bodas, que les ponian una sabana, 6 lienco, para que en él se estampase el testimonio de la virginidad, 
que era la sangre, que del primer acto se vertia, la qual se quitaba de la cama delante de testigos, que pudiesen 
afirmar haverla visto, con la sefial de la sangre, que comprobaba la corrupcion de la Doncella, y embuelta, 6 do- 
blada, la ponian en cierto lugar, diputado para esto, donde quedaba guardada, en memoria de la limpiega, y puridad, 
con que la dicha Doncella venia 4 poder de su Marido. Seria posible, que quisiese significar entre estos Indios lo 

* David is said, in the twelfth chapter of the Second Book of Samuel, after having been rebuked by the prophet Nathan for his adultery with 
the wife of Uriah, to have done penance, fasting and lying on the ground in an unwashed state for six days, lamenting the sickness of his child; but 
when he was informed on the seventh day that the child was dead, he is said to have arose from the earth and washed and anointed himself. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. : as 

mismo, este cuidado de los viejos, de traer manta, 6 sabana, y tenderla sobre la cama de los desposados, para los 
primeros actos matrimoniales ; y es creible, que seria este el intento, pues la ropa, y esteras, que sirvieron en este 
Sacrificio, se Ilevaban al Templo, y no servian mas en casa, como ni mas, ni menos la ceremonia antigua de guardar 
la sabana, con sangre, entre los Hebreos, en lugar particular, y seguro. : 

Si en la Camara, 6 Aposento donde havian estado los Novios celebrando sus Bodas, se hallaba algun carbon 
caido, 6 alguna sefial-de cenica, tenianlo por mal aguero, é inferian de él, no haver de vivir los desposados, con 
paz, y sosiego, ni permanecer por mucho Tiempo juntos ; pero si hallaban algun grano de Maiz, 6 de otra alguna 
semilla, atribuianlo 4 mucha prosperidad, y conservacion de vida pacifica, y permanencia del Matrimonio. Al 
quinto Dia se bafiaban sobre unas esteras de espadafias verdes, guardando entrambos en este acto mucha honestidad, 
y cubriendo con cuidado las partes de su puridad. En este bafio les servia el Agua, y se la hechaba encima uno de 
los Ministros del Templo, haciendo esta ceremonia, como que les hechaba la bendicion. A los Seftores se les he- 
chaba el Agua quatro veces, 4 reverencia de la Diosa de las Aguas, llamado Chalchihuitlhuechue, y otras quatro le 
hechaban vino tambien, a reverencia del Dios Baco, Uamado Tezcatzoncatl, que segun esto debian de ser estos los 
Dioses Abogados de las Bodas, como tambien los tenian los Gentiles Antiguos (como id hemos dicho) luego les 
vestian nuevas, y limpias vestiduras, y daban al Novio un Incensario, para que perfumase a los Idolos, que debian 
de ser los dichos, que tenian presentes, y en sucasa. A la Novia ponian sobre la cabeca plumas blancas, y emplu- 
mabanle tambien los pies, y las manos, con otras coloradas. Acabado todo esto, repartianse otra vez mantas, y 
cantaban todos, y bailaban, cargando las barrigas de comida, y las cabecas, mas que con Agua. Esto dicho era 
casi general costumbre entre estas Gentes en sus aiuntamientos matrimoniales, salvo, que los que no tenian tanto 
posible, no hacian todas las dichas ceremonias, ni combidaban 4 tantos, sino ajustabanse a su posibilidad, y cele- 
braban sus Bodas conforme les alcangaba el posible. Los Macatecas, no solo aiunaban, y hacian penitencia; pero 
abstenianse de consumar el Matrimonio, por tiempo de veinte Dias, exercitandose en estos actos penitenciales. 

No sé de donde tuvieron estas Gentes motivo de usar esta ceremonia, en especial los Mexicanos, aiunando 
quatro Dias, y haciendo penitencia, y orando 4 sus falsos Dioses ; pero sé, que fue Ceremonia hecha por el Santo 
Mancebo Tobias, quando se desposo con Sara, Hija de Raguel, el qual se abstuvo de los afectos Matrimoniales, 
por consejo del Angel Rafaél, tres noches, y 4 la quarta consumaron el Matrimonio, gastando las tres antecedentes, 
en oraciones, y peticiones 4 Dios, exortando el Bendito Moco 4 su Esposa 4 lo mismo; lo qual hecho asi, consi- 
guieron el fin de su Matrimonio; de manera, que lo que podemos inferir de aqui es, que lo primero, que se debe 
hacer en los Desposorios, es, pedir 4 Dios favor, para conservarse en el estado de casado, a que se aplica, y abste- 
nerse de los actos carnales, por algun tiempo, 4 exemplo de los Santos, que asi lo hicieron. Pero es gran confu- 
sion, para los Christianos, que aora viven, saber, que esta Ceremonia fue usada de Gente buena antiguamente, y 
que ellos aora no la usen; y lo que mas debe confundirlos, es, que no solo pueden aprenderlo de los Santos, sino 
que estos Indios Gentiles se la ensefian, usando de oracion, sacrificio, y abstinencia en los primeros Dias de sus 
Contratos, y Matrimonios; maiormente, que ai Canon expreso, que dice asi: Quando el Esposo, y Esposa han 
de ser bendecidos del Sacerdote, sean llevados de sus Padrinos; pero despues de haver recibido las Bendiciones, 
abstenganse aquella noche de su aiuntamiento, por reverencia de las dichas Bendiciones. Y en otra parte dice, que 
por dos, 6 tres Dias se dén 4 la oracion, y guarden castidad. Estas palabras de el Derecho son de San Evaristo 
Papa, y Martir ; pero aunque es verdad, que no son de Mandamiento expreso, 2lo menos, como dice la Glosa, 
son de Consejo; y siendo el Consejo Santo, es racon que se tome; y esta es la racon, porque entre el Desposorio, 
y Velaciones, ai tiempo intermedio, para que se confiesen, y comulguen, que es un acto Christiano, y necesario, 
para recibir este Sacramento, que en Lei de Gracia lo es; y por esto se dice en el Concilio Tridentino : Amonesta 
el Santo Sinodo a todos los casados, que antes de contraer el Matrimonio (& lo menos tres Dias) antes de consu- 
marlo, confiesen sus culpas, y pecados, y lleguense dignamente al Santo Sacramento de la Eucharistia: De 
manera, que es Ceremonia digna de alabanca, y mui santa, esta de suspender los actos Matrimoniales, por alguno, 
6 algunos Dias, para vacar 4 Dios, y pedirle los buenos fines del Matrimonio. Y esta Ceremonia hallamos entre 
estos Indios Idolatras, ¢ Infieles, no s¢ de quien aprendida, si id no es, que se la ensefio la ragon, por ser, como 
es, en s) cosa buena; de la qual carecen nuestras Gentes Espafiolas, que aun no se han bien tomado las manos, 
quando id usan de el poder, que les parece, que tienen en la Muger, que han recibido por propria: remedielo Dios, 

‘que es el Poderoso, que io no puedo mas, que decirlo, y aun. abominarlo, porque parece, que no se pretende, en 

16 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

esto, mas que la consumacion del gusto, y no la consecucion del fin, para que fue ordenado, de tener Hijos, para 
la multiplicacion, y conservacion de la especie. Verdad sea, que me acuerdo de aquel Matrimonio de Her, Hijo 
del Patriarca Judas, con Tamar, Muger de mucha disposicion, y hermosura, con la qual casd, y 4 breves Dias le 
mato Dios; porque dice la Sagrada Escritura, que era malo en su presencia; y entrando su Hermano Onias en 
su lugar, por segundo Marido, no acudia a la intencion del Matrimonio, que era la procreacion de los Hijos, por 
lo qual lo castigd Dios, y quito la vida. Y dice Lira, que el pecado de su Hermano Her fue este mismo; y que la 
causa de cometerle era, porque su Muger no se hiciese prefiada, porque en los Dias de su parto no le privase de 
los actos venereos; y tambien, porque pariendo, no se estragase, y perdiese de su hermosura, que es de la que 
mas gocaba, sin advertir, que no era aquel el fin del Matrimonio; de manera, que castiga Dios estos desconciertos, 
y pone freno, en estas demasias, quando los Matrimonios no llevan mas fin, que easarse, por gocar de la hermo- 
sura, y gracias de la Muger con quien casa. Y de estos, si ai algunos, diganlo los. casos muchos, que acerca de 

estos pasan en el Mundo. 

Carrruto VIL. 

Donde se trata de los Grados de Consanguimdad, que estas Gentes Indianas tenian ; y se declaran, 
los que son forcosos, y de Le: Natural. 

Era Lei comun, y aprobada costumbre, entre estos Indios Occidentales, tener Grados de Consanguinidad, entre 
si, los quales reconocian por impedimento forcoso, para no poder contraer Matrimonio, entre los comprehendidos 
en ellos. Estos eran, Padre con Hija, Hijo con Madre, Suegro con Nuera, Ierno con Suegra, Padrastro con 
Antenada, Antenado con Madrastra, y Hermano con Hermana. ‘Todos estos Grados eran ilicitos, y dirimian el 
Matrimonio ; y si algunos eran hallados haver cometido este acto, eran castigados, por ello, como transgresores de 
su usada, y prohibida costumbre (como lo vimos en el Libro del Govierno, y Leies.) Estos Grados de Consangui- 
nidad (aunque no de una misma manera) han sido comunes en el Mundo, y mui usados de las Gentes de él, los 
quales se entienden de dos maneras. El uno es Natural, que segun difinicion de los Hombres Doctos, es un nudo, 
y junta de muchas Personas, que se corresponden, y comunican en sangre, que decienden de un tronco, y cabega, 
que guardan entre si un cierto orden, y grado de conocimiento, en linage, y parentesco. 

E] fundamento es, que como la Consanguinidad sea un nudo, y comunicacion de sangre, de necesidad se sigue 
cierto Amor Natural, como lo declara Aristoteles, diciendo, que el Amor maior, y mas apretado, despues del de 
los Padres, es el de los Hermanos, como aquellos, que participan de un mismo tronco, y una misma sangre. Este 
Amor Natural dicho, no se deriva 4 muchas Generaciones ; porque. dado caso, que los Hombres se amen unos 2 
otros naturalmente, no es en racon de ser Deudos, y Parientes, sino en quanto cada Animal, como dice el Filosofo, 
ama 4 su semejantc ; y por serlo un Hombre de otro, se aman unos a otros naturalmente, y no por venir todos de 
un Padre, conviene a saber, de Adan antes del Dilurio, 0 de Noe despues de el; por quanto la fuerc¢a de este Amor, 
que nace de esta consanguinidad, se disminuie por discurso de Tiempo, y en la debilitacion de la Naturaleca; y asi 
se halla esta Consanguinidad, en diversas Familias, en unas mas, y en otras menos, como lo prueba, y declara doc- 
tamente el Abulense, en el lugar citado, que por no ser de los que pretendo, .en este Capitulo, dejo de ponerlo. 
Otra Consanguinidad ai, que se llama legal, que no difiere de la pasada, en racon de su esencia, por quanto es una 
misma cosa con ella; pero diferenciase de ella, en racon de la asignacion, de sus grados; porque en la: Natural no 
ai Grados determinados ; porque (como hemos dicho) en unas Familias, y Generaciones dura mas, que en otras, 
segun la maior, 6 menor fuerga, de la sangre, que los Padres comunican 4 los Hijos, en el acto de la Generacion ; 
y asi decimos, que esta Consanguinidad no tiene grados determinados; pero la legal si, porque la Lei, 6 Leies pro- 
hibien ciertos Grados, en los quales no se pueden los Hombres casar, con las de su misma parentela, y sangre, asi 
para contraer Matrimonio, como para suceder a los Padres, y Progenitores, en las Herencias, y Bienes. Esta de- 
terminacion (como diximos) aunque comprehende 4 todas, 6 4 las mas Naciones del Mundo, no a lo menos en el 
numero de los grados. 

Verdad sea, que entre algunas Gentes no ha hayido estos Grados de Consanguinidad, y que han contraido Her- 

we 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 17 

mano con Hermana. Y entre muchos Barbaros (como despues veremos) han usado esta costumbre bestial, de usar 
los Hijos de las Madres, como bestias sin ragon, de los quales grados, el primero, es entre Hermanos ; porque el 
Padre, nila Madre, en orden del Hijo no dice grado ninguno, porque son el principio de este Parentesco, y Con- 
sanguinidad ; pero entre las Gentes, que usan, y han usado de racon, han sido, y son prohibidos algunos grados, 
pero varia, y diferentemente. 

En la Lei Mosaica (que era Divina) no se prohibia, sino en el primer grado, que era no poder casar, ni contraer 
Hermano con Hermana; pero Primos Hermanos contralan, y se casaban, y los que nosotros Ilamamos Primos 
Segundos, y Terceros. Enel Testamento Nuevo, y Lei Evangelica, en que de presente vivimos, se acostumbraron 
4 los principios siete grados de Consanguinidad, los quales tenia prohibidos Nuestra Madre la Santa Iglesia, y dentro 
de este numero de grados, ninguno podia contraer Matrimonio, sino era con Dispensacion, que nacia de legitima 
causa; pero despues se redujeron 4 quatro, por los muchos, y mui grandes inconvenientes, que de este largo 
Parentesco resultaban: lo qual duro hasta el tiempo de Inocencio Tercero, que en un Concilio General, determind, 
no ser mas de quatro los Grados, y dirimio los tres de ellos, como parece en los Sacros Canones. Este grado de 
Consanguinidad, prohibido en la Lei Antigua, conviene a saber, no casarse Hermano, con Hermana: es el que se 
hallo entre estos Idolatras Mexicanos, sz saber, que entre Primos Hermanos, 6 Segundos corriese este im- 
pedimento. 

Los Indios de la Vera-Paz muchas veces, segun el Parentesco, que usaban, era fuerca que casasen Hermanos con 
Hermanas, y era la racon esta: Acostumbraban no casar los de un Tribu, 6 Pueblo, con las Mugeres del mismo 
Pueblo, y las buscaban, que fuesen de otro; porque no contaban por de su Familia, y Parentesco los Hijos que 
nacian en el Tribu, 6 Linage ageno, aunque la Muger huviese procedido de su mismo Linage; y era la racon, 
porque aquel Parentesco se atribuia 4 solo los Hombres. Por manera, que si algun Sefior daba su Hija, 4 otro de 
otro Pueblo, aunque no tuviese otro heredero este Senor, sino solos los Nietos, Hijos de su Hija, no los reconocia 
por Nietos, ni Parientes, en racon de hacerlos herederos, por ser Hijos del otro Sefior de otro Pueblo; y asi se le 
buscaba al tal Sefior, Muger que fuese de otro Pueblo, yno de el proprio. Y asi sucedia, que los Hijos de estas 
Mugeres, no tenian por Parientes 4 los Deudos de su Madre, por estar en otro Pueblo, y esto se entiende, en quanto 
4 casarse con ellas, que lo tenian por licito, aunque en lo demis se reconocian. Y porque la cuenta de su Paren- 
tesco era entre solos los Hombres, y no por parte de las Mugeres, por esto no tenian impedimento, para casarse, 
con los tales Parientes ; y asi se casaban con todos los grados de Consanguinidad, porque mas por Hermana tenian 
qualquiera Muger de su Linage, aunque fuese remotisima, y no tuviese memoria del grado, en que le tocaba, que la 
Hija de su propia Madre, como fuese havida de otro Marido, y por este error se casaban, con las Hermanas de 
Madre, y no de Padre. Tambien se casaban con las Cufadas, que tuviesen Hijos, 6 no los tuviesen de otros 
Maridos, y con las Madrastras concurriendo, a su parecer, ciertas legitimas causas. 

Los Moradores de la Provincia de Nicaragua, no contraian, ni se casaban con Hermanas, lo qual tenian por 
rigurosa Lei prohibido: todos los demas Deudos, y Parentescos, no eran prohibidos ; y asi se podian casar, y se 
casaban, Primos con Primas, Tios con Sobrinas, y otros Parientes, con otras de su misma Sangre. Las Gentes de 
los Reinos del Piru, tuvieron por grados prohibidos casarse Hermano con Hermana; Primo Hermano, con Prima 
Hermana; Sobrino, con Tia; Tio, con Sobrina; y tenian este abuso por gran delito; porque no solamente 
llamaban Hermanas, Madres, y Hijos, 4 los que verdaderamente lo eran; pero tambien 4 los Primos Hermanos, 
-Tlamaban Hermanos, y alos Tios, Padres; y 4 los Sobrinos, Hijos. 

Los Mexicanos, y Tetzcucanos, en todos sus Reinos, y Provincias, jamas usaron sus casamientos, en los grados, 
que algunas de estas Naciones referidas, mas antes guardaban los grados de consanguinidad, que se han dicho: 
como el Padre Frai Toribio Motolinia lo dice en su Memorial, y supolo mui de raiz, y averiguadamente ; porque él, 
con los demas, primeros Religiosos, de aquellos Tiempos, de la conversion de estas Gentes, trabajaron con grande 
solicitud, y cuidado, por saber los grados, en que contraian su contrato natural, y Matrimonio, para vér como debian 
proceder, en el Christianismo; y no hallaron serles licito por Lei, ni por costumbre, ninguno de los grados referidos ; 
y asi, nunca tal casamiento se tuvo por licito, antes fue siempre havido por ilicito, y reprobado, y digno de gran 
castigo. Verdad sea, que se hallaron en el distrito de esta Nueva-Espaiia, quatro, 6 cinco casados de esta manera, y 
en grados ilicitos, y prohibidos, que fue con Hermanas suias: pero esto no fue, porque no havia costumbre contraria, 
sino porque eran Reies, y Gente poderosa, los quales no tienen contradicion, y resistencia; y si dan en seguir su 
gusto, le es mui facil desterrar 4 la ragon, como vemos haver hecho Herodes, tomando por Muger, a la de su propio 

F 

18 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Hermano Filipo, siendo contra la Lei, que lo prohibia, viviendo el Hermano, como se lo reprehendid el Gran : 
Precursor de Christo, San Juan, en’ cuia demanda murid. Y asi fue entre estos Indios, en aquellos sus pasados 
Tiempos: y si asi algunos se copulaban, en la forma dicha, era por defecto de Justicia, y sobra de Poderio de 
Sefiores, y Reies, lo qual se ve muchas veces en muchos Reinos, que los tales, 6 por los tales, se quebrantan las 
buenas Leies ; y se suspende, y aun se tuerce la Justicia; y asi porque sus Leies, y costumbre, prohibia el tal Matri- 
monio con Hermana, quando se convirtieron al Christianismo les fueron quitadas las tales Mugeres, como 4 Gentes, 
que havian vivido amancebadas, y no en legitimo Matrimonio. 

Otro abuso usaron algunas Gentes de otras Provincias, mui apartadas de estas de Mexico, y Tetzcuco, y fue, que 
los Sefiores, y Gente Principal, que usaban tener muchas Mugeres, muerto este, las recibia el Hijo que heredaba el 
Sefiorio, y las tenia por propias; pero tambien fue esto mui poco usado, y no eran todas las Mugeres, y Mancebas 
de su Padre (segun el parecer de Religiosos, que lo supieron bien, y de raiz) sino solas aquellas que no tuvieron 
Hijos del Sefior difunto, como en orden de ampliar la Generacion de su Padre: y puesto que en estas Provincias se 
usaba esta costumbre, no era tenida por buena, ni licita, sino por mala, y reprobada; y quanto mas esta mala 
costumbre se venia acercando 4 los Reinos de Mexico, y Tetzcuco, tanto mas se vituperaba, y reprobaba, y por esto 
le Hamaban a este hecho Tetzahuitl, que quiere decir: Cosa espantosa, y de asombro ; y & los Hiyjos que nacian de 
este aituntamiento, Uamaban Tetzauhconetl, Elyos de asombro, y de espanto, porque les espantaba ver, que era aquello 
prohibido, y que huviese Gente que lo cometiese. 

En el Reino de Mechhuacan, huvo abuso, segun fue Fama, de tomar 4 la Suegra por Muger ; y tambien, si alguno 
casaba con Muger, que fuese maior en Dias, si esta tal tenia alguna Hija havida de otro Marido, se la solia dar a 
este segundo Marido, solo a fin de tenerle contento, para que no la dejase, por vieja ; de manera, que tenia 4 Madre, 
y Hija por Mugeres, ambas en un tiempo; pero no se tenia esto en todos aquellos Reinos, por buena costumbre, 
sino por abuso abominable, introducido por Reies,’y Sefores, y Personas Principales, que no reconocian Superior, 
que pudiese irles 4 la mano, ni reprehenderles caso tan malo, y escandaloso ; y asi, hablaban de ello, como de cosa 

vergoncosa ue causaba admiracion, y escandalo en la Republica. 
ro) 3 3 

Cariruxto VIII. 

De como entre algunos de los Gentiles Antiguos, se usd casarse Hermanos con Hermanas, y Padres 
con Hijas, y Madres con Hyos. 

De estos nuestros Indios decimos, que tuvieron muchas Mugeres, en especial los Reies, que como poderosos las 
havian facilmente. Del gran Rei Motecuhcuma, se dice, que tenia muchas, y 4 todas las sustentaba abundante, y 
copiosamente. De los Reies de Tetzcuco, en especial del prudentisimo Negahualpiltzintli, dicen, que tuvo cien 
Hijos havidos en diversas Mugeres, aunque los que mejor lo han averiguado, no le dan mas de sesenta, y estos he 
visto io pintados en sus Historias. Estos Sefiores tenian costumbre, de darles casa, de por si, 4 qualquiera de estas 
Mugeres ; porque demas de mostrar en esto su Grandeca, acudian a la condicion natural de las Mugeres, que es no 
gustar de vér 4 su lado, 4 Ja que le tiene con su Marido. Bien se prueba esto con aquella ragon de Lia, diciendo 4 
su Hermana Rachel, quando le pedia de las Mandragoras, que su Hijo le havia traido del Campo: no basta que me 
tengas alli 4 mi Marido, sino que tambien quieras lo que mi Hijo me hadado? Y en el Gapitulo Treinta se 
conoce, gue Jacob tenia dada Casa de Campo, y de por si, & todas sus quatro Mugeres ; porque dice la Sagrada 
Escritura, que viniendo Lavan detris de su Ierno Jacob, entrd 4 buscar los Idolos, que le havian hurtado, por todos 
los Tabernaculos, y Tiendas, comencando por el de Lia, y luego por los de las dos criadas, acabando en el de Rachel. 
De manera, que esta era costumbre antigua. Y la misma guardo Salomon, haciendole casa de por st ala Hiya det 
Ret Faraon, que no la quiso tener en igual grado, con las demas Mugeres, aunque les tenia dadas Casas 4 todas, 6 
1a en la suia Real, 6 en otras partes convenibles. Y facilmente me persuadiré, que las tenia todas dentro del compas 
de su Real Palacio, y no es mucho pensarlo, pues no es mucho para un Rei hacerlo. 

Yo he visto todas las Casas del Rei Nezahualpilli, en Tetzcuco, y todos los que han querido las han visto, y las 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 19 

ven los que quieren, las quales cogen gran parte de suelo (como en otra parte hemos dicho) y dentro de sus Jardines, 
aun permanecen los Edificios de algunas Casas edificadas para las Mugeres de este Rei: a las quales iba de su Real 
Palacio, por un camino, y senda, hecho 4 mano de Cal, y Canto, dos estados de alto del suelo, y levantado de paredes 
hasta medio cuerpo, y tan angosto, que apenas cabe por el una sola persona; de manera, que si quieren pasar dos 
juntos, han de ir el uno tras del otro. Y esto hacia por grandeca; porque iendo por él, y viniendo otra persona 
alguna no pasase, sino que se bolviese ; lo qual, si alguna vez acontecia, se hacia asi, sin bolverle las espaldas el 
Hombre, 6 Muger, que le encontraba, sino hechando los pasos atras, como los havia traldo Acia delante, y sin 
mirarle 4 la cara, ni haciendo ningun feo movimiento de cuerpo. Tambien he visto pintada la Casa del Famoso 
Rei Motecuhcuma, y tengo la pintura en mi poder, que es mucho de ver, y en ella estan pintadas las Casas de sus 
Mugeres, en lo mas interior de las suias Reales, & las quales entraba por sendas, y veredas ocultas. Toda esta 
Magestad guardaban con sus Mugeres, y las guardaban, con Gente anciana, y de confianga. 

Carur XXVII. Libri Quinti Acoste. 

De Indorum ceremoniis et ritibus, nostratibus nonnhil cognatis et affinibus. 

CerEMoni® Indorum quamplurime, cum Mosaice legis ritibus conveniebant. Habent, quibus etiam cum Mauris 
et Mahumetistis conveniant. Nonnullis doctrine quoque Evangelice respondent: ex quibus precipué sunt 
ablutiones, ipsis Opacune dictze: Hoc enim uno fine lavantur, ut 4 peccatis suis emundentur. Mexicanis insuper 
suus quoque Baptismus in usu erat. Nam de recens natorum infantum auribus et pudendis portiunculas presectas 
offerebant: guibus ceremoniis populi Judaice circumeisionem quadantenus emulabantur. Sed omnium maximeé 
hac in regum aut magnatum filiis observabant, hoc feré modo. Ut primum in lucem infantes edebantur, eos sa- 
cerdotes lavabant, dextris ipsorum gladiolum, sinistris autem parmulam inserentes. Plebeiis liberis masculis instru- 
menta fabrilia indebant: foemellis autem, quod ad colum et lintea spectaret. Et hzec ante Idolum quatuor diebus 
perficiebantur. Jn contractibus matrimonialibus utrinque ratis consignationibus rem firmabant: de quibus Licen- 
tiatus Polus integrum tractatum edidit. Qui in Mexico matrimonio sese juncturi erant, hoc modo et ritu liga- 
bantur. Tum sponsus, tum sponsa ante sacerdotem considebant. Quorum prehensis manibus, sacerdos rogabat, 
utrum matrimonii consensum utrinque ratum haberent. His ergd annuentibus, sacerdos ex flammei, quo sponsa 
caput velabat, et sponsi pallii finibus nodum stringehat, eosque ita vinctos in sponsi des ducebat. In his focus 
instructus lucebat, quem sponsi cum obiissent, posted und considebant. His ritibus matrimonium stabilitum erat. 
In sponsarum castitate deprehendenda sponsi admodum seduli scrutatores erant. Quas si fors pollutas invenirent, 
cum magno probro tum parentibus tum cognatis vitium imputabant. Contra verd si quam pudicitie iviolate et 
intemerate deprehenderent, eam maximi faciebant, et parentes donis offundebant, diisque sacra faciebant, et mutuo 
tum in sponsi tum in sponse edibus, lautis conviviis agitatis, dies aliquot hilariter sumebant. Quod si sponso 
sponsa domum adduceretur, continuo in libellos (ut vocant) inventarios bona universa, et clenodia, et omnis presens 
supellex consignabantur, cujus consignationis copia utrisque parentibus eo fine offerebatur, ut si fors aliquando 
inter ipsos non conveniret, divortio (nam id frequenter fiebat) facto suum quisque quod attulisset, reciperet. Bonis 
divisis, alter alterum solutum pronunciabat, et uterque, uti sibi. commodum esset, de novo nubebat. Si quos du- 
rante matrimonio liberos progenuissent, tunc vir mares, foemina filias assumebat, et capitah pana enterdicebatur 
illis, ne post hac ullo uspiam congressu matrimonial jungerentur. Id quod stricté ac pracisé servandum erat. 
His ct similibus ceremoniis, etsi quidem nobiscum quadamtenus ipsi convenire videantur: attamen dum inconve- 
nientia et absurda plurima immiscent, 4 nostris ritibus absunt longissimé. Indi enim plerique his tribus maximis 
criminibus obnoxii erant, nimirum, ferocia, impuritate et otio. Uno enim promiscué furore insaniebant aded, ut 
levi ex causa sese invicem cederent et immolarent. Impuri verd et desides in eo erant, quod sub mentionem 
suorum Idolorum ubivis ederent et biberent, et in omnibus leves ac mutabiles, plus feeminarum mollitiem, quam 
virorum constantiam emularentur. 

Que omnia in ipsis Sathanas operabatur, cujus he artes sunt proprie, ut ad peccata et homicidia, et incestas 

20 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

libidines, ac desidem et otiosam vitam homines subinde impellat et preecipitet. Nunc verd postquam sancti Evan- 
gelii voce personante ad frugem redierunt, ludicra heec et ineptias, quibus 4 Sathana et idolis diu elusi fuerunt, 
supine ultro citroque rident, plus se timore, ne diabolus ipsis noceret, quam vero et sincero affectu amoreque 
actos, hos olim cultus ministrasse, dicentes. Plurimi Indorum seipsos in hoc deceperant, dum de una salute et 
felicitate externa solliciti, eternorum et post hance vitam capiendorum bonorum nullam curam susceperunt. Nam 
cum externis bonis cumulatissimé diffluerent, superstitionum securitas confertim irrepsit: sicut hujus exemplum 
in Mexicanis et Cuscanis videre licet, qui superstitionum suarum nullum finem modumque sciebant. Nam harum 
in Cusco ad minimum trecenta genera distincta numerabantur. Ex regibus Cuscanis Mango Inga Yupangui (su- 
perstitionibus asserendis veluti natus) festa et ceremonias et sacrificia tot peperit, ut numerari commode non potue- 
rint. Simile quoque Mexicanorum Rex Iscodlt, in regno quartus, designavit. Czterz nationes, ut provincia 
Guatimala, cum Insulis Nove Hispanie, et provincia Chile, etsi et ipsee quidem plurimis sacrificiis abundarent, 
non tamen ulla parte conferri poterunt cum Cuscanis et Mexicanis, quibus duobus pracipue locis Sathanas cum 
omni sua potentia, ut et Rome et Hierosolymis, principaliter sibi sedem et solium fixerat. Ex quibus tamen, 
nunc Dei optimi maximi beneficio procul exactus est, et in loco ejus sancta salvatoris nostri Jesu Christi Crux 

regnumque viget ac dominatur. 

Cariruto XV. 

Como ha sido costumbre Antigua, el uso de el Repudio, asi entre Gentiles, como entre los del Pueblo 
de Dios, y estos Indios Occidentales. 

Estos Indios Occidentales, que como todas las Gentes, que usaron de Matrimonio conjugal, tambien le tuvieron, 
acostumbraron, asi como todos los demas, tener divorcio, y usar de repudio ; lo qual se manifiesta, no solo porque 
ellos mismos confesaron, despues de recibida la Fé, haver usado de él en su infidelidad, sino por lo que los Ministros 
Evangelicos vieron, y experimentaron, despues de haver comenc¢ado la predicacion en estos Reinos, y Provincias. 
Esta costumbre fue General, entre estos Indios, aunque variados los modos. Y para que se entienda, pondré aqui 
lo que se acostumbraba en la Ciudad de Tetzcuco, que era donde, como en Atenas, 6 en la Gran Roma, en otros 
Tiempos, florecieron las Leies, porque governaron succesivamente en aquel Reino dos Sefiores, que fueron Padre, y 
Hijo, por tiempo, y espacio, de mas de noventa Afios, los quales fueron mui Republicanos, que celaron mucho el 
bien de su Republica, y trabajaron, por tenerla bien regida, y governada (como en otra parte hemos dicho) y entre 
muchos Jueces que havia, para diversas causas, y negocios, havia otros nombrados, para los Matrimonios, y litigios, 
que acerca de ellos se ofrecian. Estos (dice el Padre Frai Toribio Motolinia) que vido estar sentados, en la Sala de 
su Juzgado, en el Palacio Real, oiendo de estas dichas causas; y que eran muchos, porque cada Pueblo tenia alli su 
Juez, 2 los quales reconocian los de los Barrios, y Parroquias, y ante ellos presentaban sus quejas. Y se dice, que 
estaba tan en su punto esta Policia, en aquella Republica, que no solo los del Reino eran oidos, en ella de sus 
causas ; pero que el Gran Motecuhguma solia remitir muchos alli. El modo, que tenian para sus Divorcios, y 
Repudios, era el siguiente: Llegados al lugar del Juzgados, los casados, que iban discordes, presentaban su queja 
ante los Jueces, los quales la olan, con grande atencion, y severidad. Y despues de oidas todas las Alegaciones del 
quejoso, preguntaban al que era culpado de los dos: Si era Verdad lo propuesto, y alegado, por el contrarior El 
otro respondia lo que en el caso le convenia. Luego les preguntaban, de qué manera havian vivido juntos, si havia 
sido con afecto matrimonial, 6 por modo fornicario, y si en su aiuntamiento havian tenido aquel trocado consenti- 
miento, que ai del Varon a la Muger, con que se reciben por esposos? Y si havian tenido licencia de sus Padres 
para contraer Matrimonio? Y si havian precedido las ceremonias todas, que se usaban en el dicho Contrato, y 
Matrimonio? Conforme 4 lo que a estas preguntas respondian, velan si estaban casados, 6 solamente amancebados. 
Si vivian vida fornicaria, no hacian caso de ello, y apartabanlos, como 4 dos, que estaban amancebados, dandoles las 
penas, que sus Leies disponian. Si estaban casados con todas las ceremonias, en su Matrimonio acostumbradas, 
procuraban componerlos, amonestandoles la prosecucion del Matrimonio, y diciendoles, que mirasen con quanto 
acuerdo, y solemnidad se havian casado, y que no tratasen de deshonrar, y avergoncar 4 sus Padres, y Deudos, que 
en ello havian entendido, ni escandalicasen al Pueblo, que ii sabia, que eran casados. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. ~ JI 

Hecha esta paternal amonestacion, si los que venian demandando Divorcio, y alegando nulidad en su Matrimonio, 
y aiuntamiento conjugal, la recibian con Amor, y se conformaban, en su presencia, despachabanlos, con mucho 
contento, -y exortabanlos, para que otra vez no se desaviniesen, ni llegasen 4 semejante punto. Pero si todavia 
perseveraban en su pertinacia, y eran rebeldes 4 sus consejos, y amonestaciones, despedianlos con aspereca, y ellos. 
se iban, y apartaban, dejandose el uno al otro, para nunca mas vivir juntos. Este acto, que aqui se hacia ante estos 
Jueces, parece, que era licencia tacita, para este Divorcio, y apartamiento, porque nunca sentenciaban en disfavor 
del Matrimonio, ni consentian, que por autoridad de Justicia, ellos se apartasen ; porque decian ser cosa ilicita, y de 
mucho escandalo para el Pueblo, favorecer, con autoridad publica, cosa contraria 4 la racon ; pero ellos se apartaban 
de hecho, y este ee se toleraba, aunque no en todos, segun el mas, 6 menos -escandalo, que se engendraba en el 
Pueblo. oe 

Otros dicen, que por Sentencia difinitiva se hacia este Repudio, y Divorcio. Y las causas, que ordinariamente se 
alegaban, por parte de los que lo pretendian, eran decir: Dejamonos, porque nos queremos mal. Y el Varon 

-alegaba, que su Muger no le queria servir, ni acudir 4 las cosas de su oficio, que es obligada a hacer en su casa, y 
que era perecosa, y otras causas, que para justificar la de su intento, le parecian convenir, y ser necesarias ; y decia 
mas: Pues no la hayia de dejar teniendo tal, y tal falta? Ella alegaba, que la maltrataba, y queria mal, y no la daba 
de vestir, ni lo necesario, para el sustento de su casa, y otras racones a este tono; por lo qual los Jueces senten- 
ciaban (si acaso concedemos, que havia sentencia) que se apartasen, y quedasen libres, y sin obligacion el uno, al 
otro; pero no de la murmuracion del Pueblo, que buelto contra ellos, decian ser dignos de grandisima pena, por. 
haver quebrado la Fe, é integridad del Matrimonio, y haver dado tan mal exemplo 4 la Republica. Estos Repudios 
acostumbraron hacerse, en algunas Provincias, sin sabiduria de las Justicias, sino que con propria autoridad se 
apartaban ; en especial si, eran Sefores, y Gente poderosa. Y en estas ocasiones mas valia el Poder, que la Racon ; 
porque, en realidad de verdad, aunque se usaron, jamas se tuvo por bien de la Republica; y asi sucedia hayer grandes 
enemistades, y contiendas, entre los Deudos, y Parientes de la una parte, con los de la otra, que hacia el Repudio, 6 
lo pretendia. Y si eran Sefiores, y Reies, llegaban 4 punto de mover Guerras, y se destrujan unos, a otros. 

No solo esta costumbre ha sido de estos Indios ; sino de Naciones mucho mas Antiguas, de las quales sabemos 
haverle usado en sus Matrimonios, segun que les era permitido. Porque dado caso, que lo ha havido, jamas ha sido 
licito, sino permitido, por quanto es contra la intencion del Matrimonio, y Lei Natural. De los Gentiles cosa es 
notoria, y manifiesta, porque las Leies Humanas, no solo afirman ser costumbre suia, pero declaran, con igloos 
expresas, al modo, que tenian en repudiarse, como se puede ver facilmente en los Digestos. 

De la Gente del Pueblo de Dios, sabemos haverlo tenido, y usado, hasta la venida de su Hijo al Mundo; el qual 
se dice en el Deuteronomio, por estas palabras: E/ Varon, que se casare, y no se agradare de su Muger, por odio, 
que la tenga, 0 por alguna otra causa, de fealdad, que en ella vere, escriva el libelo de Repudio, y deselo en sus 
manos i la Muger, que repudia, y hechela de su casa. Las causas, que podian mover a este Repudio, dicen algunos, 
que eran, enfermedad corporal, tolerada por mucho Tiempo, 6 alguna falta, y fealdad notable de su cuerpo. Otros 
dicen, y mui probablemente, que este Repudio se concedia, para las cosas nuevamente vistas, y halladas en el Tiempo, 
que corria despues de hecho el Matrimonio, y asi lo siente Lira, y eran odio, y rencor, que se tuviesen, 6 algun 
adulterio oculto, que la Muger cometiese. De manera, que el no tenerse buena voluntad, el uno al otro, era causa 
suficiente, para repudiarse. Esta misma tenemos dicho, haver sido la que tambien tomaban estos Indios, por ocasion 
de dejarse, y no hacer vida maridable, y debia de ser la de otros Gentiles, para hacer lo mismo. : Y que esta haia 
sido causa legitima, de dejarse, pruebase por el Profeta Malaquias, diciendo del Varon, que tiene enfado con su 
Muger: Si por ventura la tuvieres cobrado odio, dejala. Donde parece serles permitido dejarles, por el odio, y mala 
voluntad, que les tenian, y no quererse bien, y cl adulterio oculto, y las otras dichas. El intento de darse este libelo’ 
de Repudio, era apartarse el Varon de la Muger perpetuamente, sin quedarle licencia, para poder. recibirla mas, y 
ella quedar libertada, para poder casarse con otro, que quisiese. Y asi, dice Josepho, que las palabras, que. este 
Escrito, y Repudio contenian, eran estas: Yo te prometo, de no llegar mas 4 ti, ni tener copula contigo. Otros 
han querido decir; que en este libelo iba escrita la causa, porque el Varon la repudiaba. Pero esto no es de creer, 
por quanto este libelo se daba en favor, y defensa de esta Muger repudiada; y no era racon, que el Marido, 
con quien despues casase (si se casaba) supiese la causa de su Repudio: pues siempre era falta, y defecto, 6 mala 
voluntad que se tenian; y si.era por algun adulterio oculto, que solo era conocido de su Marido, no era licito, que 
se hiciese publico 4 otros... Demis, de que este libelo se daba 4 la Muger, y ella ‘lo recibia, y- guardaba, para su 

G 

29 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

defensa, en todo tiempo, y por esto havia de ir, con palabras seguras, de que por él no le pudiese venir ningun 
mal; y aviendose de casar con otro (si por ventura el segundo marido lo leja) era fuerga cobrarle mala voluntad, y 
quedar desavenidos en su Matrimonio, y ocasionados para repudiarse facilmente. Y asi es de creer, que dirian en 
él las palabras, que pone Josepho, y no otras; porque de aquellas no puede colegirse cosa, que sea en deshonor 
y menosprecio de la repudiada, aunque ia se sabia, que havia causas que lo permitian. 

Quando no supieramos, por lo dicho, que los Gentiles usaban de repudio, lo probamos eficazmente, con saber, 
que los Judios le tuvieron ; porque ano ser uso suo, tampoco los Judios le tuvieran, porque sino tuvieran noticia 
de otras Gentes, que lo acostumbraban, no tuvieran ellos por negocio grave no usar de él, pues no le conocian. 
Pero sabiendo, que otros lo usaban, y que a ellos en su Lei se les negaba, y prohibia, lo tuvieran por caso dificul- 
toso, y pesado. Lo qual se conoce, en que tambien, porque vieron, que otras Gentes tenian Rei, y Sefior par- 
ticular que los governaba, y regia, se tuvieron por menos que los otros en no tenerle, y por esto fueron & Samuel, 
y le dijeron : Danos Rei, como lo tienen las otras Gentes, y Naciones. Y por esto hemos de decir, que todas las 
cosas ilicitas, que les fueron permitidas, 4 los Judios, las usaban los Gentiles, 4 los quales les parecia ser de menos 
calidad, y estimacion que ellos, si las cosas que acostumbraron, a los Judios, no ‘se las concedieran. Y por esto les 
fue concedido el libelo del repudio, cosa comun, y usada entre Gentiles. 

Este libelo de Repudio, no se concedié 4 los Hebreos por bueno, porque en si no lo era; pero concedidseles, y 
permitidseles, segun la durega de su coracon, y pertinacia de sus costumbres, que es lo que dijo Christo 4 ciertos 
Fariseos, que le tocaron esta materia, y trataron de haverlo dado Moisen, & sus antepasados, y progenitores, como 
parece por San Matheo, donde trats Christo Nuestro Sefior del Matrimonio, y como era cosa injusta dejarse los 
casados. De aqui nace saber, que muchas cosas malas, que se permiten, 6 conceden, no se conceden, por ser ellas, 
en si mismas, malas, sino por evitar otras peores, 6 mas malas. Y porque de aborrecer uno 4su Muger, 6 por 
haverle adulterado secretamente, 6 por otra causa, y no tener libertad de dejarla, y apartarse de ella, podia resultar 
(como dice el Tostado) otro.maior mal, que era matarla, por eso les fue concedido este libelo, y apartamiento. 

Pero dira alguno, que por qué en esta Lei Evangelica, y de Gracia, no corre la permision del Libelo, como 
corria entonces, pues corren las mismas causas aora, que entonces? A esto decimos, que 4 los Hebreos se les did 
Lei imperfecta, como Gente, que lo era, y mui sujetos 4 sus pasiones, y 4 Gente semejante pudo permitirsele este 
caso ilicito. Pero como entré Christo introduciendo su Evangelio, y dando Arancél de vida perfecta, entré tambien 
desterrando las imperfecciones de los Hombres, que hasta su venida se havian tolerado, y mandando lo contrario, 
porque no era licito, y lo que no es licito, en qualquier tiempo se puede revocar, aunque en otros antes se haia 
usado, y permitido; y esto prueba Christo, diciendo: Esto que aora pasa entre vosotros, de repudiar las Mugeres, 
lo qual os permitid Moisen, no fue cosa usada en los Principios del Mundo ; pero usdse lo contrario, porque los 
Hombres vivieron con sus Mugeres, en vinculo perpetuo de Matrimonio ; y pues no se uso entonces, no es mara- 
villa, que las cosas se buelvan a sus principios. Y si este libelo fuera cosa licita, siempre se huviera usado,. y pues 
no siempre se usd, luego no es licito. De manera, que acudiendo Moisen a la condicion dura, y pertinaz de los 
Judios, les concedid el libelo de repudio. Y lo mismo debemos decir de estos Indios, que si se les concedia el 
permiso, que pedian, para apartarse el uno, de el otro, se les concedia, 6 id tacitamente, con verlos apartados, y 
no castigarlos por ello, 6 ia que fuese por sentencia difinitiva de los Jueces, que tenian 4 su cargo las causas 
matrimoniales; pero siempre fue entre ellos, ilicito, y malo. 

Verdad sea, que dice el Padre Frai Toribio, que algunos Anos despues de haverse plantado la Fe, en estos 
Reinos, se hallaron muchos, que se dejaban facilmente el uno, al otro; y que de aqui tomaron motivo algunos de 
pensar de estos Indios (y aun de afirmarlo) que entre ellos no avia Matrimonio, ni lo usaban. Pero consta ser 
falso, por lo que de sus ceremonias dejamos dicho. Pero lo que pudo ser causa de esta rotura, fue (segun él 
mismo) él haverse sujetado 4 los Espaitoles. Porque desde entonces comened a no haver aquel concierto, y policia, 
y justicia, que antes solian tener entre ellos. Y pruebase, porque preguntados los que se apartaban tantas veces, y 
tan sin causa, solo por su voluntad, y antojo, se hallo, que todos eran mogos, y de costumbre nueva, de tiempo de 
veinte afios; y que los viejos, que entonces vivian, que avian contraido en el de su Gentilidad, se conservaban en 
sus Matrimonios. Y que si alguno se havia apartado, era por causa de adulterio, y traicion, que la Muger le havia 
cometido. Los Indios de la Florida, usaban, que quando no estaban contentos, con las Mugeres que tenian, las 
dejaban, y se casaban con otras, sin mas autoridad, que la de su antojo. Pero esta costumbre no era general en 
todos los casados, sino sola de los Mancebos que no tenian Hijos; porque los que los tenian, permanecian en su 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. . OS 

Matrimonio, y contrato. Lo qual es conforme al intento del Matrimonio, pues es a fin (entre otros) de la crianca 
de los Hijos, y es de segundos preceptos de la Lei Natural, como dice el Abulense. Quando estos desavenidos se 
apartaban, llevabanse consigo lo que era de cada uno; porque asi como apartaban las Personas, apartaban tambien 
los bienes. Yo vd mui apartada esta costumbre, dela de los Judios ; porque en dandola 4 la Muger el libelo, y 
hechandola de casa, la entregaba tambien los bienes, que 4 su poder havia traido, y parte del multiplico, que du- 
rante el Matrimonio se havia multiplicado. Pero si pecaba, de pecado de adulterio, por el qual merecia muerte, lo 
perdia todo (como lo disponen en estos tiempos las Leies Humanas) pero si era alguna otra leve causa, no los 
perdia. Usaban mas, que los Hijos de estos dos que se dejaban (si acaso los tenian) se quedaban con el Padre, 6 
se iban con la Madre, segun la edad que tenian; porque si eran pequefios, y necesitados de el abrigo, y amparo de 
la Madre, ella se los Ilevaba, y los criaba; pero si estaban ia algo crecidos, y podian vivir sin Madre, quedabase el 
Padre con ellos, y él los sustentaba. Esto mismo tienen ordenado los Decretos Eclesiasticos, en este estado Evan- 
gelico, porque si los hijos de los que se divorcian, son menores de tres afios, la madre se queda con ellos, y los 
cria; pero si son majores de tres aos, tiene obligacion el padre de tomarlos 4 su cargo, y de criarlos. 

Carrruto V. del Libro Nono de la Monarquia Indiana. 

De otros Sacerdotes, que avia en esta Nueva-Espana, y su eleccion. 

Dicrn algunos, que los Sefiores, que fallecian dejaban al maior de sus hijos por heredero, el qual sucedia en el 
Sefiorlo, y Reino, y el segundo entraba en el Sumo Pontificado. Pero dado caso, que esto se entienda del Reino de 
Tetzcuco, y del de Tlacupa, y otros; porque en ellos iban sucediendo Hijos, 4 Padres; no se debe entender de el de 
Mexico (donde principalmente lo ponen estos, que afirman esto) porque los Reies no heredaban, sino que eran 
elegidos, y como vimos en el Libro de:los Reies, quando el: Rei moria, si tenia hermano, entraba heredando ; y 
muerto este, otro, silo avia; y quando faltaba, le sucedia el sobrino, Hijo de su hermano maior, a quien, por su 
muerte, avia sucedido, y luego el hermano de este, y asi discurrian por los demas. De manera, que segun lo dicho, 
no es mui conforme a verdad afirmarlo, aunque creeré mui facilmente, que los electos en Pontifices, y Sacerdotes 
Sumos, serian de los mas Nobles, y Descendientes de la Casa Real, por ser oficio tan Supremo, y digno de persona 
tal, y que lo mereciese. Y 4 esto se inclinarian muchos, tomandolo por Suprema honra (como en realidad de verdad 
lo era) pues en lo espiritual excedian a todos, y no tenian igual. Y del Emperador Motecuhcuma se dice, que estaba 
barriendo el Templo, quando vinieron por él, para darle la obediencia; de manera, que debia de ser Sacerdote. Lo 
que de cierto se sabe es, que avia Sumo Pontifice, y que este era Supremo, 4 los demas Sacerdotes, que tenian 
veces de Obispos, y los otros se Ilamaban comunes. En algunas Provincias de esta Nueva-Espafia avia seis princi+ 
pales Sacerdotes, y el Sumo Pontifice sobre todos, 4 quien, como 4 Cabeca, reconocian, y obedecian. Estos eran en . 
gran manera honestos, y castos; y quando velan alguna Muger, bajaban los ojos al suelo; nunca bebian vino, — 
ni cosa, que emborrachase, 4 manera de los Nacareos, que les era prohibido por la Lei; mostraban mucha mortifi- 
cacion, gravedad, mesura, y magestad en los rostros; por lo qual los tenian todos por buenos, y perfectos en su 
falsa creencia, y doctrina, y dabaseles gran credito 4 lo que afirmaban ; y fnalmente, en todo tenian grande autori- 
dad, por ellos se governaba mediatamente toda la tierra, por las respuestas, que de los Oraculos recebian, las quales 
decian, y manifestaban 4 los Sefiores, y Reies; por manera, que si se avia de dar Guerra, hacer otra cosa para el 
bien, y utilidad de la Republica, los consultaban, y aquello que mandaban hacian; y asi se acostumbraban en los 
Reinos de Guatemala, y si no me he olvidado de las averiguaciones, que acerca de esto tengo hechas, en estos de 
Mexico tambien. 

En parte parece convenir este orden de Sacerdotes con aquel, que Numa constituid, que llamaron Feciales, to- 
mando el nombre de la fe, 6 fidelidad publica, que guardaban. La autoridad, y potestad de estos era, tener gran 
cuidado, que el Pueblo Romano 4 ninguna Ciudad, que con él estuviese confederada, hiciese injusta Guerra. Y si 
en algo se descomponia alguna Provincia, estos iban a desafiarla, si por bien no se reducia; y bueltos 4 Roma, 
daban noticia de ello, al Senado, y por su palabra se movia 4 hacer Guerra 4 la dicha Provincia, 6 Pueblo. Vease 

94 | SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Servio, en el Noveno, y Decimo Libro de las Eneidas, que trata largamente esto, con otras cosas, que a mi no me 
importan, sino solo decir, que.llegs el Sacerdocio 4 punto, que sin pareces de SU TOE, y sin in. justificar ellos la 

causa, nunca daban Guerra los Reies, y Capitanes. 

CaPiITruLo VI. 

De otras SE y Ministros, que tuvieron estas Gentes Idolatras. 

Entre las cosas de cuenta, y dignas de saberse, que huvo entre estas Indianas Gites fue una Ts distribucion de 
los oficios, asi supremos, como inferiores; de los quales fueron los primeros los Sacerdotes repartidos en Sumos, 
y menores; conviene a saber, Pontifice Maximo, y Menores, y Sacerdotes simples. Pero como es fuerea, para el 
buen govierno del Culto Divino, aver otros Oficiales, que se ocupen en su ministerio, asi los tenian estas Gentes. 
Estos eran como las Dignidades de las Iglesias Catedrales en el Pueblo Christiano ; conviene a saber, Tesorero, 
Maestre-Escuela, Sacristan, y Mocos de Coro. Al Tesorero lamaban Tlaquimiloltecuchtli, como decir, Oficial de 
la hacienda de los Templos, y Casa de Dios, 6 de los Dioses, que es proprio de los Tesoreros de las Catedrales ; a 
los quales pertenece la guarda de los Vasos Sagrados, y vestimentos, y de todo el tesoro de la Iglesia, a proveer de ~ 
todo lo que incumbe al Altar, y que este compuesto, y proveida la Lampara de aceite, con otras cosas 4 estas seme- 
jantes; las quales todas tenia a cargo este Tlaquimiloltecuchtli, 6 Tesorero, y 4 ellas acudia con suma diligencia, y 
puntualidad en la Casa del Demonio. 

Tenian Sacristan Maior, 4 cuio cargo estaba la guarda de los ornamentos, el qual se lamaba Tlillancalcatl. Avia 
Mocos de Coro, y servicio de Templo (como luego verémos) los quales se llamaban Teotlamacazque, como decir : 
Mocos de la Casa de Dios. Avia Chantre, a cuio cargo estaba, lo que se avia de cantar en los Templos, por ser 
oficio de esta Dignidad proveer en esto, al qual, en algunas Iglesias nuestras, llaman Cantor, 6 Primicerio, y en 
otras Capiscol, y en lo Mexicano Tlapixcatzin. Residia de ordinario en los Templos, y Casa del Demonio, por 
estar 4 su cargo comencar los Cantares, ¢ Himnos, como 4 nuestros Chantres los Psalmos, y otras cosas, que en 
las Iglesias se cantan, y deben instruir a los que cantan,. segun lo que se colige de San Isidoro, en una Carta, que 
escrivid 4 Ludo, Obispo de Cordova; y asi, este nuestro Chantre, 6 Cantor, comengaba, y entonaba primero los 
Cantares, que todos los dias se cantaban 4 los Idolos, y levaba el compas, en el Teponaztli, que se tafia, y de esto 
no avia de faltar jamas, sino era por mui grande, y legitima causa. Avia Sochantre, que era el que entonaba todo 
lo que se cantaba en ausencia del Chantre, Ilamabase Tzapotlateohuatzin. ; 

Avia Maestre-Escuela, que se llamaba Tlamacazcateutl, casi Maestro, 6 Oficial de los mogos dedicados 4 Dios, 
cuio oficio, entre otras cosas, es enmendar 4 los que yerran en el Coro; y en la Iglesia de Salamanca, y la de To- 
ledo, y otras, tener cuidado con los que han de ser promovidos en los estudios, y recibir grados ; y en otras partes 
leer, y ensefiar. . Por lo qual en el Concilio Tridentino se proveyd, que no se diesen las dignidades, 6 Oficios de 
Maestre-Escuclas, sino fuese 4 Doctores, Maestros, 6 Licenciados en Teologia, 6 Derecho Canonico; por racon de 
que debe ensefiar, 6 poner quien en su lugar ensefte. Este oficio exercitaba este Tlamacazcateutl, y debian de ser 
constituidos, en esta dignidad en Roma, dos Sacerdotes, que el Rei Tarquino Sobervio eligid, los quales tenian 
cargo de vér, y leer los Sacros Libros de las Sibilas, y los Versos,. y significaciones que en ellos avia; y se les con- 
cedid el cuidado de corregir, y enmendar los Fastos, que eran los Libros, en que estaba escrita la memoria de los 
Tiempos, y entre ellos las cosas sagradas, y Fiestas (segun algunos) de donde se intitulo el Libro, que Ovidio hico 
de Fustis. ae 

Avia una Dignidad en lo Eclesiastico de esta Ciudad de Mexico, que se lamaba Mexiaiticotturin. el qual 
tenia las veces, que en las Iglesias Catedrales nuestras el Arcediano, que segun algunos Concilios (en especial el 
Tridentino, refiriendo la constitucion de Alexandro Tercero, en el Lateranense) se Haman ojos de los Obispos, y 
Vicarios suios, el qual era como Vicario General, que presidia en todos los Monasterios, y Colegios, que avia en 
esta Ciudad, donde se criaban los Hijos de los Principales, y era ‘uno de los Sacerdotes Maiores del Templo, 6 De- 
lubro del Demonio: era como Padre, y Prelado de todas las Casas de Congregacion, y de los que en ellas residian, 
y estaban: era su comision universal, sobre todos los que en las dichas Casas, y Monasterios presidian, los quales 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 25 

todos tenian sus Prelados, 4 quienes, los que dentro estaban, 6 se criaban, reconocian por maior, y le obedecian. 
Por el orden de este dicho Teohuatzin se hacian los nombramientos, para qualquier oficio de la Republica, 6 Kcle- 
siastico, que se avia de encomendar 4 los que en las dichas Congregaciones se criaban, y asistian, segun la noticia 
que de ellos tenia, y daba, y las informaciones que hacia, quando en los dichos Colegios entraba, y los visitaba. 

Tenia grandisima cuenta, y vigilancia, con que los Mancebos se criasen en mucha disciplina, y doctrina del ser- 
vicio de los Dioses. Tenia tambien jurisdicion sobre todos los que eran, como Curas, y Beneficiados, de las Par- 
roquias de la Ciudad, mandandoles en las cosas convenientes, y castigandoles sus excesos. Este tenia otro Coad- 
jutor, llamado Huitznahuacteohuatzin, el qual era inferior al Teohuatzin; pero suplia sus veces en el govierno, 
quando por legitimas causas era impedido, 6 quando por orden suio se lo mandaba. Otro Satrapa, 6 Sacerdote 
avia de mui grande autoridad, llamado Ometochtli, el qual presidia 4 quatrocientos Sacerdotes, que se llamaban 
Centzontotochtin, y eran del servicio, y Templo del Dios del Pulque, que se llamaba Tezcatzoncatl (como decir el 
Dios Baco) no eran mas los Sacerdotes de Baal, 4 los quales maté el Profeta Elias, por falsos, y mentirosos ; porque 
jamas deja el Demonio de tener Ministros en cantidad, y abundancia, que le sirvan, como aquel que facilmente los 
engafia, con incitaciones que les hace, y casos de libertad, que les disimula. 

Carrruto VII. 

De los Sacerdotes, y Pontifice, que se elegia en la Provincia, y Senorio de los Totonacas ; y det 
modo de su eleccion, y preeminencia, y de su manera de consagracion, casi semejante en la 
confeccion del Olio, a la de el Sacerdote Summo de la Lei Antigua, que fue engano mu notable 
de el Demomo. 

Los Sacerdotes, que avia en la Provincia de los Totonacas, eran hechos por eleccion, asi como antiguamente los 
Pueblos elegian 4 los Obispos, y tambien al Sumo Pontifice el Pueblo Romano ; y esto parece por muchos decretos, 
y en las Historias de los Santos, como de San Silvestre, San Gregorio, San Nicolas, y San Ambrosio. Elegidos 
seis, en aquella Provincia, era de esta manera, que el uno de ellos era el Pontifice Maximo, y cabeca de los demas, 
los quales se iban excediendo, y aventajando en Dignidad, y Autoridad, por este orden, que el primero electo (como 

- mas antiguo) era Supremo al segundo, y el segundo al tercero, y asi iba discurriendo hasta el mas moderno, 6 ulti- 
mamente electo, aunque lo huviesen sido todos en un dia, y hora, valiendo en aquella eleccion la antiguedad del © 
nombramiento. Quando este Pontifice, y Sacerdote Sumo moria, celebradas sus obsequias (como en otra parte se 
dice) sucedia en el Sumo Pontificado, aquel Sacerdote, que despues de él, era primero, y mas conjunto a él por 
eleccion, al qual los otros Sacerdotes, con gran fiesta que hacian, lo ungian, y consagraban con un unguento, 
hecho de un licor, que se llama Ulli, confeccionado con sangre de los Nifios que sacrificaban. Este unguento, y 
confeccion de licor, se ponia en la cabeca, y con esta uncion, y ceremonia, se introducian en la Dignidad, y Oficio 
de Pontifice, y Sumo Sacerdote. Hecha la ceremonia, y uncion, luego todo el Pueblo le hacia grandisima 
reverencia, y acatamiento, y con grandes cortesias, y aplauso le daban gracias; porque se encargaba de aquella 
Dignidad, y recibia aquel estado, casi como agradeciendole, que tomase la carga, y el cuidado de su regimiento, y 
govierno espiritual ; y dandole todos la obediencia, se acababa la fiesta, y confirmacion de Pontifice, y Sacerdote 
Sumo. 

Este acto, y ceremonia de ungir los Sacerdotes, mando Dios Verdadero 4 Moisen, que hiciese en Aaron, y sus 
quatro hijos, despues de aver edificado el Tabernaculo, como parece en el Levitico, y en el Exodo se declara la 
confeccion de este unguento, con que se hacia la uncion, y consagracion del Sumo Sacerdote, y la de los otros, 
que eran’ menores. Pero lo que aqui quiero notar (dejando otras muchas cosas) no es mas, que la mezcla, y 
confeccion, que se hacia, para la uncion; la qual era de diversas especies, y cosas aromaticas, desleidas en aceite, de 
cuia incorporacion se espesaba el unguento con que se hacia la consagracion, y uncion dicha. Yodo lo qual se 
juntaba con sangre de un Becerro, y dos Carneros, que en esta ocasion, y para este efecto eran sacrificados, como 
parece por el Texto Sagrado, y con toda esta mezcla se ungia la cabeca del Sacerdote, y se derramaba por las vesti- 

—duras Sacerdotales. Lo segundo que se nota, es la astucia del Demonio, que viendo esta confeccion, para la 

H 

26 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

uncion, y consagracion dicha, la usurpd del Pueblo, y Casa de Dios, para la suia; y ordend, que sus Ministros 
fuesen ungidos con esta goma, llamada Ulli, y con sangre; y no se contentd con que la sangre fuese de Animales 
irracionales, como en el. Pueblo de Dios se acostumbro, sino que fuese de Animales racionales, y Nifios tiernos ; 
como aquel que en la destruicion, y ruina del Linage Humano se deleita, inficionada la uncion con sangre humana, 
como sucio, y puerco, que es, a diferencia de Dios, que es limpio, y puro en todas sus acciones. 

Carituto VIII. 

De los Sacerdotes, que se elegian a la Diosa Cinteutl, que eran como Monjes segregados, y 
apartados de los demas, de su digmdad, y vida. 

En esta Provincia de los Totonacas, avia una Diosa, cuio nombre era Cinteutl, 4 la qual (como en otra parte hemos 
dicho) estimaban, y honraban todos los de esta Nueva-Espafia, y tenian en mucho, para cuio servicio, aunque es 
verdad, que tenia muchos Ministros, en particular se le elegian Sacerdotes, dignos, 4 su parecer, del credito que 
debian tener Hombres que a tan gran Diosa servian. Estos eran castisimos, y de vida irreprehensible, y loable, - 
entre ellos (y aun entre nosotros lo pudieran ser, sacada la infidelidad, é idolatria, con que estaban ciegos.) Era tan 
virtuosa su vida, que todas las Gentes los venian 4 visitar, como Gente particular, y virtuosa, en las virtudes 
morales, y 4 encomendarse 4 ellos, para que rogasen 4 la Diosa, y los otros Dioses por ellos; por racon de no ser 
otro su exercicio, sino rogar por la prosperidad de los Pueblos, y Comunidades, y de los que 4 ellos se encomen- 
daban. A estos Monjes iban a consultar los Summos Pontifices, y los consultaban sobre las cosas secretas, y 
negocios arduos, y con ellos se aconsejaban, y tomaban su consejo eficazmente, creiendo ser sano, y saludable. 
Estos dichos Monjes no podian hablar con otras personas, sino era con las ya dichas, de los Pontifices, salvo con 
aquellos que los iban a visitar, como segregados de la vida comun, y apartados de los vicios ordinarios, y 4 pedirles 
consejo, como 4 Maestros, y Padres. Y en semejantes ocasiones ponianse en cuclillas, y los ojos en el suelo, olan 
las aflicciones de los que las levaban, y racones, y palabras de los que preguntaban; y aviendo escuchado con 
mucha atencion, humildad, y mortificacion, respondian 4 las dudas, y dificultades, lo necesario, escusando multi- 
plicacion de palabras, y despedianlos con brevedad, y consuelo. 

Su vestido eran pellejos de Zorros, Coiotes, 6 Adives, tralian el cabello mui largo, y trancado, jamais comian 
Carne; y alli en aquella estrecheca, y mortificacion de vida vivian, y morian, sin salir de los limites de aquella 
aspera mortificacion. Quando alguno de estos moria, elegiase otro en su lugar, y no qualquiera, sino aquel que 
era tenido, y estimado por de buena, y honesta vida, que representaba mas, y mejor exemplo, y nunca se hacia 
esta eleccion en mocos, aunque los huviese con las calidades dichas, sino en Hombres ancianos, y viejos, que 
pasaban de sesenta afios, el qual avia de aver sido casado, y entonces viudo, y libre del Matrimonio. El exercicio de 
estos Hombres singulares, y recogidos era escrivir por figuras, muchas Historias, las quales puestas en estilo, y 
bien concertadas las daban 4 los Summos Sacerdotes, los quales las referian despues, en sus platicas, y sermones, a 
las Republicas, y Pueblos. 

Carituto IX. 

De los Capellanes perpetuos, que los dela Provincia de Teohuacan tenian en los Templos, y de su 
modo de Religion, y Vida. 

En la Provincia de Teohuacan, que cae & esta de Mexico quarenta leguas al Oriente, entre otros Ministros, que 
tenian dedicados 4 sus Dioses, eran unos que servian de Capellanes perpetuos, los quales se ocupaban ordinaria- 
mente, en velar, aiunar, orar, y hacer los Sacrificios quotidianos. Estos Capellanes no eran en numero mas de 
quatro, los quales entraban a servir en el Templo, por espacio de quatro afios, los quales pasados se iban, y 
entraban otros en su lugar; de manera, que las Capellanias eran perpetuas, aunque los Ministros de ellas,. eran 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. (OT 

quadriefios, 6 Ministros trocados, de quatro en quatro afios: en cuio ministerio corria la perpetuidad de la Capellania, 
y oficio de los dichos Ministros, y Capellanes ; porque aunque avia variacion en ellos, por racgon de su trueque, no 
la avia en el Ministerio, en que se ocupaban, por ser siempre uno mismo invariable, y fixo. Llamabanse estos 
Capellanes Monauhxiuhcauhque, que quiere decir: Hombres dedicados al aiuno, y abstinencia de quatro afios. 
Estos entraban en el Templo de la manera que nuestros Sacerdotes entran en treintenario cerrado, 4 cada uno de 
los quales, daban una manta sola de algodon, delgada, y un maxtlatl, que sirve de pafietes, con que se cubren las 
partes verendas, no tenian mas ropa, con que cubrir su cuerpo, de noche, ni de dia, ni én Verano, ni Invierno, ni 
en ningun Tiempo de el Afio. Su cama era la Tierra, y los petates, 6 esteras para su reposo, el suelo desnudo, y 
una piedra, 6 canto por cabecera. Aiunaban todos estos quatro afios, con continuacion, sino era los Dias de Fiesta, 
las quales celebraban de veinte en veinte dias. Su comida era una vez al dia, y esta, quando el Sol iba mas alto, y 
4 veces, quando declinaba. No comian Carne, ni Pescado, ni Sal, ni Chile, y contentabanse con una tortilla, que 
debia de tener de peso dos oncas de Pan, y tras ella les daban una escudilla de Atole (que es lo que los Castellanos 
Ilamamos Gachas, 6 Poleadas, hechas de Maiz, que es su trigo) otra cosa no comian, ni fruta, ni miel, ni cosa 
dulce ; pero en las Festividades dichas, les era licito comer de todo quanto podian aver, y les era administrado, y 
en aquellas ocasiones podian desquitar lo que avian aiunado, aunque tengo por caso dificultoso creer, que se dema- 
siaban entonces; pues es cierto, que un estomago flaco, y debilitado, y hecho a poco sustento, que qualquier 
demasia le estraga, y ofende: por lo qual pienso, que irian mui considerados en el desmandarse, pues de los excesos 
salen las enfermedades, y muertes. 

En cada Afio de los quatro, que servian la vez de la Capellania, les daban una manta, y unos pafetes de Algo- 

‘don, como se ha dicho, y con este vestido pasaban, y corrian mui constantemente con su aiuno, y penitencia. Su 
ocupacion, y exercicio era velar de noche en el Templo, y cantar Himnos, y alabangas a sus Dioses, en el discurso 
de las quales hacian memoria de sus Proecas, y Hacafias; queriendo el Demonio, que como Dios tuvo un Moisen, 
y una Delbora, y otros Siervos, que le cantaban Canticos de alabancas, en los quales referian sus hechos, y sus 
grandes maravillas, en sacarlos con mano fuerte del poder de Faraon, y opresion de Egipto, y averlos llevado por 
el Desierto, sustentados con las viandas de su Divina Providencia, y hecholos Sefiores de la Tierra de Promision 
contra la voluntad de los que la poselan, y averlos librado de sus rabias, é iras, y sustentandolos como 4 Hijos 
escogidos, y queridos: asi el embidioso de esto, queria oir de las bocas de sus Ministros casos semejantes, que por 
ventura avria hecho por permision de Dios, y secretos juicios suios ; las quales cosas (como digo) le cantaban estos 
sus cuidadosos Ministros ; pero quiero que se sepa, que no todos quatro juntos velaban, sino que se repartian 
pareados; de suerte, que una noche eran de vela dos, y otra los otros dos, en la qual no dormian suefo ; lo uno, 
porque no les era permitido, ni licito; y lo otro, porque como ellos servian de voluntad, y con amor, no se les 
hacia penoso (que es una de las condiciones del Amor, facilitar lo dificultoso, y hacer ligero lo pesado, y grave) 
ofrecian incienso, y copal quatro veces, en la noche, 4 los Dioses, cuio era el Templo donde estaban, y de ciertas, 
en ciertas horas, era el Sacrificio que hacian de si mismos, sacandose sangre de algunas partes de su cuerpo, y der- 
ramandola entre las brasas de los incensarios, cuio humo subia con el del Incienso. : 

De veinte en veinte dias se sacrificaban en esta manera: hacian un agujero en lo alto de las orejas, y por 
él pasaban sesenta caflas, unas delgadas al principio de la herida, y otras mas gruesas en el discurso del horrendo 
Sacrificio, 4 imitacion del grosor de los dedos de las manos, y largas, como el tamafio de un braco, y otras de a braca ; 
y las ultimas, maiores, y mas largas, y todas ensangrentadas, hacianlas un monton: y acabado el tiempo de los 
quatro Afios, las quemaban todas delante del Altar del Idolo, A quien se avian consagrado, y eran en numero (sino 
me engafio) de quatrocientas. Estos eran dignos, por estos aiunos, vigilias, y penitencia que hacian, y vida 
estrecha, en que vivian, que les apareciese el Demonio, y les hablase, cuias ragones referian, y manifestaban despues 
al Pueblo, diciendoles, que asi se lo avian mandado los Dioses; y lo que afirmaban vér ordinariamente, era una 
cabeca, con largos, y estendidos cabellos. Algunos de los nuestros, sabiendo de estos Indios, que de ordinario 
yelan semejantes visiones, y apariciones, atribuiendolo 4 su maldad, por hacer escarnio de ellos ; decian, y han dicho 
ser gente perversa, y mala, y no poder ser buenos los que tanta comunicacion han tenido con el Demonio; y como 
los que esto han dicho, y dicen, son los populares, y gente simple, € indocta, quiero que sepan ser este uso mui 
acostumbrado del Demonio, con todas, 6 las mas Naciones del Mundo, 4 las quales ha tenido debajo de su poderio, 
y mando, apareciendoseles de ordinario, y 4 cada paso, en los Templos; y estos eran los Oraculos (como en otra 
parte dirgmos) porque por esta via, @ industria, los tenia mas de cierto por suios, y mui mas atraillados. Y bol- 

28 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

viendo A nuestro proposito, digo, que de la vida, exercicios, aiunos, penitencia, y devocion de estos Capellanes, y 
de las visiones que tenian, y de todo lo demas que hacian, se daba entera noticia, y cuenta 4 los Reies, en especial 
3 los de Mexico, quando se hicieron Sefiores de la Tierra, de lo qual todos se holgaban mucho ; porque juzgaban 
ser todas aquellas cosas mui en servicio de sus Dioses, y credito de su Religion, y creian venirles de ellas muchos 
comodos, y provechos. 

Si en alguno de estos Capellanes se hallaba, que en aquellos quatro Afios, que lo avia sido, se huviese descom- 
puesto en algun acto carnal, juntabanse muchos Sacerdotes, y otra mucha Gente popular, con ellos, y averiguaban 
la causa; y si por ventura hallaban ser asi, sentenciabanlo 4 muerte, cuio cumplimiento executaban de noche, y no_ 
de dia, haciendole la cabeca pedacos a palos; luego lo quemaban, y sus polvos, y cenigas, las esparcian al Aire ; 
porque no quedasen en la Tierra cenicas, y polvos de tan mal Hombre: porque juzgaban la culpa cometida, en 
semejante aiuno, por inexpiable, y sacrilega, y descomulgado, y anatema, al que la cometia. Y si por ventura 
alguno de los dichos quatro Capellanes moria de muerte natural dentro del termino de los dichos quatro Afios, que 
servia al Templo, supliase luego otro en su lugar; y tenian su muerte por sefial cierta de algun infortunio, y grande 
infelicidad para el Pueblo, y por Pronostico de alguna proxima, y breve mortandad, especialmente de Principes, y 
Sefiores: y por esta causa vivian todos con grandes temores, y recelos todo aquel Afio, con sospechas de su 
muerte, lo qual algunas veces sucedia. 

Cartruto X. 
De otras Dignidades, a cuio cargo estaban las cosas de el servicio de los Templos. 

De las personas dichas, y muchedumbre de Sacerdotes, que esta Gente tenia, para el servicio de sus Idolos, avia 
otros muchos mas, que ocupados en oficios particulares, hacian insigne, y grandioso el Estado Sacerdotal. De los 
quales era uno, que Ilamaban Epqualiztli, que tenia cargo de mandar proveer todo lo que era menester en las Fiestas 
que se celebraban en el Templo grande de la Ciudad, que eran infinitas, y sin numero, en especial, en la que ha- 
cian de el Afio nuevo. Otro avia, que se Ilamaba Meloncoteohua, 4 cuio cargo estaban las cosas del servicio del 
dicho Templo, de las quales usaban los Sacerdotes, 6 Satrapas, asi como de Papel, incienso, y una goma, que se 
llama Ulli, y de tinta, con que se embarnigaban, y entintaban los Satrapas, 6 Sacerdotes, llamados Chiconnahuacatl, 
y de las demas cosas que se gastaban en los Sacrificios, en el dicho Templo, que eran en numero inmenso. Otra 
dignidad avia, 4 cuia obediencia estaban todos los Sacerdotes que servian en el Templo de la Diosa Xilonen (llama- 
base Cinteutzin) y 4 cuio cargo tambien estaba el cuidar, y proveer todo lo necesario para el servicio del dicho 
Templo. : 

Otro Satrapa avia, llamado Atempanteohuatzin, que presidia 4 todos los Sacerdotes que servian en el Templo 
de la Diosa Toci, madre de todos los Dioses, y tenia cargo de las cosas necesarias del servicio del Templo, en 
especial para el dia de su Fiesta, plumas de Aguila, de las mas delicadas, y blancas, que estan debajo da las otras, 
que se manifiestan, y descubren 4 los ojos, y vista, y picos de las mismas Aguilas, con que avia de salir compuesta 
la dicha Diosa, que la representaba una Muger, la qual salia vestida con sus ornamentos, y emplumada con aquellas 
plumas, y en la cara un pico de Aguila. Tenia tambien cuidado este Atempanteohuatzin, de que los mogos que 
servian al dicho Templo, hiciesen cierto aiuno, en ciertos dias para él sefalados, y 4 los que eran negligentes, y 
perecosos en cumplirlo, los compelia con rigurosos castigos, y penas. Otro Sacerdote avia, que era Vicario, y 
Rector de los Satrapas, y Sacerdotes, que tenian a cargo el Templo del Fuego, llamabase Tecanmanteohua, y estaba 
tambien a su cargo todo lo tocante al servicio, y gasto del Templo, especialmente de que huviese abundancia de 
Bermellon, y tinta, para los embijes de los Sacerdotes, y de los Cacles, 6 Cotaras blancas, y Sobrepellices, y otras 
cosas para esto necesarias. . 

Otro avia, que cuidaba del Templo del Dios del Vino, llamado Tezcatzoncatlometochtli, y mandaba 4 sus Sa- 
cerdotes, y disponia las cosas necesarias para su fiesta, en especial unos Caracoles pequeitos, blancos, de que iba 
sembrada la ropa de la persona, que representaba su figura, y Sandalias blancas, y unos plumeros de Garcotas 
blancas. Este dicho tenia otro Vicario, que se llamaba Ometochtliyyauhqueme, que tenia el mismo cuidado. 
Avia otra dignidad, llamada Ometochtlitomiauh, que servia al Dios de el mismo nombre, y a su Templo, y 

Pai > 

oe 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. | 29 

Ministros. Otro, al Templo de Acalometochtli, de su nombre. Otro, al Dios Quatlapanqui, llamado Quatlapan- 
quiometochtli. Otro, al Templo de Tlilhua, llamado Tlilhuaometochtli. Otro, al Dios Nappatecuhtli, Ilamado 
Ometochtlinappatecuhtli. Todos los quales tenian inferiores otros Sacerdotes, a los quales presidian, y tenian 
cuidado de las cosas de el. servicio de los Templos, que tenian 4 su cargo, en especial los dias de sus fiestas. 
Avia en los Templos otros oficiales, entre los quales era uno, que tenia cargo de hacer traer la lela, que era 
necesaria, para quemar en los Braseros del Templo, en los quales ardia de dia, y de noche, sin cesar, ni apagarse 
el Fuego, y eran en numero mas de trecientos, con los quales iba al Monte por ella. Otro oficial tenia cargo de 
mirar, que nadie se orinase en lo interior del patio, y de que ordinariamente estuviese barrido, y limpio; y si eaela 
4 alguno que se huviese orinado, 6 en algo ensuciado, lo castigaba gravemente por ello. 

Capituto XI. 

De otros muchos Ministros, que avia en los Templos de los Mexicanos, que servian como Sacristanes. 

Av1a otros Ministros, en los Templos Idolatricos de estas Gentes de la Nueva-Espafia, los aes eran dedicados, 
para cosas de su servicio, 4 manera de Sacristanes, los quales eran en numero treinta, quarenta, 6 cinquenta, segun 
la grandeca, 6 pequenéz del Pueblo, y Templo, donde asistian, (aunque en este Mexicano era este numero aven- 
tajado, y grande.) Estos mogos eran Hijos de Sefiores, y Gente principal de la Republica, 4 cuia compaftia, y 
administracion no se admitian Hombres comunes, aunque mas ricos fuesen; porque para este oficio no valia la 
Plata, ni el Oro, sino solo la nobleca, y limpiega de la sangre. Estos tenian cargo de servir en lo interior del 
Templo, en los servicios mas propinquos 4 los Dioses, como era barrer, y regar el Templo, y tener cuidado de que 
estuviesen mui limpias, y aseadas, todas las cosas tocantes al culto de ellos, aparejaban los vasos, é instrumentos 
para los Sacrificios con toda diligencia, sin intervencion de descuido, 6 falta, y eran estos Mocos en todo tan soli- 
citos, y diligentes, que por maravilla cometian culpa en el Oficio, ni se hallaba (casi) en que enmendarlos. Tenian 
entre si, estos Mancebos, grados de preeminencia, y de cinco, en cinco Afios subian 4 ellos, conforme mas, 6 
menos se avian aventajado en su ministerio, que era subir de un oficio menor, 4 otro maior. Demas de los Man- 
cebos dichos, que eran ordinarios en el servicio del Demonio, que eran los precisos del numero determinado, que 
para st. ministerio avia de aver, se ofrecian, y dedicaban otros muchos Mancebos Nobles, Hijos de Sefiores, y 
Senadores, y Gente principal, los quales servian en aquel ministerio, como Porcionistas, en compafiia de los Ordi- 
narios, que eran como Colegiales perpetuos, hasta que se les llegaba el tiempo de tomar estado, para el qual salian, 
segun las Leies, y Costumbres del Templo, mientras estaban en aquel servicio, y recogimiento se llamaban Teotla- 
macazque, que quiere decir: Mancebos, 6 Mocos Divinos, 6 Mancebos donceles de Dios. 

Todos estos mogos, que se ocupaban en este ministerio dicho, eran doctrinados, y ensefiados por el que tenia 
oficio de Maese-Escuela, en las Ceremonias del culto de estos Dioses, y en las Leies temporales del Pueblo, como 
aquellos, que las avian de saber, para usar de ellas despues que saliesen 4 regir, y governar las Republicas, y en 
las virtudes, para que huiesen los vicios contrarios 4 ellas, segun la estimacion, que ellos podian tener de la virtud, 
por la lumbre de la ragon natural, conviene 4 saber, que no enojasen, ni hiciesen agravio, ni dafio 4 ninguno, y 
otras cosas semejantes, que enseiia, y dicta la racon, y Lei Natural. De esto se prueba aver oficio de Maestre 
Escuela entre estos Indios, al qual pertenece (como hemos dicho en otro Capitulo) leer, y ensefiar en su Republica 
Sacerdotal. Eran tambien en los actos exteriores mui honestos, y en viendo mugeres, bajaban los ojos al suelo, 
porque no se les notase alguna liviandad, y todos eran obligados por Lei, a ser castisimos, hasta que se casasen. 

30 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

CariruLo XII. 

De otros Ministros de los Templos, que servian en otros oficios exteriores, y de como estos eran 
doctrinados. 

Orra suerte, y parcialidad de mancebos avia en estas Republicas Indianas, que estaban dedicados al servicio de los 
Templos ; estos eran de los Ciudadanos (aunque no de los comunes, y mas bajos de el Pueblo, sino de aquellos, que 
tenian grado medio entre los Nobles, y Gente mui comun, como suele aver en las Ciudades) asi como Mercaderes, y 
otros, que no se exercitan en oficios viles, y tienen un medio honesto de Vida en la Republica, 6 Ciudad donde 
viven. Estos mancebos dichos servian 4 los Templos, en las cosas exteriores, y de maior trabajo, como era en traer 
lela, para los braseros, y sustentar perpetuo Fuego, que era el continuo Sacrificio (como veremos.) Tenian a cargo 
la fabrica, y reparticion de los Templos ; y finalmente, todas las otras cosas exteriores, que pertenecian al servicio, y 
ministerio de los dichos Templos. Estos tenian sus Colegios, y Casas cerca de los mismos Templos, y tenian un 
Rector, que los regia, y governaba, que se llamaba Telpochtlato, que quiere decir, Guarda, 6 Caudillo de los Mance- 
bos, el qual Telpochtlato tenia gran cuidado de doctrinarles, y ensefiarles, en buenas costumbres, y en todas aquellas 
cosas, que eran de su ministerio, corrigiendolos, y castigandolos en las culpas, y defectos, que cometian. Tenian sus 
Tierras, y Heredades para su sustento (que debian de ser de las dedicadas al uso, y gasto de los Templos) en ellas 
sembraban, y cogian Pan para su sustento. Guardaban alli su manera de Orden, y Religion, porque tenian sus 
aiunos, hacian sus Sacrificios, ofrecian sus ofrendas, y derramaban su sangre, segun Costumbre, y Leies, 4 que en 
aquellos Colegios eran obligados. 

Eran tan bien mandados, y tan obedientes 4 sus maiores, y tan prestos en todas las cosas, que se les mandaba, y 
encomendaba, que sin escusa ninguna las hacian, 4 qualquier hora, que fuese, sin reparar en el tiempo, ni hora, fuese 
de Soles, 6 de Aguas, de Dia, 6 de Noche, Invierno, 6 Verano. En este ministerio, y ocupaciones se exercitaban 
estos Mancebos todo el tiempo, que en aquellos Colegios, y Gimnasios estaban, hasta llegar el determinado de aver 
de tomar estado, y casarse, que era el de los veinte, 6 veinte y dos Afios. Quando eran de esta edad pedian licencia 
4 sus Rectores, y Superiores para buscar Muger, el qual luego se la daba; pero dicen, que en otras partes les 
mandaba el Sumo Sacerdote, que se casasen, y si no se querian casar, quedaban obligados de alli adelante 4 ser con- 
tinentes toda su Vida; y el que asi no vivia, era pregonado por malo, ¢ infame; de tal manera, que ninguno despues 
queria darle su hija, ni recebirle por yerno. En la Provincia de Tlaxcalla se acostumbraba, que si se pasaba el 
tiempo de casarse, y alguno lo disimulaba, 6 se descuidaba, 6 no queria casarse, lo tresquilaban en castigo, y pena de 
su delito (que no era pequefio entre estas Gentes de esta Nueva-Espafa, ni lo es agora, quando alguno es tresquilado, 
en especial Mugeres, que lo reciben por grandisima afrenta, sien este genero de castigo pagan alguna culpa grave, 
que cometen) y con esta afrenta, y confusion hechavanlo de la compaiia de los demas Mancebos ; y si los castigaban 
4 los semejantes, no era por la continencia, que prometian guardar despues, sino porque era caso raro, que en mui 
pocos acaecia, y tenianlo por mal aguero; porque lo ordinario, y cotidiano era casarse todos, sin repugnancia; 
antes, para ello, pedian licencia, y se la daban; pero por el contrario, si alguno se casaba sin la dicha licencia, 
tenianle por atrevido, y desvergoncado, y era notado de loco, y de poco seso, y por ello mui rigurosamente castigado. 

Quando se despedian de aquellos Gimnasios, 6 Escuelas donde se avian criado, el Maestro, 6 Rector, que los avia 
governado, y doctrinado, hacia un prolijo raconamiento, en el qual los amonestaba, que mirasen mui bien, y no se 
olvidasen de lo mucho bueno, que en aquella congregacion, y compafia avian visto, y aprendido, y que fuesen mui 
solicitos servidores de los Dioses; y que pues tomaban Muger, y Casa, trabajasen, por ser Hombres honrados, y mui 
cuidadosos de sustentarla, y de proveer su Familia; que no fuesen descuidados, y perecosos, y que supiesen criar, y 
doctrinar los Hijos, que tuviesen, como ellos avian sido criados, y doctrinados, y que para quando huviese Guerras 
fuesen Animosos, Valientes, y Esforgados Hombres, y que con estas calidades, y condiciones los Dioses les aiuda- 
rian, y harian ricos, y bienaventurados, haciendo en ellas el deber 4 buenos, y honrados Hombres. Estos, y otros 
avisos les daban, con que los despedian, y ellos se iban 4 buscar Muger, y casarse, la qual hallaba luego, y aun le 
rogaban con ella, por saber los que le pretendian por yerno la diciplina regular, y vida honesta en que se avia criado. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 31 

Cariruto XIII. 

De como se ofrecian los Ninos a los Templos, y a las Escuelas, y Gimnasios, que estaban junto a 
ellos, y de lo que les ensenaban ; y se refutan los vicios Antiguos, que en semejantes Congrega- 
ciones se usaban en Republicas Antiguas. : 

La manera de ofrecerse, y dedicarse los Mancebos, que servian, y se criaban en lo interior de los Templos, y los 
dichos, y referidos en el Capitulo pasado, era, que quando eran Nifios, poco despues que se soltaban del pecho de 
las Madres, y que sabian andar, los traian sus Padres ellos, y ofrecianselos 4 los Sacerdotes, y Ministros de aquellas 
Congregaciones con una mui elegante Oracion, y Platica, que hacian, a los quales el Ministro respondia las palabras 
ordinarias, que tenia de costumbre, y luego recebia el Nifio, y lo entregaha A los Maestros, que los criaban, hasta que 
fuesen de edad, para casar (como se ha dicho) y en teniendola para exercitarse en los ministerios, en que avia de 
servirle, ocupabanlos en ellos. Si eran de los de el servicio interior del Templo, enseftabanles (como se ha dicho) 
como avian de barrer, y con qué reverencia avian de tratar el Fuego de los braseros ordinarios, y las velas de la 
noche, y tafter los Caracoles, 6 Cornetas, y los Atabales, y Trompetas, y 4 mecer la tinta, con que se teflian todos los 
Sacerdotes, y Ministros del Templo, la qual mecian en una grande artesa, donde se tefiian cada mafiana todos, de pies 
i cabeca. Si eran de los Colegios, industriabanlos en las cosas de su oficio, en especial como avian de traer lefia, y 
la que ayia de ser para el gasto, y servicio del Templo, ensefiabanles a cortar las espinas, y puntas de Maguey, y traer 
Ramos de Acxoyatl, para los Sacrificios, y otras cosas de honestidad, y provechosas para la vida, moralmente buena. 
Estos referidos entraban en esta tierna edad dicha, para el servicio del Templo, y permanecian en él hasta casarse ; 
pero demas de estos (que eran muchos) todos los Padres, en general, tenian cuidado (segun se dice) de embiar 4 sus 
Hijos 4 estas Escuelas, 6 Generales, desde la edad de seis Aftos, hasta la de nueve, y eran obligados & ello, en los 
quales olan su doctrina, y eran enseflados en buena crianga, y costumbres, y en las cosas de su Religion, segun a su 
edad, y aos convenia. 

Alguna mas sefial de virtud, y aun de seguir mejor el dictamen de la racon natural, y Gente de mas politico regi- 
miento era esta, que no la de los Griegos, donde tanta Sabiduria mundana se sabe aver havido, y tanto en aquella 
Republica resplandecio de exercicio de las Artes Liberales, donde los Padres embiaban 4 los Hijos 4 las Escuelas, y 
Generales, no solo 4 aprender Ciencias, y Documentos de Virtud, sino donde tambien avia Dioses de amores, y 
vilecas, y les ofrecian Sacrificios de sus mismas personas, exponiendose 4 quantos querian usar mal de ellos, usando 
sucia, y nefandamente de sus cuerpos, como Lactancio lo refiere por estas palabras: Caso lamentable, y de Ilorar es, 
que Gente tan sabia, y docta, viviese tan ciega, y torpemente, que 4 sus Hijos hiciesen pacientes de los Dioses, des- 
nudando sus cuerpos, y entregandoles 4 vicios nefandos; y que maravilla, que de esta Gente manasen tantas mal- 
dades, como cometieron, pues adoraron los vicios, y los tuvieron por Dioses? Estas son palabras de Lactancio, 
hablando de las abominaciones de los Griegos, y de como, por servir 4 los sucios Dioses, ofrecian 4 sus Hijos en 
aquellos Gimnasios, 6 Lugares publicos de Escuelas, donde fuesen suciamente tratados de todos los que quisiesen. 

De esta costumbre nefanda, que fue dilatada, y estendida por muchas Naciones del Mundo Gentilicas, hace men- 
cion la Sagrada Escritura en el Libro segundo de los Macabeos, donde se dice, que Jason, despues que alcancé el 
Pontificado, y se introdujo en él, por Simonia, fue osado a edificar junto al Templo de Jerusalén, un Gimnasio, que 
es Escuela donde se aprendian las ceremonias de los Idolos Gentilicos, y Efebia, que era lugar publico, y mancebia 
de mocos para el vicio nefando. Estas son palabras de la Sagrada Escritura, donde dice, que lo uno puso con lo 
otro, y asi debia de ser entre los Griegos ; y ya que no fuese en unos mismos aposentos, seria en diversos, aunque 
continuados, unos con otros, con puertas diferentes ; pero en una misma casa, y debajo de un mismo tejado, y techo. 
Parece tambien, que las Efebias, que aqui nombra, eran los Lupanares, que se llaman en comun lenguaje, Casas 
publicas ; y viene este nombre Efebia de una Diosa llamada Hebe; y dice Pausanias en su Libro Segundo, que la 
Iamaban Pincerna, que quiere decir Copera, que sirve la copa 4 los Dioses, y de alli viene Ephebus, por Mancebo ; 
y la Etimologia suia es de esta letra /, y de esta diccion Phebus, que es el Sol, y quiere decir, Moco mui lucido, 
hermoso, y sin barbas, de lo qual trata Lucano. Mas lo que yo quiero decir, por lo dicho, es, que nuestros Indios 
Occidentales tenian Escuelas, y Generales junto 4 los Templos, para ensefiar 4 los Niftios, y Mancebos, honestas, 
y buenas costumbres, y no maldades, y abominaciones, como las huvo entre los Antiguos Gentiles. 

a2 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Cariruto XIV. 

De las Mugeres, que servian en los Templos, que eran a manera de Virgines Vestales Antiguas, y 
de lo que hacian, y cosas, en que se ocupaban. 

Ex Demonio, que siempre ha pretendido engafar al Mundo, no solo ha querido servirse de Hombres en sus Tem- 
plos, y Sacrificios, fino tambien de Mugeres, como queriendo significar en esto, ser Sefhor de todas las voluntades, 
de ambos sexos, y mostrar autoridad, asi entre los Hombres, como entre las Mugeres, para cuio fin ordeno tener, no 
solo Hombres, Sacerdotes, y Ministros de su detestable, y abominable Idolatria, sino tambien Mugeres, que con el 
mismo cuidado le sirviesen; y ha sido tan ordinario, que casi no se ha pasado Siglo, en que no lo aia pretendido, y 
puesto en execucion, y asi se sirve de ellas. Tuvo principio este ministerio en las Virgines Vestales, que fueron 
dedicadas 4 la Diosa Vesta, para que tuviesen ordinario cuidado de atigar el Fuego, que en el Templo ardia, 4 honra 
de esta Diosa, que segun San Agustin, y Ovidio, era el mismo Fuego, al qual, como los Romanos no podian figurarle 
con ninguna figura, y por semejante racon no podian tener la Imagen de esta Diosa, entre las demas de los otros, 
puesta, en el Capitolio, ordenaron, que huviese Fuego perpetuo, que la representase, y Ministros ordinarios, que lo 
aticasen, y conservasen, sin apagarse. Hstas constituid Numa Pompilio, en el quinto numero de los Sacerdotes, 
como Hombre tan dado al Culto, y Religion de sus falsos Dioses, como lo dice Dionisio Halicarnasio en el Libro 
Segundo de las Historias Romanas ; y de estas dice Tulio, que guardaban en la Ciudad el Fuego en el hogar pub- 
lico, y Tito Livio en el Libro Octavo de la Tercera Decada, y en el Primero de la Primera. El modo de su eleccion 
era, escoger veinte Doncellas, por el Sumo Sacerdote, con muchas ceremonias, y condiciones, como Aulo Gelio, en 
el Libro Primero de sus Noches Atticas, lo dice, no avian de ser menores de seis afios, ni maiores de diez, para ser 
electas, y consagradas, en este ministerio, no aviendo de tener macula ninguna, asi en su cuerpo, como en los sen- 
tidos. Luego que por el Sumo Sacerdote era recebida, y dedicada al oficio Vestal, la cortaban el cabello (ceremonia, 
que se usa entre nuestras Monjas, que significa cortar, y cercenar las costumbres del Mundo, y entrar 4 nueva vida, 
sin dependencia de cosas humanas.) Los primeros diez afios se ocupaban, en aprender las ceremonias, de que en el 
Templo usaban, y los Ritos de las cosas Sagradas ;_ y los siguientes diez afios las exercitaban, y otros diez despues 
ensefiaban 4 las que de nuevo entraban 4 ser Novicias. Y si pasado todo este tiempo alguna de estas queria casarse, 
podia libremente, y si no, quedabase en aquel Monasterio guardando perpetua virginidad. 

A manera de estas Virgines Vestales avia en esta Nueva-Espafia, Doncellas, y otras Mugeres, que se dedicaban, y 
consagraban al servicio de los Idolos, que por Dioses adoraban, las quales tenian sus salas, y casas 4 las espaldas de 
los Templos, no cerradas ; porque nunca los Indios usaron puertas (a lo menos en muchas partes de estas Indias, y 
Nueva-Espafia) todas estas eran Virgines, puesto que entre ellas avia algunas otras, que por su devocion servian en 
el Templo. El modo de la dedicacion, y consagracion de estas Monjas, 6 Sacerdotisas, era, que luego, que nacian, 
las ofrecian sus padres 4 los Dioses, y Templos, y daba noticia de este ofrecimiento 4 los Satrapas, 6 Curas de las 
Parroquias, y aquel Vicario General, que tenia cargo de los Monasterios, para que supiesen, que estaban dedicadas, y 
ofrecidas & aquel ministerio. Y siendo de quarenta dias, las Ilevaban los Padres 4 los Templos en bragos, y ponianles 
en las manos un manojuelo de yerva, 4 manera de escoba, en sefial, y demostracion de que avian de barrer en el 
Templo, en llegando & edad suficiente para ello ; Hevaban juntamente un incensario de barro, y un poco de Incienso, 
6 Copal en él, significando en aquella ofrenda, que la avia de exercitar en el dicho Templo. Aviendo presentado a 
la Nifia de esta manera, y con esta ofrenda, bolviase su Madre a su casa, con ella, dejando al Ministro el Incienso, 
incensario, y escoba, y encargaba el Ministro 4 la Madre, que cuidase mucho de su Hija, y tambien de llevar la 
ofrenda de veinte en veinte dias, que era una escoba para barrer, é Incienso, para incensar, y ofrecer a los Dioses, y 
cortecas de Arboles, para quemar en los braseros, 6 Altares del Fuego, que ardian delante del Templo. A esto que- 
daba obligada la Madre, desde que hacia el voto, y ofrecimiento de su Hija, para el servicio del Templo, lo qual 
cumplia con mucho cuidado. Y quando la Nifia tenia edad para andar, ella misma llevaba su ofrenda, y alguna 
manta al Dios, 4 cuio servicio estaba dedicada; y en llegando 4 edad, que se requeria para servir, iba al Templo, y 
quedabase en él, en compaiiia de las otras, que en él servian. 

-Otras avia, que no eran ordinarias, y perpetuas, sino por racon de Votos, que hacian, 6 devocion, con que se 
ofrecian. De estas, unas prometian estar un Afio, otras dos, otras mas, segun a lo que cada una se atrevia, y tenia 

wy 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 35 

devocion. Estos Votos hacian por diversas causas, 6 porque estaban enfermas, y por recebir salud de mano de los’ 
Dioses, 6 porque les diesen buen marido, 6 Hijos, y otras cosas semejantes, y por la maior parte todas estas eran 
Virgines, y llamabanse Cihuatlamacazque, que quiere decir Sacerdotisas, 6 Cihuaquaquilli, que quiere decir lo 
mismo. Estas Monjas, 6 Mocas recogidas tenian viejas, que las regian, y guardaban, que eran como Abadesas, 6 
Prioras de aquellos Calpules, y Salas donde vivian, las quales las regian, governaban, doctrinaban, y corregian en sus 
negligencias, tomandoles cuenta 4 ciertos tiempos, como quando en un Convento, tiene Capitulo.’ sus Monjas una 
Abadesa. Eran mui estimadas estas Mugeres de todos, y reverenciadas, por estar en aquel recogimiento, en servicio 
de los Dioses, y por la religiosa, y honesta vida, que hacian. Luego que entraban en aquella Casa, les cortaban el 
cabello, como & las Virgines Vestales, y 4 nuestras Monjas, en sefial de que profesaban nueva vida, y dormian 
siempre vestidas, por maior honestidad, y por hallarse mas prestas para levantarse 4 las horas del Sacrificio, a las 
quales acudian, como las Virgines Vestales las horas sefaladas de la noche. Su Dormitorio era una Sala, donde 
todas dormian, en comun, que se velan unas 4 otras, como se acostumbra en los Conventos, y Dormitorio de 
Monjas. 

El exercicio que tenian (despues que se desocupaban de los Sacrificios, y servicio del Templo) era hilar, y texer 
mantas de labores, y otras de colores, rica, y delicadamente labradas, para el servicio de los Templos, y Dioses en 
ellos adorados. Vivian mui honesta, y religiosamente, y en gran silencio, modestia, y recogimiento, los ojos en 
tierra, mostrando siempre gran exemplo, y aparencia de Religion. Sus ocupaciones espirituales eran levantarse 4 
las diez de la noche, 4 media noche, y 4 la madrugada, para ir 4 poner Incienso en los braseros, donde siempre se 
ofrecian 4 los Dioses, las quales iban con su Madre, 6 Abadesa, en renglera, 6 procesion, puestas 4 una parte, como 
haciendo ala de un Coro; y se ponian los Sacerdotes de otra, y asi en dos alas y coros hacian sus ofrendas, y 
aticaban los Fuegos, y quemaban sus Inciensos, y en todo este camino, que iban juntos Sacerdotes, y Sacerdotisas, 
con todos los otros Ministros, para esto sefialados, 4 ida, ni buelta, no se hablaban los unos 4 los otros, guardando 
mucho silencio, y religion, llevando los ojos fijos en el suelo; iban las guardas, viejos, y viejas, con grande vigi- 
lancia, y cuidado, porque no huviese cosa, en aquel acto, que fuese de descomposicion, y soltura. Despues de con- 
cluido esto, se bolvian por el camino que avian ido, con la misma mesura, y composicion, cada qual a su sala. 
Tenian cuidado cada mafiana de llevar comida caliente de Pan, y de Ave guisada, 6 otras cosas, y presentarlo a los 
Idolos, ofreciendoles aquel calor, 6 baho; porque tenian creido, que lo recebian mui de gana los Dioses, y que en 
ello se les hacia gran servicio, y gusto; despues. se quedaba toda aquella comida para los Sacerdotes. Aiunaban 
todo el tiempo, que alli estaban, comiendo una vez al dia, y no antes de medio dia, y luego 4 la noche su moderada 
colacion. Las fiestas les era permitido comer carne, porque no aiunaban, de donde parece abstenerse en sus aiunos 
de comer carne, como nosotros en los nuestros. Tenian cargo de barrer todas las piecas bajas de los Templos 
(porque las altas tenian 4 cargo los mocos Sacristanes, que eran los Hijos de Sefiores, como se ha dicho) ‘quando 
iban barriendo, siempre iban acia atras, por no bolver a los Dioses las espaldas. En algunos dias festivos tambien 
bailaban, y regocijaban la fiesta de sus Dioses, especialmente en la de aquel, 4 cuio servicio, y Templo estaban 
dedicadas. 

Si alguna de estas, cometia pecado alguno secreto, en violacion, y quebrantamiento de la castidad, temia, que sus 
carnes avian de podrirse, por lo qual hacian grande penitencia, con intencion de que los Dioses, la encubriesen su 
pecado, y no fuese disfamada por él; pero si era sabido, 6 llegaba 4 ser publico, no menos pena tenia, que las Vesta- 
les Romanas, de las quales se dice, que cometiendo estrupo, la enterraban viva, junto 4 la Puerta Quirinal, que se 
Ilamaba Collina, por donde salian al Collado Quirinal, en una cueva honda, a la qual se decendia por escalera, adonde 
las metian; y quando las levaban iban todos sus parientes con luto llorandola, como ya muerta. Detras de todos 
seguian los Pontifices, y Sacerdotes, con gran silencio, mostrando mucha tristega ; y porque no pareciese, que las 
mataban de hambre, ponianles algun pan, y leche, y agua, y una candela encendida. Quitaban la escalera, y cerraban 
bien la cueva, y bolviase todo aquel acompafhamiento, con el cumplimiento, que avia venido. Era aquel dia de esta 
Justicia, dia de loro, y luto publico, en todo el Pueblo Romano, de mui gran temor, que 4 todos comprehendia, 
temiendo ser sefial, é indicio de algun grande infortunio, que a toda Roma vendria. Plutarco en sus Problemas, 
parece decir, que una de las ragones, porque los Romanos le daban asi esta muerte, era, porque no osaban poner las 
manos en el cuerpo, sacro, dedicado, y consagrado a tan altos, y poderosos Dioses, pensando, que cometian un 
grandisimo sacrilegio, matandolas de otra manera. De esta pena, y castigo de estas Virgines trata largo Servio en 

el Undecimo de las Eneidas. Esta era la muerte de la estrupada; pero la del estrupador era sacarle a la Placa, y 
K 

34 | SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

publicamente acotarle, hasta que rendia el Alma. Esta Lei toméd Numa (segun Dionisio, Plutarco, Livio, y otros 
muchos, y lo refiere Estephano Minando en los Annales Romanos) de los Albanos, que acostumbraban matar a 
acotes 4 la Virgen Vestal violada, y al violador, conmutando Numa la muerte de ella, en la manera dicha. Esta 
misma pena, 6 otra semejante daban a las Doncellas dichas de esta Nueva-Espaiia, temiendo, que por aquella culpa 
los Dioses estaban mui airados, y que avian de descargar sobre la Republica su ira, y por esto morian ambos estraifia, 
y rigurosa muerte. 
Quando Ilegaban estas Mocas, 6 Doncellas a los afios, y edad determinada, para casarse, estando en aquel recogi- 
miento la pedian, y en concertandose el casamiento, entre los parientes, y principales del Barrio, Parroquia, 6 Col- 
lacion, luego compraban Codornices, ¢ Incienso blanco, y Flores, Cafias de humo (que se llaman Poquietes) é 
Incensario, que es un brasero 4 manera de sahumador, y aparejaban una buena comida, y componian, y aderecaban 4 
la moca, de nuevos, y buenos vestidos, é iban con ella todas las parientas, y Nevaban, toda aquella ofrenda, que avian 
aparejado, y ofrecianla al Cura, 6 Vicario del Templo, 4 cuio servicio estaba dedicada; y ella lo ponia delante del 
Idolo, con grande reverencia, y mucho numero de ceremonias: Una de las primeras era tender una manta grande 
delante del Altar de el Idolo maior, y encima de ella ponian todas las cosas que llevaban en unos platos de madera 
pintados, y embarnicados, mui hermosos a los ojos, y en uno de ellos ponian tres Tamales, 6 Bollos de masa de 
Maiz, y en otro cinco, y luego escudillas de barro de tres pies (que llaman Molcaxetes) lenos de Chilmolli, y Ave 
cocida, 6 Carne de Patos, y todo mui bien puesto, y ordenado, lo dejaban, y ofrecian; y hecha esta ceremonia, se 
despedia la Moga del Monasterio, y servicio del Templo, y se iba 4 casar. Los Parientes hacian sus ragonamientos 
al Tequacuilli, 6 Vicario del Monasterio, y Parroquia ; y respondia al proposito, dando licencia, para que la llevasen 
4 casar libremente. Esto es lo que se ha entendido de la Religion de estas Mugeres, Ministras, 6 Sacerdotisas de 
los Templos, y de los otros Ministros, y Sacerdotes, que avia en esta Nueva-Hspafia; y segun tengo colegido, lo 
mismo fue de las Provincias de Quatimala, Nicaragua, y Honduras, y de otras muchas, por mas de ochocientas 
leguas ; puesto que algo mas, algo menos, en Ministros, Ceremonias, y Sacrificios aia avido alguna diversidad, y 
diferencia. Y esto mismo podemos juzgar de todas las Naciones deste Orbe; porque no todos podemos saber las 
diferencias, 6 variedad que tenian en su Religion, maiormente, que esto'es lo mas esencial, y toda otra cosa fuera 

superflua, é impertinente. 

Capituto XV. 

De dos diferencias de Mugeres, que asistian en el Templo, y Tabernaculo de Dios, en su Pueblo de 
Israel, y de como fue corriendo esta costumbre, hasta la Venida de Christo Nuestro Senor ; y se 
concluie aver usurpado el Demonio esta manera de Rehgion, para la falsa suia, asi entre los 
Gentiles antiguos, como entre estos modernos Occidentales. 

Despe los principios, que Dios comenc¢o a tener Casa particular, y conocida en la Tierra, ordend su Magestad 
Santisima (6 ya por sefiales cénocidas, y claras, 6 ya por inspiraciones internas hechas 4 los moradores de su 
Pueblo) que asi como avia Hombres, que se ofrecian 4 su santo, y particular servicio, segregados del comun de la 
Gente, huviese Mugeres, que con particular devocion siguiesen este camino, y le diesen el Alma, con actos particu- 
lares de devocion, y gusto, para que con perpetua asistencia le alabasen en su Templo, y le honrasen, y confesasen 
por el Dios conocido de Israel, y por el maior de todos los Dioses, siendo él solo el que lo es, y los demas falsos, y 
mentirosos, inventados al alvedrio de los Hombres, y canonicados por el seso de los locos, que sin tener deidad, se la 
atribuian. Que esto aia sido verdad, coligese de muchos lugares de la Sagrada Escritura ; uno de los quales es del 
Exodo, diciendo de Moisen, que hico una Pila de Bronce, de los espejos de las Mugeres, que velaban en la puerta 
del Tabernaculo, y‘segun esto, avia Mugeres consagradas 4 Dios, que se ocupaban en velar en su santa Casa, estando 
en ella‘en Oracion, por toda la noche. Y segun Rabi Salomén, y lo refiere Nicolao de Lira, eran estas Mugeres 
devotas, que apartadas’ de las mansiones, y tiendas del Real, hacian su habitacion, & las espaldas, y costados de el 
Tabernaculo, para hacer Ofrendas, y Sacrificios. Y en el Primero Libro de los Reies, se dice, que los Hijos de el 
Sacerdote Heli, pecaban con las Mugeres que guardaban en la puerta del Tabernaculo (aunque Nicolao dice, que 

estas Mugeres eran las que despues de sus partos, venian 4 purificarse, y hacer las ceremonias acostumbradas, segun 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 35 

la Lei ; otros consienten con el primer sentido, conviene 4 saber, que eran de las que continuaban las devociones del 
Templo) por lo qual era maior el pecado de estos Mocos atrevidos, por quanto depravaban las intenciones devotas de 
las que 4 Dios se ofrecian con algun particular acto de devocion. En el Segundo Libro de los Macabeos se dice, que 
quando Heliodoro entré en Jerusalén, 4 dar saco 4 los tesoros del Templo, en la comocion, y conturbacion que reci- 
bid todo el Pueblo, asi de parte de los Sacerdotes, como de los demas populares, entraron & la parte las Virgenes, 
que estaban encerradas : que segun parecer de algunos, eran Doncellas Nobles, y Principales, que hacian su morada 
en lugares recogidos del Templo, hasta que tuviesen edad para casarse. Que esto se entienda asi, y que huviese 
Mugeres, que continuaban la asistencia del Templo, esta claro, y es cosa mui cierta; porque de Ana, Hija de Fa- 
nuel, del Tribu de Aser, se dice, que estaba en el Templo en Oracion, los dias, y las noches, sin apartarse jamas de 
este exercicio. 

Esta costumbre se guardé todo el tiempo que duro el estado de los Judios, desde que fueron sacados por la Om- 
nipotente Mano de Dios, de las crueles, y tiranicas del Rei Faraon, hasta la venida del mismo Dios en carne. Y que 
esto sea asi, esta probado, por lo que tenemos referido del Exodo, de las Mugeres que se alojaban a los costados, y 
espaldas del Tabernaculo ; porque fue en tiempo de Moisen, el qual le edificd ; y dice, que de los despojos que estas 
devotas Mugeres le dieron, y ofrecieron, hico el Labro, 6 Pila, en que se lababan, que quiere decir, seeun algunos, 
que con estos espejos lo compuso, y adornd. La continuacion de esta santa costumbre, se conoce, por lo que se 
dice, que paso en tiempo de Heli, que sus hijos solicitaban las voluntades de las que dormian junto de la puerta del 
Tabernaculo, y que fuese corriendo hasta el fin, y acabamiento del Pueblo Judaico, se manifiesta por lo que se ha 
dicho de Anna profetica. 

La prueba de todo lo dicho, se hace mas averiguada, y clara, por lo que muchos Doctores dicen, tratando del 
recogimiento de la siempre Virgen, y sin par, Maria, luego 4 pocos Afios despues de su Nacimiento, porque dice 
San Ambrosio, que avia en el Templo de Jerusalén, lugar acomodado, y decente, en que vivian las Virgenes consa- 
gradas. Y Josefo dice, que avia muchas celdas, y aposentos apartados, que podian servir de este menester ; y en este 
lugar paso esta Soberana Virgen todo el tiempo de su Niféz, hasta que la sacaron para esposa de Joseph, aviendo 
estado trece Afios en aquel recogimiento, con grandisimo espanto de los Sacerdotes que la veian, y Doncellas, que 
en aquel mismo lugar la acompaftaban. En este lugar de recogimiento, que tan de atras avia en el Templo, vivian 
las Doncellas, hasta que llegaban 4 edad de poder casarse, que eran los catorce Afios de su Nacimiento ; luego venia 
el Sacerdote Summo (6 otro por orden suio) y notificaba 4 las dichas Doncellas la Lei, y costumbre de el Templo, 
como lo cuenta Ludulfo de Saxonia, Cartujano, a cuio mandamiento acudian todas, con mui prompta obediencia, y las 
que llegaban a los catorce Afios, salian, é¢ ibanse 4 casa de sus Padres, y ordenaban de darles maridos. En lo que se 
ocupaban en aquel Santo Lugar, y morada, era en recar mental, 6 vocalmente ; en labrar Sedas varias, y diferentes, 
para las cosas del servicio del Templo, y vestiduras de sus Ministros. Cuidaban de dia, y velaban de noche, en las 
cosas de Virtud, y Oracion, y cantaban Himnos, y Psalmos al Sefior. 

Bien parece por lo dicho, la costumbre tan antigua, y santa que huvo en el Pueblo de Dios, de que en su santo 
Templo huviese Mugeres recogidas, que de ordinario le alabasen, y engrandeciesen, ocupandose en sus continuas 
alabancas. Y de aqui infiero, que como el Demonio quiere, en quanto puede, y se le da permiso, imitar 4 Dios, 
hico su Colegio de Virgenes Vestales, para que asi recogidas, y encerradas, guardasen virginidad, y le sirviesen en 
la administracion del Fuego. Y esta mui claro aver usurpado esto del Santo Templo de Dios; pues tantos Afios 
fue antes su principio, que el que did Numa Pompilio al de estas Virgenes, las quales constituid entre los ocho 
grados de Sacerdotes, que ordend, para los Sacrificios (como en otra parte, y Capitulo hemos visto) las quales, demas 
de aticar el Fuego de su encomienda, hilaban, y texian, y hacian otras cosas, en que se ocupaban, y entretenian, y 
cantaban Canticos en alabancas de sus falsos Dioses. San Isidoro, en su Chronica, dice, aver reinado en Roma 
Numa Pompilio, y aver instituido los Pontifices, y Virgenes Vestales, reinando en Jerusalén el Rei Manases, de 
donde se colige lo dicho, y ser primero las de el Pueblo de Dios, que las del culto de el Demonio. Tambien vino 
discurriendo esta costumbre, hasta el tiempo de estos Indios, en cuios Templos (como queda visto por el Capitulo 
pasado) las avia en tanta abundancia, y en tantas cosas ocupadas, algunas de las quales son mui parecidas a las que 
obraban, las que a nuestro Verdadero Dios servian, en aquellos Tiempos de su Antigua Lei; y por aqui se vera la 
embidia del Demonio, y sus astucias, y tracas, aunque ninguna le vale para conservarse, dado caso que se tolere por 
algun tiempo. : : 

De estas Mugeres que hemos dicho del Pueblo de Dios, unas eran casadas, otras viudas, y otras doncellas, consa- 

36 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

gradas 4 Dios, por diversas cosas, aunque la principal, y ordinaria era, para ofrecerle divinas alabancas ; y las Don- 
cellas, para conservarse en su virginidad, y purega, hasta que de alli salian, para recibir esposo. Esto paso en aquella 
Lei Antigua, y Casa del Pueblo de Israel, en la qual huvo Gente del estado de las Mugeres, que de ordinario alaba- 
ban en ella i Dios. Pero esto se purifico, y engrandecid mas, en la Venida de su Hijo, en carne, en este Estado 
Evangelico, y de Gracia, no solo aviendo Mugeres particulares, que en sus Santos Templos le alabasen de dia, y de 
noche; pero Congregaciones de Santas Virgenes, que con particular Voto, y Consagracion perpetua, se sacrificaron 
a la guarda de su virginidad, y 4 las continuas alabangas de la Magestad Santisima de Dios ; de las quales, como dice 
Filon Judio (y lo refiere Eusebio Cesariense, en su Historia Eclesiastica) huvo en los principios de la Primitiva 
Iglesia, por los Montes de Palestina, y Desiertos de Egipto grandes Congregaciones de Mugeres, en lugares, y Casas, 
apartadas de los Monasterios de los Hombres, donde guardando perpetua castidad, servian 4 Dios en continua peni- 
tencia, abstinencia, y maceracion de sus cuerpos, cantandole Himnos, y Psalmos, con voces mui dulces, y acordadas, 
dandose al estudio de las Sagradas Escrituras, asistiendo 4 los Oficios Divinos, con grandisima devocion, y atencion. 

De la primera que sabemos aver comengado esta vida Monastica, y reeogida con Voto de Virginidad perpetua, 
es la Sacrosanta Virgen Maria, como lo afirman todos los Doctores Sagrados, con animo constante, y firme de 
servir A Dios, en recogimiento perpetuo. Y que este Voto le aia hecho en el Templo, y Casa donde estaba, consta, 
porque es Sentencia comun de los Theologos, que le hico antes de sus Desposorios, y asi lo afirma Escoto; y se 
sigue claramente, de lo que se sabe, que sus Padres la Ilevaron al Templo de edad de tres Aftos, y no salio de él, 
hasta que se le did por Esposo al benditisimo Joseph; de donde se sigue conclusivamente aver sido el dicho Voto 
en aquel recogimiento. Y aun despues de desposada, y prefiada del Salvador del Mundo, dice Origenes, que pasaba 
lo mas del Tiempo, en aquel recogimiento, donde se avia criado desde Nifia; y reprekendiendo esto algunos Sacer- 
dotes, y queriendolo estorvar (por ser cosa prohibida estar las casadas en el lugar consagrado, para solas las Don- 
cellas) fue defendida de Zacarias, Padre de San Juan Bautista, 4 quien por Espiritu Divino, fue revelada su purega 
virginal, y la prefiéz, y parto sin mancilla. De manera, que aver Mugeres consagradas 4 Dios, ha sido siempre ; 
pero mas en particular, en este estado dicho de la Lei de Gracia, cuia Patrona es la Santisima Virgen Maria, que 
con particular Voto ofrecid 4 Dios su virginidad, y vivir recogidamente, para servirle con las demas Doncellas, en 
continuas alabancas, si su Voluntad Santisima no huviera sido, de que se desposara con Joseph, para lo que tenia 
determinado de la Redempcion del Mundo. Y A imitacion de esta Gloriosisima Doncella se consagraron las que 
hemos dicho, de los primeros Tiempos de la Iglesia, y se consagran de presente, las que con titulo, y nombre de 
Monjas, viven Vida Religiosa, Santa, y bien regida, sirviendo 4 Dios en castidad perpetua, y cantandole Himnos, 
y Psalmos, como lo hacian las Sacerdotisas antiguas, que el Demonio quiso tener, fingiendose Dios, falsa, y men- 
tirosamente. Este modo de vivir, y conservar castidad, y pureca de Vida, es mucho mas perfecto que el pasado, 
por quanto aquello era por tiempo limitado (conviene 4 saber) hasta que las dichas recogidas tuviesen edad para 
casarse, como parece por lo que pasaba en el Templo de Jerusalén, y en las Virgenes Vestales de la ciega Genti- 
lidad, que pasados tantos Afios tenian licencia (si querian) de trocar vida, y en las Doncellas de las Casas del De- 
monio, de esta Nueva-Espafia, y Pirt, las quales sacaban para tomar marido, y se le daban : teniendo lo contrario, 
por caso no convenible, ni hacedero. 

Pero porque hemos dicho, que en la Lei Antigua no huvo quien por Voto se consagrase 4 perpetua virginidad, 
quiero, para los que no lo saben, referir lo que Hombres doctos, y sabios avran leido, en la exposicion de Nicolao 
de Lira, hablando del Sacrificio que el Principe Jepte, quiso hacer de una sola hija que tenia, adonde prueba, 
averse consagrado & Virginidad perpetua, y que de esta manera cumplid el voto, que avia hecho su padre, como 
parece en su Glosa, por muchas racones sabias, y doctas, que alli pone; que lo que yo pretendo, no es mas de 
decir, que aunque sea verdad, que le aia hecho, y se huviese consagrado 4 Dios, por virginidad perpetua; y Maria, 
hermana de Moisen, fuese virgen, como lo afirma San Ambrosio, y Gregorio Niseno lo procura probar de la 
Sagrada Escritura, y huviese avido estas Virgenes Vestales, recogidas entre la Gentilidad, y las Doncellas, entre 
estos Indios; y en la Lei Antigua, estas dichas, y otras, no llegan todas estas 4 igualar con el voto de esta Sacra- 
tisima Virgen, ni con su cuidado en alabar, y bendecir 4 Dios. De las unas (que son del Pueblo de Dios) clara esta 
la prueba: pues esta en opinion, si fue, 6 no fue asi, lo que se dice de ellas, que hicieron; porque aunque estos 
Santos dicen de Maria, la Hermana de Moisen, que fue Virgen, dice Josefo aver tenido por marido 4 un Hombre, 
Hamado Hur, y de él un Hijo, llamado Besebél; y de la Hija de Jepte, es parecer de Hombres mui sabios, que su 
padre la sacrificd, quitandole la vida ; porque tenia prometido, que la primera cosa que viesen sus ojos, bolviendo 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. | of 

de la Guerra victorioso, la sacrificaria 4 Dios ; y lo primero que vid, fue 4 su Hija, que lo salid 4 recibir con otras 
amigas suias, tafiendo, y cantando. Y Cayetano en el Ingar de los Jueces, no solamente cree, que la mato, sino 
que la ofrecid en holocausto, lo qual decia el Abulense, que despues de averla muerto, la quemé, y hecha ceniga, 
la ofrecid al Senior. 

De las segundas, que son las Mugeres Gentiles, y de las Congregaciones del Demonio, no ai comparacion; lo 
uno, por ser en servicio del Demonio, lo que hacian, lo qual, no solo no era de alabanca, ni honra, pero de 
oprobio, y menosprecio del mismo Demonio, 4 cuio servicio se hacia; porque usurparse uno la Gloria que no 
“tiene, bien se hecha de vér, que antes es ofensa, y agravio, que se hace, que honra que recibe. Lo otro, porque 
dado caso, que esto fuera en orden de virtud (lo qual se ha negado, y niega) no era con perpetuidad, sino 4 cierto, 
y determinado tiempo; y saliendo de aquel recogimiento, y trocando estado, se olvidaban del pasado, y se ocupaban 
en la crianca de sus Hijos, y servicio de sus Maridos. De manera, que lo santo, y bueno (no negando lo que paso 
en la Lei Antigua del Pueblo de Dios) es esto que pasa en este estado de Gracia, en el Voto de la Virginidad, y 
Castidad perpetua, y en el recogimiento de estas benditas Mugeres, ofrecidas 4 Dios, para que le canten sus con- 
.tinuas alabancas, conforme esta ordenado por nuestra Madre, la Santa, y Catolica Iglesia Romana. 

Cariruto XVI. 

De lo que se ha potlido colegir, y hallar del modo del Sacerdocio, de los Reinos de el Piru, y sus 
Mimstros. 

Dex Sacerdocio, y Ministros de los Templos, y Dioses del Pirt, no se ha podido colegir el orden cierto, que en su 
guarda huvo, ni el numero, y distincion de sus Sacerdotes; y lo que mas se puede con verdad afirmar, es decir, 
que tenian Sumo Sacerdote, que en su lengua se llamaba Vilaoma, el qual tenia otros Sacerdotes sujetos, que eran 
sus inferiores, y de esto aun no se sabe afirmar mui en particular. Los Sacerdotes que avia, se dice, que no eran 
casados. Y la racon de no poderse dar tan cierta noticia de las cosas de aquellos Reinos, a cerca de su Religion, 
como la vamos dando de estos, fue, que como las riquecas que avia en ellos, fueron las maiores que juntas se han 
hallado, en todo el Mundo, las quales, casi todas las poseian los Templos, y en ellos las guardaban, y conservaban 
los Sacerdotes: como los nuestros entraron tan de repente, y todo su principal intento no fue sino de recogerlo, y 
arrebafiarlo todo, los Sacerdotes, 4 cuio cargo estaba, con miedo de que no los atormentasen por ello, lo desapare- 
cieron, y trasportaron, y con este desaparecimiento, desaparecid tambien la memoria de sus escritos, y cosas que 
pudieran dar noticia de lo que el Capitulo trata; y asi por este modo casi se enterrd este nombre de Sacerdote. 
Sucedio tras él huirse los mas, la eversion, deshacimiento, y aniquilacion repentina, y acelerada de toda su Republica, 
aiudando & esto los nuestros, con las Guerras Civiles, que entre si tuvieron. Y por esta causa, como tan en breve 
desaparecid el Sacerdocio, falts la memoria de sus particularidades. Podra tambien aver concurrido alguna inadver- 
tencia de los Religiosos, que despues supieron las lenguas, los quales como preguntaron, y supieron otras muchas 
cosas de la Religion, no advirtieron a preguntar esto, que era tocante 4 su Sacerdocio. Solamente no se ha podido 
ignorar, por ser cosa, mas que otra, sefialada, y mui notoria, la orden que avia de las Monjas en los Templos. 
Estas eran muchas en cada Monasterio, entre las quales avia mucho orden, concierto, y distincion, y sobre todo 
mucha Religion: E] Dios 4 que eran consagradas, era el Sol, las quales hacian oficio de Sacerdotes, pues que ofre- 
cian Sacrificios de muchas cosas, que por sus manos obraban, para el Culto Divino, y servicio particular del Sol. 
Todo su exercicio de estas Mugeres, era texer, y labrar ropa de lana finisima, tefida de mui finas, y diversas tintas, 
y colores: Hacian Vino mui delicado, y puro para los Sacrificios: Servian de noche, y de dia en los Templos del 
Sol, con grande cuidado, y solicitud; y de creer es, que las devociones, y ceremonias, que exercitaban, debian de 
ser muchas, y mui devotas. Pues tan cuidadosos, y religiosos fueron los Reies Ingas, cerca del Culto Divino, y 
en especial del Sol, 4 quien tanto reverenciaron, maiormente diciendose de ellos, que en cosas de buen govierno 
excedieron, no solo 4 sus pasados, pero 4 muchos Principes, y Monarcas del Mundo, y asi no puede ser, sino que 
fueron muchas, y mui notables las ocupaciones, que para el exercicio espiritual, que en los Templos se avia de 
obrar, estos Reies ordenaron. Porque tanto numero de Virgenes, y Dongellas, hijas de Sefores (que pasaban 
L 

38 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

muchas veces de docientas) y aiuntadas alli, para el Culto Divino, no avian de estar ociosas, ni ocupadas profana, 
y desaprovechadamente. : | 

Estas Virgenes se renovaban de tres en tres Afios, de esta manera: Si por ventura el Rei estaba presente, 6 en 
su ausencia su Governador, 6 su Lugar-Teniente, hacialas presentar ante sl; y de las que ya estaban en edad de 
casarse, escogia tres, 0 quatro, 6 cinco, las mas hermosas, y de maior Dignidad, para Mugeres del Sol, y estas 
siempre permanecian en su virginidad. Escogidas ya, y dedicadas al Sol, apartaba otras tres, 6 quatro, las de 
maior hermosura, para si mismo, el Rei, y en su ausencia el Governador; y las demas, casabalas con los Hijos de 
los Sefiores presentes, que al acto se hallaban; y otras daba 4 otros Grandes Sefiores sus Vasallos, aunque tuviesen 
otras Mugeres ; lo qual ellos tenian por mui grande favor, y merced. A las que eran menos nobles, dabales 
licencia el Rei, para que sus padres las casasen. Casadas todas estas mandaba luego el Rei 4 los oficiales, 4 cuio 
cargo estaban, que hinchesen el numero de las Virgenes, que faltaban, de diez afios arriba, que fuesen Hijas de 
Sefiores, para que se criasen en el Templo, como las pasadas, y sirviesen en los oficios, en que las otras se avian 
exercitado. Mientras estaban estas Mamaconas (que asi se Ilamaban) en aquellos Monasterios, guardaban, 4 lo 
menos exteriormente, tanta castidad, que se cree, no aver avido personas en alguna parte del Mundo, mas castas, 
ni que puedan de esta virtud ser loadas entre infieles. Algun Religioso afirmé, aver bauticado 4 una de estas la 
qual vido ya mui vieja, que avia sido escogida, para muger del Rei Guaynacapa, padre de los Reies Guascar, y 
Atabaliba, que por morir el Rei presto, no Ilegd 4 su talamo, que viviendo ella despues muchos afios, jamas quiso 
casarse, y asi permanécio en su virginidad; cuia muerte, llorandola un Sefior, Hermano suio, entre otras cosas de 
que la loaba (6 que le causaban lastima) decia: Hermana mia, que mueres virgen al cabo de tantos afios. De estas 
Monjas, 6 Mamaconas, aun quedaron reliquias en el Tiempo del Christianismo (despues de aver destruido los 
nuestros el Templo del Sol, 4 quien estaban consagradas) y no en numero pequefio, sino mui grande, y crecido, 
que despues de ser Christianas, permanecieron en casta, y recogida vida, 4 la manera que nuestras Beatas, con 
Aviso particular, y religioso. . . 

¥ 

Caritruto XXXI. 

De otra mas estrecha manera de Religion, con que el Dios Quetzalcohuatl era servido, de Mancebos, 
y Doncellas, y de como se las consagraban. 

Tenian estos Naturales otro Dios (del qual ya hemos dicho, en otro lugar) llamado Quetzalcohuatl, el qual tenia 
sus Ministros particulares, asi de Mancebos, como de Doncellas, que 4 su devocion, y contemplacion se dedicaban 
4 su servicio. Estos vivian vida mas estrecha, que los pasados, la qual se Hamaba Tlamacazcayotl, que quiere 
decir: Vida de Penitencia, por ser en honra de Quetzalcohuatl, que dicen averla hecho mui grande, y averla 
ensefiado 4 sus Discipulos. Estos vivian en Congregacion, como los Sacerdotes, y Colegiales, y las Doncellas, en 
recogimiento, como las Sacerdotisas. Traian los unos, y los otros el cabello largo, eran mui honestos, y castos : 
Estos andaban mas honesta, y religiosamente vestidos, que los Ministros dichos, en el Capitulo pasado. Bafia- 
banse 4 media noche, sin faltar jamais en esta ceremonia; velaban hasta las dos de la mafiana, orando, y cantando 
4 su Dios Cantos, y alabancas; derramaban sangre de su cuerpo, al:punto de la media noche, de diversas partes, y 
miembros donde’se puncaban, con las puntas del Maguey. Aunque estaban en aquel recogimiento, tenian licencia 
de salir a los Montes, Bosques, y Fuentes & qualquier hora de la noche, & derramar sangre, y hacer Sacrificios al 
Dios, que mas le inclinaba a su devocion, como entre nosotros suele ser concedido 4 los Monges, y Religiosos salir 
4 los Bosques, y Montafas 4 estaciones particulares, por el credito, que tienen de su buena vida, y santidad. Y lo 
que se dice de estos Mancebos, se dice tambien de las Doncellas, que en su recogimiento, no eran menos devotas, 
y honestas, que ellos. ; 
Tenian un Rector, en su Convento, que se llamaba del nombre de su Dios, Quetzalcohuatl, el qual velaba 
mucho sobre su guarda, y doctrina, reformando lo relajado, y conservando las virtudes, y loables costumbres. 
Estos Mancebos, y Doneellas, en llegando a edad de quatro Afios, dejaban 4 sus Padres, y Deudos, y se iban a 
estas Casas de recogimiento, donde avian de permanecer hasta que se les llegase el tiempo de casarse, y tomar 
estado. ‘Tenian sementeras, en que trabajaban, y se ocupaban, que eran de la propriedad de los Templos; pero 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 39 

para su sustento ordinario tenian los Padres cuidado de embiarles la comida. No usaban estos mocos de becote, ni 
orejeras, ni otra cosa, que significase liviandad ; eran mui honestos en vestirse, y templados en el comer, y beber, 
hablaban poco, y eran mui diciplinados. 

Para aver de dedicar alguno de estos, 4 este Dios Quetzalcohuatl, hacian sus Padres, y Deudos, un mui gran 
Combite, y daban la voz 4 Quetzalcohuatl, Rector de estos Colegios, asi de Mancebos, como de Doncellas, el 
qual no iba al Combite, ni asistia a la presentacion del Nifio, por ser persona de mucha Autoridad, y que no visi- 
taba 4 nadie, ni entraba en otra casa mas, que en la Real a vér al Rei las veces, que se ofrecia; pero embiaba 
persona, que en su nombre recibiese al Nino, y lo traxese 4 su presencia, el qual tomaba en sus manos, y ofre- 
ciendoselo 4 su Dios Quetzalcohuatl, le decia: Seftor, y Dios invisible, Defensor, y Amparador de todos, el Padre, 
y la Madre de esta criatura te vienen a ofrecer este Nifio, porque es tu hechura, y obra de tus manos, para que 
viva, y sirva en este Templo, y Convento de Penitencia, y Diciplina; suplicote, Seftor, lo recibas, en compafia 
de los tuios bien Diciplinados, y Penitentes, y le favorezcas, para que sea de buena Vida, y alcance alguna Dignidad, 
y algun bien en ella; y acababan con decir: Maymmuchihua, que quiere decir: Hagase asi, que es como decir: Amen. 
Si por ventura era el Nifio, 6 Nifia de dos Afios, tomaba posesion de él, este Satrapa, haciendole una herida ligera, 
y sutil en el pecho, con una navaja, en sefial, que era del culto, y servicio del Dios Quetzalcohuatl ; pero si era de 
menos edad, davanle un collar, que llamaban Yanuali, el qual traia puesto al cuello, hasta que legaba a la edad con- 
yeniente, para ser admitido en aquella Congregacion, y Monasterio de Quetzalcohuatl, y llegados 4 ella, el muchacho 

se iba 4 su Monasterio, y la muchacha al suio. 

Cariruto XXXII. 

De la Platica, y Exortacion, que a estos Mancebos, y Doncellas hacian Deudos, y Parientes mas 
ancianos, y viejos, para inclinarlos al cumplimiento de el Voto, con que sus Padres los ofrecian a 

estos falsos Dioses. 4 
Au quinto, 6 sexto Afio del nacimiento del Nifio, 6 Nifia, que era la edad, en que avian de ser entregados 4 sus 
Monasterios, juntabanse los Parientes mas ancianos, y viejos, y llamando al muchacho, dabanle noticia del Voto, 
que sus Padres avian hecho, y del lugar donde lo avian prometido, y de la vida, que avia de tener, diciendo: Mui 
amado, y precioso Hijo, hacemoste saber, que Dios invisible, Criador de todas las cosas, llamado Quetzalcohuatl, 
te crid, por cuia voluntad naciste en el Mundo, y sera bien, que adviertas, que el maior Padre que tienes, es el 
Maestro, que ensefia, y cria en diciplina, y doctrina sana, acompafada con buenas costumbres ; por esta causa tus 
Padres, luego en tu nacimiento, y nifiez, te prometieron 4 la Religion de Quetzalcohuatl, para que estes, y vivas 
en el Convento de los Tlamacazques, sirviendo 4 Dios, Criador de todas las cosas, pidiendole continuamente, te dé, 
de sus bienes, y comunique de sus bondades, y haga de buena vida, donde haras penitencia, por ti, y por todos los 
demas de tu linage, que andan enmarafiados, y enfrascados en las cosas necesarias, y forcosas de la vida; y por 
toda la Republica, necesitada de favores de el Cielo. Hijo, advierte, que estas obligado 4 cumplir este Voto, por 
ser mui justo, que obedezcas 4 tus Padres, que te criaron con gran trabajo, administrandote tu Madre la sangre de 
sus pechos; vé, Hijo, y metete en el Convento, para cumplir el voto prometido, que alli hallarais Hijos de Prin- 
cipales, y Nobles, que antes que tu fueron A acreditar esta religiosa, y honesta vida, y de donde los sacan, y 
escogen para Sefiores de el Pueblo, Jueces, y Governadores de la Republica, y Capitanes Generales de los Exercitos. 
Estando en el Convento, olvidarte has de tu casa, y hacienda, y de los regalos de tu nifez, y de los que te han 
hecho (parece cierto tener estos Gentiles en su boca aquellas palabras del Psalmo *: Oie, Hija, inclina con atencion 
tus oidos, y olvida tu Pueblo, y la Casa de tus Padres) y proseguian, diciendo: Has de barrer el Templo, y las 
Casas de Religion, y las calles, y patios, por donde suele pasar Dios invisible ; velaras mucho, desechando el 

* Nezahualcoyotl the celebrated king of Tezeuco, composed sixty hymns in praise of Huitzilopuchtli, which from a fragment or two which 
have been preserved show that he possessed a talent for poetry. Boturini mentioning these hymns says, “ Y aun despues de la conquista, fueron 
celebres los LX Cantares, que el emperador Nezahualcoyotl compuso en alabanza del Criador del cielo, y tierra, y se sabe que el dia segundo 
del mes Panquetzaliztli, en una solemne fiesta, se cantaban las grandezas del Dios Huitzilopuchtli, y en el patio de su templo un hombre, y una 
muger, guiaban el canto.” These hymns are here alluded to because one almost begins with the words “ Man perisheth like the grass of the 
field,” which would also appear to be taken from the Psalms. 

40 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

suefio, y la pereca; obedeceras 4 todos, con diligencia, y sin replica de palabras. Advierte mas que no vasa a 
Casa de Penitencia, 4 ser honrado, y preferido, ni 4 que en ella mandes, sino 4 obedecer, y ser mandado y sujeto 

todos. Y quando llegares 4 la edad maior, donde la carne comienga 4 mostrar, y tener sus sentimientos, serds 
mui casto, venciendo sus movimientos, y deseos, como soldado valeroso; no dards consentimiento 4 ningun mal 
pensamiento ; porque en teniendo voluntad para pecar, avras pecado, y sera causa de que Dios te prive de sus 
Dones, y de tu buena Fortuna, ni alcancaras Dignidad, ni Nombre en la Republica, sino que te castigara el Sefior 
rigurosamente. Esto dicho haras con toda voluntad, por ser mandamiento del Sefor como lo hacen los otros Mi- 
nistros, que sirven en el Templo, que se Ilaman Tlamacazquez, porque a eso vas 4 su compafiia, y eres obligado a 
nacer el bien, que vieres hacer. Otro aviso es, que en todo seas templado, y abraces mui de coragon la abstinencia, 
y aiuno; porque los que unan, pocas veces son tentados (a lo menos derribados) de la carne. (No sé como 
dixeron estos Indios esta doctrina, que es lenguage de San Pablo, quando dijo, que huiesen la demasia del beber, 
en el qual esta la luxuria; y de la maceracion en si mismo, dijo, que quando mas templado, y flaco en el cuerpo, 
se hallaba mas fuerte, y valiente en el espiritu.) Haras mui alegremente los aiunos, que te mandare hacer tu Maior, 
y Prelado, porque no incurras, en pena de desobediente, y cometas en ello pecado; y por remate te decimos, que 
aprendas con cuidado lo que te ensefaren los Sabios. 

Si era Nifia la que avia de entrar, en aquella Religion, demas de lo dicho, le hablaban unas venerables viejas de 
esta manera: Mui amada Hija, ya aveis oido lo que os han dicho los mui honrados viejos, lo que os rogamos es, 
que lo tengais siempre, en la memoria, por ser antorcha encendida, que os da luz, y alumbra, para acertar en 
vuestras obligaciones ; y sobre lo dicho afiado esto poco (hablando una sola) Hija mia, en tu nifiez te prometieron 
tu Padre, y Madre de meter en el Convento de la Religion de Quetzalcohuatl, donde estan, y viven las Doncellas, 
que se dicen hermanas de Dios ; estando con estas, seras compafiera de las Virgines, que sirven, y loan Dios de 
dia, y de noche; pues, Hija mia, ya tienes edad de discrecion, y usas de ragon, justo es, que vaias al Convento, 
para cumplir el Voto, que tus Padres prometieron. Y hagote saber, que aquel Convento de Doncellas, es honesto, 
y es lugar de penitencia, y de bugna crianga, y meritorio; por eso es menester, que hagas la voluntad de la Per- 
sona que te mandare ; porque el que viviere alli bien, y fuere obediente, y se humillare, y embiare suspiros al 
Cielo, con lagrimas, y se encomendare 4 Dios, ganara su amistad; y el que lo contrario, incurrira en swira, y 
maldicion, para siempre. Vé, Hija mia, con toda tu voluntad, a servir a Dios, y estaras, y viviras con las Donce- 
Ilas Castas, y Penitentes; y lo que mas te encomiendo es, que seas casta en Cuerpo, y Alma; porque las Virgines 
de coracon, y cuerpo son mas allegadas 4 Dios: Barreras todos los patios del Convento, y Templo, y con solicitud, 
y cuidado guisaras la comida, que cada mafiana se ofrece en el Altar: Obedeceras 4 todos; porque la obediencia 
representa la buena crianca, y nobleca: Seras honesta, y recogida, no desvergoncada, y liviana; y si por estar 
vestidas de carne las otras Doncellas, que alli estan, algunas lo fueren, huie de su compafia, porque cada qual gana 
la merced de sus obras; y en una Casa de recogimiento se ha de tomar de unas lo bueno, que se viere hacer, y 
huir de lo malo, que otras cometieren. Con estas palabras, y platicas despedian 4 estos Muchachos ; y cierto no 
sé qué mas se pudiera decir en nuestro Christianismo, si no fueran errados en los Votos; y pienso que son platicas, 
que debian ser mui encomendadas 4 la memoria; pues no importa ser de Gentiles, quando las racones son Cato- 
licas ; y como dice San Agustin, lo bueno que ellos dicen, lo hemos de tomar, y reducir 4 las cosas de Nuestra 

Lei, como de aquellos, que nos las tenian usurpadas ; ni son malos documentos para los Religiosos, que vienen a 

tomar el Habito, sin proposito de ser mas que otro, para que siempre vivan consolados, y no pretendan mas en. 

la Religion. 

oe 

Cariruto XXXII. 

De la pena, y castigo, con que los Sacerdotes Gentiles castigaban a los inobedientes, a los manda- 

mientos Kclesiasticos ; la qual es mui semejante a la que, en este Estado de Gracia, usa la Iglesia, 
que se llama Excomunion, . 

Entre las penas Eclesiasticas (y que mas debe temerse) es la Descomunion, porque priva, y enagena al Hombre 
de la comunicacion de los Sacramentos, y consuelos espirituales, inclusos en la Iglesia de Jesu-Christo, Este modo 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 4.1 

de Pena (6 otro casi semejante) fingid el Demonio, en su Gentilico Pueblo ; y no debid de ser con menos intencion, 
que en todas las demas cosas, con que ha querido imitar 4 Dios, en sus Divinas, y justas Leies: si ya lo hiciera en 
orden de algun bien, y servicio suio; pero ha sido, por solo introducir en los coracones de los Hombres, para que 
pareciendo bueno por este modo, introduxese juntamente los muchos, y detestables errores, que en ellos ha preten- 
dido, para mas engafiarlos. Este modo de execracion usaron muchas Naciones Gentilicas, de las quales los Ateni- 
enses (de quien los Romanos se aprovecharon, y tomaron las Leies de las doce Tablas, segun Anastasio Germonio) 
tuvieron antiguamente ciertas maldiciones, 6 execraciones contra los transgresores, en preceptos particulares, como 
lo tiene Ciceron, y parece decir lo mismo Hesychio sobre el Levitico, diciendo, que en Atenas avia un Templo de 
execracion, y detestacion ; del qual tambien hace memoria Aristofanes; y Euripides dice, ha havido una manera, 0 
figura de descomunion entre los Argivos, usada tambien de los Atenienses. Tambien Platon la puso, diciendo, por 
exemplo las condiciones, y circunstancias, con que se avia de executar. Tambien de los Sacerdotes de Francia, dice 
Julio Cesar, que entre las cosas, que tenian de su mucho poder, y autoridad, era una esta manera de descomunion. 
Porque si alguna Persona publica, 6 particular, 6 Pueblo, 6 Ciudad no estaba por lo que ellos mandaban, y deter- 
minaban, segun su juicio, y parecer, luego lo descomulgaban, apartandole, y segregandole de la Comunion, y 
participacion de los Sacrificios ; y esta pena se tenia, en toda Francia, por gravisima; porque aquellos asi desco- 
mulgados, eran tenidos por Hombres malos, impios, y perversos. Por esta causa hujan todos los demas de ellos, 
quitandoles la habla, y pasando por el que encontraban sin saludarle, y tenian por mui mala su conversacion, y 
compafia ; temian (si hacian lo contrario) incurrir en la dicha maldicion contagiosa, y en el mismo dafio, que los 
descomulgados avian incurrido. Eran infames, y privados de los actos legitimos, ¢ incapaces para recibir Oficios 
publicos, y para parecer en juicio; por lo qual, aunque pedian Justicia, no les era administrada. Todo lo dicho 
es de Julio Cesar ; y plugiese 4 Dios, que nosotros los Christianos temiesemos la verdadera descomunion, que la 
Iglesia fulmina, como aquellos temian la mentirosa, y falsa. 

Bien se hecha de ver, por lo dicho, la manera de pena, y privacion de comunicacion, que los Antiguos tuvi- 
eron; pero qué motivo huviese sido el suio para inventarla, no se sabe. Anastasio Germonio prueba, que la des- 
comunion de la Iglesia fue instituida por el mismo Christo, y lo comprueba, con lugares de la Sagrada Escritura, 
y muchas Autoridades de Santos Doctores. Pero aunque esto es asi verdad, como se puede ver en los Lugares 
citados, de la que nuestra Iglesia usa; de la de los Gentiles, decimos con el mismo Germonio, que sera posible, y 
caso mui creible, que la tomaron de los Hebreos, de cuia Lei se aprovecharon, en otras muchas cosas, usurpando 
las del servicio del Verdadero Dios, y aplicandolas al culto idolatrico del Demonio. Y que los Hebreos aian tenido 
descomunion, lo dice Eliezer Rabbi, anotando el Capitulo 38 del Genesis, donde dice, que los hermanos de Joseph 
mandaron, con pena de Anathema, que nadie dixese, ni revelase, 4 Jacob, su Padre, la venta de Joseph. Y dice 
luego: Quereis vér la fuerca, y eficacia de la descomunion? Pues vedlo en el Capitulo Septimo de el Libro de 
Josue, y en el Primero de los Reies, y en el Quarto. En el de Josue se dice la muerte de Achan, porque hico un 
hurto de Anatema. Y San Juan parece decir lo mismo, (conviene a saber) que usaban los Judios de ella, diciendo: 
Que se conspiraron los Judios, para que si alguno nombrase el Nombre Benditisimo de JESUS, lo hechasen fuera 
de la Sinagoga; que es como decir: Privarle de la comunicacion, y compafiia de los Fieles. Y en el Capitulo doce 
dice: Que muchos de los principales del Pueblo, creieron en Christo ; pero que por el temor que tenian 4 los Fari- 
seos, no lo confesaban en publico, temiendo, que.los hechasen fuera de la Sinagoga, que es lo mismo, que antes 
dijo. De manera, que por lo dicho queda probado, aver tenido, y usado el Pueblo de Israél desde sus principios 
esta Pena; por lo qual, y por aver sido mas antigua Republica, que la de los Griegos, y otras, es mui cierto, que 
de ella tomarian este modo de castigo las Gentes, que lo usaron, por ser amigo el Demonio de hacerse algo, no 
siendo nada, y de que sus Ministros gocasen de privilegios, que los de Dios han tenido; como aquel que en todo 
lo que ha podido imitarle, no lo ha dejado de intentar. 

Por lo que en este Capitulo se ha dicho, se hecha mui bien de ver, la Autoridad del Sacerdote, que tiene poder 
espiritual para ligar Almas, y la que los Antiguos Gentiles tuvieron, aunque no para ligar, como liga en el Pueblo 
de Dios, entre sus Ministros ; pero usaban de ella, aunque impertinentemente, pues no ligaban en el Alma ; pero 
eran por ello temidos, y reverenciados. De donde se puede colegir, de quanta mas excelencia es (y por consi- 
guiente, quan digno de maior veneracion, y reverencia) el Sacerdote Christiano ; pues el que lo introdujo en su Iglesia 
fue el Summo Sacerdote Jesu Christo, segun la orden de Melchisedech ; por el qual son los Hombres guiados 4 la 
futura, y cierta Bienaventuranca. De aqui tomd Santo Thomas motivo en el Ultimo Capitulo del Libro Primero 

M 

42 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

de Regimine Principum, para decir, que Dios, con su Soberana, y Divina Sabiduria avia permitido 4 los Romanos, 
y otras erradas Gentes, que 4 sus Sacerdotes, y Ministros de sus Dioses, tuviesen la suma reverencia, que tuvieron, 
para que se conociese quanto mas obligacion tiene el Pueblo Christiano, de honrar, y obedecer al Sacerdote Cato- 
lico, que ordend, y puso en su Iglesia el Summo Sacerdote Jesu-Christo. Y asi son obligados los Reies, y Monarcas 
A reverenciar, y honrar, y obedecer al Sumo Pontifice, de la misma manera, y con la misma obligacion, que al 
mismo Hijo de Dios, cuio Teniente, y Vicario es en la Tierra, como dice San Cirilo. Y no es esto mucha mara- 
villa, pues segun dice Valerio Maximo, siempre la Ciudad Romana, y los mismos Emperadores tuvieron por deuda 
debida reverenciar, y obedecer 4 los Sacerdotes, y Pontifices ; teniendo por cierto, que mientras lo hiciesen, servian 
4 la Divina Potencia, y que su Principado temporal seria prospero, y creceria con aumento de Gloria, y Felicidad 
humana. De estos Indios no sabemos aver tenido anatematicacion, pero otros castigos muchos si. De donde 
colijo, que como todo se incluia, en pena de muerte, no se les daba nada de las espirituales ; queriendo el Demonio 
en ellos, que al que pecase, no le dilatasen el embiarselo al Infierno, con pena espiritual, que no podian ligarle con 
ella, sino que muriendo, fuesen cuerpo, y Alma juntos, acompajfiados de la maldicion de Dios, y castigo merecido 
de su Idolatria, @ Infidélidad, por la qual eran expelidos de la comunicacion de los Angeles, y entregados a la com- 
pafiia de los Demonios, que es el efecto, que la excomunion hace ; la qual deben temer los Christianos, y reverenciar 

al que con semejante pena puede ponerle entredicho en la participacion de los Sacramentos. 

CapituLo XXXIV. 

Del taner de las Campanas, y de los Veladores, que avia en los Templos, y Barrios, para llamar a 
las horas ordinarias de la administracion de los Oficios. 

Quanpo se haian introducido las Campanas, dice Baronio, que no se sabe; pero que su origen le tuvicron de las 
Naciones Gentilicas ; y que despues de tratar las cosas de la Religion Christiana publicamente, se usaron, y fueron 
haciendo maiores, para maior autoridad, y grandeca. Llamabanse Tintinabulos ; pero despues tomaron nombre de 
Campanas del Lugar donde se hicieron. Pero los Hebreos, como dice Josefo, usaban Hamar las Gentes 4 sus So- 
lemnidades, con trompetas ; subiase un Sacerdote en una de las mas altas, y eminentes Torres del Templo, alli tania 
una trompeta 4 mafiana, y tarde, dos veces al Dia. Los Gentiles usaron llamar con Tintinabulo, 6 Campana 4 los 
bafios, y otras obras. Y asi lo dicen el Poeta Marcial, y Juvenal; y en los Exercitos acostumbraban las Guardas, 
y Veladores andar con campanas, en las manos, al tiempo de la vela, y centinela. Esto afirma Suidas. Y de este 
Suidas, dice San Agustin, de Sentencia de Suetonio Tranquilo, que las Campanas, 6 Tintinabulos, que se acostum- 
braron poner en uno de los lugares mas altos, y eminentes del Templo de Jupiter Capitolino, fue este el que puso 
la primera. Los Syros acostumbraron celebrar sus Fiestas con sonido de Tintinabulos, 6 Campanas. Asi lo dice 
Luciano; y el mismo afirma, no usarse tafier 4 todas ocasiones, ni sin causa; pero que las taftian, para hacer sefal 
1 los Esclavos, y Gente de trabajo, y para otras cosas, que se hacian. Y asi como con ellas eran incitados, y des- 
pertados al trabajo, con ellas mismas eran otra vez llamados 4 descansar, y recoger. De manera, que el uso de las 
Campanas fue Gentilico ; y que aian sido grandes, se vé claro, pues hacian sonido para regir las Gentes al trabajo, 
y bolverlos & sus casas. Pero la Iglesia lo redujo a si, y lo aplicd 4 su uso, convirtiendo el uso profano, en cos- 
tumbre Sacra, y Divina, en orden de congregar los Fieles 4 los Oficios Sagrados. Y aunque de los Tiempos 
antiguos, y pasados no sabemos, que en la Casa, y Templo de Dios huviese Campanas, para tafier, y llamar, con 
ellas, 4 las Gentes A la celebracion de las Fiestas, y otras ocasiones, que se ofrecian, como agora en esta Lei de 
Gracia se usa en las Iglesias ; sabemos, empero, que avia Instrumentos Musicos de Viguelas, Citaras, Harpas, Or- 
ganos, y Cimbalos, y de otros generos immensos, con que se celebraban ; de los quales estos Gentiles modernos 
tambien usaron a sus tiempos, y horas. 

De los Instrumentos, que sabemos aver mas usado, fueron unas Flautas, 4 manera de Cornetas, y de unos Ca- 
racoles, que sonaban como Bocina. Con estos Ilamaban para las horas, que se cantaban en el Templo de dia, y de 
noche; como si dixesemos, 4 Maitines, 2 Prima, 4 Visperas, y las demas horas, 4 que acudian los Sacerdotes, y 
Ministros 4 sus Sacrificios, y loores del Demonio. MHacian con esta solemnidad de instrumentos, y atabales, cada 
mafiana fiestaal Sol, quando salia, con armonia, y estruendo singular, y saludabanle de palabra, como ofreciendole 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 43 

en aquella hora Sacrificio de alabanca; y tras esto sangre de Codornices, que para este fin mataban entonces, 
arrancandoles las cabecas con violencia, y fuerca, y mostrandolas al Sol ensangrentadas, y descabecadas. Esta 
ceremonia de tanto ruido, y estruendo hacian todos los Sacerdotes juntos, teniendo cada qual una Codorniz en sus 
manos. La qual ceremonia acabada, se guisaban las Codornices, y se las comian estos dichos Satrapas, que a no 
ser el acto idolatrico, pudieran apetecer muchos esta ceremonia, pues en ella tenian seguro, y cierto el almuergo, y 
no malo. Hecha esta ceremonia, ofreciendole incienso luego, con la misma armonia, y musica de cuernos, y ata- 
bales. Los quales, como esta dicho, se tafian a todas las horas, que de dia, 6 de noche, se entraba A la Ofrenda 
del Incienso, y Sacrificio, y 4 los loores, y alabancas del Demonio. Haciendo en esto una manera de imitacion al 
tater de las Campanas a las Horas Canonicas, con que en nuestras Iglesias Christianas se llama A los Mimistros, y 
otras Gentes, para que se congreguen 4 los Oficios Divinos, y Festividades, con que se celebran. | 

Taian de noche estos Instrumentos, 6 Campanas otra vez, fuera de las que eran para despertar 4 las horas de 
su recado, y esto hacian 4 honra de la noche, 4 la qual lamaban Yohualtecuhtli, que quiere decir: Sefior de la 
noche ; que si bien se nota, es el Demonio, Padre de las Tinieblas, y Obscuridades ; y aunque diferenciaban la 
intencion, todo era 4 un mismo fin, pues era en servicio del Demonio, con actos, y ceremonias idolatricas. Estas 
eran sus Campanas, y de estas usaban en todas las Fiestas, y Solemnidades, que hacian, y cada dia (como est’ dicho) 
para las horas de sus Sacrificios. Avia Veladores, que velaban las vigilias de la noche, unos en los Templos, y 
otros en las encrucijadas de las Calles, y Caminos. Estos velaban por sus quartos, y horas, mudandose, acabado 
el tiempo de su vigilia, y vela. Unos velaban desde prima noche, hasta las diez, otros hasta media noche; y 
trocados estos, entraban en la vela otros, hasta las tres de la maflana; y 4 estos seguian otros hasta el Alva. Su 
oficio era despertar 4 los Sacerdotes, y Ministros, los que velaban en los Templos, para que acudiesen a los Sacri- 
ficios, y horas nocturnas. Los de las encrucijadas, 4 los de la Republica, para lo mismo, conforme estaban obli- 
gados. enian tambien cuidado estas Velas de aticar el Fuego de los braseros, para que siempre ardiese, y nunca 
se apagase. Y a esta Vela llamaban Iztocoaliztli, que quiere decir, Vela. 

Carut XVI. Quinti Libri Mstorie Acoste. 

De Monasterus Virginahbus, in culturam sui a Sathana fundatis. 

SicurT in Romana ecclesia diversi Religiosorum ordines existunt: ita pariter Sathanas, mendacii pater, in his locis 
ita constitutum voluit, ut ministri ipsius duram, religiosam et dolorosam vitam agerent. In Peru virginum puella- 
rumque tam numerosa ccenobia erant, ut in omnibus passim angulis provinciarum plurima conspicerentur. Virgi- 
num aliz annosiores erant, que juniores in necessariis instituebant. Has Mamacénas vocabant. Ceterz juniores, 
aliquandiu ad ministeria Idolorum aut Ingarum educabantur. Et hoc monasterium Acllaguaci, id est, domus 
selectarum appellabant. Cuilibet monasterio suus Vicarius aut Gubernator, Appopnaca dictus, prestituebatur. 
Huic, quas videbatur eligendi potestas et arbitrium erat, cujuscunque ille vel ordinis vel status ac conditionis essent, 
modd annos octo completos nedum attigissent, et coenobiis idonez esse possent. Que in ccnobium puella assu- 
meretur, ad Mamacénas ducta, de variis tum ad cultum Idolorum, tum ad ceremonias, tum ad vite castitatem perti- 
nentibus erudiebatur. Annos quatuordecim assecute, coenobiis rursum eximebantur, et in Guacas seu domos 
precatorias abstrudebantur, ubi disciplina dura et accurata coércebantur. In his perpetua castitas vovenda erat. 
Harum ergo nonnull Sacrificiis ordinariis, 4 solis virginibus prestandis: quedam extraordinariis, ut sanitatis im- 
petrationi, si Ingarum quis aut obiisset, aut in bellum adversus hostes egressus esset, adhibebantur. Earum quoque 
nonnull pro Ingarum, et horum cognatorum Ducumque conjugibus ac concubinis educabantur. Quarum si quam 
Inge alicui dono dabant, munus preestantissimum obtulisse videbantur. Et hec distributio in anno semel fiebat. 
Pro harum virginum sustentatione, quarum frequentissima multitudo erat, peculiares reditus ordinabantur, quibus 
viverent. Si quam ex puellarum medio numero Appopnica in ccenobium selegisset, ne ipsis quidem puelle paren- 
tibus adversari aut abnueré licebat. Quinimo filias suas istis ordinibus parentes plurimi ultro offerebant, eas hoc 
pacto, Ingis copulatum iri sperantes, Si que 42 Mamacénis sive Acclis, virginitatem temerasse deprehendebatur, ea 
aut viva sub terram defodiebatur, aut alio supplicii acerbissimi genere plectebatur. In Mexico Sathanas sibi quoque 
Moniales parturiverat : quarum tamen professio unius saltem anni erat. Harum isthec ratio erat. In patente illa 

AA. SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

area, de qua superius diximus, duz des sibi ex adverso posite stabant; quarum una virorum, altera foeminarum 
erat. In ede virginum, puelle 12 annorum alebantur, usque dum annum etatis 13 attingerent. Et he. filice po- 
nitentiz aut castitatis dicebantur, idolorum cultibus prestandis preefectee. Harum munus erat, templum aqua con- 
spergere et verrere, et mane tum Idolo tum ejus ministris, cibos, ex oblationibus et Eleemosynis collectis paratos, 
offerre. Cibi verd, qui idolo apponebantur, parve placente erant, manuum aut pedum, vel rerum aliarum specie 
formaque confecte. Preeter verd placentulas istas panem commistum alium quoque pinsebant: quem singulis 
diebus Idolo objectum, Sacerdotes posted vorabant, sicut simile quid de Baal apud Prophetam Danielem legimus. 
Virgunculis his primo capilli tondebantur, quos deinde ad definitum quoddam tempus renasci permittebant.. 
Eedem, sub noctis medium quoque non secus ac viri ad misse celebrationem (que in ede ista continuo perage- 
-batur) surgere cogebantur. Tllis et Abbatissee ordinarie erant, que quaslibet ad officii sui opera compellebant. 
Pannos etiam et cortinas pretiosissimas vario genere texere addiscebant, quibus idola et templa prevelabantur. Ha- 
bitus earum candidus erat: nec quoquam colore alio vestiri audebant. Noctu pcenitentiam agentes, flagris se incu- 
tiebant, et aurium summam partem sauciabant. Cruore ex vulneribus manante faciem ac genas tingebant : ad quas 
iterum emaculandas, in cellis suis vasa aqua plena asservabant. Vitam omni modestia et castitate commendabilem 
agebant. Si que secus vel in minimo facere deprehendebatur, nulla exceptione morti dedebatur, ut que Dei 
domum libidine foeda conspurcasset. Commissi autem piaculi suspicionem captabant, quoties aut glirem discur- 
santem, aut vespertilionem volantem, aut Idoli velum arrosum conspicarentur. Arbitrabantur enim, nec glirem 
nec vespertilionem, tantum arrodendorum velorum facinus patraturos fuisse, nisi Deus, flagitio admisso irritatus, 
hanc ipsis potestatem indulsisset. Itaque exquisita indagine omnia explorabant. Rea deprehensa, illicd supplicio 
afficiebatur. In hec ccenobia nulle virgines admittebantur, nisi ex sex illis ditionibus, in hanc rem selectis, oriunde 
essent. He, veluti dictum est, unius saltem anni spatio, quo im Idoli ministerium 4.parentibus devovebantur, in 
ccenobio isto morabantur. Eo exacto, ad parentes, si luberet, redibant, et nubebant. 

Porrd, que hactenus de virginibus ccenobialibus Peruanis enumeravimus, iis feré similia sunt, que de virginibus 
Vestalibus Romanis ab historicis tradita legimus. Sed cur diabolo volupe fuerit, ut etiam a puris, castis et illibatis 
hominibus, singularibus ministeriis coleretur, sciendum est, istheec omnia non eo animo facta esse, quasi is casti- 
tate et innocente vita delectaretur, cum foedus et spurcus spiritus 4 natura sit: verum hanc potius ob causam, ut in 
universis Dei honorem predaretur, et per proterviam emularetur: cum prima et precipua hec summi Dei voluntas 

sit, ut in perfecta et consummata castitate et sanctitate ipsum colamus et veneremur. 

Carur XVI. 

De aliis monasteriis religiosis, quibus Sathanas adserendas et propagandas horrendas. superstitiones 

utitur. 

Ex literis illis, quas nostre societatis quidam ex Iapan misit, satis abundé notum est, in locis illis maximum 
Religiosorum (quos Bonsos vocant) numerum existere. Ex iisdem etiam, quam miras et inauditas superstitiones 
agant, quamque putida mendacia evomant, clarissimé constat. Itaque de his nos quoque hic breviter aliquid 
dicemus. Qui in China Patres egerunt, Bonsos sive Religiosos diversis ordinibus discretos esse, recensent. Non- 
nulli enim vestibus vittisque candidis utuntur: alii atris. Et hi nec vittas nec crines habent, nec admodum 
magni fiunt, cum non minus quam vulgata populi feex 4 Mandarynis seu magistratu sontes plectantur. Nec pisces, 
nec carnes, nec quicquam aliud, quod vitam habuit, gustant, sola oryza et herbis pascendi. Furtim tamen et in 
abscondito nihil non, quod suave sit, comedunt, et populo promiscuo multo nequiores sunt. Religiosi aulici, in 
Paquin habitantes, maxime apud omnes estimationis sunt. Mandaryni persepé in dictorum monachorum Varellas 
sive conventus animi gratia se conferunt: 4 quibus raro non probé appoti dimittuntur. Monasteria frequenter 
extra urbem sunt. Intra urbem sunt Templa ac delubra. In China nec templis nec Idolis multum tribuunt. Heec 
enim omnia Mandaryni in risum ludumque convertunt, affirmantes, preter officium et potestatem Mandarynorum 
nullam aliam vitam aut Paradysum: preter sontium verd carceres et supplicia, nullum infernum restare. lidem 
etiam pretendunt, cultus Idolorum universos ided saltem excogitatos esse, ut hoc quasi freno populi ferocia coérce- 
‘retur, quod ipsum Ethnicus quoque philosophus statuisse legitur. Hoc quoque velo ipse Aaron utebatur, cum 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. Abd 

insanienti populo aureum vitulum extruxisset. Chinensium mos est, ut in navium puppis sacello, quod plerumque 
superimponunt, discinctam quandam virginem aut foeminam factitiam in sellam collocent ; ante quam duo Chi- 
nenses, specie angelorum in pedes consederunt, superius vero Candela seu lumen, noctibus ac diebus jugiter ardens, 
suspensum est. Quoties ergo vela demissuri sunt, multis ritibus et ceremoniis idolo isti sacrificant, thm tympana 
tim campanas simul impellentes, et telis ignivomis aérem percutientes. Sed de Religiosis pergamus dicere. Ex 
nullis odorari vestigiis possumus, uspiam in Peru peculiarem aliquam domum extitisse, in qua Religiosi congregati 
vixerint. Czterorum verd sacerdotum ac Magorum numerus propé infinitus fuerat. Mexicanis consuetudo pecu- 
liaris queedam haud dubio ab ipso Sathana introducta, solennis fuit. Nam intra magni templi, de quo anté diximus, 
terminos duo monasteria erant, quorum hoc (ut jam comprehendimus) virginibus, illud viris, annos 18 aut 20 
natis consecratum habitabatur. Hi Religiosi vocabantur: qui monachorum more radebantur quidem, sed pilos 
aliquanté longiores, et ad aures usque promissos alebant. Capillos autem per directum verticem transversorum 
quatuor digitorum latitudine tam promissos enasci permittebant, ut quasi cesaries propendens, dorsum integeret, 
quos etiam flocci more torquebant aut innectebant. Hi juvenes, qui suas Idolo Vitzliputzli operas voverant, in 
paupertate et castitate summa vitam trahentes, Levitico officio fungebantur, templique sacerdotibus primariis sub- 
serviebant, thuribula et cereos accurando, vestes sacras custodiendo, loca sacratiora purgando, et ligna congerendo, 
ut loco lampadis perpetuus ignis ante Idoli faciem arderet. Praeter juvenum horum certum numerum, pueri quoque 
quamplurimi velut horum simiz alebantur, quorum opelle et officia varia erant, sertis et herbis, ac rosis aut juncis 
templum ornandi; aquas loturis sacerdotibus ministrandi: novaculas ad sacrificia necessarias acuendi: eos, qui 
stipem rogaturi essent, comitandi: et tandem ipsas victimas ad aras procurandi. Singulis his Religiosis sui priores 
attendebant, ut casté et innocenter ubivis se gererent. In locum forté aliquem, quo foeminz essent, ingressi, capi- 
tibus pronis nutabant, et oculos in terram defigebant, aspectum earum minimé ferentes. Vestes eorum retium 
instar texte erant. Conventuales autem pueri Eleemosyne rogande causa in civitatem quotidié mittebantur, quaterni 
quaternis, aut seni senis semper juncti. Horum incessus admodum religionis et devotionis plenus erat. Quod si 
diutius oberrando stipis nihil impetrassent, licentia data in agros irruebant, et frumenti tantum, quantum necesse 
esset, vellebant, nemine contra hiscente, aut eosdem loco ejiciente. Nec enim ullos, quibus fruerentur, reditus 
alios habebant praeter Eleemosynas. Horum numerus quinquagenarum nunquam excedebat. Poenitentiam acturi 
de media nocte surgunt, et tubis lituisque inflatis populos ad preces excitant. Certo et ordinario numero Idolo 
serviunt : et ligna, ne ignis emoriatur, tempestivé injiciunt: et thuribulum, quo sacerdos suffitum Idolo ciet, ne- 
cessariis instruunt. Dicti pueri suis majoribus in omnibus promiscué obedientissimé parebant. Sacrificio a sacer- 
dote peracto, pueri in locum privatum abscedebant, et acutissimis ferreis instrumentis malas sibi findebant: extil- 
lantemque sanguinem temporibus illinebant. Eo facto in alio loco parata aqua cruorem eluebant. Quin et capita 
sua, sacerdotum more bitumine perfundebant. Vestes ex cannabe crassa textas gerebant. Hac seria contritione, 
cum summa inedia, castitate et tolerantia, universum annum exigebant: aded ut stupendum sit, vanam vane reli- 
gionis imaginationem apud istos pueros potuisse tantum, ut tam constantia virili pro ordinis sui instituto istis foedis 
Sathanee abominationibus operari voluerint, cum verum et unum Deum, nemo nostrém vel dimidia quidem reli- 
gionis severitate, colere sustineat. Sed isthec superstitio precipué illis admonitioni et exemplo sit, qui vel ad 
quamcumvis suorum peccatorum superficiariam condolentiam illicd insolescunt, et vite confidentioris sordibus se de 

novo illicd repolluunt. Heec autem Indorum superstitiosa pcenitentia ideo ipsis toleratu facilior obveniebat, quia 
non assiduo duraret, sed unius anni curriculo finiretur. 

Carut XVII. 

De gravi alia penitentia Indorum, instinctu Sathane ipsis monstrata. 

Ap hunc jam locum devoluti, oper facturi pretium sumus, si execrandam Sathane ambitionem et fastum adhuc 
clarius in propatulum efferamus: ut eo propius conspecto, nativam nostram socordiam mittentes, ad serium et 
purum Dei immortalis cultum alacriores et religiosiores exurgamus. Indi dicti tanta tyrannide et cecitate 4 Sathana 
percussi sunt, ut et Prophetis Baalicis in omnibus similes evaserint, qui se ipsos ceedebant sauciabantque: et simul 
immanitatem eorum emulati sint, qui Beel-phegor filios filiasque suas pro sacrificiis mactabant, et eosdem per 

N 

46 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

ignes ire jubebant, sicut de istis S. pagina aperté testatur. Sathanas verd per hee id assidué molitus est, ut cum 
perditione gencris humani cultum suum latius propagaret. Paulo ante hee recensuimus, quo pacto sacerdotes et 
religiosi de media nocte suo idolo fumigatum exsurrexerint. Id jam pertexendum., Suffitu peracto, sacerdotum 
primas sive superintendens in latam aream secedebat, in qua ex ordine multa scamna seu sellz posite conspicie- 
bantur. In harum una considens ille, Puya ex Mangey, id est, framea ferrea pedem juxta digitos transfigebat, ut 
cruor confertim ex plaga emanaret. Eo tempora illinebat partim: partim frameam universam tingebat: quam ita 
cruentam in globos ex stramine confectos defigebat, ut pcenitentia, quam pro populo universo fecisset, ejus con- 
spectu omnibus nota fieret. Posted ex lacune cujusdam, in hunc usum fabrefacte, et Ezapan, id est, aqua sanguinis 
dictee, aspergine cruorem capitis eluebat. In templo hujusmodi framearum magnus passim numerus offendebatur : 
cum singule singulis vicibus tantum servirent, et subinde recentes adhiberentur. Preetered jejuniis quoque corpora 
castigabant, ita, ut quinque decemve diebus continuis perseepé nihil gustarent alimenti, si festa primaria agerentur. 
Hee verd quatuor anni temporum primariorum similia erant, Castitatis tam pertinaces amatores erant, ut*plurimi, 
ne carnis tentationibus succumberent, sibi ipsis genitalia finderent, et infinitis artibus quesitis generandi seu coéundi 
potentiam destruerent; saltem, ut hoc pacto Deos suos propitios et pacatos servarent. Sed et a vino, Veneris inci- 
tabulo, in solidum abstinebant, et somno parcissimo utebantur, cum noctis partem maximam suis superstitionibus 
impenderent : et tandem dolores ac cruciatus infinitos sibimet studio ac amore diaboli creabant. Hee verd universa 
eo animo et fine patrabantur, ut pro peenitentiariis religiosissimis, et jeyunatoribus strenuis ab omnibus haberentur. 
Flagris se plerumque nodosis cedebant. Lo vero die festo, quod in honorem Idoli Tezcatlipuce (is Deus pceni- 
tentize erat) celebrabatur, non sacerdotes solum, sed ipse quoque populus certatim flagellabatur. Flagella autem ex 
funibus recentibus, ulnz majoris longitudinem habentibus, et ex cannabe tortis constabant. Funium extremitates 
nodis exasperatee erant, quibus scapulas et dorsum percutiebant. Ad huic festo solemnitatem majorem concilian- 
dam sacerdotes diebus quinque jejunabant, de die semel tantum cibum gustantes, et 4 conjugibus suis se dissepa- 
rantes. His verd quinis diebus ne latum quidem pedem ex templo efferebant, sicut heec omnia ex Jesuitarum literis 
ex India missis, prolixius intelligi possunt. In Peru, cum festum Ytu, admodum solenne, appropinquaret, populus 
universus duobus ad minimum diebus jejunio se macerabat, eo intervallo 4 conjugibus penitus amotus. Nec quic- 
quam, quod cum Sale aut Axi decoctum erat, interim edebant, nec Chicao potabant. Ut peccata queedam definita 
expiarent, urticis se nonnunquam feriebant; nonnunquam saxis sese invicem contundebant, tamdiu, dum in cujus- 
libet dorso constitutus plagarum numerus emineret. Nonnullis in locis impulsu cacodemonis excecatz hujus 
gentis aliqui in deserta et eremias profugientes, ibi vitam acerbam et duram longo tempore agebant. Interdum pro 
victimis seipsos offerebant, ex abrupto saxo se dejicientes, et in mille frusta comminuentes.. Que hactenus com- 
memoravimus, nihil aliud nisi laquei Sathane sunt, qui nihil in votis magis optatisque unquam habuit, quam ut 

universum genus humanum in eternum secum exitium pertraheret ac precipitaret. 

Carituto XXXIV. del Libro Trece de la Monarquia Indiana. 

De los Oficios, y Oficiales, que hana entre estos Inhos, en tiempo de su Gentilidad, y de las cosas 
curiosas, que hacvan. 

Entre los Indios de esta Nueva-Espaiia havia muchos Oficiales de muchos, y varios Oficios, en especial grandes 
Escultores de Canteria, que labraban, quanto querian en Piedra, con otras Piedras guijarrefias, y Pedernales, 
porque carecian de Hierro, y Acero, y tan prima, y curiosamente las labraban, como en nuestra Castilla, los Ofi- 
ciales con escodas, y picos acerados, como se hecha mui bien de ver, oi Dia, en algunas figuras de sus Idolos, que 
pusieron por esquinas, sobre los cimientos de algunas Casas en. esta Ciudad de Mexico (aunque no son de la obra 
curiosa, que hacian) estos Idolos mandé picar los Afios pasados, el Arcobispo Don Frai Garcia de Zuftiga, que 
fallecid este Alo pasado de 1606, pero para el que pudiere, podra ver dos figuras hechas a lo antiguo, en el Bosque 
de Chapultepec, que son retratos de dos Reies Mexicanos, las quales estan esculpidas en dos Piedras duras, nacidas 
en el mismo cerro, la una de mui crecida estatura, y la otra no tanto; pero tan enriquecidas de labor de Armas, y 
Plumas, 4 su usanca, que parecen mas labradas de cera, que de la materia, que son, tan lisas, y limpias, que no 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. AT 

parecen hechas 4 mano*. Todo esto labraban (como hemos dicho) con otras Piedras, y Pedernales; y segun la 
curiosidad de la labor, pienso, que estuvieron mucho tiempo en acabarlas. De estas cosas eran mui curiosos todos 
los Lapidarios, y Canteros. Los Carpinteros, y Entalladores labraban la madera con Instrumentos de Cobre; pero 
los Lapidarios cortaban, y labraban las Piedras preciosas, con cierta arena, que ellos sabian, aunque aora las cortan 
con Esmeril, y hacian de ellas las figuras, que querian. 

Havyia Plateros, pero faltabales las Erramientas necesarias, para labrar de Martillo, 6 Maconeria; pero con una 
Piedra, sobre otra, hacian una Taca Ilana y un Plato. Para las cosas, que dicen de fundicion, y vaciado, eran 
mui habiles, y hacian una Joia de Oro, 6 Plata, con grandes primores, haciendo mucha ventaja 4 nuestros Plateros 
Espafioles, porque fundian un Pajaro, que se le andaba la Cabega, lengua, y las alas, y hacian un Mono, ut otro 
Animal, que se le andaban cabeca, lengua, pies, y manos, y en las manos le ponian unos trevejuelos, que parecia 
bailar, con ellos. Y lo que mas es, que sacaban de la fundicion una Pieca, la mitad de Oro, y la mitad de Plata, 
y vaciaban un Pece, la mitad de las escamas de Oro, y la mitad de Plata, y otros variados, conviene 4 saber, una 
escama de Oro, y otra de Plata, de que se maravillaron mucho los Plateros de Espana. De estos ai id mui pocos, 
© Casi ninguno, porque como andan tan oprimidos, y pobres, ni tienen de que hacerlos los Indios, ni Reies, para 
quien sean, y asi no ai Oficiales, que los hagan; verdad sea, que de los que viven he visto io vaciar algunas cosas 
mui curiosamente, y para unos cordones de Dalmaticas de la Capilla de San Joseph, en San Francisco de esta 
Ciudad, se huvieron de hacer unas Calabacillas de Plata, que sirviesen de botones (por ser el ornamento de mucha 
estimacion, y precio) y buscando Platero, que las hiciese, entre los Espafioles, nos embiaron a un Indio, que vivia 
a las espaldas de nuestra casa, el qual las vacio, segun sus antepasados sabian, y salieron con todo el primor imagi- 
nable. Y en esta manera de plateria, daban los Nuestros la ventaja 4 los Indios; porque demas de querer Arte, 
requiere tambien espacio, y flema, la qual tienen estos Indios, para qualquiera cosa, que la pida. 

Havia Pintores buenos, que retrataban al natural, en especial Aves, Animales, Arboles, Flores, y Verduras, y 
otras semejantes, que usaban pintar, en los aposentos de los Reies, y Seflores ; pero formas humanas, asi como 
rostros, y cuerpos de Hombres, y Mugeres, no los pintaban al natural, antes algunos tan feos, que parecian 
monstruos ; que parece, que permitia Dios, que la figura de sus cuerpos se asimilase 4 la que tenian sus Almas, 
por el pecado, en que siempre permanecian; mas despues que fueron Christianos, y vieron nuestras imagenes, 
traidas de Flandes, de Italia, y otras partes de Espaiia, se pulieron mucho, y no ai cosa, que no imiten, y hagan; 
y son algunos de ellos tan diestros, y primos, asi de pincél, como de encarnacion, que no les hacen ventaja los 
Castellanos; y viven oi algunos, que si quisiesen trabajar, en sus obradores, les dan 4 cinco pesos, y de comer 
cada dia, como me lo ha dicho uno de los que han deseado, tenerlos en sus casas; pero no quieren, :porque ganan 
mucho mas en las suias, y hacen sus liengos, y colaterales, como los Espafioles, y jamias les falta obra; porque 
demas de ser buena, es mas barata. Hai Entalladores (y los havia en su infidelidad) mui primos, en. especial en 
esta Ciudad de Mexico, donde, con la comunicacion de los Espafioles, se han perfeccionado, y pulido mucho, de 
los quales conozco muchos, que hacen la madera de lo que se obligan los Pintores Espafioles ; y hai en esta par- 
cialidad de Santiago (entre otros) Uno, que ninguno de los Nuestros le hacen ventaja, y él excede 4 muchos: 
llamase Miguél Mauricio, de mucho, y delicado ingenio, con el qual, y con los otros, que digo haver en esta parte 
de Ciudad, hice el Retablo de este Santo Templo, que edifiqué en ella, que es una de las mejores cosas del Reino. 
Labran Talla, y Escultura, asi grande, como chica, y hacen Imagenes, y Santos de hueso, de mucha curiosidad, y 
por serlo tanta, las llevan 4 Espafta, como llevan tambien los Crucifijos huecos de Cafia, que siendo de la corpu- 
lencia de un Hombre, y maior, pesan tan poco, que puede llevarlos un Nifio de pocas fuercas, tan perfectos, tan 
proporcionados, y devotos, que no pueden ser mejores. De esta verdad todos son testigos, y asi paso por ella, sin 
curar de citar Autores. Havia Oficiales de Loga, y de Vasijas de barro, para comer, y beber en ellas, mui bien 
hechas, pintadas, y galanas, aunque no sabian usar de el vidriado ; pero luego lo aprendieron del primer Oficial, 
que vino de Espafia, por mas que él se guardaba, y recataba de ellos. Otros Oficiales havia, y hai, en diversas 
Provincias de esta Nueva-Espajfia de. hacer estos Vasos, que llaman Xicaras, y Tecomates, los quales son de ciertas 

* A Mexican piece of sculpture of an extremely fine polish, and formed out of an excessively hard and heavy block of stone of a greenish 
colour, is preserved in the British Museum, an engraving of which of the sizeof the original will be found in the present work. . From the 
feathered serpent at the back of the head, the green colour of the stone, and other peculiar characteristics it may be inferred that this is.a bust of 

Quecalcoatle. The mutilations which it has sustained seem to be accounted for, by what Torquemada here says of the orders which were given 
by Don Frai Garcia de Zuiiga. 

48 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Calabacas mui duras, y bien diferentes de las nuestras: Son los Tecomates de Arboles Monteses, y Silvestres, que 
sin ningun culto, ni beneficio, las dan en grandisimo numero, como io los he visto, en las Tierras calientes, porque 
no se dan en las frias, de los quales hai de diversas formas, y maneras: Estas las pintaban (y pintan oi dia) de 
muchas figuras, y colores, tan finas, y tan asentadas, que aunque estén cien Aftos, en el Agua, nunca la pintura se 
les borra, ni quita; antes se envejecen, quiebran, y se desportillan, que dejen de conservar su color, y barniz. De 
estas hai muchas, y de muchas hechuras, y maneras, aunque lo ordinario es usar de ellas, en su hechura Ilana, y 
simple; son Vasos mui hermosos, y lindos, que de las que llamamos Xicaras, hai algunas tan grandes, y anchas, 
que no la abraca un Hombre: son como Fuentes de Plata, y en algunas ocasiones sirven de lo mismo. 

Havia, y hai, Texedores, que texian las Ropas, y Vestidos, 4 la manera, que las usaban, en especial los Reies, 
y Sefiores, y tambien los Ministros de los Templos, y para el adorno de los Idolos, y cosas de su servicio. Estas 
Ropas las hacian de Algodon, unas blancas, otras negras, y mui pintadas, de diversos colores *: Unas eran gruesas, 
como Angeo, 0 Brin; Otras delgadas, y tupidas, como Ruan, y otras mas delgadas, 4 manera de Toca, y muchas 
como Almaycales Moriscos; eran, finalmente, como las querian. Otras hacian de pelo de Conejo, entretexido de 
hilo de Algodon, mui curiosas, que usaba la Gente Principal, 4 manera de Bernias, con que se defendian del frio, 
por ser mui calientes, suaves, y blandas, y tan artificiosamente labradas, que ‘parecia de mui grande maravilla 
poderse poner en ellas, el pelo de Conejo. Otros Oficiales havia, que hacian Esteras de Palma, y Tule, que es 
Enea; estas servian entre todos, como de Alfombras, que tendian, y tienden por los suelos, y son algunas tan 
lindas, y curiosas, tan labradas (de la misma Palma, y Juncia) que no se puede encarecer, y sirven 4 algunos de 
Tapices, y Panos de pared. Havia tambien Oficiales de curtir Cueros de Venado, Tigres, y Leones, y otros 
Animales, los quales adobaban maravillosamente, con pelo, y sin pelo, de todos colores, y tan blandos, que hacen 
oi Dia guantes de ellos. Demas del calgado comun (que eran Sandalias de Cafiamo de el Maguey, que es la cepa 
de su Vino) hacian tambien para los Sefores, y Principales, mui pulidos y delicados Alpargates del mismo Caftamo, 
y Algodon, y algunos mui curiosos, mui pintados, y dorados, y para esto havia Oficiales mui aventajados, y 
primos. 

Pero lo que parece mas de maravillar es, el Oficio, y Arte de labrar de Pluma, con sus mismos Naturales 
colores, asentada, de la misma manera, que pueden los mui primos, y pulidos Pintores, con delicados, y delgados 
pinceles. Solian en su Gentilidad hacer (y de presente hacen en algunas partes) muchas cosas de Pluma, como 
Aves, Animales, Hombres, y otras cosas mui delicadas, Capas, y Mantas, para cubrirse, y vestiduras para los Sa- 
cerdotes de sus Templos, Coronas, Mitras, Rodelas, y Mosqueadores, y otras cosas, como querian. Estas Plumas 
eran verdes, azules, coloradas, rubias, moradas, encarnadas, amarillas, pardas, negras, blancas, y finalmente de 
todas colores, no tefidas por algunas industrias Humanas, sino todas Naturales, como las crian varias, y diversas 
Aves; y a esta causa tenian en grande precio, qualquiera especie de ellas, porque de todas se aprovechaban, hasta 
de los mas minimos, y pequefios Pajaritos. Pues si tratamos de el Tiempo presente, despues que vieron nuestras 
Imagenes, y otras cosas mui diferentes de las suias, como han tenido en ellas larga materia de estender la conside- 
racion, y avivar los Ingenios ; es cosa maravillosa, con quanta perfeccion se exercitan, en aquella sutil Arte, y para 
nosotros mui nueva, haciendo Imagines, y Retablos; y otras cosas de sus manos, dignas de ser presentadas 4 Prin- 
cipes, y Reies, y Sumos Pontifices ; como por mucho regalo, y estimacion se las han llevado-. Ai otra cosa de 
notable primor, en esta Arte de Plumeria, que si son veinte Oficiales, toman 4 hacer una Imagen todos ellos 
juntos, y dividen entre s}, por partes, la Imagen, y cada qual de ellos lleva 4 su casa la parte, que le cupo, en suerte, 
y la hace, sin ver la que hace el otro, ni los matices, que le da, ni colores con que la hermosea; y despues de 
acabada, se buelven a juntar, y la componen, y pegan unas partes con otras, y queda, despues de toda junta, la 
figura, 6 quadro, tan ajustado, é igual, en su proporcion, que no parece haver sido de diversas manos, sino de una 
sola, y sorteados los colores, con grandisimo cuidado. 

* Ludolfus, in his Ethiopian History, says that the Jews of Africa fabricated beautifully wove vests. 

+ Garcia remarks that the art of painting with feathers, in which the Mexicans attained such great perfection, may be reckoned a lost art since 
the Phenicians practised it in early ages. ‘ “ Lo que es mui digno de notar, en comprobacion de este dictamen, es el uso que tuvieron los Fenicios 
de la Pluma, para adornarse, segun Bocharto, i Fulero, i hacer Figuras, é Imagenes de ella: cuio Arte, con la destruicion de Tyro, i Fenicia 
perecio en Asia, i aun no quedo reliquia de ella en Asia, ni Europa; pero en las Indias Occidentales la hallaron los Espafioles tan aumentada, i 
tan elegante, que los mas diestros quedaron pasmados de tan exquisita habilidad, como se ha referido, i prueban Aldrovando, que refiere algunas 
Pinturas de Pluma, i otros.” 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 49 

Y es mucho de notar, que lo mismo, que estos Oficiales hacen de Pluma, hacen otros mui comunes, y dese- 
9 Q » q D) b W 

chados, de hojas de Arboles, y Rosas, de diversos colores, que ni mas, ni menos, forman una Imagen de Santo 

J By Gh 9 9 § 5 ¥ 
hacen quadros de Armas, y letreros mui grandes, y vistosos, que representan mucha Magestad, en las acoteas, y 
puertas de Iglesia, en algunas Fiestas Principales, que celebran, asentando las hojas de los Arboles, y las de las 
Flores, y Rosas, con engrudo, sobre las esteras, 6 Petates (que asi los Ilaman) conforme las colores, que pide cada 

9» 9 & 9 2 gl GUIS jp 
parte de la figura, enriqueciendo el campo, y quadro con cien mil menudencias, el qual queda mui lindo; y despues 
de haver servido, en la ocasion, para que se hico, se piden para adornar algunas salas, y aposentos; y de estos he 
9 » para q co, se p p § > ¥ 2p y 
dado io mucha cantidad, en especial, en la Capilla de San Joseph, del Convento de San Francisco, hechas para las 
Fiestas de estos dos Patrones ; las quales piden algunos devotos, por su devocion, aunque despues con el tiempo 
q P g » P oh P p 

se consumen. 

Oficiales tenian, y tienen,-de hacer Navajas de una cierta Piedra negra, 6 Pedernal, que verlas sacar de la Piedra, 
es cosa de grande maravilla, y digna de mucha admiracion, y de ser alabado el ingenio, que inventd esta Arte. 
Hacense, y sacanse de la Piedra (si se puede dar bien 4 entender) de esta manera. Sientase en el suelo un Indio 

se, Y p ; 

de estos Oficiales, y toma un pedaco de aquella Piedra negra (que es asi como Azabache, y dura, como Pedernal, y 
 W peda ig] gra (q y 2: 

es Piedra, que se puede llamar preciosa, mas hermosa, y reluciente, que Alabastro, y Jaspe, tanto, que de ella se 
hacen Aras, y Espejos) * y este pedaco, que toman, es de un palmo de largo, 6 poco mas, y de grueso como la 

» y Lspe] yi pedaco, q > Pp § Pp yde § 

pierna, 6 poco menos, rollico; tienen un palo del grueso de una langa, y largo, como tres codos, 6 poco mas, al 
principio de este palo ponen mui pegado, y bien atado otro trocuelo, de un palmo (para que pese mas aquella parte) 
luego juntan ambos los pies descalcos, y con ellos aprietan la piedra, como si fuese con tenacas, 6 tornillos, de 

£0 J Pp BOEr. yf p Pp 2 cas, » C 
banco de Carpintero, y toman el palo, con ambas 4 dos manos, que tambien es Ilano, y tajado, y ponenlo 4 besar 
con el canto de la frente de la Piedra, que tambien es llana, y tajada, por aquella parte, y entonces aprietan acia, el 
pecho, y con la fuerca, que hace, salta de la Piedra una Navaja con su punta, y filos de ambas partes, como si de 
un Nabo, 6 Rabano la quisiesen formar, con un cuchillo, mui agudo, 6 como si la formasen de Hierro al Fuego, y 
despues en la muela la agucasen, y ultimamente la diesen mui delgados filos en las Piedras de afilar, y sacan estos 
Oficiales en un mui breve espacio de estas Piedras, por la manera dicha, mas de veinte Navajas. Salen de la misma 

Pp »P J 
forma, que son las que usan nuestros Barberos, para sangrar, salvo, que tienen un lomillo, por medio, y acia las 
» aoe Pp prar; que; Pp Bay: 

puntas salen algo combadas, con mucha graciosidad ; cortan, y rapan el cabello de la primera vez, y con el primer 
tajo poco menos, que una Navaja acerada, pero al segundo corte pierden los filos, y luego es menester otra, y otra 
para acabar de rapar la barba, 6 el cabello, aunque a la verdad son baratas, y asi no se siente gastarlas. Muchas 
veces se han afeitado muchos Espafioles Seglares, y Religiosos, con ellas, en especial al principio de la Poblacion de 
estos Reinos, quando no abundaba la Tierra de los instrumentos necesarios, y Oficiales, que acuden oi 4 ella, de 
que viven, y con que se sustentan. Pero concluio, con decir, que verlas sacar, es cosa digna de admiracion, y no 
pequefio argumento de la viveca de los Ingenios de los Hombres, que tal manera de invencion hallaron. 

Seccron VI. de el Capitulo Il. del tercero libro de Garcia, sobre el Origen de los Indios. 
De la Idolatria de los Judios, i Indios. 

Quin leiere el Testamento Viejo, i las Historias de los Hebreos, vera quan inclinados eran los Judios a la Idolatria. 
En faltando Moises, luego idolatraron, como parece en el Exodo, adonde reprehendiendo el mismo Moises 4 Aaron, 
por qué les havia dejado idolatrar ? Respondid: Tu conoces a este Pueblo, que es inclinado 4 la Idolatria. Algunos 
Doctores dicen, que entre otros Misterios, porque Dios aparecid 4 Moises en una Qarg¢a, que ardia, i no se quemaba, 
fue porque no pudiesen hacer Idolos de ella, como los hicieran, si apareciera en otro Arbol. Porque 4a la Serpiente 
de Metal, que Moises hico, la adoraron, ila guardaron hasta el tiempo del Rei Ezechias, que la mando deshacer, 
i fundir, porque la daban los Hebreos honores Divinos, i idolatraban en ella. El Tostado advierte, que los Hebreos 
adoraban Idolos en Egypto, imitando 4 los Gitanos, que eran grandes Idolatras; i para probar esto, se aprovecha 
de lo qué dice el Profeta Ezechiel debajo de una Metafora. Tambien prueba esto, diciendo, que si los Hebreos no 

* We have seen a large mirror of this kind which was lately dug up in the city of Mexico. 

OQ 

50 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

estuvieran acostumbrados al culto de los Idolos, no pidieran luego, en saliendo de Egypto (ausente Moises) junto 
al Monte de Sinay, 4 Aaron, que les hiciese Dioses, 4 quien adorar. Lo tercero se prueba, porque sino estuvieran 
tan hechos A idolatrar, ni fueran tan inclinados 4 la Idolatria, no se la vedara Dios tan 4 menudo, i con tanto enca- 
recimiento, como parece desde el Exodo, hasta el fin de el Deuteronomio, i principalmente en este Libro del Deu- 
teronomio. Finalmente concluie el Abulense, diciendo, que los Hebreos fueron oprimidos con trabajos, i dura 
servidumbre, porque si los dejaran en su libertad, no cesaran de acudir al Rito, i Ceremonias de sus Idolos. Y se 
ha de advertir, que el ser inclinados 4 la Idolatria, era mas comun en la Gente de los diez Tribus, como consta de lo 
que refiere la Sagrada Escritura en el Libro quarto de los Reies, Capitulo 17. de que ia hicimos mencion. Solo 
quiero que advierta el Lector, como refiere alli la Divina Escritura muchas cosas, que adoraban los Israelitas de los 
diez Tribus mui semejantes 4 las de los Indios, como era el Sol, Luna, i Estrellas, i Idolos, cuios Altares estaban 
hechos en Alturas, Collados, i Montes, adonde incensaban, i ofrecian sacrificio. 

Yo entiendo que no huvo, ni ai Nacion en el Mundo tan inclinada a la Idolatria, como estos aici eran en el 
tiempo de su Gentilidad, en lo qual parecen mucho 4 los Judios; porque aunque los Gentiles tuvieron infinidad de 
Idolos, i adoraban cosas sucias, i bajas, como era el Perro Osyris, i la Vaca Isis, que adoraban los Egypcios, i el 
Carnero Amon en los Desiertos de Libia: en Roma la Diosa Febrea de las Calenturas, i el Anser de Tarpeya: i 
en Atenas la Sabia, el Cuervo, i el Gallo, i otras semejantes bajecas, i burlerias, de que estan ilenas las Historias 
de la Gentilidad, viniendo en tan gran oprobrio, i bajeca los Hombres, por no haverse querido sujetar 4 la Lei de 
su Verdadero Dios, i Criador, como San Atanasio doctamente lo trata, escriviendo contra los Idolatras, {que ‘como 
dijo Aurelio Prudencio : 

Quidquid humus, quidquid Pelagus mirabile gignit, 
Induxere Deos: Colles, freta, flumina, flammas. 

Que en Castellano suena. 

Quanto admirable engendraron 
Tierra, i Mar, en Piel, i Escamas, 
Estrechos, Montes, Rios, Llamas, 
Para Dioses aplicaron. | 

Mas en los Indios, especialmente del Pert, es cosa que espanta, i admira, i aun saca de juicio la rotura, i perdicion 
que huvo en esto, porque adoraban los Rios, Fuentes, Quebradas, Pehas 6 Piedras grandes, Cerros, i Cumbres 
de Montes, que ellos llaman Apachitas, i lo tenian por cosa de gran devocion. _ Finalmente, qualquiera cosa de 
Naturaleca, que les parecia notable, i diferente de las demas, la adoraban, como reconociendo alli alguna particula- 
ridad. En Cassamalca de Lanasca ai un Cerro grande de Arena, que fue principal Adoratorio de los Antiguos, que 
ellos Ilaman Guaca; i preguntado, qué Divinidad hallaban alli? Responden, que aquella maravilla de ser un Cerro 
altisimo de Arena, enmedio de otros muchos, todos de Pefla. Yala verdad era cosa maravillosa pensar, como se 
puso tan gran pico de Arena enmedio de Montes espesisimos de Piedra. A este tono qualquiera cosa que tenga 
estrafieca entre las de su genero, les parecia que tenia Divinidad, hasta hacer eso con Pedrecuelas, i Metales, i aun 
con Ralces, i Frutos de la Tierra. Como en las Raices que Ilaman Papas ai unas estrafas, a quien ellos ponen 
nombre Llallaguas, i las besaban, i adoraban. Adoraban tambien Osos, Leones, Tigres, i Culebras, porque no les 
hiciesen mal; i como son tales sus Dioses, asi son donosas las cosas que les ofrecen, quando los adoran. Usaban, 
quando iban de camino, echar en los mismos Caminos, 6 encrucijados, en los Cerros, i principalmente en las 
Cumbres, Calcados viejos, i Plumas, Coca mascada, que es una Ierva como Gumaque, de que usan mucho: i quando 
no puden mas, siquiera una Piedra, i todo esto es como ofrenda para que los dejen pasar, i les dén fuergas: i 
dicen, que las cobran con esto, como mas largamente se refiere en un Concilio Provincial de Lima, i en el Cate- 
cismo, que anda impreso por mandado del Concilio Provincial, que se celebrd en la sobredicha Ciudad Afto de 1583. 
i donde se refieren inumerables idolatrias, i supersticiones, que tenian los Indios del Peri. Pues los de Nueva- 
Espafia fueron tan perdidos, i ciegos en esto, que nunca acabaramos de numerar los Dioses que tenian. Solo digo 
lo que refiere Fr. Estevan de Salacar en los Discursos del Credo, remitiendose 3 una Historia, 2: Relacion de la 
Teologia de los Indios Mexicanos, que tuvo en su poder, ise perdid, i anegd en el naufragio de los Jardines Afio 
de 1564. que de solos los borrachos tenia trecientos Dioses, con que quedara probado, que no ha havido, ni ai 

Nacion mas dada a la Idolatria, que estos Indios, i por el consiguiente pareeidar: i los Hebreos en esto de ser 
faciles para idolatrar. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 51 

Quien leiere al Profeta Ezechiel, vera como los Hebreos adoraban en los altos Montes, ilevantados Collados : lo 
qual (como dije arriba) hacian sin faltar un punto los Indios del Pert, [como los demas Gentiles.] Y porque aqui 
mi intento solo es probar, como en esto se parecen los Indios, i Hebreos, no quiero ser mas largo en contar Idola- 
trias de los unos, i de los otros, remitiendome 4 lo qué el P. Acosta, i otros han escrito de esta materia. 

see 

Seccion Uutima. 

De el Vestido de los Indios, semejante al de los Judios. 

Si bien se mira el Vestido que ‘traen los Indios, particularmente en el Pert, es mui semejante al que tralian los 
Judios, porque usan de una Tunica, 6 Camiseta, que es como Sobrepelliz sin mangas, i de una Manta rodeada 
encima. Traen por Calcado unas Sandalias, algunas hechas de suelas de Gapatos, i atadas por arriba, otras las 
suelas hechas de Cabuya, que es como. Cafiamo, con sus ataderos: i este Calcado es mucho mas usado en Nueva- 
Espaiia, como lo es en el Pert el Vestido que he dicho. Antiguamente traian en el Peri el cabello largo, como los 
Nacareos, excepto los que llamaban Orejones, i 01 Dia lo traen los que estan por conquistar. Que aqueste aia sido 
el Trage, 1 Habito de los Hebreos, consta asi por sus Historias, como por Pinturas antiguas, que los pintan vestidos 
en este Trage. Y este Vestido, i Calcado traian los Apostoles. 

Estos dos Vestidos, Manta, i Camiseta, que traen los Indios en el Pert, eran los que puso en apuesta Sanson, 
que la Escritura llama Tunicam, et Syndonem, i es lo mismo que los Indios dicen en el Pert Cusma, i Pacha, i los 
Espafioles Camiseta, i Manta. 

Fr. Estevan de Salacar dice, que los Caldeos usaban de una manera de Capuces, cuio es el Vocablo Capuz. Y 
cierto, que si bien se mira, difieren poco, 4 lo menos en la forma de la Camiseta de los Indios Peruanos, i del 
Guaypil, que traen de la misma hechura que Ja Camiseta, las Indias de Nueva-Espaita; i menos se diferencian 
aquellos Capuces de los que traen las Indias de los Llanos del Pert. Fr. Agustin Davila, Arcobispo de Santo Do- 
mingo, refiere en su Historia Dominicana del Nuevo Mundo, como en un Pueblo, llamado Tamaculapa, que es en 
la Misteca, se hallaron unas Vestiduras Sagradas, de el que ellos tenian por Sumo Sacerdote, mui semejantes 4 las 
que se ponian los Pontifices Maximos de la Lei de Moises, las quales tenian escondidas los Indios. 

Carituxo II. 

Como parecen los Indios a los Hebreos en muchas de sus Costumbres. 

En este lugar havemos de tratar de las Costumbres de los Indios, i asi primero traeré exemplos de las que tenian 
los Hebreos, para que se vea como son mui semejantes, i parecidas A las de aquella Gente del Nuevo Mundo, que 
ese mismo orden he guardado en lo que hasta aqui he referido de los unos, i de los otros. 

La Sagrada Escritura refiere, que Abraham alco las manos al Cielo al Seftor excelso, poseedor del Cielo, i Tierra, 
que era como juramento que hacia, de no tomar cosa alguna, grande, ni pequefia del despojo que havia tomado a 
los Reies, que vencieron 4 los de Sodoma. 

Los Indios del Pert, si bien se echa de vér, quando afirman, 6 con eficacia dicen algo, miran al Cielo, i levantan 
Acia alli la mano, i la besan, jurando lo que quieren afirmar. Asi lo hico aquel Mensagero, que fue a hablar a ~ 
Guascar Inga, de quien hacen mencion las Historias-de el Peri; i espero en Dios de hacerla Yo en mi Monarquia 
de los Ingas. Tambien hicieron esto los Sefiores, i Caciques, que fueron a hablar 4 Inga Yupangui, de quien tam- 
bien se tratara en la sobredicha Monarquia, 4 que me remito, si sale a luz. ; 

Costumbre era de los Hebreos, i durd hasta el tiempo de Christo Nuestro Sefior, llamar Hermanos 4 los Pari- 
entes de segundo, i tercero grado de consanguinidad. Abraham (como parece en el Genesis) dijo 4 Loth: Pues 
somos Hermanos, no es racon, que entre nuestros Pastores, 7 nosotros aia discordias. Yen el mismo Genesis llama 
la Escritura 4 Abraham Hermano de Loth, diciendo: Como oiese Abraham que estaba cautivo su Hermano Loth. 
Aqui le Hamé Hermano la Escritura i Loth. Y esta misma nos ensefia, que era Loth Sobrino de Abraham. Y asi 
la Divina Escritura, acomodandose 4 la costumbre, 1 modo de hablar, llama Hermanos a los primos Hermanos, i 

a2 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Parientes. Y pues havemos traido exemplos del Testamento Viejo, sera bueno que los traigamos tambien de el 
Nuevo. Por S. Mateo, S. Marcos, S. Lucas, iS. Juan, parece claro, como Santiago el Maior, i$. Juan Evange- 
lista, Hijos del Zebedeo, i de Maria Salome: i Santiago el Menor, 1S. Simon i Judas, Hijos de Maria Cleophe, se 
llamaban Hermanos de Christo Nuestro Sefior, i sabemos que eran Primos hermanos suios, Hijos de Hermanas de 
Nuestra Sefiora. Los Indios (particularmente del Pert, de quien, como de Gente que tengo mas. noticia, digo mas 
que de otros) tenian, i tienen oi Dia esta costumbre al pie de la letra, porque los Tios llaman Hermanos 4 los So- 
brinos, ilo mismo es en los primos Hermanos. En el Genesis se dice, que Jacob adord 4 su Hermano Esau siete 
veces, postrado en Tierra, quando le salié a recibir al Camino. Las palabras que aquesto refieren, reducidas al 
Castellano, son estas: V el mismo Jacob, saliendo & recibir & su Hermano Esau, le adord postrado en Tierra siete 
veces. Y quando vino aquel Mensagero, de quien se hace mencion en el segundo de los Reies, a dar la nueva a 
David de la muerte de Saul, dice el Sagrado Texto, que se postro en Tierra, i adord 4 David. Tambien nos refiere 
el Evangelista S. Mateo, que llegs la Madre de los Hijos del Zebedeo 4 Christo Nuestro Sefor, adorandole, i ha- 
ciendo reverencias, como quien iba 4 pedir mercedes. 

Estos Indios se humillan, postran, i hacen grandes reverencias, que en el Pert llaman mochas, quando ven, i 
encuentran, i hablan 4 sus maiores, 4 los Sacerdotes que los doctrinan, ia quien quieren bien, 6 deben respeto, i 
temor. Y aunque la reverencia, i postracion de rodillas que aora hacen los Indios de Nueva-Espaita 4 los Sacer- 
dotes, se la ensefid D. Fernando Cortés, Marques del Valle, de felice memoria; pero Yo entiendo, que en alguna 
manera hacian algo de esto antiguamente, pues lo usan aora con los que no son Sacerdotes, como sean Personas de 
respeto. Todo lo qual se verifica al pie de la letra en los Indios del Pert. 

Seccion I. 

Donde se prosiguen las Costumbres de Indios, « de Hebreos. 

En el Exodo cuenta la Sagrada Escritura, que ocupo el Rei Faraon en Egypto a los Hijos de Israel en Oficios viles, 
en lodo, pajas, iadobes. Pues esto mismo usaron los Indios en tiempo de su Gentilidad, como consta de las se- 
ales, i ruinas de algunos paredones de adobes, que han quedado en el Peru: i el Dia de oi se hacen en este Reino 
muchas Casas, i Edificios de adobes, los quales hacen los Indios, i los llevan acuestas de una parte a otra. Y en el 
mismo Exodo se dice, que les daban tareas a los Israelitas, i les hacian traer la paja para los adobes. Esto se hace 
puntualmente en el Pert, que les dan tarea de veinte i cinco adobes cada Dia, i ellos traen la paja acuestas para el 
barro ; ino solo se les sefiala tarea 4 los Indios en los adobes, sino tambien en qualquiera obra, 6 material de ella, 
i en las cargas de Lefia, i Ierva: porque es Gente tan floja, i tan para poco, que si esto no se hiciese, no valdria dos 
maravedis quanto trabajan, i hacen ; i si algo hacen que no sea por tarea, es menester que el Amo, i Duefio de la 
obra, 6 hacienda, esté presente, i les dé un grito, i gritos: en lo qual parecen bien a los Judios, que son Gente 
para poco trabajo ; i asi solemos decir: (Vo son Judios para trabajo. Y aunque Faraon daba a los Hebreos tarea 
para oprimirlos mas ; pero Yo tengo para mi, que como los vio tan flojos, itan para poco, que debid de sefalarla 
por esta causa. . 

La Sagrada Escritura dice en el Exodo, que los Hebreos estimaban en mas los Ajos, i Cebollas, i Ollas podridas 
que comian en Egypto, que no el Mana, que sabia al Manjar que querian, i deseaban: i asimismo deseaban mas 
estar en aquella esclavonia, i vivienda trabajosa, i miserable que alli tenian, que ir 4 la Tierra de Promision. 

Asi estos Indios estiman mas una poca de Chicha, que es su Vino, i unas Raices, i Jervas para comer, que 
quantos regalos les pueden hacer, i dar los Espafioles ; i con estar tan oprimidos, i metidos en pretina (como dicen) 
en tiempo de su Gentilidad, i tener aora mucha libertad, con todo eso tienen por mejor vida aquella, que no la que 
tienen aora: la qual, sin comparacion es mejor, i de mucha mas libertad, descanso, i regalo, asi para’ el alma, 
como para el cuerpo. 

Josepho Judio dice, que las piedras de las Torres, i Muros de Jerusalem estaban tan artificiosamente puestas, i 
juntas unas con otras, que con ser las piedras de Marmol, no se parecian las junturas. 

Edificios de aquesta manera huvo en el Pert, i aun hasta aora han perseverado-en el Cuzco, donde estaba la 
Casa Real de los Ingas, i el Templo del Sol, que aora es Capilla Maior del Convento de Santo Domingo, que en 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 53 

aquella Ciudad esti fundado en las mismas Casas de los Ingas ; en Tiaguanaco, i Tambo, i en las que aora sirven de~ 
Ventas en el Camino Real del Pert, comengando desde Pasto, que en Lengua de Inga Ilaman Tambos, han tambien 
perseverado algunos pedacos, i piecas enteras, cuia labor es estrafia, i para espantar ; porque no usaban de mezcla, 
ni tenian Hierro, ni Acero para cortar, i labrar las piedras, ni maquinas, ni Instrumentos para traerlas, i con todo eso 
estan tan pulidamente labradas, i juntas con tal artificio, que en muchas partes apenas se ven las junturas de unas 
con otras. i : 

En el Exodo se cuenta, como Moises, por consejo de Iethro, haviendo escogido los mas fuertes, i esforcados 
Varones de todo Israel, los sefialé, i hico Principes de todo el Pueblo, ordenando, que unos fuesen Tribunos, que 
como explica el Tostado en el mismo lugar, tenian 4 su cargo mil, otros Centenarios, que tenian ciento, otros Quin- 
quagenarios que tenian cinquenta. Otros Decanos, que tenian diez: los Decanos, segun el Tostado, estaban sujetos 
4 los Quinquagenarios, i estos 4 los Centenarios, i los Centenarios 4 los Tribunos. Y despues en los Numeros se 
refiere, que fueron contados, i repartidos por Familias los Hebreos, que havian de ser para la Guerra. Y esto de 
haver Tribunos, Centenarios, &c. se conservd siempre en el Pueblo de Israel. David tuvo Tribunos, i Centenarios, 
como consta del Paralipomenon. Este mismo orden se guardd hasta los Macabeos, en cuia Historia se halla, que 
Judas Macabeo ordend Tribunos de mil Hombres, i Centuriones, que tuviesen cargo de ciento, i Penthecontarchos, 
que tuviesen cargo de cinquenta, i Decurios, que tuviesen cada uno cargo de diez Hombres. 

Este mismo orden tenian los Indios en todas las Provincias, particularmente en el Pert, adonde estaba la Gente 
repartida de esta manera: que havia Decuriones, cada uno de los quales tenia 4 su cargo diez, i se Ilamaba Chunca. 
Havia Centuriones, que cada uno tenia a su cargo cien Indios, i se llamaba Pachac. Havia Milenarios, que cada uno 
tenia cargo de mil, que eran diez Centurias’con sus Principales, llamabase Guaranca. Havia, finalmente, otros 
Principales, que mandaban 4 diez mil, el nombre de los quales era Hun: i aun oi Dia persevera esto, de haver 
Familias, i repartimientos, no solo en el Pert, pero tambien en las demas Provincias, como mas largamente lo 
dirémos en la septima Opinion. . 

SECCION I. 

Como era costumbre de los Judios, 7 los Indios enterrarse en Montes. 

CosTUMBRE era, i mui antigua de los Judios enterrarse fuera de la Ciudad en los Montes: i estos Sepulcros eran 
como Casas, 6 Bodegas, 6 Bobedas, dentro de las quales havia unas Cabernas, labradas en pefias, 6 encamaradas con 
piedra, 6 ladrillo, adonde podian estar muchos cuerpos de difuntos. La ragon porque estos Sepulcros, estaban en 
los Montes fuera de la Ciudad, era (como lo dice el Tostado) porque aquellos lugares eran, segun las Leies 
Humanas, consagrados, 1 dedicados para este ministerio. Y asi no era licito hacer alli alguna cosa profana, como es 
labrar la Tierra para sembrar, 6 plantar Arboles en ella, sino que havia de estar aquella Tierra intacta, por el honor 
i reverencia del Sepulcro Humano, que en ella estaba. Aaron se enterrd en el Monte Hor, como parece en los 
Numeros. Josue fue sepultado en el Monte de Efraim; i en el mismo Monte fue sepultado Eleacar, Sumo 
Sacerdote, Hijo de Aaron. Los Varones de Jabes Galaad, sepultaron a Saul, i 4 sus Hijos en la Montaiia de Jabes ; 
i despues por mandado de el Rei David, fueron trasladados los Hijos de Saul, i de su Hijo Jonatas, a la halda de 
cierto Monte en la Tierra de Benjamin. Tambien los Macabeos, que fueron Varones mui Ilustres, i Principes de 
los Judios, fueron sepultados en un Monte de la Ciudad de Modin. Y aun esta costumbre hallamos, que duré hasta 
el Tiempo de Christo Nuestro Sefior, como parece por aquellos endemoniados, de quien hacen mencion S. Mateo, 
S. Marcos, i S. Lucas: i dicen, que salieron de los Sepulcros ; porque dice el Abulense, que estaban estos Sepulcros 
en unos Montes : i el fundamento que para esto tiene, es lo que dice $8. Marcos de aquellos Demonios, que estaban 
siempre de Noche, i de Dia en los Sepulcros, i Montes: dando 4 entender, que lo proprio era estar en los Sepulcros 
que en los Montes. Y finalmente, el Sepulcro de Christo Nuestro Seftor estaba fuera de la Ciudad, junto al Monte 
Calvario, adonde fué crucificado : porque haviendo padecido fuera de la Ciudad (como dice S. Pablo) era tambien 
conveniente fuesé sepultado fuera de la Ciudad, conforme a la costumbre antigua de los Hebreos [con quien se con- 
formaron los Romanos, i lo establecieron en las Leies de las doce Tablas, i otras Naciones. | 

En esto parecen los Indios 4 los Judios, que se solian enterrar en Montes, i lugares altos: i los Indios de los 
Llanos del Peri, por no tener Montes, porque son Arenales, los hacian de la misma Tierra, i Arena, [2 swmptuosos 

P 

54 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

(como dice el Autor del Compendio, i Descripcion de Indias) 2 al presente se ven ruinas de sus sobervios Edificios : 
demas de lo; qual, por toda la Sierra del Pert: estan los Campos Uenos de Sepulcros, & modo de Torrecillas, que al 
presente estan Uenos de Calaveras, t de Cuerpos de aquellos Gentiles, que con el uniforme temperamento, 2 sutiles Aires 
estan secos, ¢ incorporados: que los unos, i los otros he visto, z confirmardan esta verdad todos los que han andado por 
aquellos Reinos ; i aiade haver tomado esta costumbre los Indios, i los Moros de los Hebreos.]_ Y oi Dia muchos 
Indios, particularmente viejos, 6 infieles, desentierran secretamente sus difuntos de las Iglesias, i Cementerios, i los 
entierran en Cerros, 1 Montes altos. 

Seccion III. 

De otras cosas, que refiere la Sagrada Escritura de los Hebreos, semejantes a las que hicieron los 
Indios. 

Cosrumpre era entre los Hebreos, quando recibian pena, i pesar de alguna cosa, romper la vestidura ‘que traian, 
como consta de muchos lugares de la Sagrada Escritura. Quando supo David la desastrada muerte de Saul, dice el 
Sagrado Texto, que tomando David su vestidura, la rompid, i lo proprio hicieron los que con él estaban. Tambien 
leemos, que quedo esta costumbre hasta el tiempo de Christo Nuestro Sefior, como parece por San Mateo : porque 
estando el Salvador delante de Caifas, Principe de los Sacerdotes, i diciendo que havian de vér al Hijo del Hombre 
venir en las Nubes (refiere el Sagrado Texto) que entonces el Principe de los Sacerdotes Caifas, rompid su vestidura, 
mostrando en esto la pena, i dolor, que havia recibido de oir aquello, que él tuvo por blasfemia; i asi dijo: Blas- 
phemavit, que es, blasfemo. 

Aquesto mismo hacian los Indios, como se vera en la Monarguia de los Ingas del Pert, que muchas veces he 
prometido sacar 4 luz. En la qual se dice, que como supiese Guaynacapac, que su Hijo Atahualpa venia retirandose 
i huiendo del Campo contrario, rompid su vestidura, rasgandola por delante. 

Item, era costumbre en los Judios dar un beso en el carrillo, en seal de paz, iamor, lo qual hico Judas con 
Christo Nuestro Sefior, aunque este fue beso de paz ee i mentirosa, pues era sefal para entregarlo a los Judios, 
i para que lo conociesen. 

Aquesto usaron tambien los Indios, como se vera en la Monarquia, donde se cuenta, que quando recibid Inca 
Yupanqui 4 su Padre Viracocha Inca, despues de haverlo hospedado, i hechas las Ceremonias, i Fiestas del Casa- 
miento del nuevo Rei, se levantd Viracocha Inca, i abragé 4 la Reina, i la beso en el carrillo. Quando vinieron de 
la Conquista Yanqui, Yupanqui, 1 Topainca Yupanqui, Hijos de Pachacuti Inca,. les did un beso en el carrillo en 
seal de amor. En la misma Monarquia se dice, que Yanqui Yupanqui, Nieto de Pachacuti Hees le did un beso en 
el carrillo 4 su Tio Topainca, en sefial de amor. 

En el primer Libro de los Reies refiere la Sagrada Escritura, que bolviendo David victorioso, aor haver muerto 
al Filisteo, levd su cabeca 4 Jerusalem, i salieron al encuentro de Saul Mugeres de todas las Ciudades de Israel, 
cantando, i haciendo Dangas de placer, las quales iban delante cantando la Victoria, que David havia tenido contra 
Saul, i diciendo, Saul mato a mil, 2 David a diex mil. . 

En nuestra Monarquia de los Ingas se dira, como haviendo vencido Pachacuti Inga 4 los Indios Soras, ordend, i 
compuso un Cantar, el qual contenia la Victoria, que de ellos havia tenido, i mandé que lo cantasen las Mugeres de 
los Sefiores, 1 Orejones, que eran los grandes de su Reino. Y quando el mismo Pachacuti Inga Ilegs victorioso de 
los sobredichos Indios Soras a vista de la Ciudad del Cuzco, mandd, que sus Capitanes entrasen i eaeuale las cosas, 
que en la Jornada havian sucedido, i la victoria que havian tenido. _ 

_ Item, era costumbre de los Judios echar del Templo las Mugeres esteriles, i que no parian, Jas apales s eran repu- 
diadas, 1 tenidas en poco, 1 vivian como afrentadas. 

Aquesta costumbre me conto un Religioso de mi Orden, se tenian los Indios del Reino Gapoteca en la Nueva- 
Espaiia. : 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS.’ ; 55. 

Seccion IV. 

Como los Judios, i los Indios hicieron sacrificio de Niios. 

En los Libros de los Reies refiere la Sagrada Escritura, que el Rei de Moab sacrificé & su primogenito Hijo sobre el 
Muro, 4 vista de los de Israel, 4 los quales parecié este hecho tan triste, i lamentable, que no quisieron apretarle 
mas, i asi se bolvieron 4 sus Casas. Pero mas en particular refiere la misma Escritura la costumbre que tenian los 
Hebreos de los diez Tribus, de sacrificar Nifios, como consta del contexto del Capitulo 17. de el sobredicho Libro 
de los Reies. Este mismo genero de crueldad, i sacrificio refiere la Divina Escritura haverse usado entre aquellas 
Naciones barbaras de Cananeos, i Gebuseos, i los demas, de quien escrive el Libro de la Sabiduria, que sacrificaban 
a sus Hijos ; i David se queja, que de estos aprendieron los de Israel sus Costumbres, i en particular sacrificar sus 
Hijos, i Hijas 4 los Demonios; i asi dice el mismo profeta: Y sacrificaron sus Hyos, « Hyas & los Demonios. 
Hieremias tambien hace mencion de aquesto mismo; aunque en la manera de matar, i sacrificar 4 sus Hijos, 
variaban los Hebreos, como lo advierte Genebrardo : porque unas veces los sacrificaban, matandolos con fuego, 
como se dice de Manases, que paso 4 su Hijo por el fuego; ide Acaz, que consagro, i sacrificd su Hijo, pasandole 
tambien por el fuego. Otras veces los sacrificaban degollandolos, que eso quiere decir David en aquellas palabras : 
Y derramaron la sangre inocente, 7 sin culpa, aunque parece que los quemaban despues, que como nota Genebrardo, 
en esto ai varias opiniones entre los Hebreos, diciendo algunos, que despues de haver muerto a aquellos Ninos en 
sacrificio, los quemaban sobre las Aras, a imitacion, i exemplo de Abraham, que asi instituid ofrecer en sacrificio 4 
Dios su Hijo Isaac. Otros dicen, que encerrados, i metidos dentro de cierta concavidad, i hueco del Idolo, los 
quemaban en el mismo Idolo, encendido con el fuego, mientras los que estaban presentes al espectaculo hacian 
ruido, i estruendo, i tocaban los Tambores, 6 Atabales, para que no se oiesen las voces del Nifio. Otros (como son 
Rabi Salomon, i Kymhi) dicen, que los pasaban por medio de las llamas de dos fuegos, 6 hogueras, teniendolos de 
una parte el Padre del Nifio, i de la otra los Ministros del Sacrificio, hasta que el fuego le consumia: [de este 
parecer es Rabi Moises, Hijo de Naaman, enlos Comentarios del Pentateuco, aunque RabiSalomon Jarchi, i Moises 
Maimonides intentan disimular esta maldad, afirmando, que solo los pasaban por las llamas: i asi disculpa 4 Achaz 
Teodoreto.] Pero sea como mandaren, que lo que sabemos cierto es, que los Judios sacrificaban sus Hijos, como 
ia lo diximos arriba, con autoridad de la Sagrada Escritura, i de lo que David, i Hieremias dicen a este proposito. 

Aunque el sacrificar sus Hijos 4 los Dioses lo usaron otras Naciones de Gentiles (como se ha dicho) pero pues 
havemos referido esta perversa, i cruel Costumbre, que huvo entre los Judios, por qué no dirémos que de ellos, 
como de sus ascendientes la tomarian los Indios del Pert, que la guardaron al pie de la letra? Deas Historias, 
que tratan del Pert, antes que fuese conquistado por nuestros Espaiioles, he sacado, que sacrificaban los Indios sus 
Hijos, por negocios que importaban al Inga, como en enfermedades suias, para alcangarle salud. Tambien quando 
iba 4 la Guerra, por la Victoria : 1 quando le daban la Borla al nuevo Inga, que era la Insignia de Rei, como aca. el 
Cetro, 6 Corona: en esta solemnidad sacrificaban cantidad de docientos Nifios, de quatro 4 diez Aftios. Tambien 
quando moria Inga sacrificaban muchos Nifios, los quales dice Juan de Betancos, que havian de ser mil, porque asi 
lo ordend, i mandd Pachacuti Inga, antes que muriese. Estos Nifios havian de ser varones, i hembras, traidos de 
todo el Reino, i algunos de ellos Hijos de Caciques, i Principales, para que apareados macho con hembra, bien 
vestidos, i con el servicio, i baxilla de Oro, que como casados, i Gente que havia de ir 4 servir 4 su Rei, i Sefior, 
havian menester, fuesen enterrados en las partes donde el Inga huviese estado de asiento, hechando tambien algunos 
de ellos en la Mar. A estas partes, i lugares los llevaban cada par por si, macho, i hembra, con mucha veneracion 
en unas Andas, para ser de esta suerte ofrecidos en sacrificio por su Rei, i Sefior; 1a este sacrificio llamaban Capac 
Cocha, que quiere decir, sacrificio solemne. Gomara dice, que sacrificaban Nifios los Indios del Nuevo Reino de 
Granada: [i los mismos sacrificios, que entre los Judios, hallo Benjamin de Tudela entre los Indios: Asiaticos de la 
Isla de Chenaraga, 6 Chingara. | 

De lo que refiere la Divina Escritura en el quarto Libro de los Reies, Capitulo 17. consta, quan grandes 
Agoreros, i Supersticiosos eran los Judios, i particularmente la Gente de los diez Tribus: 4 lo qual eran mui dados 
los Indios (4 lo que entiendo) mas que ninguna Nacion, como se puede vér en el Catecismo de los Indios, que 
arriba citamos. [Los Judios eran tan mentirosos, que dice Andrés Gail ser proprio de ellos engafiar : aunque Dios 

56 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

les havia mandado decir verdad, tantas veces ; i los Indios mienten tanto, qué nada se puede creer de lo que dicen, 
como queda dicho, i trae Herrera. Los Judios eran inconstantes, i ligeros: i nada tenian los Indios en que mas se 
les pareciesen. Los Judios eran ruines, i en extremo grado vengativos: i en una, i en otra calidad no hacian ventaja 
3 los Indios: ni tampoco en ser crueles con los vencidos ; lo qual prueba de los Judios, Beierlinck, i de los Indios 
Garcilaso, que dice: Dzos nos libre del furor de los Indios, como queda 1a referido. Hortensio dice, que los Judios 
son invencioneros, i noveleros, i no ai Nacion que exceda 4 los Indios en esto, como afirma Herrera, que en 
diferentes partes de su Historia asegura tambien ser holgaganes, peregosos, sortilegos, sucios, embaidores, reboltosos 
incorregibles, i viciosisimos, sefias todas de Judios, 4 quien, como se va probando, deben su Origen. 

Los Indios de Iucatan ahogaban en un Pogo los Perros que criaban para su regalo (i llamaban Tzomes) lo qual 
nota de abuso Judaico, prohibido por San Pablo, el Doctor Pedro Sanchez de Aguilar, 

Entre los Judios eran mui frequentes los Bafios: i entre los Indios havia pocos que no los usasen, i con tanta 
barbaridad algunos, que se mataban con ellos, segun nota Herrera: i aunque Torquemada dice, que esta no es 
Ceremonia Judaica, tienen por cierto algunos, que de los Judios los tomaran las otras Naciones: 1 de ellos, segun 
Dionisio Cartusiano, el malvado Mahoma puso en su Alcoran, lo que anteriormente usaban los Indios. La 
veneracion con que los Indios se acercaban 4 los Templos, descalcandose, no solo para ‘entrar, sino cien pasos antes 
de llegar 4 ellos, como Garcilaso advierte, parece derivada de los Judios, que celebraban descalgos las Funciones 
sagradas : i tambien lo aplicd Mahoma 4 los Suios, los quales no pueden entrar en las Mezquitas calgados. Tambien 
entre los Judios era gran ignominia rapar el cabello, i entre los Indios era la maior afrenta: i entre las Gentes fue 
sefial de esclavitud, segun S. Cirilo, i otros: por esto domada Africa dijo Propertio : 

Testor maiorum cineres tibi, Roma, colendos, 

Quorum sub Titulis Africa tonsa iacet. 

Y Claudiano : 

Militet ut nostris detonsa Sicambria signis. 

Y Lucano: 

Et nunc ¢onse Ligur. 
Y al contrario fue obstentacion de libertad criar el cabello proprio entre los Griegos, Franceses, Godos, i otras 
Naciones, i puede ser tuviese este Origen cuidar tanto en algunas partes los Indios de él, como dice Lorengo 
Beierlinck. . 

Bien notorio es, como entre las penas, i tormentos que tenian los Judios para castigar los malhechores, era 
muerte de Cruz: la qual era tan ordinaria, i comun en delitos graves, que quando sentenciaban 4 uno a muerte, 6 la 
Divina Escritura dice, el que hiciere tal, 6 tal pecado, muera por ello, se entiende muerte de Cruz: aunque es verdad 
que tenian otros dos generos de muerte, que eran apedrear, i quemar. 

En la Historia del Pert se dice, que en una Provincia, que esta debajo de la Equinocial, ien las faldas de ella 
havia muchos Templos, en algunos de los quales, especialmente en los Pueblos que llaman de Passao, tenian en todos 
los Pilares de ellos Hombres, i Nifios crucificados, ilos cuerpos tan bien curados, que no olian mal. 

Seccion V. 

De un Viage que hicieron los Indios Mexicanos, semejante al del Pueblo Israelitico. 

De la Historia Mexicana, i lo que refieren el P. Acosta, 1 Fr. Augustin Davila, Arcobispo de Santo Domingo, . 
consta, como los de aquesta Nacion tuvieron otro Viage, i Peregrinacion, semejante al que tuvieron los Hijos de 
Israel ; [i tanto, que no falta quien diga haverle fingido los Indios, haviendo oido este.] Porque se dice, que esta 
Gente Mexicana (que fueron los que aportaron 4 Nueva-Espafia, de la septima Cueva, 6 Linage) salid de las 
Provincias Aztlan, i Theuculhuacan, por mandado del Idolo, llamado Vitzilopuztli, 6 por mejor decir, de el 
Demonio, que estaba en este Idolo, 4 “quien ellos adoraban por Dios. ste, pues, les mando salir de su Tierra, 
prometiendoles, que los haria Principes, i Seflores de todas las Provincias, que havian poblado las otras seis 
Naciones, que antes de ellos havian salido: que les daria Tierra mui abundante, mucho Oro, Plata, Piedras 
preciosas, Plumas, i Mantas ricas. Con esto salieron, llevando 4 su Idolo metido en una Arca de Juncos, la qual 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. OF, 

Nevaban quatro Sacerdotes Principales, con quien él comunicaba, i decia en secreto los sucesos de su camino, 
avisandoles lo que les havia de suceder, dandoles Leies, i ensefiandoles Ritos, i Ceremonias, i Sacrificios, haciendo 
que del Cielo loviese Pan, i sacando de el Pedernal Aguas para que bebiesen, i otras maravillas, semejantes a las 
que Dios hico en el Pueblo Israelitico. No se movian un punto, sin parecer, ni mandato de este Idolo: quando 
havian de caminar, i quando parar, i donde él lo decia, i ellos puntualmente obedecian. Lo primero que hacian, 
donde quiera que paraban, era edificar Casa para su falso Dios, i ponianle siempre enmedio del Real que asentaban, 
puesta el Arca siempre sobre un Altar, hecho al mismo modo que le usa la Iglesia Christiana. Hecho esto, hacian 
su sementera de Pan, i de las demas Legumbres que usaban; pero estaban tan puestos en obedecer a su Dios, que si 
él tenia por bien que se cogiese, lo cogian: i si no, en mandandoles alcar su Real, alli se quedaba todo para semilla, 
i sustento de los viejos, i enfermos, i Gente cansada, que iban, dejando de proposito, donde quiera que poblaban, 
pretendiendo con esto, que toda la Tierra quedase poblada de su Nacion. 

Quien no dira que parece esta salida, i peregrinacion de los Mexicanos, 4 la salida de Egypto, i camino que 
hicieron los Hijos de Israel? Pues aquellos, como estos fueron amonestados a salir, i buscar Tierra de Promision : 
i los unos, i los otros llevaban por Guia 4 su Dios, i consultaban el Arca, le hacian Tabernaculo : i asi les avisaba, i 
daba Leies, i Ceremonias, i asi los unos, como los otros, gastaron gran numero de Afios en llegar a la Tierra 

_prometida: que en esto, i en otras muchas cosas ai semejanca de lo que las Historias de los Mexicanos refieren, 3 
lo que la Divina Escritura cuenta de los Israelitas, i sin duda es ello asi. No quiero ser mas largo en contar mas 
Costumbres, i cosas de la inclinacion, i natural de los Indios, remitiendome en esto 4 lo que otros Autores han 
escrito : demas, de que lo que he referido es 4 nuestro proposito, dejando lo que no lo es, para otro lugar que alli lo 
sera. Solo digo, que con todo lo que he dicho, i referido en estos fundamentos, i lo que despues diré en la tercera 
objeccion de esta Opinion, havrémos probado, no scientifica, sino probablemente, que nuestros Indios proceden de 
los Hebreos, particularmente de aquellos diez Tribus, que se perdieron, de quien Esdras hace mencion. 

Capituto VY. 

De la segunda objeccion contra la quinta Opmion, donde se trata de la invencion de las Letras. 

La segunda objeccion, que Yo hallo, es, que si los Indios descendieran de Hebreos, usaran de Letras, como ellos las 
usaron, i fueron mui curiosos en ellas: i aun segun opinion de algunos, los primeros inventores. 

A esta objeccion respondo, que la misma duda, i dificultad se puede poner de qualquiera Nacion de que ellos 
procedan, i de qualquiera de las tres Partes del Mundo, Europa, Asia, i Africa, que partiesen los primeros Pobla- 
dores a las Indias, de do supusimos al principio que havian de salir, ora fuese este Viage por Mar, ora por Tierra, 
ora con determinacion propria, ora por la Mar, con fuerca de Vientos, i Tormentas, ora con peligros, i echados de 
otros, por Tierra; porque la invencion de las Letras es mui antigua, que segun opinion de algunos, fue Adam el 
que las inventé, i ensefié 4 sus Hijos, i Nietos. Fundanse estos Autores, en lo que dice Diodoro Siculo, que los 
Caldeos, en cuia Tierra fue Babilonia la Cabeca, fueron grandes Astrologos, i que tuvieron Letras mas antiguas 
que el Grande Alexandro, por quarenta i tres mil Afios, que siendo menstruales (como ensefia Xenofonte). resultan 
cerca de tres mil i seiscientos i treinta 1 quatro de los Solares: los quales contados, retrocediendo con ellos, i bol- 
viendo al tiempo pasado, llegarémos al de Adam. El Tostado cree, que Adam uso de Letras, i escrivid algunas 
cosas, que despues con el Diluvio perecieron, [i le sigue el erudito Varon D. Gabriel Alvarez Pellicer, i otros; i 
- Platon no admite otro inventor, que 4 Dios, haciendo incapaces 4 los Ingenios Humanos de discurrir tan rara, i tan 
util sutileca, que parece echo el sello @ todas las invenciones, como dice Galileo ; i Matute afirma, que se debid a 
los Angeles.] Plinio, por no saber quien fue el inventor de las Letras Asirias, 6 Fenicias, dice que son eternas, 6 
sempiternas. Josepho dice, que los Hijos de Seth inventaron las Letras. Suidas afirma, que el mismo Seth las 
inventO. Genebrardo, i el Coronista Honorio, i Pedro Comestor, tienen por mui cierto, que Enoch las inventé. 
Y fundanse estos Autores en lo que Judas Tadeo dice en su Epistola Canonica de Enoch, que profeticd el Diluvio, i 
el fin del Mundo ; infiriendo de aqui, que ‘esta profecia la dejaria escrita, como lo sienten.|S. Geronimo, S. Au- 
gustin, Origenes, Tertuliano, Beda, i otros muchos, entre los quales Annio sobre Beroso, aplica 2 Enoch la Escri- 
tura’ que refiere Josepho de la profecia de Adam, que escrivieron los hijos de Seth en dos Colunas, una de Ladrillo, 

Q 

58 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

i otra de Piedra; i tiene Annio mucha razon, porque haviendo dicho Josepho, que Adam profetizé el Diluvo, i el 
fin del Mundo; i que los Hijos de Seth lo escrivieron en dos Colunas; i luego, citando Judas Tadeo esta profecia 
de Enoch, claramente se colige, que Enoch fue el que la escrivid: 1 por el consiguiente, desde su tiempo ai Letras 
en el Mundo, las quales quedaron en Noé por sucesion; i asi vinieron de mano en mano al Pueblo Israelitico: i 
Heber las supo, i las ensefid; i dame animo a creer, que tienen esta antigiiedad. Beroso refiere, que en tiempo 
de Nod, antes que se fabricase el Arca, huvo muchos que predicaban el Diluvio, que havia de venir, con que todo 
el Mundo havia de perecer, i que esto lo dejaron escrito en Piedras. “ Dice mas Beroso, que Noé dejé escrito en 
una Piedra lo que sucedid en el Diluvio, para memoria de sus Descendientes. De donde se infiere la antigiiedad de 
las Letras, i como todos tuvieron noticia de ellas, por la que los Hijos de Noé darian en las Partes que poblaron, que 
(como arriba diximos) fueron las Partes del Mundo Viejo, Asia, Africa, i Europa. Y aunque se lee de algunas 
Naciones, que usaron de Geroglificos, como los Egypcios, i de Pinturas, como los Cartagineses ; pero Yo entiendo, 
que tenian tambien Letras, 6 Caractéres para su comunicacion, i trato. A lo menos de los Egypcios, asi lo siente 
Pierio; ide los Cartagineses tampoco ai duda, antes la ai, si dejaron de usar de Letras, por usar de Pinturas, 6 
si juntamente con las Letras usaron tambien de Pinturas; porque para creer que usaron de Letras, ai muchos 
Testigos: i para las Pinturas, no he hallado mas de Alexio Vanegas ; con cuia autoridad hicimos un fundamento 
probable para la quarta Opinion (fuera de lo que se dira adelante.) Y siendo esto asi, concluio con lo que en esta 
solucion comencé: gue de qualquiera Parte, i Nacion que procedan, 1 vengan los Indios, havian de usar de Letras ; 
las quales he hallado que tuvieron los primeros Pobladores de Indias ; porque Pedro de Cieca refiere, como era fama 
en su tiempo, que en unos Edificios de Vinaque, de que arriba hicimos mencion, se hallo una Losa con algunas 
Letras; i en las Opiniones que se siguen, direémos como en otras Partes del Pert, i de Nueva-Espafia se hallaron 
Letras en Piedras, i Pilares. Y asi me parece, que como los Griegos en mucho tiempo no tuvieron Letras (segun 
Platon, i otros Autores refieren) por aquel gran Diluvio de Deucalion, en el qual perecid toda la Grecia, con las 
buenas Artes, [aunque los Eretrios, que Dario llevd junto 4 Babilonia, mucho tiempo despues conservaban Lengua, 
i Letras, 500 Afios antes que Apolonio pasase por alli:] asi los Indios las perdieron por su larga peregrinacion, i 
viage tan prolijo, i trabajoso, 6 por algun Diluvio, Peste, 6 Guerras; como ordinariamente todas las buenas Artes 
han perecido, 6 por Diluvios, 6 Pestilencias, 6 Guerras. De nuestra Espaha sabemos, que se perdieron en ella las 
Letras con la venida de los Godos : en cuio tiempo resucitaron con harto trabajo, hasta la destruicion, que por ella 
vino en tiempo del Rei D. Rodrigo. Y lo mismo acontecid quando entraron los Moros en Espafia ; pero en lugar 
de Letras usaron los del Pert de unos Ramales, 6 Cuerdas, con muchos nudos de diversas colores ; i los de Nueva- 
Espafia, de Pinturas, como mas largamente lo referimos en la quarta Opinion. Tertuliano Yama Caldeas & las 
Antiguas Letras: conviene a saber, 4 las Pinturas, i Geroglificos de los Egypcios. Y (como dice Covarrubias en 
sus Emblemas Morales) tiene ragon, por haverlas aprendido de los Caldeos, i estos de los antiguos Hebreos. Luego 
segun esto, no es maravilla que los Indios usasen de Pinturas, que son como Geroglificos, en lugar de Letras, pues 
descienden de Hebreos, segun esta quinta Opinion. 

Carrruto VI. 
De la tercera objeccion, donde se refieren Ritos, 1 Ceremonias, semejantes a las de los Hebreos. 

La tercera objeccion, que algunos ponen, es, que silos Indios fueran descendientes de aquellos diez Tribus de los 
Hebreos, no dejaran caer de todo punto su Lei, Ritos, i Ceremonias, en que ellos siempre fueron mui puntuales, i 
observantes. " 

A esto respondo, que (como en otra parte dixe) la Gente de los diez Tribus era mui inclinada al mal, é idolatria, 
i pasando por donde havia‘tantas Naciones de Gentiles, i Idolatras, con quien necesariamente havian de comunicar, 
i tratar, ide quien havian de ser hospedados, es cosa Ilana, que en tan grande ocasion se les pegaria algo, i aun 
mucho, como se les pegd:en Egypto; porque si tratando con la demas Gente de el Pueblo escogido de Dios, con 
mui pequefia, i leve ocasion fueron Idolatras, qué maravilla es, que lo fuesen ‘donde todos lo eran, i por el consi- 
guiente perdiesen su Lei, i Ceremonias, como nos consta que han hecho en Inglaterra, Alemania, i otras Partes, 
cuios moradores fueron observantisimos de la Christiana Religion, i Lei. Evangelica, i por seguir su torpe apetito, 
i libertad, la han perdido, i dejado caer, de tal manera que no tienen rastro de Christianos ? (no trato de los Cato- 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 59 

licos que entre ellos ai) de lo qual puedo ser Yo testigo, porque vi, i oi que hicieron en Cartagena de las Indias, en 
Nombre de Dios, i en otros Puertos de las Indias, que han tomado, tan abominables cosas, i tan grande estrago en 
las Imagenes, i Templos, que por la reverencia que se les debe, no quiero referirlas aqui, sino sentirlas, i pedir 
a Dios castigo de ellas. En lo qual son estos Ingleses peores que Hereges, porque el Herege confiesa algo de lo que 
cree la Santa Madre Iglesia Catolica, i esto lo mezcla con errores, i heregias ; pero esta maldita canalla de Ingleses 
no muestran tener cosa alguna de Catolicos, i Christianos, i asi para no tener este nombre, no se bautican; de los 
quales vi Yo algunos en Panama. Y conoci un Personage grave de la misma Nacion, que haviendo desembocado 
por el Estrecho de Magallanes, i corrido la costa del Mar del Sur, fue preso de Don Beltrin de la Cueva, Cufiado 
de el Marques de Caitete, que a la sacon era Virrei en el Peri, se halld, i se supo por su misma confesion, que no 
era hauticado. Pero siendo’informado, instruido, i catequicado en la Fé Catolica, se bauticd 4 su peticion, i fue su 
Padrino el sobredicho D. Beltran de la Cueva. Asi que no es dificultoso de persuadir dejasen caer los Hebreos de 
los diez Tribus su Lei, i Ceremonias, metidos en tan grandes ocasiones, 6 por vivir 4 sus anchuras, i no estar liga- 
dos, i atados con tantos Preceptos, como havia en la Vieja Lei. Con todo eso, inquiriendo, i examinando esto, 
con mucho cuidado, he hallado, que guardaron los Indios algunas Ceremonias, i Preceptos de la Lei antigua, que 
guardaban los Hebreos. 

Quanto lo primero, en todos los Reinos, i Provincias de los Reinos Occidentales, tenian Sacerdotes dedicados 
al culto de sus Dioses, i ministerio de los Templos. Y es cosa de notar, que en tanta diversidad de Reinos, i dife- 
rencia de Lenguas, de Ceremonias, de Ritos, ide Leies, ninguno de ellos dejé de tener Sacerdotes. Y si no me 
engano, no huvo entre los Gentiles Nacion que tan observante fuese como los Indios, en lo qual parecen bien A los 
Judios, i en la autoridad, i sucesion del Pontificado. 

En Nueva-Espafia havia un sumo Sacerdote, i otros menores, i eran ungidos [como los de los Judios] con cierto 
licor, llamado Ulli, 6 Olei, mezclado con la sangre de los Nifios, gue circuncidaban, i traian el cabello largo, como 
los Nacareos. 

Bien manifiesto es en el Levitico, i Deuteronomio, quan usado era entre los Hebreos ofrecer Animales en sacri- 
ficio, ¢ encensar el Altar, lo qual hacian los Indios al pie de la letra, aunque erraban en el objecto, pues no conocian 
al verdadero Dios, 4 lo menos clara, i distintamente, como le conocian los Judios ; pero al fin, ia que havian per- 
dido este conocimiento distinto, i claro, haviales quedado esta Ceremonia de tener Sacerdotes, de ofrecer Animales, 
i de incensar el Altar donde tenian sus Idolos; de lo qual, i de lo que en este Capitulo dixeremos, hallara el curioso 
Lector muchos exemplos en el discurso de mi Monarquia, i en otros Libros, que tratan de las Leies, Idolatrias, 1 
Ceremonias, que tenian estos Indios. Y porque procedamos con claridad, quiero referir las que guardaban los 
Judios, comencando desde el Exodo, para que confiriendolas con las que guardaban los Indios, se vea como eran 

algunas mui proprias, i otras mui semejantes. 

Seccron I. 

De algunas Leies, que guardaban los Indios, semejantes a las de los Hebreos. 

CosrumpreE, i Lei era de los Judios celebrar la Fiesta, i Pasqua del Cordero, quando la Luna estaba Ilena, como 
parece en el Exodo, adonde se dice, que mando Dios 4 Moises, i 4 Aaron, estando en Tierra de Egypto, que diesen 
orden, como los del Pueblo de Israel celebrasen la Pasqua a los catorce Dias de la Luna, en la Noche: i determi- 
nando el Sefor en el Levitico 4 Moises el Dia, i Mes en que se havia de hacer esta Fiesta, mandé que fuese en el 
Mes primero, que es Marco, 4 los catorce de la Luna en la tarde, que es quando esta llena, i lo mismo bolvid & 
repetir en el Monte Sinay. 

Los Indios del Pert celebraban por mandato, i Lei de Inga Yupanqui una Fiesta 4 las Aguas en su decimo Mes, 
que es Septiembre, quando la Luna estaba llena. Los Indios de Tlascala, de Cholula, i otras Provincias Comarcanas 
hacian tambien esta Fiesta, que era la maior de todo el Afio, la qual celebraban en su Mes, que corresponde a 
nuestro Marco, antes de la qual aiunaban, i hacian grande penitencia. En estas mismas Provincias hacian Fiestas 
4 los tres Dioses del Agua, en wna de las quales asaeteaban un Hombre puesto en una Cruz, i en otra acaflavereaban 

4 otro en una Cruz baja. 
[Los Judios celebraban las Neomenias el primer Dia de la Luna ; i como dice Torquemada: .Sz bien se considera 

60 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

esta costumbre, parece hurtada de los Hebreos, de los quales dice Santo Tomas, que ordenaron las NNeomenias en toaos 
los principios de los Meses, en memoria de la conservacion, 2 governacion de todas las cosas, la qual conservacion es 
la que nuestros Indios pedian en las suias en todos los princypos de los Meses. | 

En cl Genesis mando Dios 4 Abraham, que se circuncidasen los Ninos, de ocho Dias nacidos; i despues mando 
4 Josue, que circuncidase los Hijos de Israel, que havian nacido en el Desierto, los quales, por el largo camino, 
i desierto de quarenta Afios no se havian circuncidado. 

Esta Lei guardaban los Indios en algunas partes, como fue en Iucatan, i en la Isla de Acuzamil, donde se car- 
cuncidaban por Religion, i los Indios Totones de la Nueva-Espaia, t los Mexicanos hactan lo proprio. 

Pero si contra esto nos arguiere alguno con lo que dice Herodoto, que los Egypcios se circuncidaban antes de 
Abraham, i que estos, i los Colcos, que son Pueblos de Asia, cerca de Ponto, i los Etiopes, fueron los primeros 
entre todos los Hombres del Mundo, que usaron la circuncision, i que los Syros, i Fenices, que son en Palestina, 
lo aprendieron de los Egypcios: i que los otros Syros, que moraban cerca del Rio, llamado Termodon, i otro dicho 
Pantenio, Rios de Asia, entre Capadocia, i Ponto, i los Pueblos vecinos de aquellos Macrones, asi dichos, apren- 
dieron de los referidos la circuncision. Y finalmente, si nos dixeren, que solos aquellos siete generos de Gentes, 
que he nombrado, que son Colcos, Egypcios, Etiopes, Fenices, Syros de Palestina, 1 Syros de los Rios Termodon, 
i Pantenio, i sus vecinos los Macrones fueron los que usaron en el Mundo la circuncision, [i aun la usan los 
Etiopes, como en su Confesion de la Fé dice el Rei Claudio, para darse por descendientes de Abraham, segun Goes, 
i guardan el Sabado, ino comen Tocino, por lo qual los creid Feildio medio Judios.]| A Herodoto, i4los que 
alegaren lo referido, se responde, que sin duda los Hebreos fueron los primeros que la usaron, por mandado de 
Dios; de los quales, como de Gente mas antigua, la tomaron todos los que alli nombra Herodoto, 4 lo menos los 
Egypcios, i los Syrios, i de estos los demas, [aunque tarde, pues no la Ilevaron 4 Grecia, i Libia, bien que Ludolfo 
duda donde fue primero.] Tampoco es contra esto la circuncision de que usan los Moros, porque es cosa cierta, 
que Mahoma la tomé de los Judios. Y stendo esto asi, siguese, que tambien nuestros Indios la tomaron de los 
Hebreos, de quien vamos probando que proceden; [i aun se puede presumir, que las Navajas, i Cuchillos de 
Piedra, que tenian los Indios, segun Torquemada, Maiolo, i Salmuth, tuvieron origen de las que usaban los Judios 
en la circuncision, como dice Bernal Diaz del Castillo, i otras acciones, como consta del Exodo, i Josue. | 

Seccron II. 

Donde se prosiguen las Leies de los Hebreos, « Indios. 

En el Levitico mandd Dios 4 Moises, que huviese fuego siempre en el Altar, el qual ardiese de Noche, i de Dia, i 
no faltase. 

Los Indios Mexicanos, i los Totones, 6 Totonacas, que son en Nueva-Espaiia, guardaban esto al pie de la letra; 
ilo mismo hacian los Indios del Pert en los Templos del Sol. 

En el mismo Levitico mandd Dios 4 Moises, que la Muger recien parida no entrase en el Templo, hasta que 
estuviese purificada de la sangre menstrual. 

Los Indios de la Provincia de Nicaragua guardaban en alguna manera esta Lei, porque las Mugeres, quando 
estaban con su costumbre, no podian entrar en el Templo. 

Item, en el Levitico mandaba Dios 4 los Hebreos, que la Muger, quando estuviese con su costumbre, estuviese 
apartada siete Dias de su Marido, 1 que en este tiempo no durmiese con ella su Marido, ni tocase 4 la cama donde 
ella dormia, ni donde se sentaba. 

Los Indios de la Isla Espafiola tenian por pecado dormir con su Muger, estando recien parida, icriando. Y los 

* Gomara describing the customs of the Indians of Rio de Palmas, a country situated to the North-East of Mexico, says, “ No duermen con 
prefiadas, ni con paridas hasta que pasen dos afios. Dexan las mugeres que son esteriles, y casan con otras.” ‘ Nadie come lo que guisan las 
mugeres con su camisa, quando cuezen sus vinos derraman los vasos, pasando cerca la muger, si no estan atapados.” These customs all 
resemble the enactments of the Mosaic law, and if any doubt is entertained about the first, the following passage from Clemens Alexandrinus, an 
ancient Father of the Church, willremove it, “6 Mwoys days twv zynuwy rovs avdpas.” ‘This prohibition is not found in the Pentateuch as it 
has been transmitted to us, and since we must not accuse one of the Christian Fathers of falsifying the words of Moses, we must suppose that he 
refers to a portion of the sacred text which has been lost or to oral tradition which the Jews declare was delivered by God to Moses from Mount — 
Sinai, at the same time that he gave them the written law. 

“FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 61 

Indios del Rio de Palmas, que cae treinta Leguas sobre Panuco, acia el Norte, i los de toda la Costa, hasta la 
Florida, no dormian con sus Mugeres, quando estaban prefiadas, 6 paridas ; 1 los mismos Indios del Rio de Palmas 
no comian lo que tocaban sus Mugeres, quando estaban con su regla: i si pasaban cerca de los vasos, quando 
cocian la Chicha, que es su Vino, sino estaban tapados, los derramaban: en lo qual parece que guardaban la Lei 
referida. Pero los Indios del Darien, que es Provincia de la Costa del Nombre de Dios, hacian divorcio, 1 se apar- 
taban el Marido de la Muger, estando ella con su costumbre: en lo qual guardaban estos Indios de todo punto la 
sobredicha Lei. Tambien los Indios de la Provincia de Nicaragua guardaban esta Lei al pie de la Letra. 

Item, en el mismo Libro mandaba Dios, que no durmiese el varon con su Madre, ni la hembra con su Padre, 
ni el Padre con la hija, ni la Madre con el hijo, ni Hermano con Hermana, ora lo fuese de Padre, i Madre, ora de 
solo Padre, 6 de Madre: ni el Antenado con su Madrastra, ni el Padrastro con su Antenada. Y finalmente, paren- 
tesco de primero, i segundo grado de consanguinidad, era prohibido en la Lei antigua, i tenia pena de muerte. 

Los Indios dé la Isla Espafiola tenian por cierto, que havian de morir mala muerte, si dormian con Madre, Hiya, 
6 Hermana. Los de Nueva-Espafia ahorcaban a el que dormia con su Madre; i si el Padre se echaba con su Hiya, 
ahogaban 4 los dos con una soga; i el Hermano que Ilegaba 4 su Hermana, que fuese de Padre, i Madre, 6 de solo 
Padre, 6 Madre, tenia pena de muerte: i esta era ahogada, dandola Garrote: lo qual era entre ellos mui detestable ; 
Y si alguno era convencido, que havia llegado 4 su Madrastra deshonestamente, morian ambos. Un Rei de Tezcuco 
mando matar en veces quatro de sus Hijos, porque fueron convencidos, que se echaron con sus Madrastras. Si el 
Padrastro Ilegaba 4 su Antenada, morian ambos 4 dos por ello: i alos que dormian con las Suegras, ahorcaban. 
A los Indios del Pert era prohibido por Lei, casarse Hermano con Hermana, sino era el mismo Rei, 4 quien era 
permitido. Y tambien entiendo, que les era prohibido dormir con qualquiera Parienta, 6 Pariente, dentro de 
primero grado de consanguinidad, i afinidad, [aunque en otras partes se casaban con Madres, i Hermanas, como 
dice el P. Victoria:] de la misma manera sabemos que era prohibido 4 los de Nueva-Espafia, i 4 los de la Espaiiola. 
Pues los del Pert no eran governados por Reies mas barbaros, ni de menos entendimiento, i ragon que los demas. 
En el Nuevo Reino de Granada tenian los Indios de Bogota licencia para tener quantas Mugeres quisiesen, con tal, 
que no fuesen Parientas. Y aunque es verdad, que la misma naturalega, i la ragon abominan semejante pecado, i 
asi diran algunos, que estos Indios guardaban la Lei Natural en esto de no llegar 4 Parientas, como otros muchos 
Gentiles, i Barbaros la guardaron. Pero a esto digo, que hallo 4 nuestros Indios mui sequaces de la Lei antigua, 
acerca de muchas cosas que en ella se mandaban. De donde se colige, que la Lei que ellos guardaban, acerca del 
aiuntamiento deshonesto entre los Parientes dentro de primero grado de consanguinidad, i afinidad, era la que Dios 
puso a los Hebreos, que no contradice 4 la Natural. 

Item, en el mismo Levitico era Lei, que muriese el que cometia el pecado nefando. 

Los Indios de la Nueva-Espafia guardaban esta Lei, sin faltar un punto, i la executaban con grande rigor ; i el 
proprio castigo hacian en la Muger que se echaba con otra, por ser tambien contra Naturaleca. 

Seccion III. 

De otras Leies de el Levitico, que guardaron los Indios. 

Irem, en el Levitico mandaba Dios, que el que durmiese con alguna Esclava, fuesen ambos a dos acotados. 

Los Indios de Nueva-Espafia tenian esta Lei en alguna manera: porque el que dormia con alguna Esclava, antes 
de tener edad para conocer varon, era Esclavo: i el que legaba deshonestamente 4 alguna Esclava agena, i acon- 
tecia morir, estando prefiada, quedaba hecho Esclavo. Los Indios de Guatemala, si uno Ilegaba 4 Esclava agena, 
la pena era como pecuniaria. 

En el mismo Levitico, i en el Deuteronomio havia una Lei, que muriese la Muger comprehendida en adulterio ; 
i aunque alli no pone qué genero de muerte havia de ser; pero los Judios, de cierta consequencia, i por tradicion 
apedreaban a la Adultera en la Puerta de la Ciudad. Porque en el Deuteronomio mandaba Dios, que fuese muerto 
el Adultero, i Adultera. Y luego afiade : St alguno recibiere por Esposa alguna Doncella, i hallandola alguno en 
la Ciudad, se echare con ella, sacaras al uno, i al otro ula Puerta de la Ciudad, de donde es el Adultero, % seran 
apedreados. De aquestas palabras coligieron los Judios, que se havia de dar el mismo genero de muerte al Adultero, 
i Adultera. Y que la guardaron asi los Hebreos, parece claro, i manifiesto en Daniel, adonde se dice, como la 

R 

62 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

mocente Susana, infamada de aquellos Viejos verdes, fue llevada como Adultera fuera de la Ciudad para ser ape- 
dreada. Y esta misma Lei alegaron los Judios 4 Christo Nuestro Sefior, como parece por San Juan, quando ha- 
viendo comprehendido en Adulterio 4 una Muger, se la pusieron delante. . 

Los Indios del Peri tenian esta misma Lei, como consta de las que instituis Pachacuti Inga, de quien Yo hago 
mencion en mi Monarguca. Y los Indios de la Nacion Mexicana, los de, Guatemala, i de’ otras Provincias de 
Nueva-Espafia castigaban con pena de muerte 4 los Adulteros, de los quales algunos en algunas Provincias eran 
apedreados, i en otras les ataban las manos, i pies, i tendidos en Tierra, les daban ‘con una piedra redonda, como las 
que agugan Cuchillos, en las sienes, de manera, que de el primer golpe les saltaban los sesos; 4 otros achocaban 
con unas Porras, 6 Palos gruesos. ; 

Item, en el Levitico mandaba Dios, que santificasen el Afio quinquagesimo, el qual era Afio del mou: porque 
en él se concedian muchas cosas 4 los Judios. 

Los Indios de Nueva-Espafia, fuera de otras Fiestas, que hacian entre Afio, tenian una solemnisima de cinquenta 
en cinquenta i dos Afios, la qual se celebraba el Dia ultimo de la postrera Semana en la Ciudad de Mexico, i como 
en Metropoli de la Provincia era aqni mas solemne, que en las demas. Y es de notar, que el Afio entre estos Indios 
era de treciéntos i sesenta Dias, de manera que en cada Afio faltaban cinco Dias, i mas los intercalares, que vienen 
a hacer cerca de un Afto, el qual, quitado de los cinquenta i dos, quedan cinquenta i uno, poco mas, 6 menos, 1 i asi 
poco se diferenciaban de los Hebreos en el Afto del Jubileo. 

Seccion IV. 
Donde se concluien las Leies del Levitico, 7 Deuteronomo, que guardaban los Indios. 

En el Deuteronomio mando Dios 4 Moises, que no anduviese la Muger en habito de Varon, ni el Varon en habito 
de Muger; los quales dice el Texto Sagrado, que son abominables acerca de Dios. 

En Nueva-Espaiia tenian los Indios esta misma Lei, aunque con mas rigor, porque ahorcaban a los que andaban 
vestidos de esta manera. 

En este mismo Libro mando Dios 4 Moises, que el Hombre que despues de casado hallase alguna fealdad en su 
Muger, le diese libelo de repudio. 

Los Indios de la Nacion Mexicana dejaban, i desamparaban sus Mugeres, i las repudiaban, peredl se les pro- 
baba que eran malas, sucias, 6 esteriles. Los de la Provincia de Cumana repudiaban sus Mugeres, quando cometian 
adulterio. Lo proprio hacian los Indios de la Provincia de Nicaragua en Nueva-Espajfia ; [i lo mismo usaron los 
antiquisimos Gentiles, de quien los Judios havian tomado la costumbre, poeda por Dios a su obstinacion, para 
evitar dejasen la Lei con la Muger aborrecida. | 

En el mismo Deuteronomio havia una Lei, que si la viuda, cuio Marido era muerto, no havia Lande Hyjos de el, 
se casase con ella el Hermano de su Marido, 6 el Pariente mas cercano ; [i antes de el Deuteronomio parece se 
guardaba lo mismo algunas veces, como se refiere en el Genesis. | 

Los Indios del Pert guardaban esta Lei, porque Pachacuti Inga, que la instituid, mandaba, que la Muger viuda 
se casase con el Pariente mas cercano de su primer Marido. 

Item, los Indios de Nueva-Espafia, quando alguno moria, i dejaba Mugeres, el Hermano estaba obligado a 
tenerlas, i casarse con ellas. Y en Guatemala se casaba la viuda con su Cufiado; i si no lo havia, con el Pariente 
mas cercano al difunto. 

En los Numeros mandaba Dios, que ninguna Muger, a quien pertenecia la herencia paternal, casase con otro, 
que no fuese de su Tribu. 

Esto se guardaba en el Pert, porque como he dicho otras veces, havia entre ellos muchas Familias, cuia Cabeca, 
i Sefior se llamaba Curaca : i el Indio, 6 India de una Familia, que ellos llaman Ayllu, no se podia casar con otra, 
6 otro de otra Familia. Tambien los Indios del Darien no se casaban con Estrangeras. 

. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 63 

Seccron V. 
Como los Indios guardaron los Preceptos del Decalogo. 

Ya que havemos referido las Leies, i Preceptos, que mandaba Dios guardar 4 los Hebreos, con los quales tienen 
grande semejang¢a los de los Indios, i aun algunos son los mismos: quiero referir aqui, como guardaba esta Gente 
Indiana los Preceptos del Decalogo, que no causara poca admiracion, [aunque se consideren del Derecho Natural, ] 
ni menos sera pequefio argumento para nuestra Opinion. Rebolviendo los Memoriales que tengo, i leiendo los 
Libros, que tratan de las Costumbres, i Leies de los Indios, he hallado, que en muchas Provincias de Indias guar- 
daban la Lei, i Preceptos del Decalogo. Y ia que en algunas partes no los guardasen todos, 4 lo menos guardaban 
algunos, 6 los mas: i esto con mas observancia en unas Proyvincias, que en otras. 

Quanto al primer Precepto, que prohibe la Idolatria, no ai que dudar, sino que erraban, porque tenian muchos 
Dioses, no haviendo mas que uno, que sea verdadero Dios, sumamente bueno, todo poderoso, Criador de Cielo, i 
Tierra. Bien es verdad, que reconocian, i sabian que havia un Dios mejor que los demas, al qual buscaban en 
confuso, con alguna luz natural, de la que el Criador estampd en las Criaturas racionales, conforme lo que dice 
David: Sellastenos, Senor, con la luz, % conocimiento de tu Rostro. Sino que esta luz la tenian id tan ofuscada, 
que casi no les alumbraba: i asi no atinaban con el que era verdadero Dios. Semejantes eran estos Indios a los 
Gentiles, que tenian en Atenas un Dios no conocido, al qual adoraban en Altar particular, intitulado : Ignoto Deo. 
Al Dios no conocido. A quien declard, i did a conocer el Apostol S. Pablo, como consta en los Actos de los 
Apostoles. En Nueva-Espafia adoraban con maior adoracion al Idolo llamado Vitzilipuztli, al qual toda la Nacion 
Mexicana lamaba, E/ todo poderoso, 2 Senor de lo criado: i como 4 tal, le hicieron el mas rico, i sumptuoso Templo, 
de maior altura, mas hermoso, i de mas galano Edificio: cuio Sitio, 1 Fortaleca se puede conjeturar por las ruinas 
que de él han quedado en medio de la Ciudad de Mexico. Y en el Pert confesaban, que havia un Criador, i Hace- 
dor de el Mundo, al qual llamaban Viracocha, i le ponian Titulo, 1 Renombre de Gran Magestad, i Excelencia, 
como Pachacama, © Pachayachachic, que el uno quiere decir, Hacedor del Mundo ; i el otro, Sabidor, 2 que entiende 
el Mundo. Tambien le daban por Renombre Usapu, que quiere decir, Admrable: i otros semejantes, que eran 
como Atributos. Pero como quiera que tenian otros muchos Dioses, no podemos decir, que guardaban en todo, i 
por todo el primer Precepto, que no solo manda honrar, i servir 4 Dios, sino tambien prohibe la Idolatria, i ado- 
racion de otros Idolos, i Dioses. Tenian por cosa perniciosa los Indios de la Vera-Paz, ide otras Provincias de 
Nueva-Espafia 4 los Brujos, i Hechiceros, que hacian dafio con sus embustes, 4 los quales ahorcaban, 6 daban 
garrote, principalmente quando mataban, 6 hechicaban algun Sefior, haciendole impotente, 6 causandole alguna 
enfermedad. 

Quanto al segundo Precepto, que es no jurar, no he hallado que tuviesen alguna pena, sino es que quando los 
cogian en mentira, 6 levantaban algun testimonio, i por ventura fue la causa, que no acostumbraban jurar viciosa- 
mente, 6 con mentira. 

Quanto al tercero Precepto de santificar el Sabado, tenian sus Fiestas en Dias sefialados, en los quales hacian 
grandes sacrificios, 2 se holgaban, particularmente en el Pert. Los Indios Totones, que son en Nueva-Espafia, 
estaban obligados a ir al Templo el Sabado, 4 la Ceremonia que alli se hacia, i sacrificio que ofrecian 4 sus Dioses. 

Quanto al quarto Precepto, que es honrar Padre, i Madre, guardabanlo con gran rigor: porque los Padres 
exortaban con grande diligencia 4 los Hijos, que honrasen al Padre, i & la Madre, i a los Reies, i maiores de la 
Tierra ; i a los que tenian sobervia contra los Reies, i Sefiores, 6 hacian alguna traicion, los ahorcaban, 6 daban 
otro genero de muerte. 

Quanto al quinto Precepto, que es no matar, ino hacer injuria al proximo, tambien lo guardaban: i la pena era de 
muerte. Y lo proprio se usaba con la Muger que mataba la Criatura en el vientre, icon quien la ajudaba, i con quien 
mataba con Hechicos, i Iervas 4 otro, i con el que fue complice del delito, i did la tal medicina, 6 por mejor decir, 
poncofa. En las Provincias donde no se usaba tener Esclayos, castigaban cruelmente al que vendia 4 otro por Esclavo, 
porque fuera de que moria por ello, le vendian los Hijos, i Muger: i de el precio que por ellos se daba, Ilevaba el 
Fisco, i Camara del Sefior cierta parte, i todo lo demas se gastaba en comida, i bebida con la Gente del Pueblo, como 
bienes de Concejo, i Comunidad. En algunas Provincias de Nueva-Espafia, como es én la Vera Paz, se guardaba 
lo que he referido del Esclavo, i tambien que quando rifiendo se herian, en siendo avisado el Cacique, i Sefior, por 

64 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

la queja que daban los Parientes del herido, embiaba al delinquente un hueso, 6 una hacha, para denotar que él 
havia de ser herido con aquellos instrumentos, pues havia hecho mal a otro. Entonces el malhechor embiaba 
rogadores, i daba sus escusas, para deshacer la culpa. Pero el Juez, 6 Sefior mostraba mucho rigor, de manera, 
que hasta sentenciarlo, nunca respondia bien: al cabo quedaba sentenciado 4 que diese cierta cantidad de Plumas 
ricas, 0 Mantas, 6 Cacao, lo qual era para el Fisco. En algunas Provincias, el que mataba 4 su Esclavo, 6 le 
heria, no tenia pena alguna, porque decian, que aquella era hacienda suia. Y qualquiera qué mataba al Esclavo 
ageno, moria por ello. Y si el Marido mataba 4 su Muger, 6 al contrario la Muger al. Marido, moria por ello. 

Seccion Uttimo. Donde se prosiguen las Leies de el Decalogo, que guardaron los Indios. 

Quanto al sexto Precepto de no fornicar, hallo, que en el Pert, 1 Nueva-Espafia castigaban la simple fornicacion, 
adulterio, incesto, estrupo, isodomia. De lo primero tenemos exemplo en los Indios del Pert, los quales (como 
despues verémos) tenian una Lei, la qual ordenaba, que los doce Jueces, que estaban nombrados para mirar por las 
cosas de la Republica, i Gente de la Ciudad del Cuzco, tuviese cuidado de mirar por los Mancebos, i Mocas 
solteras, 4 los quales no consintiesen hacer ninguna liviandad ; 1 quando en algo de esto fuesen comprehendidos, 
los denunciasen para castigarlos 4 su tiempo: en lo qual eran puntuales, asi los unos para denunciar, como los 
otros para juzgar, i castigar. Confusion grande para los que estan tan ligados con Lei Divina, Humana, i Positiva, 
i andan tan sueltos, i libres, que por eso deben de llamar Solteros, i Solteras 4 las que no estan casadas, i son 
deshonestas, pues tan libre, i sueltamente viven, sin haver quien las denuncie, i Jueces que las castiguen, como los 
tenian los Indios en el Peri, aunque barbaros, i sin conocimiento verdadero, i cierto de Dios. Pues en la Nueva- 
Espafia tambien tenian castigo estos tales; porque en la Provincia de Guatemala havia una Lei, que los que pecaban 
en el vicio de la carne, siendo solteros, pagaban cierta cosa; pero morian, si los acusaban los Parientes, porque se 
tenian por afrentados. En la Vera-Paz guardaban este orden, quando uno decia 4 otro que havia pecado, 6 si le 
decian, que como, 6 por qué hico aquello? si respondia por el pecado, se entendia el de la carne, que es cosa para 
notar. Si fornicaba con Viuda, 6 Esclava, pagaba cierta cantidad de Plumas, 6 otras cosas. A la Esclava que 
dormia con yaron libre, i dentro de su Casa, la achocaban la cabeca con dos grandes piedras fwera del Pueblo, 6 la 
empalaban: ilo proprio hacian al Hombre con quien pecd. Y finalmente, en otras Provincias castigaban a los 
Mocos, i Mogas, si eran traviesos, i hacian alguna vellaqueria, i el castigo era trasquilarles, i darles Mantas pobres, 
irotas. Otras veces les picaban los labios, i orejas, 1 otras partes del cuerpo, para que asi fuesen conocidos por 
ruines. En la Provincia de Guatemala, si alguno Negaba deshonestamente a Esclava agena, la pena era como pe- 
cuniaria, 6 daba otro tanto, como la Esclava valia, 6 daba otra. Pero si alguno la amaba, i tenia por Muger, 6 por 
mejor decir, Manceba, i Concubina, el culpado llevaba maior pena. 

Quanto al adulterio, la pena era apedrear los Adulteros en el Per: en Nueva-Espafia era la que arriba diximos. 
En otras Provincias les daban otro genero de muerte. Quanto al incesto id havemos dicho como se castigaba. 
Quanto al estrupo, en algunas Provincias de Nueva-Espana moria el que forcaba alguna Doncella, ora fuese en Casa, 
ora en el Campo. El que corrompia, i viciaba alguna Esclava, antes de tener edad para conocer varon, era Esclavo. 
En la Vera-Paz, si algun Mancebo conocia alguna Doncella, la pena era hacerle casar con ella: Pero si la Doncella 
estaba desposada, el esposo jamas bolvia 4 ella, mas pedia su dote, 1 lo que trajo en vestidos, i hacienda de casa de 
sus Padres, i con eso se iba en paz, 1 quedaba libre, i soltera. 

Tambien castigaban 4 los someticos, i el castigo era pena de muerte ; i si una Muger pecaba con otra, las daban 
garrote, i por maior pena morian ahogadas. En dos, 6 tres Provincias se usaba este vicio abominable, i nefando, 
el qual se permitia publicamente, teniendo Casas publicas de Hombres. Hacian esto los miserables, porque el 
Demonio havia hecho creer que los Dioses que: adoraban hicieron eso mismo, i que asi era licito, i bueno. . Pero 
con todo eso siempre se tuvo por abominable,'i feo este pecado, acerca de estas Gentes, aunque entre los que lo 
usaban no se castigaba ; pero el que cometia este pecado, era tenido por infame. En Mexico, i en Tezcuco se 
hacia gran castigo en los someticos. El pecado de la bestialidad nunca fue visto, ni oldo entre los Indios, [aunque 
si entre los Judios, segun Seldeno,| i por eso no havia Lei-contra él, como tampoco la huvo para la molicie, porque 
Yo entiendo que no supieron, ni conocieron tal pecado. 

Pues quanto al sacrilegio, i aluntamiento con la que tiene hecho voto de castidad, tambien tenian los Indios sus 

“FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 65 
Leies, para castigar. 4 las Doncellas, que estaban en Conventos, i Casas, encerradas como Monjas, 6 como las 
Virgines Vestales, que huvo antiguamente en Roma (de que se tratari adelante.) En el Pert, si alguna de aquellas 
Virgines, 6 Doncellas, 6 Mamaconas, que eran como Maestras de Novicias, 6 Abadesas, era comprehendida en 
algun delito contra su honestidad, el castigo era infalible de enterrarla viva, © matarla con otro genero de muerte 
cruel. En Nueva-Espafia, que tambien havia de estos Monasterios de Virgines, i Doncellas, la que hallaban no 
haver guardado honestidad, i pecado contra su limpieca, i castidad, moria luego sin remision, aunque el pecado 
fuese mui leve, diciendo que havia violado la Casa de Dios: i tenian por aguero, i por indicio de haver sucedido 
algun mal caso de estos, si vian pasar algun Raton, 6 Murcielago en la Capilla de su Idolo, 6 que havia roido 
algun velo; porque decian, que si no huviera precedido algun delito, no se atreviera el Raton, 6 Murcielago a 
hacer tal descortesia. Y de aqui procedian 4 hacer pesquisa; i hallando el delinquente, por principal que fuese, 
luego le daban la muerte. En el Peri, i en algunas Provincias de Nueva-Espafia tenian Mancebias, i Casas 
publicas de Mugeres, 4 las quales no consentian que viviesen entre las Mugeres casadas, i Doncellas, para con. esto 
evitar maiores males, i dafios en la Republica, i para que las demas, que eran casadas, i doncellas, viviesen seguras. 

Quanto al septimo Precepto, que es no hurtar, se guardaba con grande rigor, asi en el Pert, como en Nueva- 
Espafia. Si el Lector quisiere vér el castigo, que hacian por este delito los Indios del Pert, i de Nueva-Espana, 
lea el segundo Libro de la tercera parte de las Republicas del Mundo, hechas por el P. Roman, de la Orden del 
Doctor S. Augustin, que alli se trata esto mui de proposito. 

Quanto al octavo Precepto, que es no mentir, ni levantar falso testimonio, tenian tambien los Indios Leies para 
castigar al que mentia, i al que levantaba algun falso testimonio. Los mentirosos en el Pert eran castigados, 
segun la qualidad de la mentira. Pero si las Mugeres eran notadas de este vicio, por pequefias mentiras que 
dixesen, eran trasquiladas, en pena de su delito. Si oi se guardara esta Lei, Yo aseguro, que havian de faltar Bar- 
beros, i no cabegas de Mugeres trasquiladas. Castigaban al que infamaba @ otro falsamente, con la poe del 
Talion. Si alguna Muger acusaba a algun Hombre, que la havia forcado, no la creian, sino traia testigos, 6 6 alguna 
cosa de aquel Hombre, como era el Pafio de manos, las Bragas, 6 la Manta con que se cubren*, en lugar de 
Capa ; si esto tralian, la crelan, i sentenciaban al culpado: i si no, lo pagaba la que levantd el testimonio. Esto 
se hacia en el Peril; pero en la Nueva-Espafia se castigaba este pecado con grande rigor, i particularmente en la 
Vera-Paz, i en otras Provincias. Era cosa abominable levantar 4 otro un falso testimonio: i lo mismo la 
mentira. Y asi amonestaban 4 los Nifios, que no hiciesen semejantes pecados, porque eran mui feos, i los casti- 
gaban por ello. 

Quanto al nono Mandamiento, que es de no codiciar la Muger agena, aunque los Indios no entendian qué cosa 
era deseo, ni apetito carnal consentido, para conocerlo por pecado; pero por lo que havemos dicho acerca del 
sexto Precepto, vera el Lector, como tambien guardaban este en alguna manera; pues ia que no castigaban el 
afecto, ni lo tenian por pecado, al fin castigaban el efecto. Lo mismo podemos decir de el decimo Mandamiento, 
que de el septimo, quanto al efecto, pues como cosa injusta la castigaban, i conocian que era malo. En algunas 
Provincias tenian por maior delito el hurto de cosas de Templo: la pena era, quedar el que hurtaba por Esclavo, 
por la primera vez; ial segundo hurtot, lo ahorcaban. Y esto baste para satisfaccion de la objeccion, que arriba 

* This was the kind of evidence which the wife of Potiphar is said in the thirty-ninth chapter of Genesis to have brought against Joseph. 

++ Since right to possession as regards many kinds of property exists rather by legal enactment than jure nature, and all rights that belong to 
that class are protected by the law, it may be worth while to notice (because the coincidence is singular) a curious exemption from penalty as well 
as blame which both the Hebrew and the Mexican laws held out in certain cases to persons who infringed upon the rights of private property. 
By the Mexican law religious mendicants and perhaps other poor people, who had vainly solicited charity, were allowed to go into the maize-fields 
and to pluck some ears of maize to satisfy their hunger; and by the Hebrew law, as we know from the second chapter of Saint Mark, persons 
casually passing through corn-fields had a right to pluck for their own use some ears of corn, since if such a right had not existed the disciples of 
Christ would not have plucked the ears of corn on the Sabbath day, for which they were upbraided by the Pharisees, nor would the latter have 
failed to reproach them for the illegality of the act of taking what was not their own, as well as for their not resting upon that day. There is 
something further remarkable in the forbearance which the Mexican and the Hebrew law exhibited towards those who, yielding to the imperious 
dictates of hunger, invaded the most unprotected kind of property, the crops standing in the open fields; since great is the contrast between the 
indulgence which those codes displayed and the severity of the law of England, where the life of a man becomes frequently forfeit for that of a 
sheep, death being by the statute law the punishment for sheep- stealing. This observation is here introduced not for the sake of disparaging a 
code of laws in many respects admirable, but to point out a blot in them which ought to be effaced. ‘The unequal, and in Ireland dreadfully abused, 
punishment of transportation, the power to sentence to which is often lodged in the breasts of those whose fellow-creatures ought never to be at 
their mercy, is that which is generally inflicted upon those who are convicted of the above-named offence, since in that country both judges and 
juries consider in this case the evasion of an unjust law preferable to its execution ; and it would be well if in all cases the dictates of conscience 
were obeyed rather than the letter of laws which are not framed in the spirit of universally recognised justice. 

i) 

66 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

pusimos, acerca de las Ceremonias, i Leies de los Hebreos, a las quales son bien parecidas, i semejantes las que he 
referido de los Indios: los quales en este genero, i materia parecen mas 4 los Judios, que 4 otra Nacion alguna : 
argumento no pequefno para probacion de nuestro intento. Y si los Indios no guardaban en todo, i por todo las 
Ceremonias, i Leies de los Hebreos, ni eran tan observantes como ellos, no ai que espantarse ; porque (como 
arriba diximos) proceden de aquellos diez Tribus perdidos: los quales, apartandose tanto de su Tierra, i pasando 
por donde havia tanta variedad de Sectas, i Religiones Gentilicas, algo se les havia de pegar de sus Costumbres de 
aquellos, i despegar de las que guardaban en su Tierra, conforme al Testamento Viejo, 1 Lei de Moises. Y asi se 

‘puede creer, que iban entremetiendo algunas de los Gentiles, i Gentes por donde pasaban, con las suias: i olvi- 
dando por otra parte de las proprias, 6 por mejor decir, dejandolas caer de malicia, pues eran de su. natural tan 
faciles para el mal: 6 finalmente, por la division de Reinos, 1 Monarquia, donde necesariamente havia de haver 
nuevas Leies, nuevas: Ceremonias, i Ritos, 1 nuevo modo de governar, para con esto distinguirse, i diferenciarse 
unos de otros. Y esta racon hallo Yo para la division de las Lenguas, como despues dirémos. 

Carrruto VII. 

De la quarta objeccion contra la qunta Opinion, donde se trata de la Lengua Hebrea. 

La quarta objeccion, que se puede ofrecer contra esta presente Opinion, es, que si los Indios fueran descendientes 
de los Hebreos, hablaran la Lengua Hebrea. 

Para esta duda he hallado tres, 6 quatro soluciones, i respuestas. La primera es, la que dimos 4 la primera 
objeccion de la quarta Opinion. La segunda solucion es, que asi como al principio del Mundo hablaron los Hom- 
bres una Lengua, la qual hablo Adam, i sus Hijos, i Nietos, i Descendientes, hasta la edificacion de aquella Torre 
de Babél, adonde por permision de Dios huvo nueva invencion de Lenguas, las quales se fueron confundiendo en 
tanta manera, que hasta el tiempo que Roma era Sefiora de todo el Mundo, eran innumerables, i casi infinitas las 
que havia. Y asi, como desde este tiempo de los Romanos, hasta que por Guerra se dividid su Imperio, i Monarquia, 
huvo una Lengua General, que es la Latina, de la qual por la sobredicha division de Imperios, 1 de Reinos, se 
inventaron nuevas Lenguas, derivandolas de la misma Latina, quales son Italiana, Francesa, Catalana, Valenciana, 
Castellana, Lusitana, i otras muchas, las quales, con emanar, i proceder de una misma fuente, 1 origen, vemos, 
que sino es en las Letras con que se escriven, i en algunos Vocablos, en todo lo demas son mui diferentes, asi 
todas, de la Latina, como ellas mismas entre si. 

De la misma manera, pues, digo, que podemos decir 4 nuestra duda, que aunque la Lengua Hebrea era general, 
i la hablaban los Hebreos de los diez Tribus, de quien vamos probando proceden los Indios, por la division de 
Reinos, Imperios, i Sefiorios, que entre ellos huvo, fueron inventando nuevas Lenguas para entenderse, 1 con esto 
juntamente diferenciarse unos de otros. 

Dice lo quarto el Padre Acosta, que si los Judios no se vieran circuncidados, no se tuvieran por Judios, [pues 
era tan estimado este Precepto, que (como dice Maimonides) aun en Sabado era licito exeoutieile ;| 1 que los 
Indios poco, ni mucho no se retajan, ni han dado jamas en esa Ceremonia. 

En esto se engafié, lo primero, porque él mismo refiere en su Historia, como los Mexicanos sacrificaban el 
miembro viril, 4 los Nifios recien nacidos, i que en alguna manera remedaban la circuncision de los Judios, [que 
usaban los Guaycurues del Paraguay, como dice el Compendio, i Descripcion de Indias. Y Herrera afirma, que en 
Guacacoalco, i Iluta se circuncidaban, i en Cuetxala, i que asi lo tenian por costumbre: lo qual prueba la confor- 
midad, aunque en Iucatin no se usase, como asegura el P. Cogolludo contra Pineda; é Illescas: i Laet contra 
Pedro Martir, i Gomara; ni es tampoco cierto, que los Espafioles se equivocasen con las bubas de los Indios, como 
discurrid Laet, de que se rie Grotio. | 

Lo segundo, porque, demas de lo dicho, de la Republica de los Indios, qué escrivid el P. Roman, i de la His- 
toria General, que higo Gomara, i de otras Historias de aquellas Partes, consta, como en otras Provincias se cir- 
cuncidaban los Indios, de que arriba hicimos mencion. et aes, : 

A lo quinto, que dice, que como havian de olvidar los Judios su Lengua, su Lei, i ee moans > -Ya tenemos. 
satisfecho, i respondido en las objecciones pasadas : i aqui podemos tambien responder lo que el mismo Padre dice 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 67 

4 una objeccion tacita, semejante 4 esta. Dice, pues, que no es cosa increible pensar, que aunque huviesen salido 
los primeros Pobladores de las Indias de Tierras de Policia, i bien governadas, se les olvidase todo con el largo 
tiempo, i poco uso. Pues es notorio, que aun en Espafia, i en Italia se hallan manadas de Hombres, que sino es 
el’gesto, i figura, no tienen otra cosa de Hombres. Hasta aqui es del. P. Acosta, a quien escrivo esta Carta, para 
que con ella responda a su duda. 

A lo sexto que dice, que no en todos los Indios es general ser medrosos, supersticiosos, agudos, i mentirosos, 
ia havemos respondido atras. 

A lo septimo que dice, que la causa de traer los Indios el vestido, de que usan, es por ser el mas sencillo, i 
natural del Mundo ; i que por eso fue comun antiguamente, no solo 4 los Hebreos, sino a otras Naciones. Digo, 
que de ninguna leemos, que el Trage de su vestido sea tan conforme al que usan los Indios, como el de los 
Judios. 

A lo octavo que dice el sobredicho Padre, acerca de la Historia de Esdras, poniendo en condicion, si se ha de 
hacer caso de ella, por ser apocrifa, 1 teniendo por tan fabuloso el Rio Kufrates de Esdras, como la Atlantida 
encantada de Platon, ia respondi arriba, diciendo, que Esdras, en lo que refiere en el quarto Libro, que es apocrifo, 
i no de Fe, tiene tanta autoridad, como un Doctor grave, i aun mas. Y aora, para maior fuerca de aquello, i de 
el fundamento de aquesta Opinion, el qual restriva en la autoridad de Esdras, quiero probar quanta sea, i quanto 
credito le dén los Sagrados Doctores, en lo que dice en el tercero, i quarto Libro. Sixto Senense, uno de los 
Hombres mas doctos, que ha tenido nuestra Sagrada Orden de Predicadores, dice, que los Griegos, no solo reciben 
por Canonico el tercer Libro de Esdras, sino que lo anteponen al primero, i segundo del mismo Esdras, i de Ne- 
hemias, de quien nadie tiene duda, sino que son Canonicos, ide Fe Catolica. Entre los Griegos, 8. Atanasio se 
aprovecha del Testimonio de Zorobabél, que refiere Esdras en el tercer Libro, Capitulo tercero, i con él arguie 
contra los Arrianos. S. Augustin lo tiene por legitimo Libro de Esdras, como parece en las palabras, que dice en 
los Libros de la Ciudad de Dios, adonde se pueden ver, i creer, para que se entienda, 1 conozca el caso que hace 

este Glorioso Doctor de Esdras, en el tercer Libro. 

Seccron II. de el Capitulo VII. 

De la autoridad de el quarto Libro de Esdras. 

x 

Pues para la autoridad de el quarto Libro de Esdras, que es el que mas hace A nuestro proposito, no nos faltan 
Santos Doctores, entre los quales es uno S. Ambrosio, el qual tiene 4 este quarto Libro por de Esdras, de quien 
fue escrito por revelacion Divina, como parece en las palabras, que este Glorioso: Doctor pone en el Libro de Bono 
mortis, donde dice, que S. Pablo siguid la sentencia de Esdras, en aquello que escrivid cerca del fin de la primera 
Epistola, 4 los Corintios, de los diversos ordenes de claridad, i de la gloria de los escogidos, que han de resucitar. 
La qual sentencia tomo el Santo 8. Ambrosio, como testimonio de gravisima autoridad, para confirmar la doctrina, 
que escrive de las moradas de las Almas Santas, despues de la separacion del cuerpo. Y el mismo Santo, sobre el 
Evangelio de San Lucas, alega del septimo Capitulo de este quarto Libro de Esdras, la profecia del tiempo de la 
venida de Nuestro Sefior, i de su muerte, ide la conversion que havia de haver de el Mundo al mismo Christo. 
La profecia es esta: M& Hijo Jesus sera revelado, « conocido & aquellos que con el se alegraran: los quales quedaron 
en quatrocientos Aitos ; 2 despues de estos Atos, sucederd, que morir mi Hijo Jesu Christo, « se convertira al siglo, 
Hasta aqui es de Esdras. Finalmente, en la Epistola i Honorancio, aconseja San Ambrosio, que se ha de leer el 
quarto Libro de Esdras, porque en él se demuestra, i prueba, que el Anima es de substancia Celestial, con que se 
impugnan, i confutan los errores, desvarios, i vanas palabras de los Filosofos, que sienten lo contrario. 

De aqueste quarto Libro de Esdras parece que tomo 8. Cipriano, muchos Afios antes, lo que ‘escrivid contra 
Demetrio : conviene a saber, que el Mundo esta viejo, i que ia va cerca del fin: lo qual se echa de vér en el descae- 
cimiento, i desmedro de todas las cosas, pues las fuercas de los Elementos, Planetas, 1 Animales estan debilitadas, 
i diminuidas, i los cuerpos de los Hombres son aora menores, i mas débiles, que fueron antiguamente. 

Tambien la Iglesia Catolica honra, i autoriga este Libro: la qual cada Afto, en la tercera Feria de Pentecostes, 
comienga el Introito de la Misa, de aquella Sentencia, que esta en el segundo Capitulo de este Libro. La ‘Sen- 

68 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

tencia es: Accipite jocunditatem gloria vestre, gratias agentes Deo, qui vos ad Celestia regna vocavit. Y en las 
solemnidades, i fiestas de los Martires canta de el mismo Capitulo: Modo coronantur, et. accipiunt palmam. 

De la autoridad de estos Testimonios, i Testigos, colige Sixto Senense, la ragon, i causa por qué se junto este 
Libro con los demas de la Divina Escritura. He sido prolijo en este digreso, i discurso, para bolver por la auto- 
ridad de Esdras, i de lo que dice en el quarto Libro ; 1 para mostrar como no tiene racon el Padre Acosta, en poner 
duda, acerca de lo que dice el mismo Esdras de los diez Tribus. Porque aunque es verdad, que de comun consen- 
timiento de los Santos Padres se determind, que este quarto Libro se pusiese entre los Apocrifos ; pero esto fue 
(como advierte Sixto Senense) por alguna doctrina sospechosa que en él ai, la qual claramente parece que contra- 
dice 4 las reglas de la buena, i recta doctrina de la Fé. Pero si bien miramos lo que el mismo Sixto refiere de este 
quarto Libro, como cosas disonantes, ninguna de ellas toca 4 nuestra Historia de los diez Tribus, de quien vamos 
tratando en esta Opinion. Y asi, quitando lo que Sixto refiere, que disona, 1 lo demas que parece disonar en este 
Libro, quedara lo demas por verdadero: de lo qual, sin miedo, podré aprovecharme en este lugar, como en efecto 
-me he aprovechado, pues los Autores arriba citados, tan graves, como son 8. Pablo, S. Ambrosio, S. Cipriano, i 
la Iglesia Catolica, se aprovecharon de él, como esta dicho: [no obstante que en Hebreo nunca le ha havido: i en 
Griego, si le huvo, se perdid: i solo existe en Latin. | 

A lo nono que dice el Padre Acosta, que quando se aia de dar credito 4 esta Historia apocrifa de Esdras, mas 
contradice, que aiuda a nuestro intento. Porque alli se dice, que los diez Tribus huieron la multitud de Gentiles, 
por guardar sus Ceremonias, i Lei: mas los Indios son dados a todas las idolatrias del Mundo. Digo, que bien se 
compadece saliesen de aquella Tierra para las Indias con ese intento, i proposito, i que no lo pusiesen en execucion 
de veras, por algunas causas que les sobrevinieron ; entre las quales, una pudo ser, que como esta Gente era mui 
inclinada a la idolatria, segun que ia havemos dicho, i pasd por tanta Tierra de Gentiles Idolatras, entre quien for- 
cosamente havian de vivir, i con quien havian de iratar algunos Dias, se les fue resfriando su proposito, i avivando 
su mala inclinacion, que es terrible negocio la ocasion de un pecado, i vicio para Gente que a él es inclinada, fuera 
que del todo no dejaron caer su Lei, i Ceremonias, pues havemos dicho en la tercera objeccion, que guardaron 
muchas de ellas. 

Seccion III. 

En que se conclue la respuesta.a lo que dice el P. Acosta contra esta Opinion. 

A lo ultimo, en que dice el P. Acosta, que vean bien los que siguen esta Opinion, en qué manera pueden Ilegar 
las entradas del Rio Eufrates al nuevo Orbe? Digo, que no se ha de entender lo que dice Esdras del pasage, i 
entrada de la Gente de los diez Tribus por el Rio Eufrates en ese sentido ; porque de esa manera, bien claro esta 
ser disparate : sino que quando fueron trasladados los diez Tribus de Samaria, 4 Asiria, pasaron por aquellas en- 
tradas del Rio Eufrates: en cuio pasage dice luego Esdras, que hico entonces el Altisimo sefiales, i milagros, 1 
detuvo las venas del Rio, hasta que pasaron. No sé Yo por qué no se ha de creer esto, que dice Esdras : pues 
sabemos de la Divina Escritura, que hico el mismo Dios maiores milagros, i sefiales con los mismos Israelitas, 
quando pasaron el Mar Bermejo, i Rio Jordin. De manera, que aquella conjuncion adversativa, Autem, se refiere 
al pasage por el Rio de los diez Tribus, desde Samaria, adonde estaban, 4 Asiria, que segun todos los Geografos, 
esta de aquella parte del Rio Kufrates ; i no se refiere al viage de esta Gente, desde los Medos, adonde entraron en 
consulta, para dejar los Gentiles, hasta la Region donde fueron, que son las Indias : [aunque no falta quien diga 
pasaron 4 Cocar, i de alli 4 la China, 1 Tartaria: ia Cocar hacen los Arabes fundacion de un Hijo de Jafet, que 
tenia este nombre :] ni tampoco aquella clausula referida, que esta Per introitus autem, es de Historia, que pasa 
adelante, distinta de lo referido, i dicho en lo pasado, sino declarativa de lo que antes se havia dicho. Porque 
diciendo Esdras, que los diez Tribus fueron trasladados de su Tierra 4 la otra parte del Rio, que es Asiria, era 
necesario luego referir, como entraron por el Rio; i porque siendo tan caudaloso havia luego duda, como pudieron 
pasar Nifios, Mugeres, viejos, i enfermos, i tanta Gente como alli havia? Dice luego, como respondiendo a esta 
duda, i objeccion tacita: Mecit enim tune Altissimus signa, &c. Porque hico con ellos luego el Altisimo sefales, 
i milagros, deteniendo la corriente, i venas del Rio: [Y aunque los Rabinos, valiendose de la confusion que ai 
sobre este Rio, quisieron hacerle el Sabatico, de que Josefo, i Plinio hacen mencion en otros sitios, i con 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 69 

contrarios efectos, i refiere Hardumo muchos, que creieron haver, 6 haver havido Rio de este Nombre, que corria 
los seis Dias de la Semana, i cesaba el Sabado: esto no tiene: fundamento, ni puede creerse sea el Rio de que 
hablo Esdras ; i los mismos Judios conocen la ficcion, como testifica Job Ludolfo, ignorando el sitio del Rio, ila 
morada de los diez Tribus, como se ha dicho.] 

Tambien la clausula, que 4 la sobredicha se sigue, que comienca: Per cam enim Regionem, &c. es declarativa de 
lo que Esdras dijo: conviene a saber, que haviendo entrado aquella Gente en consulta, i acuerdo para dejar los 
Gentiles, se fueron 4 una Region mas apartada. En la qual clausula declara, como aquella Region adonde fueron, 
estaba Afio i medio de camino, espacio bien conforme al que ai desde los Medos 4 las Indias. 

A lo demas que dice el Padre Acosta, que no sabe como esta Gente Indiana se puede llamar pacifica, &c. Digo, 
que de su natural lo es, como se vé por experiencia; porque pacifico llamamos al Hombre, que vive en paz, sin traer 
pleito, ni guerra con nadie, ni él de su natural se inclina 4 eso: i asi lo son los Indios ; i si han tenido Guerras, ha 
sido contra su voluntad, i defendiendose de los que fueron & quitarles sus Tierras, como sucedid en el Pert en tiempo 
de los Ingas: i en Nueva-Espafia, en el de los Motecumas ; i despues en ambas Provincias, ien las demas de la 
Tierra-firme, i Islas, quando entraron los Espafioles. Y con esto damos fin 4 la Quinta Opinion, [remitiendo al 
Lector al P. Torquemada, i al Compendio, i Descripcion de las Indias, i otros, que entre otras racones ponen la 
multitud de los Indios, que puede igualarse a la de los J udios, de quien dice Oseas, que excede 4 las Arenas del Mar, 
isu Tierra 4 las demas; i no nos detenemos en averiguar si de los Judios, que en tiempo de Senacherib se retiraron 
con el Rei Tiraca de Etiopia, su Auxiliar: cuio Viage se pone en el Compendio, i Descripcion de las Indias: advir- 
tiendo, que| con lo que havemos respondido al P. Acosta, tenemos satisfecho al P. Fr. Tomas Maluenda, porque 
casi dice lo mismo. que el P. Acosta: [1 no se responde 4 Rudbekio el Moco, que el Afio de 1704. havia ia publicado 
una Muestra de la Historia de Laponia, en que se persuade haver sido poblada aquella Provincia de los diez Tribus, 
‘i descender de ellos la maior parte de los Lapones ; porque mas facil Viage les damos en lo que queda referido, 
dejando para otro lugar la Opinion que hace descendientes 4 los Indios de la Tribu de Isacar, una de las diez de el 
Cautiverio de Salmanasar, i omitiendo el dictamen de Rabi Salomon, que atribuie la Poblacion de las Indias a la 

Tribu de Neptali, que con otras, dice, se perdi en Oriente. | 

Carrruxo IIL. del Libro doce de la Monarquia Indiana. 

De cosas, que entre estos Indios, de esta Nueva-Espaia, se permitian, y disimulaban. 

No solamente permitian los Antiguos Moradores de estas Indias, en sus Republicas, las Mugeres publicas, dichas en 
el Capitulo pasado, sino otras especies de mas, que el uso fue introduciendo, y los Hombres inventando: lo qual 
toleraron, y disimularon los Reies, y sus Leies, porque con esto tenian sus Republicas en Paz, y no eran cosas, que 
en nada las menoscabasen, ni perturbasen, de las quales fue una, que los Mancebos, antes que se casasen, y viniesen 
4 tener casa, y nombre de vecinos en el Pueblo, maiormente los Hijos de Sefiores, y Hombres ricos, tenian sus 
Mancebas ; y vino a entablarse tal costumbre, que las pedian 4 sus Padres, como se suelen pedir las Mugeres, que 
se han de. recibir por vinculo de Matrimonio, en especial las pedian 4 las Madres. Esto se declara por la platica, 
que de ello tenian, y tambien por el nombre propio, y vocablo que lo significaba; porque 4 la Manceba Ilamaban 
Tlacallalcahuilli, que quiere decir: Persona dejada; como quien dice: Persona, que podia dejarse, sin injuria del 
Matrimonio, 4 diferencia de la Muger propia, que llamaban Cihuatlantli; y donde no havia de pedir, 6 demandar la 
Hija 4 los Padres, para tomarla por Manceba, la llamaban con el nombre comun, y general, que es Temecauh. 
Acostumbrabase comunmente, 6 por la maior parte, que despues que aquel Mancebo havia un Hijo, en la dicha su 
Manceba, luego le era forcoso, 6 dejarla, 6 recibirla por Muger legitima: lo qual le requerian sus Padres, diciendole, 
que pues ia tenia Hijo, que mudase estado, é intencion; como si le dijeran: Pues id parece haver racon, para que la 
recibais por Muger, recibidla; y sino, dejalda, que nosotros buscaremos con quien casar 4 nuestra Hija, y la daremos 
Marido; porque ia no es racon, que viva mas tiempo amancebada. Y si el Moco acordaba de tomarla por Muger, 
combidabanse los Parientes, y Deudos de una, y otra parte, y hacianse las ceremonias, que usaban, en sus legitimos 
Casamientos. 

Havia otra especie de Mancebas (como suele aver, y las ai entre nuestros Espafioles) que quando se enamoraban, 
él de ella, y ella de él, con la fuerea de su aficion, se copulaban, y vivian esta vida el tiempo que querian, ora fuese 

iy 

7O SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

poco, ora mucho; pero si durante su amancebamiento se concertaban de casar, decianselo 4 sus Deudos, y hacian 
las ceremonias del Matrimonio, y quedaban casados: y este tal, aunque hasta entonces le llamaban con el comun 
nombre de Mancebo, que es Tepuchtl, ia de alli adelante lo perdia, y le Ilamaban Tlapalihui, que quiere decir : 
Hombre hecho, y de fuergas, y ella perdia el nombre de Manceba, y se llamaba Cihuatlantli, 0 Nocihuauh : Pedida, 
émi Muger. Otra especie de Mancebas havia, y se permitia, que era la de los Sefores Principales, 6 las tomaban 
ellos, 6 las pedian despues de ia casados, con la Sefiora, y Muger legitima, que llamaban Cihuapilli. 

Todas estas especies de Mancebas, puesto que muchos las tenian, y en muchas partes se usaba tenerlas, empero 
tenianse por ilicitas de. todos, y solamente por permitidas ; y parece esto claro, porque siempre los Padres, y los 
Parientes ancianos, y vicjos, amonestaban 4 sus Hijos, y Parientes Mancebos, que huiesen de aquel vicio; y los 
reprehendian, y castigaban, quando podian sobre el mismo caso; y por esto tenian las Hijas mui guardadas, y 
encerradas, temiendo no fuesen por engaiio, 6 aficion persuadidas 4 semejante deshonestidad. De lo dicho parece el 
buen orden, y buena Policia, que estas Gentes tenian en sus Republicas, por las Leies con que eran governadas, 
permitiendo por ellas algunas cosas, que si las quitaran todas, sucedieran maiores males. 

Cariruxio IV. 

Donde se trata de las Letes, con que estas Gentes Indianas se regan, y governaban, con las quales 
tenian, en Paz, y tranquilidad sus Republicas. 

AuNnavuE diximos, en los Capitulos antecedentes, de los Indios Islefios, regirse, y governarse Manu Regia, que es al 
Albedrio, y Pradencia de sus Reies, decimos lo contrario de estos de esta Tierra firme, y Remos poderosos, de esta 
Nueva-Espafia, los quales, para conservarse en Paz, y Justicia, las tenian mui ordenadas, y pasadas por mui 
deliberado Consejo, y confirmadas de unas generaciones, en otras. Y aunque de estas ai muchas extravagantes (de 
que luego diremos) me ha parecido hacer algunas divisiones, poniendo en proprios lugares, lo proprio, y 
concerniente 4 sus especies, de las quales sera su primera especie, y division la de los carnales, y deshonestos. 

Era Lei, que ninguno se ajuntase 4 su Madre; y el que lo contrario hacia, moria ahorcado; y si esta culpa se 
cometia por el Hijo, con voluntad de su Madre, ambos morian una misma muerte, de la qual quedaba libre Ja dicha 
Madre, si la culpa havia sido cometida, haviendo sido forcada, y con violencia; y era tenido este pecado entre todas 
estas Naciones, por horrible, y abominable ; y no sin causa, pues es tan contrario 4 toda buena Racon, y Lei Natural, 
como lo determinan todos los Hombres Doctos, en especial Escoto; y en comprobacion de esta Verdad, dice el 
Filosofo, que el Camello reconoce 4 la Madre, que le parid, y jamas la acomete, para semejante copula, aunque para 
ello le quieran hacer fuerga, y que de todo, en todo, lo rehusa; y comprueba esta repugnancia grande, que hace, con 
decir, que una vez hechd un Hombre, un Camello 4 su Madre, que para este acto la tenia encubierta, y disfracada, 
y despues del acto, como la descubriese, y fuese conocida del Hijo, fue tanta su rabia, que arremetid al que lo havia 
provocado & la copula, y cogiendole entre los dientes, le matd, con grande coraje, y saia. ‘Tambien cuenta, en este 
mismo Capitulo, que un cierto Rei de Scithia tenia una mui hermosa Iegua, cuios Potros eran admirables, y que 
porque la casta fuese buena, y no mezclada, le mando hechar un Cavallo, Hijo suio, el qual lo rehusd, y no quiso, 
por conocer, por instinto natural, que era su Madre ; pero cubriendosela, y viendola delante, acometio el acto, que 
antes no queria, por no haverla conocido, con el disfraz, que se la havian puesto; pero despues que la vid, y 
conocid, fue tanto lo que mostré sentir el caso, que corriendo desatinadamente, se despens, y higo pedacos ; esto 
dice Aristoteles, en el Lugar citado. Y si Animales, faltos de racon, tienen este sentimiento, no es maravilla, que lo 
alcancen, y prohiban por Lei los que la tienen, y usan de ella, por ser cosa prohibida en Lei Natural. Y de aqui se 
entienden aquellas palabras de Adin, hablando le la Muger: Por esto se ha de dejar Padre, y Madre, quanto a la 
copula carnal, como dice Escoto, en el lugar citado; y afiade, que el Padre no puede casarse con su Hija; y no solo 
el Padre, que la engendrd, pero ni ninguno, que sea de aquella sangre, y generacion, por linea recta; y en tanto 
grado debe ser esto verdad (prosigue Escoto) que si Adan resucitara aora, y bolviera 4 la vida moral, en que fue 
criado, no tuviera Muger con quien casar, aunque lo contradice Caietano ; de manera, que si el acto del Padre con 
la Hija es prohibido, en Lei Natural, por ser cosa, que la contradice, mucho mas se debe entender el Hijo, con la 
Madre, por ser horrendisimo caso violar las entrafias, en que se formd, y anduvo, para venir 4 tener conocimiento de 
las cosas de la Vida. : 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 71 

No era licito (y estaba ordenado por Lei) tener copula Hermano, con Hermana, y ahorcaban al comprehendido 
en esta culpa, que la tenian por grave. Esta prohibicion no es de Lei Natural, pues sabemos, que los primeros 
Hermanos del Mundo casaron con sus Hermanas; porque a no ser asi, 0 havia de criar Dios Mugeres de nuevo, 
para el acto de la generacion, 6 se havian de quedar los Hombres sin Mugeres, pues no havia otras, que las que Kva 
paria, y es de Fé creerlo ; y no haviendo otras en el Mundo, estas havian de casar con sus Hermanos ; pero despues 
de la multiplicacion de las Gentes se derogé esta Lei; y asi como entre otras Naciones, y entre nuestros Christianos, 
tambien estos Indios la prohibieron. 

Es de notar aqui, que aunque decimos, que fue derogada esta Lei, no lo fue con Lei positiva contraria, que 
expresamente lo prohibiese ; antes sabemos haver mandado Dios lo contrario, en la Lei Escrita, diciendo en el 
Levitico, que ninguno fuese osado 4 cometer este crimen con Hermana de Padre, 6 Madre, 6 de entrambos 
juntamente, sino es en el caso dicho, es 4 saber, haviendo muerto el Hermano sin Hijos; y lo mismo buelve A decir 
adelante en el Capitulo veinte. Escoto dice en el Quarto de las Sentencias, que en aquella Lei Antigua fueron 
prohibidos algunos grados de consanguinidad ; y en este Hstado Evangelico, 4 los principios de la Iglesia, hasta 
siete ; pero despues fueron reducidos 4 quatro, por el Papa Inocencio Tercero. Pero de donde proviene esta 
_prohibicion (dice Escoto) no es de Christo Nuestro Sefior en esta Lei Evangelica, porque en ella no prohibio, sino 
lo que contradice la misma Lei Natural, que es Hijo con Madre; pero es mandamiento de la Iglesia, por obviar 
inconvenientes, que a ser de Lei Natural, no fuera dispensable, como lo fue con los Reies de Inglaterra, como en sus 
Opusculos lo prueba Caietano ; y lo que de suio es prohibible, en ninguna ocasion se concede ; por lo qual decimos, 
que si convino esto a los principios del Mundo, ia aora no hace ninguna conveniencia: Lo uno, por haver muchas 
Mugeres de grados 14 mui apartados : Lo otro, porque es decencia, y respeto, que se guarda a la propinquidad de la 
sangre: y esto guardaron tambien estos Indios, si no eran algunos Sehores, que con sus Hermanas se casaban, 
aunque de estos fueron mui pocos. 

Prohibian el acto del Padrastro, con Entenada; y si era de voluntad dé la dicha Entenada, morian ambos 
ahorcados. Esta misma fue Lei Antigua del Pueblo de Dios. ! 

Lo mismo tenian por Lei, si el acto era con Suegra, por racon de tener, por grave exceso, que un mismo 
Hombre tuviese acceso con Madre, y Hija. 

El que cometia Adulterio tenia pena de muerte; y fue Lei de los Romanos, escrita en las doce Tablas, como lo 
dice Gelio. 

Y asi era, que a los Adulteros, apedreaban ; que es lo mismo, que acostumbraban los Hebreos, por mandamiento 
expreso de su Lei; segun aquel caso de la Muger Adultera, que trajeron a la presencia de Christo Nuestro Sefior, & 
la qual acusaban,-de comprehendida en el pecado; a los quales respondid Christo, que el que se hallese sin pecado, 
la tirase la primera piedra, no aprobando el adulterio, sino reprehendiendo la malicia con que pensaban cogerle, en 
su soberana respuesta; de manera, que esta Lei ha sido usada de otras Naciones tambien, como de esta, y fue 
expresa de los Judios. A ninguna Muger, ni Hombre castigaban por culpa de adulterio, si para el dicho castigo no 
precedia mas, que la acusacion del Marido ; pero havia de haver testigos, y juntamente confesion de los acusados ; y 
si los dichos Adulteros eran de la Gente Principal, y Noble, morian ahogados, en la Carcel ; y si de la del Comun, 
y Pueblo, con la pena dicha; y no es poco de considerar esta distincion, y diferencia, pues no se hace mas, entre 
Gente de mucha racon,, y Pulicia, para que los Nobles no sean de todo punto afrentados de los plebeios, iA que con 
la vida pagan. 

Tenia pena de muerte, el que mataba 4 su Muger, por sospechas, 6 indicios, que tuviese, de que no le guardaba 
lealtad conjugal, aunque el caso fuese mui manifiesto, cogiendolos entrambos juntos ; y este castigo se reseryaba 
para el Rei, 6 Jueces nombrados, para el conocimiento de estas, y otras semejantes causas, y las tocantes al Matri- 
monio ; de los quales dice el Padre Frai Toribio Motolinia, que conocid algunos, en la Ciudad de Tetzcuco, y vido 
actos juridicos, que acerca de esto hicieron, y oid sentencias, que pronunciaron; y la ragon que daban, para que el 
ofendido no pudiese matar a sus ofensores, era, porque decian, que usurpaba la Jurisdiccion Real, no llevando su 
acusacion 4 sus Jueces, para que averiguada la verdad, y convencidos los Reos, muriesen, por sentencia, y no por 
sola pasion del Marido, que los mataba. Msto era inviolable entre estos Indios; aunque entre nuestros Espafioles 
se permite matarlos, por el dolor grande, que en aquel acto recibe el ofendido. 

En el Pueblo Antiguo de los Hebreos era Lei, que el Marido, que por algunos indicios, 6 causas manifiestas, 
tuviese sospecha, de que su Muger no le guardaba la fee conjugal, 4 que estaba obligada, tuviese licencia, si la fuerca 

72 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

de los celos le aquejaba, de Mevarla al Templo, a la presencia del Sacerdote, ante el qual la acusaba del crimen, que 
sospechaba haver cometido, el qual, por falta de testigos, ¢ informacion suficiente, no podia probarle. Hecha la 
acusacion, destocaban 4 la Muger, que se sospechaba ser adultera, y hecho Sacrificio por ella, con algunas cosas, que: 
en los Numeros, expresa el Texto Sagrado, tomaba un Vaso de barro el Sacerdote en sus manos, lleno de Agua, y 
hechaba en ella un poco de polvo, cogido de el suelo del Templo, y maldecia las Aguas, y polvo, y luego decia a la 
Muger: Si no ha dormido contigo Varon ageno, y si no has maculado, ni manchado el talamo de tu Marido, no te 
ofenderan estas Aguas amarguisimas, en las quales tengo hecha junta, y congregacion de maldiciones ; pero si has 
faltado en la fee‘de tu Marido, y te has apartado de la obligacion, que le tienes, y te has manchado, y juntado con 
otro Varon, quedaras comprehendida en estas maldiciones, y comencabalas a decir de esta manera: Hagate Dios 
comprehendida en estas maldiciones: pongate por exemplo publico de tu maldad en todo su Pueblo de Israel; quiera 
él, que tu muslo se pudra, y coma de Cancer, y que tu Vientre se hinche, y rebiente ; entren estas Aguas malditas, 
en tus entrafias, y con la hinchacon de tu Vientre, se pudran tus muslos; a las quales maldiciones dichas respondia 
la Muger, Amen, dos veces, y dabale 4 beber las Aguas, que tenia en el Vaso. Si era verdad el crimen, que el Ma- 
rido le imponia, podriansele las entrafias, y rebentandole el Vientre, moria la adultera; pero si no lo-era, no la 
ofendia, y quedaba libre de la calumnia. Algo de esto, se quiso introducir, en el Christianismo, en los primeros 
Tiempos de la Iglesia ; pero aunque les fue permitido, alos del Pueblo Judaico antes del advenimiento de Christo, 
dioseles este permiso (como dice el Tostado) como 4 Gente imperfecta ; porque si no tuvieran este permiso, mataran 
4 sus Mugeres, con la rabia de los celos, que havian engendrado ; y porque no fuese con atrevimiento proprio, se les 
concedid este permiso, con Autoridad Divina, y asi 4 estos les fue licito; pero como la Lei Evangelica es en todo 
perfecta, repudid este uso, por quanto no era licito, aunque fue tolerable, por aquel Tiempo, y lo evito entre los 
Christianos, y lo tiene prohibido, por diversos Canones, como se notan, en el Derecho, y lo toca Santo Thomas, en 
su Segunda Parte; de manera, que todas las Republicas bien ordenadas ha havido Leies de tolerancia, para: la: con- 
servacion de su buen Govierno. 

Aunque la muerte ordinaria de los Adulteros era con piedras, en medio de las Placas, 6 Mercados, era con esta 
diferencia, que 4 unos ataban de pies, y manos, y les daban con una grande piedra, en las sienes, con que a pocos 
golpes moria; otros eran muertos 4 garrotagos ; y otros cargados de piedras de el tropel de la Gente, y Pueblo, que 
se hallaba al espectaculo, que era sin numero ; y apenas havia recibido la primera el reo, quando estaba cubierto de 
otras sin cuento; de tal manera, que pudiera aquel ser el lugar de su sepultura, sin que de su misero cuerpo se pare- 
ciese nada. Y si por alguna racon particular los Adulteros, siendo de los Pipiltin, que quiere decir Principales, y 
Nobles, eran ahorcados por este crimen, les emplumaban las cabecas, poniendoles ciertos penachos verdes, y con 
este atavio los quemaban; y decian hacer esto por genero de compasion, que de ellos tenian. 

Todos los que cometian incesto en el primer grado de consanguinidad, tenian pena de muerte, si no eran cufados 
y cufiadas ; y era costumbre, que quando moria alguno, que tuviese Hermanos, el maior, 6 menor, uno, 0 otro de 
ellos, si eran muchos, la recibia por Muger, dado caso, que el difunto huviese havido Hijos en ella. 

Esta costumbre parece que quiere oler 4 la Lei Antigua, que mandaba Dios, que si el casado moria ‘sin Hijos, 
quedase obligado el maior, de los que quedaban, a casarse con ella, para resucitar la generacion de su Her- 
mano; porque el Nombre del difunto, no pereciese, sino que se eternicase; pero es con esta diferencia, que 
alli lo mandaba Dios, por defecto, y herencia de los Hijos ; y aqui no se guardaba este respeto, entre los Indios, 
aunque tampoco era esto siempre, como tambien alla en la Lei Antigua; porque quando el Hermano no queria, ni a 
persuasion de la cufiada, ni en la presencia de los Jueces, hacia aquella ceremonia de escupirle en la cara, y descal- 
carle un capato, y quedaba libre, aunque no sin afrenta, ¢ ignominia; pero esto no se sabe, que sucediese entre 
estos Indios. 

Al Marido, que tenia acceso con su Muger, despues de haverle faltado en la fee conjugal, le castigaban, y esto 
era en algunas partes, y es cosa mui de notar; porque entre nosotros los Christianos es Lei, que si acaso se ha co 
metido’esta culpa, y el Marido la perdona, no puede despues matarla por ella, haviendo llegado otra vez 4 los actos 
Matrimoniales; y debia de ser esto asi entre esta Gente, y no sé el origen, ni ragon en que se fundaban. 

No tenia pena, por la Lei, el que llegaba 4 la Manceba de otro, si no era, que huviese mucho Tiempo, que la 
tenia el otro, y eran tenidos ambos, por casados. 

Al que cometia el pecado nefando ahorcaban, y ponian sumo estudio, y diligencia los Jueces, en “inquirir, si se 
coméetia esta culpa en las Republicas, para castigarla, por tenerla por bestial, y agena de toda racon. 

Be Xus 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 78) 

El Hombre, que se vestia habitos de Muger, moria ahorcado; y lo mismo la Muger, que se ponia en habitos 
de Hombre. . 

Esta fue prohibicion, en la Lei Antigua, que dis Dios 4 su Pueblo; y da la racon Lira, diciendo: Que por 
escusar actos libidinosos, que en semejantes trages pueden solaparse, y encubrirse. 

Si algun Summo Sacerdote, 6 Pontifice era comprehendido en alguna culpa de deshonestidad, 6 era hallado 
con alguna Muger, era desterrado, y privado de sus bienes, y castigado, con otros maiores castigos ; pero si eran 
notados del pecado nefando, los quemaban en algunas partes, y en otras los ahorcaban, 6 mataban, como les parecia 
convenir, y satisfacer 4 la gravedad de el caso. | ; 

A las alcahuetas castigaban, con esta pena, averiguado, y sabido, por cierto, que usaban el oficio de tercera : 
La sacaban 4 la verguenga, y en la Placa, delante de todo el Pueblo, la quemaban los cabellos, con rajas de tea, 
hasta que Ilegaba el calor, y fuego 4 lo vivo de la cabeca, y asi afrentada con sus cabellos quemados, y untada toda 
la cabega con las gotas de la resina de la Tea, la despachaban 4 su casa. La diferencia de estos Indios, y nosotros 
en esto, no es otra, sino que nuestras Justicias usan encorogarlas, afrentandolas en publico ; aunque para quien no 
tiene verguenga de usar semejante oficio, no es mala coroga quemarle los cabellos ; y quien no se afrenta de ofender 
4 Dios, menos tendra por afrenta verse empapelada, y asi no es mal castigo, para quien no tiene verguenca, darle 
el que le puede poner temor, y causarle dolor, y escocimiento. Y si la persona, a quien se alcahueteaba era de 
estimacion, y autoridad, le daban maiores penas a la alcahueta. . 

La Muger, que con otra Muger tenia deleitaciones carnales, 4 las quales Ilamaban Patlache, que quiere decir 
Incuba, morian ambas por ello. 

Si alguno tenia acceso, con alguna Esclava agena, y la dicha Esclava moria estando prefiada, hacian Esclavo al 
que cometia esta culpa; pero si paria, llevabase el Padre la cria, y quedaba Uiére. Esta Lei no sigue la nuestra, 
que hace esclavo al Hijo de la Esclava, siguiendo el parto al vientre. 

Carirunto V. 

Donde se ponen las Lewes, que hablan contra los Ladrones, y se confutan otras Antiguas. 

Una de las cosas de que mas se afrentaban estas Gentes, era, hurtar lo ageno, conformandose, con aquella Sen- 
tencia, que dice: Lo que no quieres para ti, no lo quieras para otro; y como sea verdad, que ninguno quiere, 
que otro le tome las cosas, que son suias, y reconoce por proprias, tampoco querria quitarselas al vecino. -De 
aqui es, que jamais usaron Puertas, en el Tiempo de su Gentilidad; porque no era necesario defender nada 
con -ellas; siendo cierto, que sin Puertas estaba todo defendido, aunque para cubrir, y ocultar lo interior de la 
casa, usaban de un Caftigo, 4 manera de ¢arco, el qual ponian por puerta arrimado 4 los umbrales de la casa, y 
colgaban de él un sartal de tejuelas, 6 otras cosas, que pudiese hacer ruido; y el que llegaba A querer entrar, 6 
pedir algo, movia las tejuelas, y al ruido salian los de dentro 4 saber quien era, 6 qué queria, y el que Ilegaba, 
© entraba, de alli era despachado, con todo recato, y encogimiento, sin que huviese exceso en pasar los 
limites del recaudo, que trala. Esta era costumbre tan inviolable, que jamis se quebrantaba ; y de aqui se conocera, 
quan seguras tenian sus Haciendas los unos, de los otros, en sus casas ; pero porque no ai virtud moral, que puesta 
al albedrio del Hombre, sea de todo punto guardada, ia que por los mas de una Republica esto se execute, ai 
algunos, que lo quebrantan ; por eso digo, que es esto lo general (como veremos en otra parte) pero para lo par- 
ticular, y para los transgresores, tenian puestas las Leies siguientes. 

Era Lei, que nadie hurtase en general ; y si era cosa de valor, y el que lo havia hurtado, aun no lo havia gas- 
tado, 6 despendido, quitabaselo la Justicia, y al dicho ladron vendian por esclavo; pero si lo havia ia gastado, 6 
malbaratado, moria por ello. 

E] que hurtaba en la Placa, 6 Mercado, que laman Tianquizco, luego alli era muerto 4 palos, por tener por 
mui grave culpa, que en semejante lugar, y tan publico, huviese tanto atrevimiento. 

El que hurtaba cantidad de Magorcas de Maiz (que son las espigas del trigo de estas Indias) moria ahorcado 
por ello; y la misma pena tenia, si en los campos, y sembrados arrancaba matas de este dicho Maiz en cantidad. 

Erales permitido 4 los que pasaban de camino, tomar alguna, 6 algunas Macorcas para comer. Esta libertad, 
y permiso se uso en la Lei Antigua del Pueblo de Dios, concediendoseles 4 los que pasaban, poder comer en las 

U 

74 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Viftas, y Sembrados, lo que les bastase; y esto es lo que reprehendid Christo Nuestro Seftor 4 Ios Fariseos, 
quando notaron a sus sagrados discipulos, de que en el Dia del Sabado entraban en los Sembrados, y tomaban lo 
necesario, para satisfacer la hambre, lo qual les era permitido (como hemos dicho) porque la Lei daba este permiso, 
con tal, que no huviese exceso en el arrancar, 6 cortar. las espigas, y esto no era hurto; porque como se dice 
en el Derecho, la Necesidad no hace al Hombre ladron, sino la voluntad, y asi la necesidad les hacia entrar A 
coger espigas, las quales fregadas entre las manos, limpiaban los granos, y se los comian ; porque como dice la 
Glosa de este Capitulo, la Hambre escusa de ladronicio, por quanto la Necesidad carece de Lei. Y esta misma 
necesidad escusd 4 David, comiendo los Panes de la proposicion, que eran de solos los Sacerdotes, como tambien 
se lo refiere el Seftor, en este mismo Capitulo de San Matheo, y comer lo necesario, y no mas, se dice en el 
Derecho ser licito.. Y no sé si quedé de aqui la costumbre, que en nuestra Espafia se guarda, con los que entran en 
las Vilas, aunque sea en presencia del Vifiadero, como, no haga mas de comer, sin sacar ningun racimo, A lo 
menos dice el Glosador del Derecho, que de Derecho Divino le es licito 4 qualquiera comer uvas de Vifia agena. 

No pueden dejar de quedar reprehendidos los Antiguos Romanos, en este permiso, y licencia, que estos Indios 
tenian dada 4 los caminantes, y gente, que pasaba junto de los sembrados, para que pudiesen coger alguna, 6 
algunas Macorcas de la primera renglera de las caitas ; lo qual ellos prohibieron, con grandisimo rigor, ordenando, 
que de noche no se hurtase ninguna espiga de los sembrados, y no solo que no lo hurtasen, ni cortasen, pero que 
ni aun la pisasen ; y 4 los comprehendidos en el quebrantamiento de esta Lei, si era Mancebo ia de edad suficiente, 
que de ella se pudiese colegir su malicia, moria por ello, sacrificado 4 la Diosa Ceres, y con mas rigor, que si fuera 
homicida*; y si era menor de edad, era acotado por el albedrio del Pretor, ante quien pasaba esta acusacion, y 
pagaba él, 6 sus deudos por él, el dano hecho, con el doble, 6 tres tanto. Siendo, pues, los Romanos los que se 
preciaron de usar de las Leies de las doce Tablas; y llevando esta, con tanto rigor, en cosa tan leve, no es mara- 
villa, que otras Barbaras Naciones del Mundo aian incurrido, en tan grande inhumanidad; y nombremos por 
primeras 4 los de Atenas, que mientras les durd las que Draco (Antiguo, y Sabio Filosofo) les did, morian por 
qualquiera pequefio delito, el que lo cometia; y la misma pena tenia el que hurtaba una sola Aceituna, como se le 
averiguase el hurto. De esta indiscreta constitucion de Leies no se escaparon los Delvices, moradores, y vecinos 
del Monte Caucaso, que por qualquier delito, y hurto pequefio cortaban las cabecas 4 los que las cometian. Otros 
sus vecinos de estos dichos, tenian su contrario extremo, que por delito, ni causa grave que fuese, no los mataban, 
sino que los desterraban de su Patria 4 los delinquentes ; asi lo dice de ambas Gentes, Estrabon. 

Era Lei, y con rigor guardada, que si alguno vendia por esclayo algun Nifio perdido, fuese esclavo el que lo 
vendis, y su hacienda se partiese en dos partes, la una para el Nifio vendido, y la otra para el que lo havia com- 
prado ; y si eran muchos los que havian hecho la dicha venta, eran todos vendidos, y hechos esclavos por ella. 
Vendian por esclavo al que tenia alguna Tierra en deposito, 6 en terceria, y la vendia sin licencia de la Justicia. 

Carituto VI. 
De las Leies tocantes, y pertenecientes a las Guerras, y Soldados. 

Una de las condiciones, que en la Guerra se piden, y la principal, es, que sea movida con causa justa, determi- 
nada por Ragon, y Justicia, sin la qual no se puede Namar buena, ni ragonable, sino mala, y mui mala; y aunque 
no en todas las Naciones del Mundo se ha guardado esta condicion, porque entre Infieles los mas se han preciado 
de Tiranos, i4 que no aian sido todos, estos Indios Mexicanos mostraron en su Gentilidad, preciarse de ella, y asi 
fue Lei establecida, entre ellos ; y no sé si alguna vez quebrantada (despues que se introdujeron en el Imperio) por 
alguno de sus Reies, y Principes, que ninguna Guerra se movia, que no fuese justa. Para cumplir con esta con- 
dicion, y no faltar en ninguna de las que eran necesarias para la justificacion de los que la movian, se ordenaba 
por este modo. Si algun Pueblo se rebelaba, 6 causaba motin, luego embiaban los Sefiores de los tres Reinos 

* This is an exaggeration : the laws of the Romans were not extremely severe; and if the sentence ‘Let him die the death’ had been inscribed 
amongst the laws of the Twelve Tables, it would not have been interpreted by them to mean ‘ Let him be crucified ;’ a very usual mode of capital 
punishment amongst the Jews; which totally overthrows the argument of a writer ina late number of the Quarterly Review, who contends that 
revealed religion dispensed with the necessity of severe penal enactments ;—since how did it happen that stoning to death, burning to death, and 
crucifying, were common punishments amongst God’s chosen people? Perhaps it will be foolishly replied, that because of the hardness of their 
hearts it was so. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 75 

Principales, que eran Mexico, Tetzcuco, y Tlacupa, Gente, para que, de secreto, supiesen si aquella Rebelion 
era movida de todo el Pueblo, 6 por sola voluntad del Sefior, que lo tenia 4 cargo, y governaba; si se averiguaba 
ser por el Sefior, luego proveian Capitanes, y Jueces, para que con numero de Gente, fuesen 4 prender al amoti- 
nador, y rebelde, y mandaban hacer de él publica Justicia, y de aquellos, que se hallasen comprehendidos, y culpados, 
en la conjuracion ; pero si el algamiento, y rebeldia nacia de todo el Pueblo, en comun, embiabanles 4 requerir 
diversas veces, que se sujetasen a la obediencia de los Reies, que los tenian 4 su cargo, por Vasallos, pagando los 
tributos, y pechos, que tenian de obligacion ; si venian en ello, y se humillaban, eran perdonados ; pero si menospre- 
ciaban las amonestaciones, y ruegos de los Reies, y Legados, 6 Embaxadores, que iban con la Embaxada ; embiabanles 
ciertas Armas, y Rodelas, en sefial de amenaga, y desafio ; y luego pregonaban la Guerra contra ellos 4 Fuego, y Sangre ; 
pero de tal manera, y con tal condicion, que en qualquiera tiempo, y hora, que se bolviesen de Paz, y se rindiesen 
4 la obediencia, cesaba Iuego la Guerra ; porque no pretendian nombre de crueles Tiranos, sino de Reies humanos, 
y solo querian sujetar voluntades, y no matar, y quitar vidas: condicion por cierto digna de consideracion, y nota. 
De las Naciones Antiguas sé me ofrece la Romana, de quien dice Tito Livio, haver tenido esta costumbre, los 
quales no hacian Guerra 4 ningun Pueblo, ni Republica, por agravios que les hiciesen, ni por traiciones, que les 
armasen, sin que primero los amonestasen, y procurasen atraer de Paz; y quando por este modo no querian, 
procedian en la causa por amenacas, y desafio; para lo qual era nombrado el Sacerdote maior, de los que tenian 
por nombre Feciales (como ia hemos dicho, en otra parte) al qual llamaban por excelencia, Pater patratus, y ves- 
tido de Sacerdotales Ornamentos iba 4 la Ciudad, de quien se havia recibido el agravio, 6 injuria; y antes de entrar 
en ella, Hamaba algun Portero, 5 persona (la primera que encontraba) y le decia ciertas deprecaciones, ruegos, y 
protestaciones, 6 requerimientos, persuadiendo & la Ciudad, 4 que se bolviese 4 la obediencia Romana, 6 que le 
satisficiese, en lo que era deudora. Hecho esto, ibase de alli a la Placa, y embiaba a decir 4 los Governadores, y 
Magistrados de la Ciudad su legada ; los quales presentes, dabales cuenta de su venida, y rogabales, que acudiesen 
4 sus obligaciones, y que satisficiesen el dano hecho 4 la Republica Romana, sefialandoles para la respuesta diez 
dias de placo; y si pedian mas termino, para deliberar, se le concedia, por otros diez, y luego otro, hasta treinta, 
y al cumplimiento de cada diez dias, bolvia 4 saber lo determinado, y resuelto ; y si pasados no se rendian, ni suje- 
taban, sino que permanecian en su rebeldia, desafiabalos, diciendo de esta manera: Oie Jupiter, y tu Juno, y 
Quirino, y todos los Dioses Celestiales, y Vosotros tambien los Terrenales, y los de el Infierno, oid: Delante de 
Vosotros testifico ser aqueste Pueblo injusto, que no quiere satisfacer lo que debe, y por tanto Io, y el Pueblo 
Romano (cuio Legado soi) le determinamos hacer Guerra. Luego tomaba una Langa un poco quemada, 6 ensan- 
grentada, que para este efecto llevaba, y arrojabala dentro de los terminos de aquella Ciudad, y Provincia; y otros 
dicen, que tiraba una Saeta; y sease lo que se fuere, esta era la ceremonia principal, dejando otras muchas, que 
tambien hacian. Hecho esto, se bolvia 4 Roma, y acompafiandose de los otros Sacerdotes, sus Colegas, y Feciales, 
entraba en el Senado, a dar racon de lo acaecido, y certificaba ser justa la Guerra, y que licitamente podian darla. 
De esto dice mucho Servio Grammatico, en los Comentos de Virgilio; de manera, que jamas movieron Guerra 
los Romanos, que no fuese justificandola, con las moniciones, y requerimientos dichos, lo qual vemos haver 
acostumbrado estas Gentes Occidentales, y ser ordenadas por los Sacerdotes, sin cuio parecer (como hemos dicho 
en otra ocasion) no se movian 4 hacer Guerra 4 ningun Pueblo, y guardabase esta costumbre, y Lei inviolable- 
mente ; y aun en el modo del desafio parece, que convinieron, porque los Romanos arrojaban Langa, 6 Saeta, 4 los 
desafiados, y estos Indios ofrecian la Saeta, con una Rodela, la qual era la sefial cierta del desafio, y con esto se 
bolvian 4 dar racon de lo hecho, y puede ser que fuese a este acto algun Sacerdote, como iba en Roma; porque es 
mucha racon, que el que da el consejo, intervenga en la cosa aconsejada, maiormente si es Persona de autoridad, 
como lo han sido siempre entre todas las Naciones de el Mundo los Sacerdotes, y en especial entre estos Indios, 
que los han tenido en grandisima veneracion. 

Era Lei, que degollasen 4 los que en la Guerra hacian algun dafio 4 los enemigos, sin licencia del Capitan, 6 si 
acometian antes de tiempo, 6 si se apartaban de la Vandera, 6 Compaiiia, 6 si quebrantaban, y traspasaban algun 
bando hechado, por el Capitan. Esta es Lei mui ordinaria, en las Guerras, para que las cosas de ella sucedan, 
como se pretende ; porque & no ser asi, y querer cada uno seguirla de sus antojos, seria ir errado todo, é incurrir 
en el peligro de la muerte, que 4 los ojos tienen: Verdad sea, que algunas veces se toléra esta ultima condicion, 
por otros maiores bienes, que hico la Persona, que la quebrantd ; de lo qual se me ofrecen dos exemplos: el pri- 
mero pone Tito Livio, en un Mancebo Romano, de grande esfuerco, y valentia, por el qual fue vencido el Exercito 

76 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

contrario de los Albanos, y metiendole en Roma triunfando, llevaba por trofeo la vestidura de un cufiado suioi 
casado con su Hermana, al qual havia muerto en la Guerra; y como lo saliese 4 recibir su Hermana, y conociese 
por el vestido, con que Horacio entraba triunfando ser muerto su esposo, comen¢d 4 Ilorar, y hacer extremos, 
en medio de tanto regocijo, con que los demas festejaban la Gloria de el vencimiento ; y movido Horacio 4 safia de 
las lagrimas, y consideradas las.de su Hermana, sacd la espada, y diola de estocadas, de que luego murid, sin ser 
poderosos A defenderla de la muerte los que se hallaron presentes al caso ; y quando la vido espirar, dijole Horacio : 
Vaia con los muertos, la que llora al enemigo del Pueblo Romano, difunto, y muerto, sintiendo mas la muerte del 
esposo, enemigo de la Patria, que la de dos Hermanos, muertos en defensa de ella, y el Triunfo, que el tercero 
gana con la Victoria del muerto. Quedaron todos asombrados del hecho, y Horacio en manos de la Justicia, para 
degollarle, loraba el Padre, y decia, quando lo vido al pie del suplicio, y horea, hablando con los Jueces : Como 
es posible, que aquel, que poco ha libro al Pueblo Romano, en su afliccion, y conflicto, este aora preso en la Paz, 
y que las manos, que desataron las ataduras de la muerte de los Romanos, estén atadas para recibirla? Fue tanto 
lo que se movio el Pueblo, acordandose del maior bien recibido por el valeroso Mancebo, que olvidado del mal 
presente, lo defendid, oponiendose a la Justicia, tolerando un yerro hecho, por gratificar otro maior bien 
recibido. 

El segundo es aquel bando, que hechd el Rei Saul, mandando por él, que nadie fuese osado 4 comer bocado, 
hasta que consiguiese la Victoria, que iba siguiendo de los Palestinos Filisteos, el qual bando, y pregon fue debajo 
de juramento, y pena de muerte, al que lo quebrantase: pero no sabiendolo el Principe Jonatas, su Hijo, por estar 
en lo fuerte de la Batalla, y peléa, quando su Padre lo mands, comio de un poco de Panal, que hallo en el camino, 
iendo en el alcance de los enemigos, y mui cansado ; y siendo comprehendido en este quebrantamiento de precepto, 
quiso el Padre matarlo ; pero no lo consintid el Pueblo, y multitud de Soldados, diciendo, que nunca Dios permi- 
tiese, que Jonatis muriese, haviendo sido el principio, ¢ instrumento de haverles dado’ Dios 4 sus manos los 
enemigos, de cuia Victoria era suia la Gloria; y ahade Josefo, en las Antiguedades Judaicas, que lo libraron del 
juramento de el Rei, y manos de su Padre, queriendo antes quedar agradecidos del bien recibido, que admirados 
del Animo de un Hombre, que por no quebrantar una Lei, se mostraba severo, homicida de su proprio Hijo. 

Tenia Pena de muerte, el que quitaba a otro la presa, y cautivo, que por su persona havia havido en la Guerra; 
la misma pena se daba, juntamente con perdimiento de bienes, al Seftor, 6 Principal, que en algun Baile, 6 Fiesta, 
© en acto de Guerra sacaba las Insignias, 6 alguna Divisa, 6 sefal, que fuese como las Armas, 6 Divisas de los 
Reies de Mexico, Tetzcuco, y Tlacupan, sobre lo qual solia haver entre los Sefiores, y Potentados grandes disen- 
siones, y Guerras. 

Al traidor, que descubria 4 los enemigos los secretos de la Guerra, 6 las cosas comunicadas, para el consegui- 
miento de ella, hacian pedacos, cuios bienes eran confiscados para el Visco Real, y todos sus Hijos, Deudos, y 
Parientes quedaban hechos perpetuos esclavos, y manchados, para siempre, como lo guedan entre nosotros los que 

han traido Sambenito, 6 decienden de ellos. 

Capituxto VII. 

De otras Leies extravagantes, y diversas, que no siguen orden, ni especie. 

Los Jueces de qualquier Consejo, que fuesen, tenian pena de muerte, si hacian alguna Relacion falsa al Rei, o 
Sefor Superior, acerca de algun pleito, y causa, que en su Tribunal, y Juzgado pasase, y la misma, los que sen- 
tenciaban las causas injustamente, cuia execucion, vimos en uno de los Capitulos pasados ; y ciertamente que es 
Lei, que se debia guardar inviolablemente, asi para la seguridad de las conciencias de esos mismos Jueces, pues 
que en hacer contra Justicia, hacen contra ragon, y se condenan, como para el bien, y provecho de la Republica, 
la qual es bien regida, y governada, quando la Justicia corre por parejo, entre los Litigantes, y no ai quien se 
amotine, quando se conoce, que se da al que se debe. é 
A los Hijos, que heredaban Hacienda de sus Padres, y la gastaban mal, y la desperdiciaban, ahorcaban; y 
castigaban alos que por alguna racon no daban muerte, con penas, y castigos graves; porque decian, que eran 
_dignos de gran reprehension los que no estimaban, y tenian en mucho el sudor ageno, sin el qual, el que lo deses- 
timaba padeceria hambre, y trabajo, y como a indigno de la vida, era racon, que la perdiese. la Pena, con que 
los Romanos castigaban esta culpa, era, no permitir que le fuese entregada la Herencia, como lo dicen Ciceron, 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. Wd 

y Ulpiano; y en el mismo grado ponian al prodigo, y despreciador de su legitima, que al furioso, y loco, y 
corrian ambos por una pena. Consideren las Republicas Christianas, si por ventura corrieran por ellas estas Leies, 
los que huvieran muerto por esta culpa, y adviertan, que quando esta Lei Humana falte, que esta ai la de Dios, y 
su estrecho juicio, y el que le ha de ser hecho acerca de esta tan grande perdicion ; y quan grande confusion es no 
mirar, que los bienes heredados es grande afrenta perderlos, en especial quando se gastan en vanidades, y solturas 
de mogos, y gente loca, que no atiende 4 mas que triunfar, el Tiempo que dura, y seri posible (lo qual Dios no 
quiera) que el que los dejo lo esté padeciendo en la otra vida. 

La misma Pena tenian los que quedaban por Tutores, si no daban buena cuenta 4 los Menores, de su Tutoria, 
de los bienes, que dejaban 4 su cargo, los Padres difuntos. Esta fue una de las Leies de las Doce Tablas, de que 
tanto se preciaron los Romanos, como lo dice Ciceron; y sera tambien racon, que aprendiesen de Indios, que 
tampoco estiman los Espafioles esta Lei, y que no corriese por ellos un abuso tan malo de entregar las Tutelas con 
muchos papeles de gasto, y poco dinero de recibo. 

Y para maior confusion, digo, que cierto Cavallero murié en estas Indias, que dej6 4 dos Hijos, que tenia, 
grandisimas Herencias, y tanto, que iendose 4 casar el maior de ellos, algunas leguas de la Ciudad, donde moraba, 
me certificaron, que todo el repostero era de sedas, y los garrotillos con que apretaban las cargas, y las herraduras 
de las mulas, que las levaban, eran de Plata; y hecho el casamiento, y gasto de él, queriendo el Tutor (que los 
havia tenido 4 cargo desde Nifios) darle su hacienda, como Hombre casado, y que tenia casa, entremetio un vale 
(entre otros papeles) de quarenta mil pesos de solas colaciones, que se havian gastado en el casamiento, y Fiestas ; 
y por este vale se hechara mui bien de ver la cantidad, que Ilevarian los otros, de cosas mas quantiosas. Esto he 
dicho por dos cosas; la una, para persuadir, que quien no lo suda, y trabaja, no siente perderlo; y la otra, para 
dar 4 entender, que al que no tiene conciencia, no le duele, ni le remuerde afiadir vales, porque todo va a costa del 
vecino, no advirtiendo, que todos estos vales quedan sentados en los libros de las cuentas de Dios. 

Tenia pena de muerte, el que quitaba, 6 apartaba los Mojones, y Terminos, 6 sefiales de las Tierras, y Here- 
dades. . 

Los Mancebos no tenian licencia de beber Vino, hasta llegar 4 tanta Edad, y Afios, los quales estaban ia sabidos 
por Lei; y asi, era cosa ignominiosa emborracharse, lo qual castigaban con graves penas ; porque si era Mancebo, 
Ilevabanlo 4 una casa, que llamaban Telpuchcalli, y alli lo mataban 4 garrotagos ; y si era Principal, y tenia oficio 
en la Republica, 6 en la Guerra, quitandole el oficio, le dejaban afrentado, y sin él. 

El esclavo que estaba preso, y podia soltarse de Ja prision, y se entraba en Palacio, sin sabiduria de las Guardas, 
y Porteros, quedaba libre de su esclayitud, y de las penas en que pudiera ser condenado; que segun esto, las 
casas de los Reies Indios, eran como los Asilos, y Lugares de Refugio antiguos, para los condenados, que no es 
poco de notar. 

Era Lei, que muriese sacrificado, y abierto por los pechos, el que hacia Hechicos, y Maleficios, para que 
viniese alguna ruina, 6 mal sobre la Ciudad. Esta Lei era del Pueblo de Dios, donde mando esto por expresas 
palabras: No sufriras, que vivan los maleficos, que son los que hechan suertes, y hacen encantos. Al que mataba 

con bebedicos, era Lei, que muriese ahorcado por ello. 

Carituto VIII. 

De los Establecimientos, y Leies de los Indios, de los Reinos de Guatemala, y otras Provincias sus 
Convecinas. 

AunavueE estos Indios Guatimaltecos, convenian con los otros referidos arriba, de estos Reinos de la Nueva- 
Espaiia, en muchas de sus Leies, si no en todas, no eran los castigos, y penas iguales ; porque parece encontrarse 
en ellas, siendo en unas, mas remisos, y en otras, mas graves sus castigos: por lo qual me ha parecido ser 
necesario, tratar del buen Govierno de esta Republica, como de Reino diviso, y apartado de los id dichos, de esta 
Nueva-Espafia, y decir sus Leies, y castigos determinados en ellas. Pero hemos de notar primero, que los Reies, 
que suelen ser, y son los que ordenan Leies ; y las mandan promulgar en sus Reinos, y Republicas, no estaban 
libres en esta de Guatemala, quando el que lo era se preciaba mas de Tirano, que de Rei, y tenia su castigo, y paga, 

X 

78 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

como el que por tirania la tenia merecida. Para lo qual era costumbre mui usada, entre ellos, que quando el 
Sefior, y Rei era tirano, y cruel, los que eran Cabecas de Familias, 6 Casas Solariegas, como solemos decir 
nosotros los Espafioles, los quales se sentian agraviados de él, comunicaban sus quejas, y agravios 4 la Gente 
Principal de el Reino, mui en secreto; y si hallaban en ellos animo de acometer aquella empresa, juntabanse 
los conjurados, y mataban al Rei, y daban por esclavos, y cautivos 4 todas sus Mugeres, y Hijos, y confiscaban 
todos sus bienes, y repartianlos entre si; pero si todo el Reino, 6 Pueblo, no convenia en la conspiracion de los 
querellantes, y agraviados, acudian con su demanda al Sefor, que entendian ser mas poderoso de. los vecinos, y 
comarcanos 4 su Reino, y ofrecianle (para moverle) todos los despojos, y hacienda de el Rei, y que le darian sus 
Mugeres y Hijos por esclavos. Si el Rei vecino lo aceptaba, embiaba su Gente de Guerra, para que matasen al 
Tirano, por el mejor y mas seguro modo que pudiesen ; y muerto, levantaban otro Rei en su lugar, y no por 
esto eran condenados, ni juzgados los conjurados en esta conspiracion, y muerte, ni se les daba pena alguna. 

Qualquiera Cavallero, 6 Cacique que impedia, que los Macehuales, y Vasallos pagasen los Tributos, y Rentas 
debidos al Rei, moria con la pena del conspirador, y la misma tenia el que los amotinaba, y los movia a ser inobe- 
dientes ; y ponian luego otro en su lugar, y dabanle la autoridad, que el conspirador, 6 amotinador tenia. 

El que mataba a otro, moria por ello, como ha sido usado en las mas Republicas del Mundo. 

Si la Muger del Rei cometia adulterio, notabase la Persona, con quien le havia cometido ; y si era Principal, y 
Noble, dabanle garrote, y de esta manera morian ambos ; pero si era plebeio, y del comun, era despefiado. 

Si alguno tenia copula con alguna esclava, era castigado con pena pecuniaria, y algunas veces daba el fornicario, 
otro tanto dinero por la culpa cometida, como valia la esclava, con quien la cometid, 6 compraba otra de. igual 
valor, y quantia; pero si la culpa havia sido cometida contra algun Sefior, de quien se supiese haver tenido este 
trato, con la dicha esclava, doblabase la pena, por racon de haver sido maior la ofensa. 

Al Ladron castigaban con pena pecuniaria, y todo aquello, en que era condenado, por racon del hurto, se’ 
aplicaba al Rei, y a su Fisco, de mas de que pagaba 4 su duefio todo lo que parecia haver hurtado: esto se entiende, 
sino era notado de Ladron frequente, y ordinario ; pero si lo tenia por costumbre, y era incorregible, lo ahorcaban; 
pero primero precedia requerir 4 todos sus Parientes, si los tenia, para que redimiesen su vida, pagando por él, las 
condenaciones en que estaba comprehendido; y si ellos se escusaban, y respondian estar id hartos de traerle en 
hombros, y de pagar por él, los hurtos que hacia, y pedian, que lo castigasen, entonces le ahorcaban, y con la 
muerte satisfacia, lo que no podia restituir en vida. 

A todos los que sentenciaban 4 muerte, era mui ordinario, y comun confiscarles los Bienes, y hacer esclavas a 
sus Mugeres, y Hijos, que no es poco tiranica esta Lei; porque dado caso, que en algunas cosas sea licito castigar 
alos Hijos, en las culpas de los Padres, como lo vemos en los Herejes, y Judios, mandando los. Sacros Canones, 
que sean comprehendidos en los castigos de sus Padres; porque como dice una Glosa, las mas veces acontece 
seguir los Hijos las malas costumbres @ inclinaciones de sus Padres: no en todos los casos es licito, porque el 
homicida, que mata repentinamente a otro, no hico pecado, en que pudiese incurrir culpa en su Hijo, y asi, no 
sera racon, que lleve parte en el castigo, que por Lei se debe dar al Padre, y esta no es culpa de infamia, aunque 
es agravio del proximo ; y donde no ai traicion contra Dios, negando su Nombre, ni-contra el. Rei, usurpandole su 
Real Estado y Corona; no es ragon, que la culpa sea de participantes, no siendo complices en el delito; y asi, 
decimos, que si ai culpas, que merezcan este castigo, como es en los traidores, que corre su traicion, en confis- 
cacion de sus bienes, y derribamiento de Casas, sembrandolas de sal, y en infamia de sus Hijos. Ai otras, que no 
incluien en s} tanto rigor, aunque no escusan, ni libran de la muerte al que peco, y quedan sus Mugeres, y Hijos 
libres de infamia, por racon de la culpa ; y se verifica ser maior la tirania de esta Lei de lo que parece ; porque aun 
entre las que tanto van miradas, y remiradas, como son las dichas, de que nuestro Christianismo usa, no ai ninguno 
que haga esclavo al Hijo libre, y 4 la Muger, que lo es tambien, por culpas agenas; porque ai diferencia 4 quedar 
manchados en una culpa de participantes 4 quedar hechos esclavos por ella; porque los manchados, y amancillados, 
que son comprehendidos en la culpa de sus Padres, aunque lo quedan, no 4 lo menos esclavos, que es perdida la 
Libertad en que Dios los crid, lo qual no es licito que pierda, por quanto es la cosa mas preciosa de quantas ai en 
la Vida, fuera de la misma vida, que se goga, y no qualquicra culpa los ha de condenar & tanta pena, si no son 
aquellas dichas, que por su atrocidad deben castigarse en las Generaciones futuras de los que las cometieron. 

A los fornicarios, conviene & saber, soltero, y soltera, que eran comprehendidos en la fornicacion, castigaban 
con pena pecuniaria, lo qual se acostumbra en los amancebados, que siendo convencidos de su delito, son conde- 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. . 79 

nados en el Marco de Plata, 6 en otra quantia, conforme son las Tierras; y absueltos de esta culpa, en lo temporal, 
aunque no de la espiritual, para lo qual tienen que hacer penitencia para satisfacer 4 Dios, que no pide Marcos, ni 
oncas de Plata, sino coracones arrepentidos de pecar, y obras buenas de satisfacion. Pero si havia parte que 
representase injuria, como es Padre, y Madre, por Hijo; 6 Hermano, por Hermana, y reclamaba sobre ello, le 
daban pena de muerte; y quando menos, le hacian Esclavo, que es lo mismo que nosotros usamos: si ia no es, 
que perdona la parte, por alguna causa de las que legitimamente se conceden. 

Al que hacia fuerca 4 alguna Muger, si la culpa Iegaba 4 tener execucion, moria por ello ; pero sino llegaba 4 
acto, hacianlo esclavo, por la violencia, y fuerca, que pretendid, acometiendo 4 cumplirla. El que hurtaba alguna 
cosa de los Templos, si era de valia, y precio, moria despefiado, por el grande atrevimiento que tuvo, en llegar 4 
las cosas que decian ser sagradas, y dedicadas 4 su Dios; y si eran leves, lo hacian esclavo. 

Carituto IX. 

Donde se prosigue la materia de el pasado. 

Era Lei inviolable entre estas Gentes Guatemaltecas, que 4 todos los Nobles, y Sefiores, que en la Guerra 
prendiesen, los matasen, y sacrificasen 4 sus Idolos, y sus carnes fuesen despues comidas de los Reies, y Sefores 
vencedores. La racon que daban para no perdonarlos, y sacrificarlos, y comerselos, era, querer poner terror, y 
espanto en los enemigos, para que los estimasen, y entendiesen, que los que 4 los Reies mataban, y comian, tam- 
bien matarian, y comerian 4 los Vasallos, pues eran en estimacion menos. Esto mismo (aunque disimuladamente) 
parece haver hecho Ptolomeo, Hijo de Cleopatra, Reina de Egipto, como lo cuenta Josepho, el qual despues de 
haver vencido una Batalla, en Judea; y haviendo puesto en huida a los moradores de ella, llegd la tarde de este 
dia, en que vencid a ciertos Pueblos, donde halls muchas Mugeres, y Nifios que se havian recogido alli, con el 
temor de la muerte, y las mandd matar 4 todas, sin dejar ninguno de todos ellos, y hacerlos pedacos, y hechar en 
muchos calderos, y poner 4 cocer, fingiendo comer carne humana, y que ellos eran la comida de aquel dia, para 
poner espanto, y miedo a los contrarios, creiendo de ellos ser verdad, que comian carne humana; y que la suia, si 
venia 4 sus manos, havia de tener por sepulcro sus crueles, y obscuras entrafias, porque se le diesen de paz, sin 
venir 4 las manos. 

El Vasallo, que huia de su Sefior, cuia fuga, si se sabia con tiempo, y podian haverle 4 las manos, lo mataban, 
y le confiscaban todos sus Bienes, y 4 sus Hijos, y Muger (si los tenia) hacian esclavos. Esta Lei, como la otra 
dicha, en el Capitulo pasado, era tiranica, y cruel. 

Al que cometia crimen de traicion contra su Rei, y Republica, 6 descubria los secretos de la Guerra, 6 se 
pasaba 4 los enemigos, mataban, y confiscaban sus bienes, y su Muger, y Hijos quedaban esclavos. 

Era Lei, que nadie cacase en Montes agenos, ni pescase en Aguas, fuera de sus terminos, y linderos, y a los 
que lo quebrantaban, si eran amigos, no los daban por incurridos en la condenacion de la pragmatica, pero quita- 
banles la caca, 6 pesca; y si eran enemigos, eran llevados ante el Rei, 6 sus Jueces, por cuia sentencia eran con- 
denados 4 muerte, y executada la pena; aunque algunas veces se comutaba esta muerte en esclavitud, segun al 
Rei le parecia. 

El que servia en Palacio, y quebraba algo, 6 perdia alguna cosa del servicio de su Sefior, pagabalo, segun el 
valor tenia la cosa perdida, 6 quebrada, aunque fuese de mui poca quantia. 

Si por ventura algun Padre havia mandado su Hija, en casamiento 4 algun Mancebo, y para obligarle el que se 
la havia pedido por Muger, le havia dado algo: si despues el dicho Padre se hacia afuera, y negaba su Hija, y no 
la daba, hacianle pagar lo que en orden de esto havia recibido, en qualquier quantia que fuese, y castigabanlo : 
porque no consentian, que ninguno burlase 4 otro, en semejantes casos, por ser caso que acaecia mui pocas veces. 

La Muger, que una vez era dotada, 6 la havian comprado, como ellos decian, no bolvia jamas a casa de sus 
Padres, ni entre sus Parientes, sino que en muriendo el Marido, la casaban, con otro de la Parentela, y muchas 
veces con el Hermano de el Marido difunto, y esto era mui comun casarse con los cufiados, como hemos visto en 
las Leies Mexicanas, y se acostumbro, en otras mas Antiguas Republicas. . 

La Muger, que por alguna causa, se ausentaba de su Marido, 6 se iba con otro, 6 a casa de sus Padres, no 

380 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

tenia pena ninguna por Lei establecida; pero si requerida del Marido, no queria bolver, se casaba con otra; 
porque en este caso las Mugeres eran poderosas 4 no seguir asus Maridos, si no querian hacer vida con ellos, 

y ellos se tornaban 4 casar, por no poder vivir sin Muger, por ragon de la comida, y otras cosas necesarias para 
la vida. 

Carituto X. 

De las Lewes, que teman los Indios de la Vera-Paz, y sus Provincias. 

Las Gentes de la Vera-Paz, y sus Provincias, asi como tenian Sefiorios que poselan, tenian Leies, con que regirlos ; 
porque como dejamos probado, no puede haver Republica sin Leies, con que ‘se ryan, y conserven, por ser lo 
contrario de esto, behetria, y confusion. Y para no errar en las del govierno del Pueblo, comencaban de Dios, y 
de su servicio, las que estos ordenaron, aunque en unas, y en otras fueron erradas, pues no conocieron a Dios, como 
debian conocerle, ni las que en orden de la Republica hicieron fueron de todo punto limpias de Tirania; pero ia que 
iban errados, en el conocimiento, no lo fueron en la intencion, pues en orden de ella las ordenaron. Y comencaron 
del Culto Divino, pareciendoles, que de su acierto nace la Policia del Pueblo: La primera de las quales era, honrar, 
y servir 4 Dios, para cuio servicio tenian ordenadas sus Fiestas, y Sacrificios. 

Este fue hecho Romano, cuio Pueblo y Gente, la primera Lei, que promulgé de todas las contenidas en las doce 
Tablas, fue el Culto Divino, y Honra de los Dioses, como lo dice Modestino en su primera Lei, y de esta Orde- 
nanca, y Lei fueron derivando las demas, para el buen govierno de su Republica. Y no porque iban errados, en 
esta primera Lei, -diciendo, que acariciasen 4 los Dioses, y se Jlegasen a ellos con sumision, y humildad, era mala la 
intencion, pues iba guiada 4 lo que era racon que la Divinidad fuese conocida, por merecedora de perpetuo servicio 
al qual acudian con Oraciones, y Sacrificios; y lo mismo se dice de estos Indios de la Vera-Paz, acerca de esta 
primera Lei, con que comengaban las de su Republica, porque quando hacian oracion, invocaban aquel, que les 
havia dado el sér de vida que tenian, y havia sembrado en sus coragones, € impreso en sus Almas la lumbre con que 
lo buscaban. 

No tenian pena ninguna ordenada acerca de esta Lei; y sera la racon, porque como eran Idolatras, no conocian 
ningun quebrantamiento de ella, y tambien porque en los actos interiores (como en otra parte hemos dicho) no 
tiene que hacer la Lei Humana: y amar, 6 no amar a Dios, cae debajo de actos interiores, para cuio quebranta- 
miento esta ordenada la Divina. Tampoco los Romanos ordenaron castigo, ni pena acerca de este mandamiento, 
remitiendolo 4 Dios, diciendolo por estas palabras formales: Qu secus fawit, Deus ipse vindex sit: El que lo con- 
trario hiciere, quiera Dios ser el mismo que lo vengue; como si dijese: Al que no guardare esta Lei, castigue 
Dios, como el que puede en los actos interiores del Alma, y actos exteriores del cuerpo ; por esto no tenian puesta 
pena, y tambien, porque teniendo por cierta su Religion, que profesaban tan antigua, y entre ellos aprobada, por 
sus Profetas falsos, y theologos, y adivinos, y por los mismos predicada, y por sus Sacerdotes exercitada, con 
grande y admirable devocion, penitencia, y exemplos de honestidad, y por los Reies, y Sefiores mandada guardar, 
tenian por caso de gran crimen quebrantarla, temiendo 4 los Dioses contenidos en ella, de los quales esperaban el 
castigo. 

Era Lei, que los Hechiceros, que con pacto del Demonio hacian mal 4 la Republica, muriesen por ello, dandoles 
garrote, 6 ahorcandolos ; y muchos de estos mataban 4 muchos, fingiendo darles salud con sus Hechicos ; de donde 
tomo ocasion cierto Sehor mui Principal, y de Vasallos, para consultar 4 uno de estos, que en su lengua llamaban 
Aheque, y fingiendose malo, y haciendo movimientos de estar agonicando, pididle remedio 4 su mal; el Hechicero, 
que no conocid la astucia, ni tampoco sabia como curarle, le dijo: Sefor, tu has hecho pecado con una Muger 
Viuda, por eso te quieres morir. Viendo el Seftor la mentira tan clara, y manifiesta, porque recorriendo su memoria 
no hallo en ella haver cometido jamas tal culpa, conociod su engafio, y manddle ahorcar, y desengaié 4 los suios de 
aquel manifiesto embuste. 

Si alguno mataba a otro, el que lo sabia luego lo denunciaba al Rei, 6 4 su Justicia, la qual preguntaba con dili- 
gencia, quien era el muerto, y quien el matador, y la causa porque havia sido la contienda, 6 quien se lo havia man- 
dado, y si tuvo complices, y compaiieros, en el hecho; y todo esto averiguado, despachabanse Ministros de Justicia, 
que mataban al matador, y 4 los comprehendidos en el delito. Esta muerte era darles garrote; y todo se hacia sin 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 81 

dilacion, y gastos de Letrados, y Procuradores ; los quales tienen de mafia, y costumbre, antes de sacarle del riesgo, 
tenerle consumida la bolsa al pobre reo. 

Cosa era mui comun entre estos Indios de la Vera-Paz, Tonilense los unos, a los otros; esto era, el que primero 
vencia al otro con astucia, y cautelas, como hallase quien se lo comprase ;_y por ser caso enorme, havia Lei contra 
el que lo prohibia; y averiguandose, que algunos de estos plagiarios havia delinquido en esto, sin dilacion lo mata- 
ban, dandole garrote; y demas de quitarle la vida, le vendian los Hijos, si los tenia, y la Muger, y del precio, que 
por ellos se daba, llevaba el Fisco Real cierta parte, y todo lo demas se gastaba en comidas, y bebidas, para todo el 
Pueblo, que para esta justicia y regocijo se combidaba, y juntaba en un Lugar publico. 

Quando rifiendo unos con otros, se herian (que pocas veces acaecia) era avisado el Sefior, por los Parientes del 
herido ; el qual luego que lo sabia, embiaba un hueso, 6 una hacha, 6 otra cosa a estas semejante, al heridor, como 
declarando por esto, que ia sabia su culpa; el heridor, 6 reo, que estaba cierto, de que ia el Rei, 6 Sefior sabia, lo 
que havia pasado, embiabale gente, que en su nombre confesase su culpa, y le rogase se la perdonase, poniendole 
delante la ocasion, y causas motivas, que havia tenido, para haverse demasiado; y aunque el dicho Sefor mostraba 
de presente mucho enojo, y dificultaba Ja misericordia, acriminando el delito, al fin lo sentenciaba, y mandaba, que 
pagase ciertas plumas ricas, que corrian en toda aquella tierra, por moneda, y con esto se quedaba libre, y el herido 
satisfecho en su querella. Esta condenacion se aplicaba al Fisco Real, y de ello no se daba nada 4 la parte. 

No tenia pena ninguna el que heria, 6 mataba esclavo suio; porque decian era su hacienda, y que hacian en 
ellos como en cosa propria, de la qual no havia que dar cuenta 4 nadie. Entre nosotros es pagar otro al Rei, y con 
esto queda satisfecha la muerte del esclavo. 

Al que mataba esclavo ageno, comunmente se lo mandaban pagar, y los Parientes del matador hechaban entre si, 
por cabecas la paga, y con esto quedaba la Lei cumplida ; aunque no entre Espafioles, que manda, que se dé el valor 
de otro, al Rei; pero no sé, qué fundamento pudieron tener estos Indios, para hacer esta diferencia entre la muerte 
del libre, y esclavo, si ia no es, que fue la misma, que tienen los Espafioles, y esta se quede para los Juristas, que 
profesan esta Facultad, porque aun para citar sus nombres faltaria papel, quanto, y mas los Textos, que ellos citan. 

El que mataba 4 Hombre libre, moria por ello, sin remision, por ser esta Lei inviolable ; su muerte era darle 
garrote, 6 ahorcarle, que una de estas dos muertes era la ordinaria entre aquellas Gentes. 

Si el Marido mataba 4 la Muger, 6 la Muger al Marido, eran ahorcados por ello, 6 dados garrote ; y entre noso- 
tros encubados ; aunque ia consiente esta Lei, que se les dé garrote primero, por ser caso horrendo encubarlos, como 
solian, entre animales, enemigos del hombre, el qual con la rabia de la muerte, tenia cierta su desesperacion, lo 
qual se escusa muriendo antes de llegar a vér los animales crueles, que le dan por compafieros; y pienso, que esto 
ultimo, esta tambien derogado. 

Cariruto XI. 

De las Leies tocantes a la sensuahdad, y gente formearia, y se declara, con qué ONS 0S, Y¥ penas 
eran castigados, y corregidos. 

Era Lei, que el Mancebo, que tenia acceso 4 alguna Doncella, se casase con ella, y 4 esto era compelido, quando no 
queria ; y si la dicha Doncella estaba desposada con otro, quando cometio esta culpa, no la recibia; antes pedia, que 
le restituiese la Dote, 6 Arras, 6 otra qualquier cosa, que huviese dado ; lo qual pagaba el Mancebo violador a sus 
Padres de la Doncella violada, y con esto quedaba satisfecha esta causa. 

Al que cometia fornicacion con Viuda, 6 Esclava, condenabanle en sesenta plumas de las ricas, y preciadas, y 
otras veces en ciento, conforme era la culpa cometida ; tambien se estendia esta condenacion 4 otras cosas, como era 
Cacao, y Mantas. 

El que adulteraba con Muger casada, era condenado en la pena de cien plumas ; pero si la culpa era frequente, 
y muchas veces cometida, dabanles garrote a entrambos. 

El Mancebo libre, 6 esclavo, que era comprehendido, en haver adulterado, con la Muger del Sefior, 6 Principal, 
era luego muerto, con la muerte comun que acostumbraban, aunque algunas veces era entregado para ser sacrificado 
el Dia de sus Fiestas. 

¥ 

82 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Si algun esclavo, soltero, 6 casado, tenia aiuntamiento con Muger esclava, dentro de la casa de su Sefior, era Lei, 
que fuesen sacados ambos fuera del Pueblo, y muertos 4 pedradas, como en la Lei Antigua de los Judios, aunque 
algunas veces la hincaban un palo, por la garganta, a ella, 6 la daban garrote, y de esta manera moria, y él era entre- 
gado. para el ordinario Sacrificio. 

Quando algun casado cometia esta culpa, con Doncella, tenianlo por grande afrenta sus Deudos, y Parientes ; 
y disimulabanlo, encubriendo el pecado, por la infamia que de saberse se les seguia, y porque la moca no perdiese 
casamiento ; (que no era poca discrecion) pero si alguna vez no se guardaba este secreto, y se ponia la causa en 
tela de Justicia, condenaban al adultero, en cien plumas, que era la pena. 

Si el casado pecaba con Viuda, 6 con casada, castigabanle una, y dos veces; y si los bolvian 4 coger en la 
misma culpa, atabanles las manos, por las espaldas, y suspendianlos en el Aire, como quando estropean, y asi 
suspendidos, y levantados del suelo, ponianles debajo cierta Ierba ofensiva, y de mal olor, 4 la qual ponian fuego, 
y dabanle humago con el humo que de si hechaba, por un grande rato, y con este castigo quedaba pagada la culpa, 
y amonestandolos a la enmienda, los embiaban libres, y si no se enmendaban, pagaban con pena de muerte. 

A esta pena havia de preceder la acusacion del Marido, y dicese havyia muchos, de estos Indios, que eran buenos 
hombres, y pacientes, que no decian al Rei, 6 4 su Justicia el pecado cometido de su Muger ; pero para compur- 
garla del delito, le daban un Pajaro de los que ellos sacrificaban, y les decian, al adultero, y a ella, que sacrificasen 
por aquel delito, y que lo confesasen al modo, que acostumbraban, y con este Sacrificio, y Confesion quedaban 
contentos, y satisfechos los ofendidos, y no querian, ni pedian de su injuria otra vengan¢a ; y 4 todos los que con 
esta satisfacion disimulaban su afrenta, los tenian por hombres virtuosos, y Humanos. Quien duda, que no es 
virtud perdonar injurias, y mas si es acto hecho por amor de Dios, en el qual se incluie grandisimo merecimiento ? 
Pero de estos casos pocos ai de los nuestros, que los perdonen. 

Un mal abuso tenian estas Gentes acerca de esta materia, y era, que tenian de costumbre, quando llegaban 4 
estar malos, de confesar todas sus culpas, 6 al Medico, que los curaba, 6 al Sacerdote, 5 Hechicero, que contaba 
los Dias de su enfermedad, para sus supersticiones, 6 los Hijos 4 los Padres, y la Muger al Marido, y el Marido 4 
la Muger, donde se decian los pecados, que en salud havian hecho ; y era fuerga, que si la Muger havia adulterado, 
y decia verdad en su Confesion (como era cierto, que la decia) lo havia de saber su Marido, a quien se confesaba. 
De aqui nacio una Lei, que diciendo la Muger casada haver quebrantado la Fé conjugal, y haver adulterado con tal, 

6 tal Hombre, ora fuese soltero, ora casado, la dicha Muger fuese acusada del crimen, y declarado el complice 
juntamente, y sin mas testigos, ni probanea, sino por la confesion simple de la Muger, era el complice condenado, 
y castigado (aunque negase) con las penas en las Leies (de mas, 6 menos culpas) contenidas, y muchas veces con 
muerte, segun lo demandaba el caso. 

Esto dicho acaecid aun despues del Christianismo, y estando id Religiosos de Nuestro Padre Santo Domingo en 
la Tierra, aunque no en el mismo Pueblo, donde se efectud; y fue, que estando la Muger de un Cacique, 6 Prin- 
cipal de cierto Pueblo, enferma, y 4 la muerte, se confesd de haver tenido amistad, y trato ilicito, con cierto 
Mancebo, y pecado con él, y por sola esta confesion fue preso el acusado, y ahorcado por la culpa. Caso es grave, 
y de Gente tirana, pero mui usado en aquellas Gentes ; y la ragon, que daban para hacer estos castigos, sin mas 
informacion, ni probanga, que la confesion simple del enfermo, era decir, que en aquel paso no era licito mentir ; 
y que pues confesaba aquellas cosas, que era fuerca creer, que eran verdades, y que como tales havian de ser casti- 
gadas, para exemplo, en otros; pero gente apartada de Dios, y engafiada del Demonio, tambien podia mentir en 
aquel paso, y moverse por pasion, por solo hacer mal 4 alguno, con quien la tuviese, para solo vengarse en su 
castigo ; pero sease lo que se fuere, este mal abuso corria por aquellas Naciones, y de él tuvo origen esta Lei 
dicha. 

Algunos de aquellas Provincias fueron notados del pecado nefando, y asi havia Lei, que lo prohibia; porque 
aunque es verdad, que no siempre usaron de este bestial vicio, al fin se introdujo esta corruptela, como suelen 
introducirse otras, en las Republicas, lo qual acaecid de esta manera. Aparecioles un Demonio en figura de Man- 
cebo, el qual se llamaba Chin, aunque, segun la variedad de las lenguas, tenia varios, y diferentes Nombres, y los 
indujo 4 que lo cometiesen, como él lo cometid con otro Demonio en su presencia; y de aqui vino, que muchos 
de ellos no lo tuvieron, por pecado, diciendo, que pues aquel Dios (y por hablar mas propriamente, sucio, y vil 
Demonio) lo cometia, y persuadia, que no debia de ser pecado; pero no quedan escusados de haver cometido, el 
mas grave de todos los que se pueden llamar bestiales ; porque si este acto es en orden de la. generacion, ia se ve, 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 83 

que la misma Lei Natural incita, y ensefia, no ser licito, pues de él no se sigue el fin, que la Naturaleca 
pretende. 

Persuadidos, pues, 4 que no era pecado, vino de aqui 4 nacer costumbre de dar los Padres 4 sus Hijos Man- 
cebos un Nifio, para que lo tuviesen, por Muger, y usasen de él, como podian usar de ella; y de aqui tambien 
nacio la Lei, de que si alguno otro llegaba al muchacho, se lo mandaban pagar, condenandolo en las penas, en que 
incurria el que violaba el estado de el Matrimonio conjugal. 

No se maraville el Prudente, y Sabio Lector de oir Lei semejante, que quien esta sin Dios, facilmente cae, y se 
despefia, porque es, como el que camina a obscuras, por lugares barrancosos, y sin candela, que cada paso que da 
es de despefiadero ; y no han sido estos los primeros, antes harto el Demonio de haver tenido esta usanca, con 
otras Naciones primero, quiso traer esta mala mercaderia 4 venderla entre estos, preciandose, no solo de malo, y 
perverso perseguidor de los Hombres, sino tambien de sucio pervertidor de costumbres. Y el que condenare 
estos por Gente indigna de la vida, que vivia, no se olvide del Emperador Adriano, que no solo fue notado de este 
vicio, pero al mancebo, que le servia de bardaje, despues de muerto, lo higo adorar como Dios, y le constituid 
Altar, y Templo, y ordeno Sacrificios ; asi lo dicen Dion, y Helio Esparciano, como mas largamente queda visto 
en el Libro de la Verdadera, y Falsa Religion, tratando del Dios Antinoo, que fue este mancebo, asi llamado, y 
adorado del dicho Emperador Adriano; y tambien Pausanias lo refiere, en muchas partes de sus Libros, y Eusebio 
Cesariense, San Geronimo, San Atanasio, y Theodoreto, Origines, Prudencio, y Tertuliano. Y de aquella Gente 
Sabia de Grecia, dice el mismo Eusebio, que cada uno tenia su moco, por manceba, y de esta culpa, y vicio fue 
notado Aristoteles (Padre de la Filosofia Natural) como quiere Juan Ravisio en su Oficina. Y de los Franceses 
dice el mismo Eusebio, en el lugar citado, que se casaban los mocos, unos con otros, sin verguenga, haciendo 
licito el vicio, y pecado nefando. Pues esta maldad, y vicio tan nefando, y sucio era el pecado, que tan a rienda 
suelta, y sin freno cometian los de Sodoma, que por esto se llaman Sodomitas los que estropiecan, y caen en él, y 
por él, enojado Dios, los destruid, y asold, y dejo tan sefialada memoria de su corrupcion, y rotura, y llegd a 
tanto este detestable vicio en estos sucios, y cenagosos Puercos, que ia no le cometian en secreto, pero mui en 
publico lo solicitaban, y no solo no apetecian tan enorme culpa en los Hombres, pero aun en los dos Angeles de 
Dios, que venian en forma de Hombres, y trage de Mancebos, dispuestos, y hermosos, la desearon, y apetecieron, 
y aun quisieron quebrantar, con violencia, y fuerga, las puertas de la casa del Santo Loth, donde los havia recogido, 
si Dios, con su poder, no los deslumbrara, y cegara, trocandoles el sentido, con deslumbramiento, que segun Lira, 
se llama Acrisia, que es una especie de ceguera, que el que la padece, aunque tiene los ojos claros, no vé aquello, 
que quiere, que es 4 manera de embeleco, y desatino, con que el que busca anda atontado, y desatinado, sin hallar 
remedio 4 su deseo. 

Por esto (como digo) los destruid 4 todos, haciendo en este castigo muchas maravillas, para que con maior 
cuidado quedase estampado en los coragones, y memoria de los Hombres ; la primera de las quales fue tratarlo con 
su amigo Abraham, para que rogandole, por ellos, se hechase de vér quan merecido lo tenia, pues sacado Loth, y 
su casa, no quedaba ninguno, que no estuviese comprehendido en aquel pecado. Otra fue sacar 4 Loth, con su 
Muger, y dos Hijas, y luego comencar a llover Fuego del Cielo, con que fueron abrasados. La Muger de Loth, 
porque bolvio la cabega atras, buelta en Estatua de Sal; el lugar de las Ciudades, y sus situaciones hecho estanque 
de Aguas, tan prodigiosas, y de admiracion, como lo nota Josefo, y otras cosas; de manera, que esto fue lo que 
sucedid, y este pecado el que cometieron, el qual vino corriendo 4 otras Naciones, y discurriendo por esta, como 
hemos visto. Y no es maravilla (como hemos dicho) que los que estan sin lo principal, que es Dios, estén sin 
actos de Vida racional, y de Hombres, y estén hechos de la condicion de los Cavallos, como dice David, en quien 
no al racon, ni juicio. 

Diximos no quedar ninguno de los de aquella Ciudad, que no estuviese comprehendido en este pecado, y asi lo 
dice con expresas palabras el Texto Sagrado, desde el menor, hasta el maior cercaron la casa de Loth, y todo el 
Pueblo junto, y dijeron 4 Loth: Donde estan los Varones, que se hospedaron esta noche en tu casa? Sacalos 
aca fuer4, que queremos conocerlos ; este conocimiento era de acto carnal, y bestial contra natura; de donde se 
infieren las dos cosas dichas : la una, que este pecado ia lo cometian publicamente, pues a voces lo solicitaban: y 
la otra, que era comun en todos, pues todos lo voceaban. 

De manera, que tras de estos nombrados, vinieron dando de ojos estos Indios de la Vera-Paz; pero no 
corrid tan en general, que los comprehendiese 4 todos; antes havia Gentes en las mismas Provincias, que se 

84 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

cometia, que lo reprobaban, y los viejos, y viejas, que lo sabian, refiian fuertemente i los muchachos, que lo 
consentian, y usaban, y les amonestaban 4 que se apartasen de él, porque perseverando en tan enorme culpa, 
moririan de ello. 

Chmtana XII. 

Que prosigue las Leies de los Indios de la Vera-Paz, y se notan las que tenian ordenadas, en racon 
de hurtos. 

Acerca de los hurtos tenian estas Gentes Leies diversas, porque de diferente manera castigaban los hurtos 
pequefios, que los maiores, y de cosas gruesas; y asi era Lei, que el que hurtase una Gallina, 6 algun poco de 
Maiz, 6 cosas semejantes, los bolviese 4 sus dueftos, y mandabanle al ladron pagar algunas plumas, en maior satis- 
faccion del hurto, 6 alguna Manta, 6 Cacao, conforme le parecia al Juez, que lo sentenciaba ; de manera, que esta 
condenacion era un precio equivalente, al de la cosa hurtada, y todo el hurto, y condenacion, en que el ladron era 
condenado, se aplicaba al Rei, 6 Sefior del Pueblo; porque el que lo havia perdido no queria parte de la dicha 
restitucion, aunque el dicho Sefor se lo daba todo, teniendo aquella restitucion por inficionada, y no digna de 
tornarse 4 recibir de manos tan malas, como las del ladron, que lo havia hurtado. 

Al ladron, que hurtaba alguna ‘cosa de valor, y estima, asi como una Corona de Oro, que ellos usaban, 6 cosa 
semejante, hacianle bolver lo que havia tomado, si acaso lo tenia, y otro tanto precio mas, de lo que era el valor 
del hurto, y con esto quedaba libre; pero si lo havia disipado, y desparecido, vendianlo por esclavo, y del precio 
en que era vendido, se pagaba la cantidad, de lo que montaba la cosa hurtada. 

Esta Lei era del Pueblo Antiguo de Dios, aunque diferentemente usada, la qual dice de esta manera: El que 
hurtare Vaca, t Oveja, y la matare, 6 vendiere, pagara por una Vaca cinco, y por una Oveja quatro; pero si no 
tuviere, con que restituir esta cantidad, en que quedaba condenado, sea vendido. Ofrecese dudar, por qué man- 
daba Dios, que de estas cosas fuese la restitucion, con el quatro, y cinco; tanto, siendo mui comun, que la que se 
hacia de otras caseras, y de mas valor, y precio, no pasaba de otro tanto de lo que valia. A esto respondid Es- 
trabon en su Glosa, diciendo, que se mandaban pagar por el Buei, y Vaca otras cinco, por cinco provechos, que 
se sacan de ellas ; el primero, porque eran necesarias para el Sacrificio, que 4 Dios se hacia; el segundo, porque 
aran la Tierra, y cultivan lo sembrado; el tercero, porque se comen sus carnes; el quarto, porque dan leche; y 
el quinto, porque sus cueros son provechosos para muchas cosas. Y de la Oveja dice, que se pagaban quatro, por 
otras quatro propriedades (conviene 4 saber) porque eran del Sacrificio, dan Lana, para vestirse los Hombres ; dan 
leche, y carne para el sustento de la Vida Humana; pero aunque estas condiciones son verdaderas, y que se 
conocen, en estos dos Animales, no son necesarias, para que obliguen a tanta restitucion, y asi lo contradice Lira, 
diciendo, que lo mismo corre de el Oro, por quanto es mui provechoso, para algunos Medicamentos, y Monedas, 
que de él se hacen, y para vasos, asi del Servicio Divino, como del Humano, y otras cosas muchas a que se aplica, 
y en que se gasta. 

Por lo qual responde de otra manera, diciendo, que algunos pecados se castigan mas gravemente, que otros, no 
solo por la maior gravedad del pecado, sino tambien, por reprimir en los Hombres la continua, y mala inclinacion 
de cometerle. Las cosas caseras, y que se guardan en los cofres, y arcas (como es el Oro, y la Plata, ropas, y 
vestidos) no son tan faciles de hurtar, ni estan tan dispuestas al hurto, como las Ovejas, y Vacas, que se apacientan, 
y pastorean en los Campos ; y como la facilidad de poder tomar lo ageno, induce al hurto, y en estos Animales era 
mui facil cometerlo ; por esto mandaba Dios, que el que hurtase Oveja la restituiese, con el quatro tanto, y de la 
Vaca, 6 Novillo el cinco tanto ; porque es mas dificultoso de guardar este Ganado, que las Ovejas, asi como tam- 
bien son las Ovejas mas dificultosas de guardar, que las alhajas, y cosas de casa, y como podia haver mas ocasion 
de hurtar Novillo, 6 Vaca, por su menos guarda, asi mandaba Dios, que fuesen cinco los que por el hurtado se 
restituiesen, y por la Oveja quatro, por quanto tenia, y podia tener mas guarda, que el Novillo, y la ocasion era 
menos para ser hurtada. Y afiade Josefo, que esta Lei se entendia tambien de los otros Animales, que son del 
servicio del Hombre, y se apacientan en los campos, de los quales, segun su mas dificultosa, 0 facil guarda, se 
reducia su pena, y restitucion 4 la del de la Vaca, 1 Oveja; pero si en poder del ladron se hallaba la Vaca, & 

Xx 

Oveja, que havia hurtado, no pagaba por ella mas de otro tanto, por quanto se presumia, que era inclinado a 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 85 

bolverla, y restituirla, pues no la havia muerto, 6 vendido; pero sila havia muerto, 6 vendido, y no tenia caudal, 
para pagarla, con el quatro, 0 cinco tanto, en que por la Lei era condenado, era vendido, y de el precio de su 
venta se pagaba: Y en esto concierta la Lei Indiana, con esta del Pueblo de Israel, que era vendido, para la satis- 
Jacion del hurto hecho. 

E] que mataba Pajaro de las Plumas ricas, que se crian en estas Provincias, tenia pena de muerte, por estimarlas 
en mucho, y no haverlas en otra ninguna parte de estas Indias, y por usar de ellas, como usan otras Naciones de 
Moneda, para los tratos, y contratos. 

El] que en Monte ageno hurtaba de estas Plumas, se las hacian pagar, con otras tantas mas de las que contenia 
el hurto ; lo mismo del Cacao, y otras semillas. 

El que tomaba frado alguna cosa, 4 pagarlo 4 tanto tiempo, y pasado el placo no pagaba, era Ilevado ante la 
Justicia, y le hacian pagar por fuerca. 

Si alguno tomaba muchas cosas fiadas de unos, y de otros, y despues no podia pagar, vendian la Persona, y lo 
procedido de ello dabanselo al Rei, 6 Sefior del Pueblo; pero si eran las deudas de mucha cantidad, le daban 
garrote, como a quien robaba en poblado. . 

Esto es lo mismo, que acontece entre nosotros, quando alguno quiebra, con mucha suma de Hacienda, Ievan- 
dose, 4 las bueltas, las de muchos particulares, y acontece las mas veces ser de malicia estas quiebras, por quedarse 
con el sudor, y trabyjo ageno, que wu tiene escondido, y puesto en cobro, para poder vivir despues, con mejor, y 
mas segura pasadia, para los quales son mut justas las penas, que por Leies tienen impuestas ; y aun se vieron 
executadas este Ato pasado de 1605, en cierta Persona de esta Ciudad de Mexico, que en menos de un Afio hico 
baratas de mas de quarenta mil pesos, de cosas, llevando a todos lo que podia, para la malicia, que tenia determi- 
nada ; Yuego did en decir, que estaba perdido, y quebrado, aunque no le valid para el castigo, al qual sacaron 4 
la verguenga, y embiaron 4 Galeras ; porque es cosa mui santa, que al ladron, que de esta manera quiere robar, en 
poblado, no solo no le sea consentido, pero gue juntamente sea mut bien castigado. Y esto hacian estos Indios de 
la Vera-Paz, con los que asi se avergoncaban, a tomar fiado, y no pagaban. 

Cariruto XIII. 

En el qual se continuan las Leies de los de la Vera-Paz, y declaran las que tenian acerca del no 
mentir, ni levantar Testimonios. 

Como el mentir, y levantar falso Testimonio, es cosa tan nociva, y perjudicial 4 los Hombres, asi no ai ninguno 
de todos los Mortales, que no conozca ser malo, por lo qual es fuerca, que en las Republicas bien concertadas sean 
estas dos cosas prohibidas, como nocivas, y perniciosas al bien comun de ellas ; y por esto estos Indios, no solo 
no aprobaban la mentira, pero castigaban, y reprehendian asperamente al mentiroso ; y era Lei, que esta reprehen- 
sion fuese hecha por el Rei, 6 Seftor, que governaba, para que se entendiese, que pues era la reprehension hecha 
por la Persona Suprema, que no era la culpa leve, y ligera, sino mui grave, y pesada, y asimismo mui justa cosa, 
que fuese aborrecida, como mala, y pesima. 

El que mentia en perjuicio de su proximo, era tambien asperamente reprehendido, y condenabanle mas, en 
quince, 6 veinte plumas, conforme era la culpa, al albedrio del Juez, que lo sentenciaba. 

La Muger que acusaba, a algun Hombre, de alguna culpa, que con ella huviese cometido, 6 pretendiese cometer, 
con violencia, y fuerga, no era creida, ni por su sola, y simple palabra condenaban al acusado ; pero para conocer 
de esta causa, havia de haver testigos, los quales las mas veces faltan, por quanto el que pretende cometerla, no 
aguarda, que los haia, sino que procura, que todo esté en mudez, y silencio. 

Si no havia testigos, ni los podia presentar la querellante, pedianle sefias, estas no havian de ser qualesquiera 
(por racon de que el caso era de muerte) sino mui conocidas, y averiguadas prendas, estas havian de ser del 
vestuario del reo, y acusado, asi como el Maxtlatl, que les servia de caraguelles, 6 calcones, algun pafio de manos, 
© la manta, que tralia vestida, que le servia de capa, para que conocida qualquiera de estas cosas, en particular, 6 
todas en comun, ser real, y verdaderamente del dicho acusado, fuese executada en él la pena de muerte, a que la 
Lei le condenaba. ; ; 

Dos Leies vemos aqui encontradas, una en favor, y otra en disfavor de las Mugeres: La primera era, la que 

Z 

86 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

tenemos referida, acerca de la confesion, que hacian en sus enfermedades, en las quales declaraban los complices de 
sus flaquegas, y por sola su confesion morian ; de manera, que en este caso su sola, y simple palabra la tenian por 
verdad averiguada,. y valia tanto, como qualquiera mui bastante Probanga. sner 

La segunda es, no darles credito en salud, aunque el caso fuese cierto, sino havia testigos, 6 prendas, que 
condenasen al acusado ; porque asi como creian, que en la confesion de la muerte no mentian, asi presumian, que 
en salud, no dirian verdad, sino que con pasion, 6 mala voluntad, que tuviesen, podian acusar 4 uno, y quererse 
vengar por este’ modo del que les huviese injuriado. 

Si havia alguno, que 4.los adulteros acusase, y no con bastante, y plenaria informacion, y ellos lo negaban, 
dabanles tormento de cuerda, atandoles recia, y fuertemente los bracos atras, por los molledos, y asi les daban el 
garrote, por las espaldas ; y si no confesaban, afadian 4 este tormento, otro, y era darles humoa narices, y que- 
mabanlos, 6 chamuscabanlos algun tanto, teniendolos suspendidos de la Tierra en el Aire; si confesaban, quedaban 
condenados 4 pena; pero si negaban, ibanse libres. Este mismo tormento daban 4 los ladrones mal convencidos, 
y notados de vehemente sospecha. 

Este genero de tormento leemos haverse dado por un Emperador Romano, 4 un quitapelillos, que era el 
apoiador, y solemnicador de sus dichos, y gracias, de los que suele haver, y mui ordinarios, en las Cortes de los 
- Reies, que solo-atienden al gusto de la vida, y no al-daho, que a si mismos, y 4 los que lisonjean hacen, aunque 
este Emperador gustaba ser celebrado en su Govierno, conocid en el pecho de este adulador, el fuego que ardia, 
con que le queria aticar su vanagloria, alabandolo en todas las cosas ; y como vido el humo, que reventaba por la 
chimenea de la vanagloria, y conocid el dano, que de ello 4 entrambos se les seguia, mandolo colgar de los pies, 
la cabeca inclinada, y buelta 4 la Tierra, y darle humo 4 narices, diciendo: Perezca con humo, el que de humo se 
sustenta, y hicole rendir el Alma, en este tormento,-que no lo-es pequefio, ni por pequefo lo tenian estos Indios, 
pues seguia al de cuerda, quando el reo estaba tan rebelde, y negante, que no le podian hacer confesar la verdad 

del delito, de que era acusado, y con semiplena proban¢a atormentado. 

Cariruto XIV. 

De algunas de las Leies, de que usaban las Gentes del Piru, con que se regian, y governaban 
aquellos grandes y poderosos Reynos. 

Havia Lei universal, en todos los Reinos del Pirt, sujetos 4 los Reies Ingas, de que ninguno casase, ni pudiese 
casar, con Hermana, Prima-Hermana, Tia, ni Sobrina, por tener estos grados de consanguinidad, por prohibidos, 
y por mui grave delito lo contrario; pero como el que hace la Lei, asi como le queda Autoridad de derogarla, asi, 
ni mas, ni menos la tiene de dispensarla: estos Sehores, y Reies, aunque la hacian guardar inviolablemente, en 
todos los otros, en si mismos la toleraban, casandose, con las que les parecia convenir, de las de su Linage, com- 
prehendidas en los grados referidos ; la ragon que daban era, 4 su parecer, bastante, porque decian, que los Reies 
havian de contraher con sus semejantes, para que la Sangre Real no descaeciese de su Alteza, y Dignidad, en que 
estaba subida, y que no la havia, que lo fuese tanto, como la misma repartida en los Hermanos, pues era de unos 
mismos Padres, y que era nobleca heredada por igual, sin diminucion de Noblega, y tenian por mas legitimo here- 
dero el que nacia de Hermana, que de Hermano, por la maior certeca, que les parecia haver en la legitimacion, 
aunque esta ragon no es buena; porque aunque es verdad, que corre la certidumbre de ser Hijo de la Muger, que 
lo pare ; pero no por eso se ha.de'negar la que de parte del Padre tiene; porque de lo contrario se seguiria, no 
haver Fé Humana, acerca de los Padres, y cada uno se presumiria Hijo del vecino (que es caso indigno de 'pensarse) 
y tambien el Inga pudiera entrar en esta cuenta, sospechando, que no era suio, y que la fuerca de la Herencia, y 
Sucesion en el Reino, no le venia legitimamente por él, sino por ella. 

Otra racon ai, por la qual pudieran estos Reies casarse, con estas Personas inclusas en estos grados, y es la 
que ia en otra parte dejamos dicho, de que no contradice 4 la Lei Natural, pues sabemos haverse principiado en 
ella; y-como no sabian la de Dios, escrita al Pueblo de los Judios, ni la Evangelica, en este Estado de Gracia, no 
atendian @ la justificacion, que es escusarlo, pues ai otras Mugeres, que pueden entrar en este lugar, y cuenta, por 
el respeto que se debe a la propinquidad de la sangre. 

FROM. SPANISH AUTHORS. 87 

Era Lei, que los adulteros muriesen por el delito, que cometian, si era de voluntad de entrambos ; y sino, del 
que se probaba haver inducido, 6 hecho fuerca al otro. 

Al ladron, que hurtaba alguna cosa quantiosa, mataban a la primera vez, que cometia este nee y crimen ; la 
ragon era, porque el Rei tenia dispuestas las cosas de sus Reinos de tal manera, que ninguno, por pobre que fuese, 
tuviese ocasion de hambrear, que para los semejantes (como en otra parte se ha visto) tenia rentas, y despensas, de 
donde fuesen sustentados, y asi no tenian ocasion de hurtar por necesidad; y por esto qualquiera hurto que se 
hacia lo atribuian 4. vicio, y por esto los ahorcaban; pero hurtos de menor quantia, y de poco precio, las Justicias 
ordinarias los castigaban, y componian. 

En las rencillas, y litigios, nacidos de disensiones, y otras cosillas semejantes, tenian autoridad los Governa- 
dores, y Justicias Maiores de los Pueblos de oirlas, y dar sentencia en favor del agraviado. 

_ Los castigos, que daban por estas culpas leves, era uno (entre otros) darles con unas piedras en las espaldas 
algunos pocos golpes moderados. 

Los homicidas, que violentamente mataban, eran castigados, con pena de muerte irremisiblemente. 

Los que mentian eran castigados, segun la calidad, y demasia de la mentira; en especial las Mugeres, en las 
quales se executaban las Leies, aunque fuesen mui livianas, y leves sus mentiras, el qual rigor no se guardaba con 
los Hombres. pug) 

A los Hechiceros, y Brujos, que con sus hechicos, y encantos causaban en las Mugeres esterilidad, 6 ligaban a 
los Maridos, 6 que con Hechigos mataban (cosa, que muchas veces se usaba entre ellos) daban pena de muerte, 
haciendolos morir'a tormentos mui crueles; y esta pena no se executaba, en todas las Ciudades del Reino, sino 
solamente en la del Cuzco, donde presidia el Rei, para que el castigo fuese conocido, y divulgado, por todo él, y 
los Encantadores,. y Hechiceros atemorigados. 

Los delitos, que se cometian en perjuicio de una Comunidad, y Republica, tenian autoridad los Jueces, y Go- 
vernadores de ella, de castigarlos conforme al rigor de sus Leies; pero si merecia muerte, nunca se la daban al 
delinquente, sin consultarlo con el Rei, porque tenia reservado para si todo lo criminal, en especial la pena de 
muerte. 

Los Contadores maiores, y menores, tenian en las cuentas gran fidelidad; pero si en algo faltaban, y no daban 
las cuentas mui limpias, y sin marafias, luego los mataban. Si algun Sefior, deudo del Rei, 6 que venia de Sangre 
Real, cometia algun -crimen, por el qual merecia muerte, y por alguna Racon, 6 Privilegio no era condenado 4 ella, 
quedaba condenado a carcel perpetua, la qual era cruelisima, y estaba Hee de la Ciudad, y poblado media TELE, 
y con ella acababa triste, y miserablemente su vida. 

Tenia Lei puesta, gue huviese por todos sus Reinos peso, y medida, porque ninguno fuese agraviado, ni 
enganhado. ; 

Era tambien Lei, que puesto el Sol, nadie entrase en la Ciudad del Cuzco, ni saliese, y lo. mismo se randki, 

antes de salir el Sol, por la mafiana; y era la racon, porque se supiese de todos los que entraban, y salian en ella, 
y de donde venian, 6 qué querian. 

Cartruto XV. 

De algunos casos de permsion, que se toleraban en las Lewes de estos Gentiles Indianos, y de otros, 
que con rigor castigaron, sigmendo la pena de ellas. 

Como la carne no respeta a nadie, y la voluntad del Hombre (en qual mas, 6 en qual menos) se abalance a cosas de 
su gusto, no siendo regida por Dios, ni reprimida de su Gracia, es cosa cierta, que se inclina 4 las cosas deleitosas, 
y gustos sensuales, en especial en los Mancebos, que, 6 no quieren tomar estado, 6 para tomarle primero, se pican 
de enamorados, y de pasear calles loca, ¢ impertinentemente. De aqui resulta, que aunque sea con intencion de 
casarse, aia muchos, que demas de ser enamorados, anden celosos, y aun sin juicio, amenacando al contrario, y aun 
sentenciandolo 4 sus solas, 4 muerte, y entre los confusos pasos de sus paseos, pensar, que lo ha hecho tajadas ; 
y como son celos los que hacen esta guerra, que son resabio de locura, quando llega 4 la puerta de su Dama 
halla vivo al enemigo, de donde le nacen nuevos rencores ; y si no puede meter mano a la espada por entonces, 4 

88 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

las veces lo desafia, y cita para otra parte, y con esto cree quedar vengado; al fin son cosas de locos, y descon- 
ciertos de Mugeres, y casos comunes en el Mundo. 

De este genero de Gente havia alguna, entre estos Indios; porque acontecia enamorarse dos Mancebos de. una 
Muger, para casarse con ella, y como de semejantes casos es mui ordinario resultar otros peores, y deseaban la 
venganca, y como no podian tomarla el uno del otro, por quanto si legaban a las manos, tenian cierto el riguroso 
castigo, el qual fuera en ellos irremisiblemente executado, lo qual temian; por esto para desahogar el pecho, y dar 
soltura 4 su colera, tenian permiso de desafiarse los dos, no para matarse luego, sino para refir entre si, en la 
primera ocasion de Guerra, que sucediese, y ordenase. Hecho este desafio, y puestos en la ocasion, buscabase el 
uno, al otro, y como si fueran de los del Vando enemigo, asi se herian, y golpeaban, buscando cada qual modo de 
vencer al otro. Los que de el Exercito velan lo que entre los dos pasaba, que luego advertian la causa porque 
refiian, dejabanlos herir, y golpear, hasta que conocian flaquega en el uno de ellos, 6 en entrambos, si eran de igual 
coragon, y corage, y llegaban a despartirlos, para que no se matasen, y con esto quedaban en paz, y se iban, sin 
que de alli adelante les consintiese la Lei, que se encontrasen en celos. 

Lo mismo acontecia quando alguno tenia una Manceba, si otro se enamoraba de ella, 6 se ip llevaba de casa, el 
agraviado desafiaba al otro, para la primera Guerra, y el que de los dos se mostraba mas aventajado, segun el Juicio, 
y parecer de Jueces, para este desafio sefialados, se quedaba con la moga, y se la llevaba & su casa. Estos son los 
casos de permision, que estos Indios tenian, con otros algunos, que dejo, por pasar a los que con rigor executaban 
en favor de la Justicia. Pero quiero, que se note este paso, como quisieron estos Naturales dar 4 entender, que 
no todos los ierros hechos por amores se han de castigar, y que los celos de los solteros se vengaban, por este 
modo. 

Aunque (como hemos dicho) permitian algunas cosas, por tener por necesario este permiso, en ragon de Go- 
vierno, en las Republicas, otras castigaban con sumo rigor, por pedirlo asi las circunstancias, que los acriminaban ; 
y eran tan severos, y rigurosos en hacer Justicia, en las cosas, que pedian este rigor, que no solo no lo disimulaban 
en la Gente comun, y popular, pero ni aun en los proprios Hijos, y Hermanos lo perdonaban, como en diversos 
casos se vido. 

Uno de estos acontecid en la Ciudad de Tlaxcalla, de la qual, y de toda su Provincia era Senor Maxixcatzin, 
en la parte que le cabia, con los otros tres Sefiores, que parcialmente la sefloreaban: Este tenia un Hermano de 
mucha estimacion, y valentia, y era juntamente Sefior de Vasallos, el qual cometid adulterio, con una Muger casada, 
en el qual fue comprehendido ; pero por ser tan Gran Sefior, y Hermano de tan valeroso Capitan, aunque la Lei le 
condenaba 4 muerte, no luego’ se la dieron, por guardar el decoro 4 su Hermano, y tomar su parecer; fuele 
propuesto el caso, y aunque sintid el riesgo, no temid los fines; y para llegar 4 la conclusion, juntdse con los otros 
tres Sefiores, el lugar de sus consultas, y determinaciones ; y hecha la acusacion, y conocida por verdadera, fue el 
reo condenado a muerte, en el qual se executd con el rigor, que pudiera en un otro particular, y plebeio, sin valerle 
ser quien era, ni ser Hermano del Gran Maxixcatzin, que por su mucho valor era de presente el Capitan General 
de aquella Sefiorla, y el que governaba los Exercitos. En este caso fue este valerosisimo Capitan el primero, que 
lo condend, pareciendole ser mejor, que su Hermano muriese, que no que sus Leies fuesen quebrantadas, por no 
dir 3 los menores animo de pecar, con esperanca de que su culpa tendria remedio. Caso fue este por cierto de 
grande admiracion, y exemplo notable para muchas otras Naciones. 

No fue otra la intencion de Seleuco, Rei de los Acenos (como cuenta Valerio Maximo) sino mostrarse justo, y 
recto executor de las Leies, que ordend para su Pueblo, entre las quales fue una, que al adultero le fuesen sacados 
los ojos, por ello, la qual el Principe, Hijo suio, Heredero de su Reino, quebranto, y mando, que pagase la culpa, 
con la pena, que la Lei mandaba; pero contradijo este rigor toda la Ciudad, y Pueblo, pareciendole mas leve caso 
tolerar el quebrantamiento de una Lei, que tener un Rei sin ojos, y ciego, despues de los dias de su Padre ; pero 
como el Legislador instase, y el Pueblo contradijese, fue por el severo Rei determinado, que le sacasen un ojo a él, 
y otro 4 su Hijo, para que la Lei no se violase, y asi se cumplid, siendo el Padre el que pago primero. De aqui 
toman algunos argumento de engrandecer la severidad de este Principe, que quiso antes quebrarse los ojos, que 
quebrantar las Leies de su Republica, y no es caso poco de notar; pero maior espanto causan los hechos de 
aquestos Indios, que no solo quebraban los ojos 48 Hermanos, y Hijos, sino que les quitaban la vida, por solo 
guardar las Leies; en especial es mucho de notar, en Nezahualpiltzintli el castigo de sus proprios Hijos, por culpas 
cometidas con sus Madrastras. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 89 

De la Gente del Testamento Viejo sabemos haver cometido este delito ; pero no que con este rigor se castigase ; 
el primero de los quales, segun parece por las Sagradas Escrituras, fue Rubén, Hijo del Patriarca Jacob, que con 
poco temor de Digs, y respeto de su Padre, tuvo acceso con su Madrastra, Muger del Patriarca, y Madre de sus 
proprios Hermanos, y no por esto el Santo Jacob lo matd, solo sabemos, que aunque lo sintid sumamente, como 
lo notan Lira, y el Abulense, no le quitd la vida, ni aun se dice haverle hecho castigo alguno por ello por entonces; 
pero lo que tenemos por cierto es, que le negd la Primogenitura, y el Imperio en las ultimas bendiciones, que les 
hecho a la hora de su muerte, y quedd desposeido de estas Honras, y Dignidades. 

Absalon tambien fue comprehendido en esta maldad, perd castigdlo Dios de su mano, pagando este delito, con 
el pretenderle 4 su Padre David la muerte, y alcarse con el Reino ; que lo que la Sagrada Escritura dice, no es sino 
que lloraba el desastre, y mal fin de su Hijo, y no la ofensa, que de él havia recibido en esto, y en otras cosas. Y 
con lo dicho concluio, diciendo, que si estos Indios tuvieron Leies, que quisieron que se guardasen en otros, no 
permitieron que se quebrantasen en si mismos, ni en sus Hermanos, ni Hijos. ; 

Otro caso cuenta el Padre Frai Toribio en su Memorial, haver acontecido en el Mercado de la Ciudad de Tetz- 
cuco, y fue, que un dia de Feria, concurriendo en ella grandisimo gentio, se asieron en palabras dos Mugeres (cosa 
mui comun entre ellas, por ser sus mas ordinarias armas) y encendidas con ira, llegd su enojo 4 prueba de manos, cosa, 
que raras veces havia acaecido, y la que pudo mas de ellas, lastimo a la otra, en una oreja, de que le corrid alguna 
sangre. A los moxicones, que jamas se havian visto, en el Mercado, ocurrio casi toda la Gente de él, como 4 fruta 
nueva, aunque no para Ilevarla ninguno 4 su casa; y como jams se havia visto caso semejante en el Tianquiztli 
(que asi llaman al Mercado) quedaron los mas (si no fueron todos) espantados, y escandalicados, y con el miedo 
del delito, fueron a dar parte del caso al Rei Nezahualpiltzintli, en cuio tiempo sucedid, el qual mui corrido de vér 
el desacato, que en aquel lugar publico, las dos atrevidas Mugeres havian tenido, manddlas castigar, mandando en 
el castigo, que la mas culpada, y que havia herido a la otra, muriese; y asi murid por ello, siendo 4 ella castigo de 
su culpa, y 4 los demas exemplo, para que en semejantes lugares no se atreviesen 4 injuriar 4 nadie, ni 4 escanda- 
ligar al Pueblo ; y aunque es barbaro el hecho, a lo menos se notara haver sido, para poner temor en la observancia 
de las Leies, que quando se executan con rigor, alguna vez en algun reo, y delinquente, es freno aquel castigo, 
para que no con tanta facilidad los otros pequen*. 

% Tn the eleventh and twelfth verses of the twenty-fifth chapter of Deuteronomy a curious Mosaic ordinance occurs, to which it is sufficient in 
this place merely to allude. The object of the Hebrew legislator in framing this law was not to forbid pugilism among the Jews, but merely to 
preserve decorum in the camp of Israel. At this distance of time only two inferences can be drawn from the ordinance in question, viz. First, 
That the costume of the children of Israel must nearly have resembled that of the Mexicans, of which an old poet has unintentionally given no bad 
description in the following verses,— 

“ A painted vest Prince Vortigern had on, 
Which from a naked Pict his grandsire won ;” 

and, Secondly, That they were absolute barbarians when they quitted Egypt. For whilst many persons idly contend that the Jews who were contem- 
porary with Moses, and instructed by him, who had been taught by the Deity, were a mighty refined and cultivated race of people; the fact cannot 
be too often insisted upon, that the laws of the Pentateuch, adapted no doubt to the moral condition of the Israelites for whom they were made, 
and not enacted where’ unnecessary, furnish the most solid grounds for supposing that they were scarcely advanced beyond the savage state. 

LSS) 
> 

91 

SERMAM DO AUTO DA FE*. 

QUE SE CELEBROU NA PRAGA DO ROCIO DESTA CIDADE DE LISBOA, JUNTO DOS PASSOS DA 
INQUISICAM, EM 6 DE SETEMBRO DE 1705, EM PRESENGA DE SUAS ALTEZAS. 

Pregado pelo Mlustrissimo e Reverendissimo Senhor Dom Diogo da Annunciagam Justiniano, do 
Conselho de Sua Magestade, que Deos guarde, e Arcebispo que foy de Cranganor.—Lisboa: Na 
officina de Antonio Pedro Ozogalrao. Com todas as licengas necessarias, 6 Setembro, 1705. 

“Inse autem populus direptus, et vastatus : laqueus juvenum omnes, et in domibus carcerum absconditi sunt: facti sunt 
P q J 
in rapinam, nec est qui eruat ; in direptionem, nec est qui dicat, Redde.”—Isat. cap. 42, vers. 22. 

gti ee 
Muyto alto, e muyto poderoso Principe, e Senhores nossos. 

DDESGRAGADAS reliquias do Judaismo! Infelices fragmentos da synagoga! Ultimo despojo da Judéa! Escan- 
dalo dos Catholicos, e até dos mesmos Judeos riso detestavel! Com-vosco fallo, oh mal aconselhada gente ! 
A vés declamo, oh povo mal aconselhado! ‘Vés sois 0 riso detestavel dos Judeos, porque sois tio ignorantes que 
nio sabeis observar a mesma ley em que viveis. Vés sois 0 escandalo dos Catholicos, porque nascendo no gremio da 
sua igreja a vossa apostasia vos desterra do seu gremio. Vés sois 0 ultimo despojo de Judéa, porque para a nossa 
afronta c4 vos lancoua sorte em o nosso Portugal, para nos infamar com o mundo o ter sido no nosso orizonte 0 vosso 
oriente. és sois os infelices fragmentos da synagoga, porque toda a sua grandeza veyo a acabar na vossa miseria. 
Vés sois finalmente as desgracadas reliquias do Judaismo, porque sois os lamentaveis avancos de Israel, que depois 
de destruido o vosso Reyno, vos espalhastes pela Europa para inficionar nacdes inteyras com a vossa companhia ; 

* The following pages will be read with interest by those who may wish to be better acquainted with the history of the Jews and the tenets of 
their religion. Under the impression that they contain much curious information, we are induced to lengthen the Appendix with insertion of matter, 
which more nearly concerns them than the Mexicans. It has been elsewhere observed, that exactly about the period of Columbus's alleged discovery 
of America, the Jews suffered a till then unheard-of persecution in Spain, which ended in their all being obliged to quit that territory ; when Portugal 
offered an asylum to some of the exiles, whilst the greater part sought refuge in Constantinople and other cities of the Turkish empire. What- 
ever might have been the sentiments which the Government of Portugal in the first instance entertained towards the Jews, and whether humanity or 
policy prescribed the particular line of conduct adopted ; it is matter of history that the favour shown to them was of short duration, and that they 
were afterwards treated with as much cruelty in Portugal as they had before been in Spain. The persecutions which they experienced in the 
latter country for many years were unremitting: and the annexed Sermon, which must carry with it all the weight of evidence usually attached 
to an official document, proves that at a period so late as 1705, when the archbishop of Cranganor preached before the Royal Family on the 
occasion of the Auto da Fé which at that time took place at Lisbon, the Jews were dragged to the flames by the Inquisition. The perusal indeed 
of a discourse so full of rancour and of invective against them, might well lead one to suppose that a much more recent although a secret page of 
history, and not the recollection of events nearly two thousand years old, had excited the feelings of the archbishop, and dictated to him the lan- 
guage to which he then gave utterance. The Sermon itself was printed at Lisbon, as the title-page professes, in 1705. But the Answer to it, which 
is avery remarkable defence of the Jewish religion by a Jew, (to which, as regards a main argument brought forward, viz. That itis customary with 
the Rabbis always to interpret literally the texts of Scripture, whilst Christians on the contrary give to it, as it may suit their purpose, a literal, © 
a metaphorical, a typical, or an allegorical sense ;—a reply not likely to be pleasing to the Jews might easily be made,) has never been printed, 
since neither in Spain nor Portugal would the necessary license have been granted: and the declaration in the title-page, “ Impresso en Villa- 
Franca, por Carlos Vero, a la Insignia de la Verdad,” is merely ironical. { 

a 

92 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

e transplantados em qual quer canto da terra, assim he fecunda de abominacdes essa vossa miseravel planta, que 
della renascem Judeos todas as horas. _ 

2. Vés sois aquelles, a quem a esperanga sendo tao larga, nao cansou a paciencia. Vés sois aquelles, a quem a 
evidencia sendo tao clara, nao bastou a vos convencer 0 genio. EK yds sois aquelles, a quem o castigo sendo tao 
grande, vos obstinou a vontade, para persistir na teyma. O castigo, que abranda brutos, vos fez obstinados. A 
evidencia, que convence loucos, vos fez teymosos. E a esperanca, que cansa o animo, vos fez sofridos. Principiastes 
enganados por conselho de quatro tontos, a esperar o Messias depois que Christo Jesus veyo ao mundo; e em 
lugar de ter fim com a sua vinda a vossa esperanca, a sua vinda vos fez esperar pelo Messias como homens desespe- 
gados, para desesperadamente serdes Judeos. 

3. Quanto me compadego da vossa disgraca, oh filhos de Israel! Com quantas lagrimas de sangue deve a nossa 
piedade chorar o vosso infortunio, considerando o que hoje sois, e antigamente fostes! Antigamente herdeyros 
do amor, que nao merecia a vossa continua obstinacio: hoje arrazoadamente emprego da ira, que em vés tem a sua 
justa vinganca. Hoje o theatro he cadafalso da vossa afronta: antigamente os tabernaculos erao’ timbre da vossa 
crenga. Antigamente fostes respeitados da agua e mais do fogo, hoje o fogo tem em vés 0 seu pasto; e as vossas 
cinzas afogadas no mar tem na agua o seu tumulo. Hoje todos vos lancdo da sua companhia: antigamente todos 
procuravao a vossa amizade. Antigamente as trombetas acclamavao a vossa gloria na observancia da vossa ley ; 
hoje as trombetas publicao a vossa infamia na supresticiosa observancia de hua ley nao so amortecida, mas j4 de 
todo morta. Hoje o ser Judeo he descredito em toda a parte: antigamente o ser Judeo era credito em todo o mundo. 
Antigamente as vossas cabanas no deserto erao choupanas aonde o Ceo vos recreava com favores: hoje as vossas 
cabanas no povoado sao choupanas aonde o fogo por justica vos reduz a cinzas. Hoje, que a caso succedeo ser o dia 
do vosso Purim, o dia desta vossa abjuracdéo, que vem a ser 0 mesmo, que o dia da expiacaio dos vossos peccados, a 
cor amarela e encarnada dos vossos sanbenitos, e as insignias de fogo das vossas camarras, j4 se nao trocao em outra 
cor, antes ficio no mesmo accidente. Antigamente no dia da expiagao das vossas culpas, o fio encarnado, que 
pendia das pontas do cabrito, aquem sacrificaveis neste dia, se trocava em branco, porque assim mostrava Deos 
que vos perdoava os vossos peccados. Antigamcnte as vossas herancas ero posse inseparayvel da vossa familia: hoje 
em lugar da vossa familia succedeo o fisco na vossa heranca. Hoje tendes hum Deos téo justamente irado, porque 
O agravais injustamente, que ha ja mais de 1632 annos, (que tanto tem durado esta vossa ultima dispersio, desde 
que Tito vos destruio) que ha ja mais de 1632 annos, que Deos vos castiga com hua escravidio tao comprida, e- 
so elle sabe quando tera fim este vosso cativeyro. Antigamente tinheis hum Deos tao inclinado a misericordia 
para os vossos castigos, que os vossos trabalhos nfo passarao do numero de breves annos. Porque no Egipto pelo 
peccado da venda de Joseph, que foy o peccado primeyro em que conspirarao juntos os vossos pays, durou noyventa 
e hum anno a vossa peregrinacao, que padecestes por este peccado. No tempo dos Juizes, pelas vossas idolatrias, 
que forao a vossa segunda culpa, para que concorrerao todos os yossos avés, acabou-se em cento e onze annos a 
escravidao que padecestes porque fostes idolatras. Em Babylonia, aonde estivestes desterrados pela morte dos 
profetas, acabou-se em setenta annos o vosso desterro. Estes fostes, quando mataveis prophetas, adoraveis idolos, 
e vendieis innocentes ; mas ja agora nfo sois estes, quando nao vendeis innocentes, ainda que por innocentes vos 
vendais todos. Ja nao sois estes agora, que nao matais a prophetas; estes fostes, quando tinheis peccados tao 
grandes ; e agora ja nao sois estes, quando nao tendes tao grandes peccados ? 

4. Verdadeyramente (oh filhos do meu coragio !) que esta differenga em que hoje estais, do que antigamente fostes, 
bastava para causar lastima a peytos mais duros, quanto mais a nds, que supposto nao temos 0 vosso sangue, somos 
todos vossos irmaos pelo sangue de Jesu Christo, que vos redemio, e pelo santo Baptismo, que vos lavou. Na ver- 
dade, (oh desgragada gente !) que esta mudanca podia per si sd fazer pendor a loucos, quanto mais a vos, que vos 
prezais de entendidos. Porque considerando o que fostes, e o que sois, bastava esta consideracéo para vos trocar 
do que sois, para o que deveis ser; e se quizesse hoje o Deos de Israel, nosso e ja vosso Deos: se quizesse hoje 
o Deos de Israel que vos arrependesseis de todo 0 corac&o, j4 que hoje de vos arrependeres com toda a sinceridade, 
nesta vossa abjuracao, days hum authentico testemunho do vosso arrependimento. Sem vos afrontar, porque sé 
vos pretendo convencer, vos-hey-de mostrar 0 vosso erro, e desenganar a vossa teyma, que se fordes racionaes vos 
hey-de fazer Catholicos. Desejara que nao fosseis vos hoje s6mente os meus ouvintes, porque sois quatro mise- 
raveis, que como ignorantes da mesma ley que professais, fazeis cousas ridiculas por actos de religiio. Desejara 
pois que todos os vossos mestres, que tendeis espalhados pelo mundo, fossem hoje os que me ouvissem ; porque tao 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 93 

demostrativamente hey-de hoje destruir os fundamentos da vossa esperanca, que hey-de necessitar ao seu e ao 
vosso juizo para serdes fieis, ainda que vos e elles ostenteis a vontade para serdes Judeos. Bem sey, que sem pia 
affeicao na vontade nao pode haver assenso para crer no juizo; mas taes hao-de ser hoje as premissas, que hey-de 
propor ao vosso entendimento, que necessariamente hey-de tirar do vosso juizo a concluzdo contra a mentira da 
vossa seita, a favor da verdade da nossa fé. 

5. E para que a presente demonstracdo tenha toda a efficacia para convencer ao vosso engano, nao vos hey-de 
allegar razoens theologicas, porque estas dependem de principios, que ou a vossa ignorancia nfo sabe, ou a vossa 
apostasia porfiadamente nega. Nao me valerey do Testamento Novo, porque 0 nao admitte a vossa teyma, supposto 
que pelo baptismo estais obrigados a crer a sua verdade. N&o vos persuadirey com os nossos Padres, porque os 
tem por suspeitos a vossa incredulidade. O Testamento Velho, nado na nossa Vulgata, porque a nao admittis por 
Canonica, mas na vossa mesma raiz Hebraica ou Caldaica, que para vos tem authoridade sagrada, e como tal he para 
vos texto authentico, sem duvida nem controversia, sera o texto de todo este meu arrazoado. As exposicdes dos 
vossos Rabinos, em cuja doutrina vos fundais para serdes Judeos, serao de todo este meu discurso huma confirma¢io 
evidente. Ora ouvi-me desapayxonados, que eu vos prometto de vos deyxar convencidos, porque vereis como o 
juizo se rende 4 forca da evidencia. 

6. Vio o profeta Isaias no capitulo 42 dos seus vaticinios, em espirito, o miseravel estado a que os Judeos pelos 
seus peccados havido de chegar depois da vinda de Christo, que foy e he o verdadeiro Messias, que Deos pro- 
metteo ao mundo em as suas Escrituras, e querendo desenganar a esperanca dos Judeos, lhes deu hum evidente 
sinal para os Judeos conhecerem o seu engano: “Ipse autem populus direptus et vastatus : laqueus juvenum 
omnes, et in domibus carcerum absconditi sunt: facti sunt in rapinam, nec est qui eruat; in direptionem, nec est 
qui dicat, Redde.” Sabe, povo desgragado! diz o profeta, sabe, que depois de vir o Messias, has-de ser hum 
povo espalhado por todo o mundo, hum povo escravo em toda a terra. Porque has-de ser hum povo destruido, e 
hum disperso povo; “Ipse autem populus direptus et vastatus.” As poucas reliquias, que ficarao da tua gran- 
deza, para authentico testemunho do castigo do teu peccado Isai. c. 42, vy. 22. serio huma meada, que com fio tam 
direyto te levara a huma tao horrenda priséo, que cada hum dos Judeos estara preso em seu carcere separado, em 
sua casinha escondido, com tal segredo, e posto na prisao com tal cautela, que nem o que [a esta sabera o que 
hontem foy, nem o que hoje vay, sabera, o que ira 4 manhaa, “In domibus carcerum absconditi sunt,” seris tam 
desgracado, 6 povo infelice! que compondo-se de velhos e mocos o teu povo, todos os Judeos se enredarao huns 
com os outros como se forao meninos; porque todos sao hum laco em que se prendem todos, e em que todos ca- 
hem: ou cada hum dos Judeos he hum laco, porque cada hum dos Judeos he huma meada: “ Laqueus ju- 
yenum universitas ipsorum, vel omnes ipsi,” diz 0 vosso texto Hebraico, assim te confundirds, e embaracaras assim, 
oh miseravel Judea! porque nao advertes que te espera hum carcere duro, pois nao pode haver industria que te 
livre do carcere, porque fazendo-te culpado o Judaismo, he o enredo tam grande, que nam pode haver resgate 
que te livre da prisam tam estreita: “acti sunt in rapinam, nec est qui eruat ; in direptionem, nec est qui dicat, 
Redde.” ' 

7. Que este texto de Isaias se entenda do castigo que hoje padecem os Judeos, bastava a vossa experiencia para 
© convencer assim; porque vés mesmos vos estais vendo no estado em que o profeta diz que vos haveis de ver 
depois do Messias vir; vés mesmos vos vedes espalhados por todo o mundo, dispersos por toda a terra; e ou por 
indystria, ou por verdade andais apartando-vos huns dos outros; e se ocultamente vos unis para judaizar, publica- 
mente vos separais para contraditar aquem vos accusa por Judeos. Vés mesmos chorando a vossa desgraca, vos 
lamentais, a nos os Catholicos, que os vossos inimigos vos enredao, e que em huma meada de nés cegos, vos levio com 
hum fio tam direito aos carceres do Santo Officio, que a rede varredoura das vossas embrulhadas vos mete em huma 
prisdo tao estreita, com generalidade tam grande, que todos os que tem 0 vosso sangue est&o sujeitos a este infor- 
tunio, aquem commumente chamais os vossos trabalhos, sem haver quem vos possa resgatar desta desgraca. Tudo 
isto junto 4 vossa experiencia bem prova que com vosco falla o Profeta neste texto. Quando porem isto nam 
bastasse para concluir esta verdade, o testemunho do vosso Rabbi Samuel o concluiria, pois ha mil annos que 
confessa este Rabino naquella sua celebre epistola, que ha 705 annos escreveo a Rabbi Isac, que pelo peccado de 
matares a Christo he que vos succedeu este cativeiro: “Aperté dicit Deus, quod erit desolatio post occisionem 
Christi, sicut est nostra desolatio postquam Jesus fuit occisus.” 

g. Meus irmios: vedes ja satisfeitos todos estes sinaes do que vos havia de succeder depois de ter vindo o 
2B 

O4. SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Messias, segundo vos diz 0 vosso profeta? Ou vedes ou nao vedes? Se o nao vedes estais cegos, porque cada hum de 
vos esta jA posto neste estado ; se 0 vedes porque vos nao desenganais, que a vossa esperanca he hum erro manifesto, 
e que o Messias que esperais nao pode vir, porque os sinaes provdo que ja veyo o Messias? Depois do Messias vir 

b) 

haveis de ser povo espalhado e povo destruido : “ Populus direptus et vastatus.” Haveis de ser todos hum enredo, ou 
hum enredo cada hum de vés : “ Laqueus universitas ipsorum vel omnes ipsi.” Haveis de ser presos, nto em carcere 
commum, mas em particular carcere, porque para cada hum de vés havia de haver hua casinha para vossa prizdo : 
“In domibus carcerum absconditi sunt.” A priz&o ha-de ser tao forte, o carcere tam duro, que nao pode haver braco 
que vos livre do carcere: “ Facti sunt in rapinam, nec est qui eruat; in direptionem, nec est qui dicat, Redde.” Pois 
se tudo isto exprimentais ja hoje, e vossos avos o tem experimentado ha ja tantos annos, como esperais ainda a 
vinda futura se tudo isto vos havia de succeder de pois da vinda ? Que loucura he a vossa para esperar futuro 0 que ja 
foy no passado? Vedes os effeitos da vinda, e ainda esperais a vinda depois de ver os effeitos? O cativeyro 
continua, a prizao nfo acaba, o enredo reforga-se, o desterro estende-se, a destruigao prolonga-se, e o Messias nam 
chega, quando depois de chegar o Messias, vos havia de succeder tudo isto. O successo prova a vinda que ja foy, 
e vos 4 vista deste successo esperais que ainda a vinda haja de ser? Sim; porque esse he o castigo grande que 
Deos vos deu pelo horrendo sacrilegio de Ihe matareis a seu filho. LEsperareis ao Messias contra as mesmas razes 
de 0 esperareis, e assim no vindes a esperar ao Messias que ainda ha-de vir, mas desesperastes porque jd veyo o 
Messias ; e como huns homens desesperados desteis em esperar por desesperacao. Deos prometteo-vos o Messias 
que havia de vir, e como tal ja veyo; vos desesperados porque veyo o Megsias ateimastes a esperar por desespera- 
cio ao Messias, que nao pode vir, e que por consequencia se nao pode esperar, porque he impossivel o Messias 
que esperais: e€ por isso mesmo porque he impossivel, vos resolveis a esperar hum Messias que nao pode vir, 
porque nao quereis acabar com a vossa esperanca do Messias. 'Tendes hoje, segundo as mais ajustadas chronolo- 
gias, desde o tempo de Abraham, em que Deos vos prometeu mais expressamente ao Messias, 3615 annos de espe- 
ranca, e inda nao estais cangados de esperar ; porque ainda hides esperando, e ainda até o fim do mundo haveis de 
esperar. Valente esperar sem cancar com tanta esperan¢ga o animo dos Judeos! Cruel Messias, que tanto tarda; e 
ainda ha-de tardar tanto! Soffrida gente, que tanto se resolve a esperar pelo seu Messias! Mas esperay quanto 
quizeres, porem desenganay-vos, que em quanto nao acabar a vossa esperanga, e nao confessares que fora da 
pessoa de Christo Jesus, nao he possivel outro Messias, a vossa redempgao nao chega, 0 vasso cativeyro dura, e 
duraré 0 vosso castigo : “Nec est qui eruat; nec est qui dicat, Redde.” 

9. Mas isto mesmo parece que implica para que dos Judeos se entenda este lugar de Isaias, do castigo que 
padecem nesta sua ultima dispersao. Porque o profeta affirma que nao hao-de ter redemptor os Judeos, para se 
verem livres do cativeyro presente, e se vos preguntarmos a cada hum de’'vés, até quando ha-de durar esta vossa 
escravidao ; nos haveis de responder todos que em quanto nao vier o Messias por quem esperais haveis de experi- 
mentar este castigo. Pois se os Judeos no Messias futuro esperao a sua redempcio, e ainda hoje esperao ao 
Messias, como diz 0 profeta que nado hado-de ter redempcao os Judeos? Por isso mesmo, porque os Judeos no 
Messias futuro esperao o seu remedio, por isso hao-de ficar sem remedio os Judeos, porque nunca para os Judeos 
ha-de chegar o Messias. E como o Messias he impossivel, por isso tamhem he impossivel o remedio que no 
Messias espero os Judeos. 

10. O Messias, que os Judeos esperao, he impossivel, pelos predicados intrinsecos de que se persuadem que se ha- 
de compor o Messias. He impossivel pelo tempo em que ha-de vir, até he impossivel pelos sinaes que ha-de ter 
quando vier. He impossivel pelos sinaes, porque todos ja estao verificados em Christo, e he impossivel que fora 
de Christo se possam verificar estes sinaes. He impossivel pelo tempo em que ha-de vir, porque o tempo ja 
passou quando Christo veyo, e he impossivel que o tempo que ja passou esteja ainda por vir. He impossivel 
finalmente pelos predicados intrinsecos de que os Judeos supdem que se ha-de compor o Messias, porque esses 
mesmos provao que nao he possivel o Messias, aquem os Judeos esperaéo, porque sd Christo teve os predicados 
que sao proprios do Messias, e como nesta impossibilidade o Messias que esperao os Judeos nao he owtra cousa 
mais que huma quimera que fingio a sua teyma; para o profeta desenganar aos Judeos que a sua esperanc¢a era 
huma fabula, o objecto dos seus suspiros hum sonho, lhes diz que por mais que esperem, ja mais ham-de conseguir 
o fim da sua esperanca e o termo do seu desejo: “Nec est qui eruat ; nec est qui dicat, Redde. 

11. Esta sera a materia desta minha demonstracio: a esperanca dos Judeos destructiva da sua mesma espe- 
ranga; porque esperaéo os Judeos hum Messias que sen’o pode esperar, porque he impossivel por todas as 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. : 95 

razdes 0 Méssias que espero os Judeos. Evidente he esta demostracéo para quem sinceramente quizer abracar a 
verdade, porque nao podera resistir 4 forca da evidencia; desconsola-me porem, e quasi me desanima, para nao 
esperar fructo deste meu trabalho, o ver que mal poderey eu com razGes destruir a vossa porfia, quando Christo 
com milagres n&o curou em vossos antepassados a sua teyma. O entendimento nao pode resistir 4 verdade, bem 
que © vosso, genio se aposte a resistir 4 forca de toda a razio: Disputo com o vosso juizo, e néo com a vossa 
vontade; nao com a vontade, porque palavras nao vencem obstinagdes. Com o vosso juizo sim, porque o 
entendimento da assenso 4 verdade. Ouvi-me com pia affeycam na vontade, sem querer de preposito obstinar o 
coracam, e logo vereis como 0 vosso juizo se convence para abjurar verdadeiramente o vosso erro, e depor a vossa 

porfia. Entremos em o discurso, e principiemos a convencer a vossa teyma, pelos predicados intrinsecos do 
Messias. 

CL. 

_12. Para vos demostrar que 0 Messias que esperais he impossivel pelos predicados intrinsecos, de que su- 
pondes que se ha-de compor o Messias quando vier, e fazer-vos evidente que nao ha-de ter execucam a falsidade da 
vossa esperanca, he necessario preguntar-vos se vos esperais ao Messias, como Deos vos prometeu pelos seus 
profetas que o Messias havia de ser; ou se esperais ao Messias, governados pela cabeca de quatro ignorantes, que 
para se enganar a si, e a vos fingirao hum Messias ridiculo, e como tal o propuzerao 4 vossa credulidade. Seo 
esperais do primeiro modo; esperaveis bem, se ainda o Messias nao tivera santificado ao mundo com a sua 
presenca. Se o esperais do segundo modo sois loucos, porque antepondes a verdade de Deos a tontices de quatro 
parvos, que vos quizerao entreter com esta esperanga. Como homens de juizo, jA sey que me haveis de responder 
que esperais ao Messias segundo Deos revelou pelos seus prophetas que o Messias havia de ser quando viesse. 
Dizey-me agora, e quem ha-de ser o Messias por quem esperais? Ha-de ser puro homem como Moyses, que vos 
libertou do cativeyro do Egipto, ou como Zorobabel, que vos redemio da escravidio de Babilonia? Bem vejo que 
me respondereis, ou os vossos Mestres por vos, que o Messias ha-de ter muyto mayores excellencias, porque vos 
ha-de libertar da prezente oppressao com liberdade mais gloriosa. Assim o confessao todos os vossos Rabinos no 
seu Talmud, no livro Sanchedrin, no capitulo Helech. © 

13. Torno a preguntar-vos, esse Messias, que ainda esperais, supposto que ha-de ser mais poderoso que Zoro- 
babel, e que Moyses, ha-de ser s6 homem como estes dous forao ; ou ha-de ser homem e Deos como nenhum 
destes dous foy? Desta resposta depende a verdade da nossa fé, e a falsidade da vossa crenga. A seyta moderna 
dos vossos Rabinos vos aconselha que nao respondais a esta pregunta ; porque infalivelmente vos havemos de con- 
vencer emo vosso erro. E para isso vos persuadem que quando nao puderdes escusar-vos 4 reposta, negueis o 
artigo do Messias, dizendo que nao veyo, nem ha-de vir ; porque a vinda do Messias nao he artigo de fé: e que 
o ser Judeo nao consiste nesta esperanca, mas bem sim na observancia da ley de Moyses, que he sd 0 que obriga 
aos Judeos. 

14. Para total intelligencia deste ponto he necessario saber, que dcerca do Messias estao hoje os Judeos divididos 
em duas opinides totalmente oppostas e diversas totalmente. Huns dizem, e este he o parecer commum desta 
miseravel gente; huns dizem, que ainda nao veyo o Messias, outros affirmao, que ja veyo ha 1632 annos, por- 
que nasceu na occasiam em que Tito Vespasiano destruio a Jerusalem. Assim estd escrito no Talmud no livro 
Bereschit Rabba, que he a glosa mayor do Genesis no capitulo Echa. Eno livro Sanchedrin no capitulo “ Cum 
similiter.” E porque tendo o Messias ja vindo, segundo esta opinido ha mais de 1632 annos, ainda em tantos annos 
nenhum Judeo vio ao seu Messias: dizem huns, que anda desconhecido peregrinando pelo mundo, outros que esta 
4s portas de Roma na companhia de muytos pobres pedindo esmola: outros que est4 escondido nos montes Caspios, 
e com tal cautela que se algum Judeo o quizer hir 14 buscar o rio Sabatino lh’o impede, porque chegando algum 
Judeo 4s suas margens, converte as suas agoas em pedras, lancando hum tal chuveyro de pedradas sobre os pobres 
Judeos que ou hao-de ficar alli mortos ou se hao-de retirar deyxando ao seu Messias 14 dentro no seu en- 
canto. 

15. Outros considerando que os montes Caspios estao muyto perto, e esta fabula do rio Sabatino se convencia 
de ridicula, appellaram para o Paraiso, dizendo que 1a esta o Messias entretido na companhia de Moyses e Elias, para 
que quando for tempo Deos o mande libertar aos Judeos. A estas duas opinides acrescentarfo terceyra os Ra- 
binos modernos, affirmando que o Messias nfo viera, nem havia de vir, porque Deos nao o promettera nas Escrituras, 

96 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

nem a sua vinda era artigo de fé para os Judeos. Esta opiniao de novo inventada teve tao pouco sequito que ainda 
nfo encontrey outrem que a seguisse mais que a Francisco Antonio de Olivares, Castelhano de nacimento, o qual 
nesta cidade foy relaxado em 14 de Julho de 1686, e morreo profitente deste artigo ou deste disparate, que por tal o 
estim4o todos os Judeos sem controversia, como consta do Talmud no tratado Sanchedrin no capitulo Chelech, aonde 
expressamente confessio os Rabinos que nao ouve propheta que nao tratasse da vinda do Messias ; “ Omnes prophetz 
aliquid de Messia predixerunt.” O mesmo se afirma no Jalcut na exposic&o do capitulo 66 de Isaias, sinal 368. 
Na mesma verdade contest&0 todos os Judeos, quando no Sabbado em todas as suas synagogas cantéo aquelle seu 
celebre motete em Hebraico, Jgdal Elohim chay, que he o mesmo que pedirem a Deos que lhes apresente a 
vinda do seu Messias. E para nao nos determos em hum artigo que he commum a toda a synagoga, bastara para 
estabelecer a sua verdade o testemunho de Rabbi Moyses Egipcio, que he hum dos mais antigos Mestres que tem 
os Judeos. Diz pois este Rabino no. seu Deuteronomio, aonde escreve os artigos da ley, que o undecimo artigo 
della he a confissio do Messias, a quem os Judeos devem crér com firme fé, sob pena de que fazendo o contrario 
serao reputados por hereges da synagoga: “ Undecimus articulus est Messias, et hunc tenentur Hebrei firma fide 
credere et venturum sperare, prout omnes prophete predixerunt. Et qui hance veritatem negaverit, lege discedere, 
et hereticum reputari deberet.” 

16. Suppostas estas duas opinides, que sdo aquellas que acerca do Messias tem os Judeos, dizey-me agora, filhos 
de Israel, este Messias, que j4 veyo no tempo em que se destruio a vossa cidade, ou que ainda ha-de vir como vés 
esperais, ha-de ser ou foy puro homem; ou ha-de ser juntamente homem e Deos? Apertados com essa pregunta 
respondereis todos que ha-de ser ou foy puro homem. Pois se assim foy 0 vosso Messias, que ja veyo, ou ha-de ser 
o vosso Messias, que ainda ha-de vir, sabey de certo. que nem ha-de vir, nem ainda veyo: porque esse Messias como 
vés dizeis que ha-de ser ou jd tem sido, Rabbi Moyses Egipcio em seu Deuteronomio, he totalmente impossivel; e 
o impossivel nem pode ter sido pelo passado, nem pode ter sido pelo futuro. O Messias ha-de ser Deos e homem, 
porque Deos revelou pelos seus prophetas que no Messias havia de haver o constado destas duas naturezas, hu- 
mana e divina, e como he impossivel que Deos minta, e que Deos engane; tambem he impossivel poder haver 
Messias verdadeiro com outros predicados, que nfo sejao aquelles que Deos revelou, que havia de ter o verdadeiro 
Messias. Logo o Messias, que vossa esperanca finge futuro, porque ainda nao veyo; ou o Messias, aquem nao 
obstante ter vindo ainda esperais para conseguir a vossa liberdade, he impossivel em si se he impossivel, nem 
pode ter vindo, nem pode vir: logo a vossa esperanga he destructiva de si mesma, porque nunca pode ter fim esta 
vossa esperanca. Esperay quanto quizeres os que vos determinais a ser Judeos, mas desenganay-vos que se 0 vosso 
Messias foy ou ha-de ser como esperais, nem ha-de ser, nem tem sido, porque he impossivel tal Messias. Ora ouvi 

aos vossos profetas. 

§ IL. 

17. A dous profetas entre outros muitos revelou Deos quem havia de ser o Messias que tinha determinado mandar 
ao mundo; a Isaias,. e a Jeremias, Isaias assim o descreve no capitulo nono dos seus Vaticinios, conforme ao vosso 
texto Hebraico: “Infans natus est nobis, et Filius datus est nobis, et erit principatus super humerum ejus: et 
vocabitur nomen ejus Admirabilis, Consiliarius, Deus Fortis, Pater Sempiternus,” ou “ Pater Sempiternitatis, Princeps 
Pax: ad multiplicandum principatum, et pacis non erit finis, super solium David et super regnum ejus sedebit; ut 
confirmet illud, et corroboret in judicio et justitia, a modo, et usque in sempiternum.” Nasceu-nos hum menino, 
deu-se-nos hum filho, que ter4 sobre o seu hombro o seu imperio : chamar-se-ha Admiravel, Conselheiro, Deos Forte, 
Pay Eterno, ou Pay da Eternidade, Principe da Paz, ou Principe Paz, que ha-de multiplicar o seu imperio : sentar-se-ha 
sobre o throno de David, e sobre o seu reyno, para o confirmar, e corroborar em juizo e justica, desde agora para 
sempre até toda a eternidade. 

18. A mesma, ou quasi a mesma, revelacio com pouca differenca fez Deos ao profeta Jeremias nos capitulos 23. 
e 33, segundo o vosso mesmo Hebraico texto: “Ecce dies venient, dicit Dominus, et suscitabo David germen 
justum. Ht regnabit Rex, et intelliget, et faciet judicium et justitiam in terra. In diebus illis salvabitur Juda, et 
Israel habitabit ad fduciam. Et hoc est nomen, quod vocabunt eum -A:” inefavel, seu outro nome inefavel “A: “justus 
noster.” Vird o tempo, disse Deos, em que eu produzirey para David hum garfo da sua geragao. Reynara Rey, seré 
sabio, fard juizo e justica na terra. E nesse tempo se salvaré Judas, e Israel estaré na sua companhia com toda a 
confianca. O nome que ha-de ter he o de Deos ‘A: -A: dous nomes inefaveis, justo nosso. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS.: 97 

19. Dous sinaes vos dio aqui estes dous profetas em cada hum dos seus vaticinios, para que vés os Judeos 
pudesseis conhecer ao Messias que vos promettia nestas duas profecias ; Isaias diz, que o Messias ha-de nascer 
pequeno, “Infans natus est ;” que se ha-de dar em tempo, “ Filius datus est ;” que ha-de ter hombro, “super hu- 
merum ejus ;” que ha-de ter imperio, que se ha-de multiplicar, e que ha-de crescer, “ad multiplicandum imperium ;” 
que se ha-de sentar no throno e reyno de David, “ super solium David, et super regnum ejus sedebit.” Este he o 
primeyro sinal que o profeta d4 para se conhecer ao Messias. Diz mais, que além de todos estes predicados, que 
ao Messias verdadeyro hao-de competir, terd outro sinal por onde se possa conhecer. Porque serd o seu proprio 
nome Admiravel, “Admirabilis ;” Conselheyro, “ Consiliarius ;’ Deos Forte, “ Deus Fortis ;” Pay Eterno “ Pater Sem- 
piternus,” ou Pay da Eternidade “ Pater Sempiternitatis ;” Principe da Paz “ Princeps Pacis,” ou Principe Paz “ Prin- 
ceps Pax.” Que a paz no tera fim, “et pacis non erit finis.” Que o seu imperio duraria desde agora até toda a 
eternidade, “a modo, et usque in sempiternum.” Este he o segundo sinal do Messias; o primeyro sinal evidente- 
mente prova que o Messias ha-de ser homem, porque se o Messias ha-de nascer pequeno, ser dado em tempo, ter 
hombro, imperio que cresca, e se multiplique, sentar-se no throno de David, e sobre o seu reyno, necessariamente 
havia-de ser homem o Messias, porque sé a quem he homem podem competir estes predicados. 

20. O segundo sinal demonstrativamente conclue a divindade do Messias, porque se o Messias havia-de ter os 
nomes que o profeta diz, e ser chamado Admiravel, Conselheyro, Deos Forte, Pay Eterno, ou Pay da Eternidade, 
havia-de ter imperio perpetuo, reyno sem fim, paz sem termo: como nenhum homem precisamente homem pode 
ter paz sem termo, reyno sem fim, imperio perpetuo, nem ser Pay Eterno, ou Pay da Eternidade ; chamar-se Deos, 
ou competir-lhe de Deos o nome ; necessariamente havia-de ser Deos 0 Messias; porque estes predicados sé podem 
competir aquem he Deos; logo por estes predicados, que sé a Deos podem ser proprios, havia-de ser Deos o Messias, 
pelos primeiros havia-de ser homem, e havia-de ser Deos pelos segundos; logo o Messias havia-de ser Deos e 
homem. 

21. Jeremias prova o mesmo argumento, e tambem para se conhecer o Messias da dous sinaes, porque diz que 
o Messias ha-de ser futuro, “Ecce dies venient;” que se ha-de produzir em tempo, “suscitabo ;” que ha-de ser 
geracao de David, ou que para David ha-de ser a sua geracio, “germen David;” que ha-de fazer justica, “ faciet 
justitiam;” e que esta justica ha-de ser na terra, “in terra ;” que no futuro ha-de ser rey, “et regnabit Rex ;” que 
ha-de salvar em tempo os Judeos, “ salvabitur Juda ;” e que os Judeos hao-de morar com elle com toda a confianga, 
“Jsrael habitabit ad fiduciam.” Todas estas circunstancias provao que o Messias ha-de ser homem, porque sé a 
quem he homem podem competir estas circunstancias todas. 

22. O Messias além do que j4 tem dito o profeta havia-de chamar-se por seu proprio nome Deos, e nao havia 
de ser este nome Deos; qual quer nome dos que Deos tem; mas o nome santissimo ‘A: o inefavel, que significa a 
omnimoda asseidade de Deos, e ser eterno por essencia (como logo provarey com os Rabbinos) cujo attributo sé a 
Deos pode competir, ou cujo nome sé em Deos se pode verificar. Porque assim como sé a Deos pertence o ser 
omnimodamente de si e nao de outrem; assim sé a quem fér Deos pode pertencer aquelle nome, que nega a balei- 
dade, e firma a asseidade. Logo se Deos diz que este he 0 nome que o Messias ha-de ter, ou o Messias havia-de 
ser Deos, ou Deos nos pés em perigo de adorarmos por Deos ao Messias, naéo sendo o Messias Deos: porque 
veriamos no Messias, como proprio aquelle nome, que nao pode ter senao quem fér Deos. Deos nao pode ser 
cauza de erro nem de engano. Logo necessariamente havia-de ser Deos 0 Messias, pelos primeyros predicados que 
Deos revelou que o Messias havia-de ter he o Messias homem; pelos segundos he Deos, logo era Deos e homem 
o Messias. Logo se esperais a hum Messias homem somente e nao Deos, esperais hum Messias impossivel ; por- 
que sendo Messias como vés dizeis nfo ha-de ter aquelles predicados que Deos disse que havia de ter o Messias. 

-Dizem-vos os profetas que o Messias ha-de ser Deos e homem? E vés contra 0 que vos dizem os profetas, por cuja 

boca fallou Deos, esperais a hum Messias homem somente. Logo esperais a ham Messias que nao pode ter vindo, 
nem pode vir ; logo a vossa esperanca he destructiva de si mesma, porque nao podendo a esperanga cahir senao em o 
objecto possivel, nao he sé impossivel o objecto que esperais, mas tambem a esperanga com que esperais 0 objecto. 
E assim como o impossivel nem no passado nem no futuro ou no presente pode ter execucao, assim a vossa espe- 
ranca de hum Messias somente homem, no presente he sonho, no passado foy sombra, e no futuro ha-de ser fabula. 

2C 

98 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

§ IV. 

23. Que solucao dais a estas duas profecias, que sdo tao claras contra a vossa esperanca? Que resposta dais a 
huma demonstragao tao evidente contra 0 vosso engano? Ou credes 0 que vos dizem estes dous profetas, ou niio o 
credes? Se o credes, como esperais a hum Messias contra 0 mesmo que os profetas vos dizem? Se o nao credes, 
para que enganais ao mundo, e porque vos enganais a vés dizendo que sois Judeos? Bem sey que me respon- 
dereis nao vos convencem estas duas profecias, porque como sois ignorantes nao lhes sabeis a resposta. Mas que 
os vossos Mestres sabem muito bem soltar estas duvidas. Que se estivesseis em Olanda, em-Veneza, em Liorne, 
ou em Turim, que vos nao haviamos de apertar tanto, porque 14 tinheis Rabbinos, que como letrados sabem explicar 
estes textos ; e que como Mestres doutos sabem responder a estes argumentos. Ora eu estou pelo partido, mas 
seguray-me vos que haveis de estar pelas respostas dos vossos Mestres, e pela explicacdéo dos vossos Rabbinos, que eu 
vos repitirey tudo o que elles vos dizem, e ensinao para escurecer a nossa verdade, porque evidentemente vos hey 
de mostrar a falsidade da sua doutrina: e a Deos, que nos ha-de julgar a todos, tomo por testemunha de vos referir 
tudo 0 que sey que os vossos Mestres vos ensinao para soltar a este argumento: ou para dizer melhor com 0 vosso 
Rabbi Samuel tudo o que os vossos Mestres dizem para vos enganarem a vés, e para se enganarem a sy, “ Domine,” 
diz este Rabbino escrevendo a Rabbi Isac, “ Domine mi, videtur quod decipimus alios, et nos ipsos.” 

24. Rabbi Avenazra, de pois de se ver convencido com o texto de Isaias para confessar que o Messias havia-de 
ser Deos, vendo que o lancavao da synagoga, para se conservar com os Judeos, negou que do Messias fallasse neste 
lugar o profeta, dizendo que del rey Ezechias falla 0 texto. E Rabbi Salama&o, que para vos enganar foy entre 
todos os Judeos 0 vosso Salam&o, seguio o mesmo parecer; mas vendo que do texto facilmente se convencia esta 
interpretacao para poder sustentar 0 seu erro, se atreveo a viciar_o original Hebraico, commettendo neste particular 
hum gravissimo peccado, pois tinha hum expresso preceito no Deuteronomio, por onde Deos lhe prohibia com- 
metter tio grande maldade: “ Non addetis super verbo, quod ego precipio vobis, nec minuetis ex eo ;” assim se le 
no vosso texto Hebraico. O mesmo fizerao os Rabbinos modernos ao texto de Jeremias, porque tambem negao 
que do Messias falle o profeta; porque huns affirmao que o texto se entende de David, de Zorobabel outros, e 
viciando tambem o mesmo original em Jeremias, todos contestao que 0 nome de Deos nao prova a divinidade do 
Messias, Deuteron. cap. 4. ver. 2, porque no texto nao se da ao Messias 0 nome de Deos; porque ainda que se lhe 
dé, da Escritura consta, que o nome de Deos se apropria aquem nao he Deos. 

25. Estas sao as respostas que os vossos Mestres dao 4s nossas demonstragdes ; mas logo parecem suas estas 
repostas, porque se convencem de falsas todas, duas falsidades dizem nesta resposta os vossos Rabbinos. A primeira 
que estes textos de Isaias e Jeremias se nado entendem do Messias. A segunda que no texto de Isaias falla del rey 
Ezechias 0 profeta, e que no texto de Jeremias o profeta falla de David, ou de Zorobabel. Que o nome de Deos 
applicado neste dous textos ao Messias no prova que fosse Deos o Messias, ainda que do Messias se entenddo 
estes dous textos; ou porque ao Messias se nao attribue de Deos o nome; ou porque ainda que se lhe attribua, 
desta attribuigao se nado prova a divindade do Messias. HE para que vejais com evidencia como tudo isto que os 
vossos Rabbinos vos ensinao he huma mentira crassa, e hum fatal desproposito, reparay na facilidade com que se 
convence esta sua doutrina, e vamos a provar que estes dous textos se entendem do Messias. 

26. O Targum ou parafrazi Caldea de Rabbi Jonathas Bem Vzielis, que he o mesmo que do Rabbino Jonathas, 
filho de Vziel, a quem alguns auctores por razao da pouca noticia que tem dos livros Hebraicos, confundem com o 
Targum de Rabbi Ankelos, pois trasladou em Caldeo este lugar de Isaias, Rabbi Jonathas, segundo achou em o 
vosso original Hebreo: “Infans natus est nobis, filius datus est nobis, et vocabitur,” digo “suscipiet legem super 
se ad conservandum eam, et vocabitur nomen ejus Min Kodam, Deus Fortis, permanens in secula seeculorum Mes- 
siach.” He este livro tao sagrado para vés os que sois Judeos, que até hoje nao ouve na synagoga quem se 
atrevesse a nega-lo, nem a controverte-lo, nao sé pela sua veneranda antiguidade, pois foy escrito ha 1747 annos, 
42 antes de Christo vir ; mas tambem que em todas as vossas escolas, aquem impropriamente chamam synagogas, 
o ledes todos os sabbados igualmente com a Tohra, que vem a ser 0 Pentateucho de Moyses. V6s porém, ou os 
vossos Rabbinos, que tudo fizerao ridiculo até a vossa crenca para este livro fizestes celebre, porque vos meterao na 
cabega os vossos Mestres hum famoso disparate, dizendo que quando Jonathas escrevia este livro se alguma mosca 
se punha no papel aonde escrevia, que logo vinha fogo do Ceo que queymava a mosca, e deyxava o papel intacto. 
Valente desproposito que crém homens que tem juizo! Logo se o Zargum, aquem os Hebreos admittem por 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. G9 

livro de authoridade infalivel, e como livro canonico, por cuja verdade sempre estiverao sem controversia, (Sixtus 
Sen. Bibliot. 5. Lib. 4. f. mihi 315. Jacob de Val. in Prol. Psalm. Tract. 6,) do Messias explica a este lugar de Isaias 
profeta infalivelmente deve ser falso para quem fdr Judeo, negar que o profeta nao falla neste lugar do Messias. 

27. A mesma intelligencia do Targum se lé no livro Bereschit Rabba, que he a glosa mayor do Genesis, no 
capitulo 4, aonde se diz assim: ‘‘Non est autem nomen Domini hic nisi Rex Messias, ut dictum est, Principatus 
super humerum ejus :” A estes livros, que para vés sao tao sagrados que sao infaliveis, acrescentemos a authoridade 
dos Rabbinos que do Messias explicarfo este texto. Rabbi Joseph Galileo no prologo das Lamentacoens, que em 
Hebraico se chama Lcha Rabbathi, perguntando qual he o nome do Messias, assim respondeo: “Nomen Messia” 
Paz, “scriptum est enim, Princeps Pacis.” Moyses Egypcio, que he o Rabbino a quem vés por excellencia chamais 
o grande pregador, diz assim na sua epistola chamada [gerens Teman, escrita aos Rabbinos da Africa. “ Omnia 
nomina hic posita ab Isaia in cap. 9. cum epithetis suis dicuntur de puero nato, qui est Rex Messias.” He logo 
falsa a intelligencia de Rabbi Abenazra, e dos mais Rabbinos que negio fallar o texto do Messias, porque além de 
ser contra o que tantos Rabbinos antigos confessarao, he contra o Zargum, aquem vs admittis por livro authentico, 
e aquem vés reconheceis por livro sagrado. 

28. Com a mesma evidencia se prova que do Messias se entende o lugar de Jeremias, que acima ponderamos ; 
nado sé porque assim o confessao os mais doutos e antigos Rabbinos que florecerféo na synagoga; mas porque assim 
se léno mesmo ZYargwm de Jonathas: “In tempore illo statuam Messiam justum, et hoc est nomen, quod ipsi 
dicent ei -T- (nome grande,) Justus Noster.” O mesmo consta do livro Midras Tellim, que he a glosa dos Psalmos ; 
aonde expondo-se aquelle texto: “ Domine in virtute tua letabitur rex,” assim se escreve neste livro, “Quod est 
Messiz nomen? est illud quod dicitur in cap. 23 Jeremie, Dominus Justus Noster.” O mesmo consta do livro 
Echa Rabbati aonde expondo-se aquelle lugar dos Threnos, “ Longe factus est a me consolator,” fallando Rabbi 
Abba do Messias assim escreve: “ Quia elongatus est a me consolator convertens animam meam. Quod est nomen 
Messiz? (Deos, o nome inefayel,) est nomen ejus, sicut dictum est Jeremia, cap. 23, et hoc est nomen quod voca- 
bunt eum, Dominus Justus Noster.” Consta finalmente de infinitos Rabbinos e livros admittidos, pelos Judeos, que 
por nao gastar tempo deyxo de vos referir. Eis aqui as respostas dos vossos Mestres, que se comvencem de falsas 
e mentirosas, negando que nestes dous lugares fallassem do Messias estes dous profetas, néo soubera’o responder 4 
evidencia da demonstragam que fazemos destas duas profecias, e para ficarem Judeos, negarao aos livros canonicos, 
e aos mais antigos Rabbinos, para se concervarem no seu erro. 

§ V. 

29. Convencidos por falsos os Rabbinos em dizer que do Messias nao falléo estes dous profetas, vamos a con- 
vencer a segunda falsidade de Rabbi Abenazra e de Rabbi Salam&o, em que dizem que o texto de Isaias se entende 
del rey Ezechias ; e a falsidade de outros Rabbinos, que affirmao que o lugar de Jeremias se entende de David, ou de 
Zorobabel. E que o nome de Deos applicado nestes dous lugares ao Messias, nao prova a sua divindade, dado que 
do Messias fallem estes dous textos: ou porque ao Messias se nao applica o nome de Deos; porque ainda que se 
applique nao prova a sua divindade esta applicacao. 

30. Primeiramente, se a profecia de Isaias se entende del rey Ezechias, como pretendem estes Rabbinos, estéo 
elles obrigados a nos mostrarem como em Ezechias se comprio o que diz o profeta. Mas isto nao poderao elles 
mostrar sem que primeyro neguem ao capitulo 18 do quarto livro dos Reyes, ou dizerem que a Escritura ménte neste 
lugar, ou que he falso aquelle capitulo. Porque se o profeta falla de Ezechias neste texto, necessariamente Ezechias se 
nao chamou Ezechias, mas Ezechias se chamou Deos; e sé este foy o seu nome, necessariamente Ezechias foy Principe 
da Paz, e a paz do seu tempo foy perpetua. Necessariamente foy Pay Eterno, ou Pay da Eternidade. Necessariamente 
© seu reyno ainda hoje dura, e nunca ha-de ter fim, porque tudo isto consta do lugar de Isaias referido, que havia-de 
ser 0 filiio nascido de quem falla o profeta no capitulo nono. Nada disto se verificou, nem podia verificar em Ezechias: 
antes o contrario consta claramente do texto sagrado. Logo he falso dizer-se que de Ezechias falla o profeta. 

31. Que nimguem chamasse a Ezechias Deos, nem Deos fosse 0 nome com que se chamou este principe he 
certo: porque da Escritura nao consta que se lhe désse tal nome, antes 0 seu nome consta que foy Ezechias, que 
nfo fosse nem pudesse ser Pay Eterno, ou Pay da Eternidade, além de que arazio natural assim o convence, por- 
que notoriamente foy s6 homem Ezechias ; deviado estes vossos Mestres mostrar-nos donde, ou como competiao a 

100 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

este principe estes predicados, que sao proprios de Deos: porque nimguem pode ser Pay Eterno, ou Pay da Eterni- 
dade se estenda a sua duragdo, o que nao pode estar se nao com a divindade. Deviao mostrar-nos como ainda hoje 
existia este rey,e a suageracio. Deviao mostrar-nos como o seu reyno foy multiplicado, e que se nao contentéra com 
o receber como recebeo de seu pay dividido. Deviao mostrar-nos ainda hoje, corroborado e firmado o reyno de 
David, e ndo manchado e perdido em seu filho Manasses. Mas para que este ponto nao fique sé em palavras, vamos 
estabelecer com as Escrituras este ponto. 

32. O texto sagrado do capitulo 18 do quarto livro dos Reys destrée totalmente a exposicio deste Rabbino. 
Ezechias tao fora esteve de ter reyno multiplicado, que sé dividido recebeo de seu pay o reyno. Tomado o governo, 
Senacherib Ihe tomou as cidades mais fortificados do seu reyno, e para se livrar de huma oppressao, que inundou a 
todo o seu reyno, lhe deu trezentos talentos de prata e trinta de ouro, sendo obrigado para pagar este tributo, nao 
so a esgotar todo o seu thesouro, mas a tirar do Templo a prata e ouro que havia nelle. A paz que entio se lhe 
concedeo, foy tao ‘curta em a sua duracao, que todo o seu governo foy huma perpetua guerra, e seu filho perdeo todo 
o seu imperio. A confirmagao do throno de David foy perde-lo seu filho. Hoje estd destruida e extinta a sua 
descendencia, porque nao ha hoje geracao de Ezechias, nem reyno deste principe que dure hoje. Tudo isto succedeo 
a Ezechias, como consta dos capitulos 18, 19, e 20, do quarto livro dos Reys, que para vés he artigo de fé tudo o 
que consta destes capitulos. Nada disto havia-de succeder ao profetizado de Isaias. Logo ou he falsa a profecia, 
ou o texto dos Reys, ouainterpretacao dos Rabbinos. Porque se o profeta diz que o profetizado havia de chamar-se 
Deos, ser Principe da Paz, e que nao havia-de ter a sua paz fim, ser Pay Eterno ou da Eternidade, que havia de ter 
imperio multiplicado, e que nao havia-de ter fim o seu reyno, que perpetuamente havia-de corroborar, e estabelecer 
para sempre o throno de David: dizendo 0 texto dos Reys, que a Ezechias succedeo tudo pelo contrario do que 
Isaias prometéra ; necessariamente se a exposicao deste Rabbino he verdadeira, ou o profeta mintio em o que disse, 
ou o texto do livro dos Reys he falso em 0 que conta. O profeta nao pode mentir, o texto dos Reys nao pode ser 
falso, logo os falsos e os mentirosos séo os vossos Rabbinos, em quererem verificar em Ezechias hum lugar que a 
Ezechias nao pode competir. E em huma falsidade tam grande fundais vos a vossa esperanca ? 

Sail. 

33. Nem Rabbi Salamam pode seguir a esta difficuldade atrevendo-se elle e os vossos Rabbinos a viciarem o 
texto de Isaias e Jeremias, para negarem que havia-de ser Deos o Messias ; nao obstante que os profetas digaio que 
o nome do Messias havia-de ser Deos. Virao os vossos Rabbinos, porque mais que trabalhassem em expdrem a 
estes dous lugares nao podiam negar a divindade no Messias, e para se conservarem a sie a vos no Judaismo, vos 
aconselhao que nao leais nestes textos que o Messias se ha-de chamar Deos Forte, Conselheyro, Principe da Paz. 
Nem que o nome de Deos he 0 nome com que se ha-de chamar ao Messias. Mas que o texto de Isaias se ha-de 
ler: “Deus fortis, qui est Admirabilis, Consiliarius, et Pater futuri seeculi, vocabit Regem Messiach Principem 
Pacis.” De tal maneyra que o Messias tenha por nome Principe da Paz, e que Deos nao sejao Messias, mas que 
Deos impora ao Messias 0 nome de Principe da Paz. Como tambem que no texto de Jeremias nao ledis, “ Hoc est 
nomen quod vocabunt eum, Dominus Justus Noster,” mas que deveis ler, “vocabit eum Deus Justus Noster ;” de tal 
maneyra que Deos seja o que chama ao Messias, e o Messias seji o chamado. Persudirdo-se estes barbaros que com 
oO viciarem ao texto sagrado, e em lugar de “vocabitur” em Isaias, pondo “vocabit ;” e o mesmo em Jerémias em 
lugar de “ vocabunt” tinhao concluido, que ao Messias sendo dava o nome de Deos : mas enganarao-se, porque todo 
este seu trabalho nao servio de outra cousa mais que de provar a sua falsidade e o seu atrevimento. Ora véde o 
atrevimento e falsidade dos vossos Rabbinos. 

34. No lugar de Isaias em que estava escrito em Hebraico vehichre que quer dizer “vocabitur,” atreyidamente 
Rabbi Salamam, que foy insigne corruptor dos textos sagrados, escreveo vahycra, que quer dizer “vocabit.” EK 
em Jeremias estando no mesmo original Hebraico escrito crew, que quer dizer “ vocabunt,”’ escreverao icreo, que 
quer dizer “vocabit.” Facilissima he de fazer esta corrupcdo na lingoa Hebraica. Todos deveis saber que os 
sagrados textos se leréo sempre sem pontuacdo, e ainda hoje nao tem pontos nem virgulas a Biblia que conservais 
em cada huma das vossas escolas. A pontuacio sé se comecou a pdr nas Biblias 476 annos depois da vinda de 
Christo, sendo os seus primeyros inventores Rabbi Jacob Ben Naphtali, e Rabbi Aaron Ben Aser, lendo-se 
antes destes Rabbinos os livros sagrados sem pontos. WVindo Christo, querendo os Judeos negar a divindade do 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 101 

Messias, com a pontuacSo comecarao a viciar as Escrituras. Veichare, que quer dizer “vocabitur,” e vahycra, que 
significa “yvocabit,” se escrevem com as mesmas letras, e s6 a pontuacao as diversifica; como tambem zereo, que 
significa “vocabit,” se escreve com as mesmas letras com que se escreve icrewv, que quer dizer “ vocabunt.” Para 
corromperem o texto de Jeremias tomarao a letra Vau, que he a nossa vogal V, e tirando-lhe hum ponto que tem 
no meyo a letra Vau, e faz icreu, puzerio o ponto sobre outra letra, e fica a vogal V mudada em O, que quer dizer 
2creo: e com mudar hum ponto de hua letra n’outra, ficou viciado o texto de Jeremias. 

35. O de Isaias se viciou desta maneira vehicare, que quer dizer “ vocabitur” ou “vocabunt,” e vahycra, que 
significa “ vocabit;” se escrevem com as mesmas letras. A letra Cametz, que estava debaixo do Coph, transposeram- 
na, e 0 que era vehicare ficou vahicra. (Zech. Boverio in demens. simb. vere, et fal. Relo tom. i. 1. 2. f. mihi 41.) 
Todo este trabalho, e esta fadiga toda dos vossos Rabbinos, e entre todos elles do vosso Salamam, que sé veyo ao 
mundo para vos enganar este Rabbino, aproveytou-lhe bem! Mas foy para nés na sua cara lhe mostrarmos a sua 
falsidade, e o convencermos de hum insigne mentiroso. Porque se corremos aos Setenta Interpretes, que escreverao 
ha 1989 annos, 284 annos antes de Christo vir, e ao Targum, escrito ha 1742 annos, 42 annos antes da vinda de 
Christo, tanto o Targum como os Setenta Interpretes tem “ vocabitur,” ou vahycare, e nao vahycra, no texto de 
Isaias. E dcrew, que significa “vocabunt,” e nao écreo, que quer dizer “vocabit,” no texto de Jeremias, logo se Jona- 
thas quando escreveo em Caldeo, e os Setenta Interpretes em Grego, concordemente poserao “ vocabitur” no pri- 
meyro lugar, e “vocabunt” no segundo, he infallivel que assim estava entao o original que trasladarao. Nao quereis 

que esteja hoje assim? Logo esta viciado hoje: isto supposto. 

§ VII. 

36. Dizey-me agora sem paixéo: A quem havemos de seguir, e aquem havemos de crer? A Rabbi Salamam, que 
depois de vir Christo tantos annos diz que nestes textos esté “vocabit,” vahycra, zcreo, para sustentar a sua teyma ; 
ou aos Setenta Interpretes, que nao sé forao escolhidos pelos Judeos para verterem o texto Hebraico em Grego, 
como os homens mais sabios que havia na synagoga, e apartados huns dos outros contestarao 284 annos antes da 
vinda de Christo, que nos textos estava vehicare e icreu, porque trasladarao “vocabitur” e “vocabunt”? A quem 
havemos de crer, e a quem havemos de seguir? A Rabbi Salamam, conhecidamente falsario pelas infinitas corrup¢oes 
dos textos sagrados que anddo nas suas obras, e que escreveo hontem; ou o Targum, 42 annos escrito antes de 
Christo vir, que em Caldeo trasladou “vocabitur” e “vocabunt,” porque no original achou icreu e vehycare ? 
Tantos annos primeyro deste Rabbino estavam os textos de hum modo, e depois que elle escreveo quer que estejam 
de outro, e credes que este Rabbino vos falla verdade + ‘Tantos annos primeyro de vir Rabbi Salamam ao mundo 
estavao os textos allegados differentemente do que hoje quer elle que estejam: logo haveis de confessar que estao 
assim porque elle os corrompeu. Ora crede 4 vista desta demonstracio a quem quizerdes. Mas se antepondes 
Rabbi Salamam ao Targum e aos Setenta, contradizeis a reverencia com que a synagoga respeytou sempre aos Se- 

tenta e ao Targum. 
37. Que o nome de Deos applicado ao Messias em ambos estes lugares prova a sua divindade, que he o que os 

vossos Mestres assi negarao, dizendo que a divindade do Messias se nao provava por se lhe applicar o nome de 
Deos, porque a muytas creaturas se applica na Escritura este nome ; he huma fatuidade, nascida ou da vossa igno- 
rancia, ou da vossa apostasia. Ndo vos negamos que os nomes de Deos se appliquem na Escritura a infinitas 
creaturas racionaes e irracionaes, sem que nos convencamos que séo Deos essas creaturas. O ponto esta se nos 
podeis yés mostrar que 0 nome ineffavel, que he especialissimo nome de Deos, e explica o ser Eterno por essencia, 
he delegavel a quem nao for Deos ; que nds vos mostramos que sendo delegavel ao Messias este nome necessaria- 
mente havia-de ser Deos o Messias. 

38. Quereis ouvir esta verdade? Ora revolvey comigo as vossas e as nossas Escrituras. Dés nomes tem Deos 
nos Livros sagrados. I, que significa “Fortem ;” Sabaoth, que quer dizer Senhor “ Virtutum,” ou “ Exercituum;” e 
Sericie, que quer dizer, “misit me ad vos;” Elion, Elon, que quer dizer “ Excelsum ;” Elohim, Eloe, Ya, Adonai, 
que todos querem dizer 0 mesmo; Ya, que significa “Deum;” Sadaz, que quer dizer “ Omnipotentem ;” e fora 
destes tem outro especialissimo nome, que he ‘T° ineffayel segundo lhe chamio os Gregos, ou o nome ineffavel de 
Deos, a quem os Hebreos chamio o nome das quatro letras, Joth, He, Vau, He. De todas estas quatro letras ou 
nomes se integra o santissimo nome de ineffavel, que he tao sagrado para vds.os Hebreos, que invocando a Deos 
com todos os seus nomes, sé vos nio atreveis a tomar o ineffavel na boca; e sé delle usava o summo sacerdote na 

2D 

102 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

oceasiao do sacrificio; e ouvindo-lhe vés a pronuncia o reverenciaveis com o peito por terra. D'aqui vém que se 
vedes este santissimo nome escrito, nem o ledes, nem o pronunciais, e em seu lugar substituistes o nome de Adonai. 
Nem vés, nem os Gregos, nem os Latinos até agora lhe acharao o verdadeyro significado: os Latinos: explicio por 
“Deus vel Dominus ;” os Gregos por -T: ineffavel ; e por dona, os Hebreos. Eo que mais he, que para o saberes 
pronunciar, esperais que venha o Messias, porque dizeis que sé elle ha-de saber qual he a sua verdadeyra pronuncia. 
Isto assim estabelecido, dizey-me agora, o nome ineffavel he especialissimo de Deos, e significa a omnimoda‘assei- 
dade, e como tal nao se pode communicar sendo a quem for Deos, porque sé a quem o for pode competir o pre- 
dicado de ser omhimodamente de si mesmo: logo havia-de ser Deos 0 Messias, porque lhe competia este nome: 
os de mais nomes repetidos com que se invoca Deos sfo delegaveis 4s creaturas, como achareis a cada passo na 
Escritura. Mas o nome ineffavel, que ao Messias se applica, nao nos mostrareis na Escritura que se aproprie a 
outrem mais que ao Messias e a Deos; e para que concluamos este ponto, ouvi o vosso Rabbi Moyses no seu livro 

_chamado More, cap. 6, “Cuncta nomina Dei Excelsi que inveniuntur in Scripturis, ab aliqua certa operatione 
derivantur. Et nomen istud, quod quatuor litteris constat, nomen est particulare et unicum Dei Excelsi, significat- 
que Essentiam Divinam cum manifesta determinatione ad solum Deum absque aliqua equivocatione et communi~ 
catione ad alterum qui Deus non sit.” E mais abaixo acrescenta no mesmo capitulo: “ Certé alia nomina Dei sunt 
nomina que declarant aliquam operationem, a qua derivantur. At verd hoc nomen quatuor litterarum non est 
cognitum ab aliqua derivatione, et alteri non communicatur nisi soli Deo.” ‘Logo se este nome, e nao os outros, 
conforme as Escrituras e Rabbinos sé he proprio de Deos, com tal especialidade que he incommunicavel a quem 
nao for Deos; deste nome de Deos dado ao Messias bem se prova no Messias a divindade. E os vossos Mestres, 
que sabem muyto bem o que digo, de proposito confundem os nomes de Deos, porque querem de proposito errar 
no artigo da divindade do Messias. 

39. Para concluirmos este discurso nos falta somente provar a falsidade com que os vossos Rabbinos querem attri- 
buir a David ou a Zorobabel 0 texto de Jeremias. Olhay, meus irmaos, Jeremias profetizou 386 annos depois de morto 
David. Depois de morto David nao podia tornar a vir este principe ; nem podia ser no futuro, porque ja tinha sido no 
passado. Logo se David foy o profetizado, nao havia de dizer o profeta que David se produziria, “suscitabo ;” mas 
que ja estava produzido. Nao havia-de dizer que se havia-de chamar, “vocabunt;” mas que jé se tinha chamado. 
Nao havia-de dizer que se sentaria sobre o seu reyno, “ sedebit ;” mas que jd se tinha sentado. Nao havia-de dizer 
que seria sabio, “ sapiens erit ;” mas que fora hum sabio grande. Nao havia dizer que seria Rey, “regnabit Rex ;” 
mas que rey j4 0 tmha sido. Nao havia-de dizer que faria justica na terra, “ faciet justitiam in terra ;” mas que na 
terra ja tinha feyto justica. Logo a David, que jd foy, implica a profecia que ainda ser4. Logo nfo se pode en- 
tender de David a profecia. Menos se pode entender de Zorobabel, nio como digo pelas razdes com que a refutamos 
de David, mas por outras razdes igualmente convincentes. Seja a primeyra, porque o nome ineffavel nao competio, 
nem podia competir, como mostramos dos vossos Rabbinos, a Zorobabel. A segunda, o profetizado havia-de ser 
Rey, “regnabit Rex ;” Zorobabel nao foy rey, ou o considereis em Babylonia cativo, ou ja restituido 4 Judea. No 
tempo deste principe 0 povo nao esteve com toda a confianca debaixo do seu governo, que era outra circunstancia 
que havia-de ter o profetizado, “ et Israel habitabit ad fiduciam :” porque tudo pelo contrario consta da Escritura ; 
porque restituido o povo foy tal a oppressao que padecerao os Judeos no governo de Zorobabel, que consta do Livro 
de Esdras, que secom huma mio juntayao as pedras para o Templo, com outra apertavdo a espada para defender a sua 
fabrica ; e em pouco tempo deyxando 0 governo dos Judeos, Zorobabel trocou outra vez Judea por Babylonia. Logo 
nao se verifica em Zorobabel esta profecia, Assim se convencem as respostas dos vossos Rabbinos, e o peyor he 

que 4 vista da evidencia com que convencemos as suas soluc6es, sereis vés taes, que por n&o confessar 0 vosso 
erro ainda creais a humas respostas tao falsas. 

§ VIII. 

40. Ora acabay, meus irmaos, acabay de crer o que vos dizem os vossos profetas, e no sejais tao credulos para 
disparates que vos metem na cabeca dous Rabbinos ignorantes ; mas ainda mal, que crereis todos estes despropositos 
sé para teymares a vos conservar no Judaismo! Resolvey-vos a abrir os olhos, e deyxai-vos convencer da verdade, 
ja que vos persuadis com a mentira. Confessay que nao haveis-de ter liberdade em quanto nao mudares de -espe- 
ran¢a, porque he impossivel o libertador aquem esperais, pois sem ser Deos e homem nfo he possivel haver Messias. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 103 

Isto vos dizem, como até agora tendes ouvido, os profetas; e isto mesmo vos dizem os vossos Rabbinos, que agora 
ouvireis ; porque nesta verdade contestérao os mais doutos homens que ouve em a vossa synagoga. 

41. Rabbi Oseas na opinido de huns, ou Rabbi Semiam Bem Jochay no parecer de outros, que floreceu antes 
de Christo vir ao mundo muytos annos, sendo dos mais antigos Rabbinos (Boverio, ubi sub. |. 2. fol. mihi 52) da Syna- 
goga, expondo ao profeta Oseas, diz assim: Ay dos Judeos impios e homicidas, que hao-de matar o Messias Filho 
de Deos! Porque hao-de ser taes, que mandando Deos ao mundo seu Filho, o Messias, para lhes perdoar os seus 
peccados elles hao-de ser taes, que hao-de resistir ao Messias, e 0 hao-de matar quando elle vier: “ Deus sanctus et 
benedictus mittet Filium sanctum suum, et carne humana se induet. Ve illis impiis homicidis Israel, ob quorum 
amorem mittet Deus Filium suum ut eis peccata dimittat, quia propter pravas suas opiniones erunt rebelles huic 
Messie, et ingenti iracundia perciti eum occident !” Isto vos diz este Rabbino que vés haveis de fazer ao Messias, que 
era Filho de Deos. E que mais vos dizemos nés? Se era Filho de Deos o Messias, e este Filho de Deos se vestio 
de carne humana, segundo confessa este Rabbino tanto tempo antes de vir o Messias, era logo o Messias Deos e 
homem? Nao 0 podieis matar em quanto Deos ; logo em quanto homem o matastes. Logo era homem e Deos o 
Messias. 

42. Rabbi Haccados, aquem por excellencia chamais 0 vosso Mestre santo, e floreceo antes de Christo vir ao mundo 
_128 annos, porque viveo no tempo dos Machabeos, n’aquelle seu celebre livro chamado Galarazeya em Hebraico, 
que he o mesmo que revellagéo dos segredos, fallando do Messias na exposigao do capitulo (Boverio, ubi sub. fol. 
mihi 51 in fine) nono de Isaias profeta, que acima acabamos de explicar, diz assim; “ Quia Messias Deus et homo 
futurus est, ideo vocatus est Emmanuel, quod interpretatur nobiscum Deus.” Porque o Messias ha-de ser Deos e 
homem, por isso ha-de ser chamado Manoel, que quer dizer Deos ema nossa companhia. E com muyto mayor 
clareza nos repete no mesmo lugar esta verdade, como se refere em hum livro Hebraico aquem chamais ‘ Porta da Luz? 
“Rex Messias componitur ex divinitate et humanitate, et in substantia regis Messie inveniuntur due filiationes, 
quarum una est divinitatis, qua Dei Filius est ; altera erit humanitatis, qua erit filius prophetisse. In Messia, sub- 
stantia divinitatis distincta erit a substantia humanitatis, et e contra, que duo simul juncta sunt in Messia.” O rey 
Messias, diz este Rabbino, compée-se da humanidade e divindade, porque no Messias ha duas filiagoes ; huma que 
toca 4 divindade, e por esta he Filho de Deos; a outra filiacao diz ordem 4 humanidade, e por esta sera filho da pro- 
fetiza. No Messias ha duas substancias, ambas distintas huma da outra; huma he a divindade, e a humanidade a outra. 
Mas estas duas substancias, que em si sao distintas, estao ambas no Messias juntas. Que mais vos dizemos nds os 
Catholicos, que adorando em Christo estas duas naturezas, cremos a este artigo, do que vos diz este Rabbino que 
sé vio a Christo com os olhos do espirito? Dizem-vos os profetas eos Rabbinos que existirao antes de vir Christo, 
que ha-de ser Deos e homem o Messias: e sé de pois que ateimastes a ser Judeos, negando que o Messias fora 
Christo, vos rézolveis a esperar hum Messias contra o que vos dizem os vossos Rabbinos e os vossos profetas ? Nao 
he logo possivel a vinda do vosso Messias ; as Escrituras nao podem faltar, nem os Rabbinos alumiados por Deos, 
que antes de Christo vir vos disseraéo estas verdades, podem ser mentirozos. Logo Messias somente homem nio 
pode vir. He logo impossivel o Messias por quem suspira a vossa esperanca; porque lhe faltéo os predicados 
intrinsecos que Deos revelou que o Messias havia-de ter. Por isso a vossa redempcao nao chega, porque he impos- 
sivel o Messias que vos ha-de redemir segundo yds esperais. Por isso as vossas lagrimas sao sem fruto, porque a 
vossa esperan¢a nao se termina a quem pode acabar o vosso cativeiro. Por isso estais, e haveis-de estar até o fim 
do mundo, no estado em que vos vedes, que he o mesmo que vos profetizou Isaias, sem ter quem vos redima, e sem 
ter quem vos resgate: “Ipse autem populus direptus et vastatus: laqueus juvenum omnes, et in domibus carcerum 
absconditi sunt : facti sunt in rapinam, nec est qui eruat; in direptionem, nec est qui dicat Redde.” 

Sb 

43. Se o vosso Messias, a quem ainda espera futuro a vossa teyma, implica pelos predicados intrinsecos de que 
se ha-de compor, e como tal he impossivel; tambem he impossivel e implicatorio pelo tempo em que ha-de vir esse 
Messias. Os predicados intrinsecos o fizeréo impossivel em si; 0 tempo em que o esperais o fez impossivel para a 
execucao dos vossos suspiros ; porque o tempo que j4 passou he impossivel que torne a vir. E como o tempo da 
vinda do Messias se-satisfez, e cumprio quando Christo veyo, he impossivel estar por cumprir, e por satisfazer o que 
ja se satisfez, e cumprio ja. Desgracada gente em quem nao sé o objecto fez impossivel a esperanga, mas ainda o 

104. : SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

tempo fez a esperanca impossivel! Sois desgragados nao sé no Messias que esperais, porque nao pode vir; mas até 
sois desgracados pelo tempo em que esperais a sua vinda, porque pelo tempo he impossivel poder j4 vir o Messias 
que ainda esperais. 

44, Para vos persuadir esta verdade, evidente prova era a profecia de Jacob, no capitulo 49 de Gen. aonde queren- 
do Jacob assinar a seus filhos o tempo em que havia-de vir o Messias, lhes disse que a sua vinda havia-de ser quando 
faltasse 0 sceptro no vosso povo; e de facto faltou quando Christo veyo, porque ja entaéo tinha Herodes Ascalonita o 
vosso sceptro. E supposto que j4 aqui o anno passado ouvistes nas culpas de hum Judeo atrevido e ignorante, que 
este texto 0 nao convencia, porque muyto tempo antes de Christo tinha faltado o sceptro Judaico em Jeconias ; isto 
sé 0 pode dizer hum barbaro totalmente idiota da historia sagrada, porque depois de Jeconias reynou Josias, e se 
depois deste principe se perdeu no povo 0 titulo de Rey, até Herodes, o governo dos Judeos se conservou com a mesma 
authoridade no titulo de Capitaes, o que he mais claro que a mesma luz, porque da Escritura consta com toda a cla- 
reza. Tambem para vos convencer este mesmo artigo, era evidente demonstragao a profecia de Daniel, no capitulo 9, 
mostrando que as suas semanas, ainda que lhe queirais confundir 0 seu computo, ja estao compridas. Porem como 
estes dous textos nao ha sermao de semelhante argumento em que senao ponderem, para que nao digais que nds os 
Catholicos para vos convencer somos tam faltos de provas, que estamos obrigados a vos repetir as mesmas demon- 
stragdes ; por isso nao pondéro estes dous lugares, porque com outros de igual evidencia quero hoje mostrar-vos a 
impossibilidade da vossa esperanga, e convencer-vos de que he ja passado 0 tempo que ainda supondes futuro, crendo 
que ainda o Messias nao veyo, mas que ainda ha-de vir o Messias. 

45. Sonhou Nabuco de Nozor, conforme consta do profeta Daniel, no capitulo 2 dos seus Vaticinios, que vira 
huma estatua, cuja cabeca era de ouro, os bracos de prata, o ventre de bronze, os pés de ferro e barro. Viu que de 
hum monte se despedio huma pequena pedra, que tocando nos pés da estatua, reduzio todos os seus metaes a cinzas. 
Na cabeca da estatua se significava o imperio dos Caldeos: nos bragos o dos Persas e Medos: no ventre o dos 
Gregos: e nos pés de ferro os Romanos. Tudo isto he interpretacao do vosso profeta, e dos vossos Rabbinos. Este 
ultimo imperio, que foy o dos Romanos (continua Daniel) sera misturado, porque por huma parte ha-de ser de ferro, 
e de barro por outra; por cuja razdo ainda que o barro se misture com o ferro, ficaréo misturados 0 ferro e o barro; 
mas nao ficario unidos antes, por mais que se apertem, nao hao-de fazer liga entre si, porque se nao hao-de pegar o 
barro e o ferro, nem o ferro ao barro: “ Commiscebuntur, sed non adherebunt sibi.” KE assim foy na verdade, 
porque o imperio Romano, que no ferro se figurava ; e o barro, que era o reyno dos Judeos (diz 0 vosso Rabbino Joao 
Baptista Deste, que depois de reconhecer ao vosso erro se fez Catholico) ainda que se misturarao, nao se unirao ; 
porque se nao compoz do barro, que era 0 vosso reyno, e do ferro, que era 0 imperio Romano, a mesma potencia. 
A mesma exposicao seguiu 0 vosso Rabbino Tabiano de Roght, que tambem se converteu a Christo depois de o ter 
negado na synagoga, no seu livro chamado ‘ Diologo de la Fede, por isso o profeta diz que nestas duas potencias 
havia-de haver mistura, “commiscebuntur,” mas nao havia-de haver liga, “sed non adherebunt sibi ;” porque sup- 
posto que Judeos e Romanos se confederdrao como amigos, Dan. cap. 2. ver. 43. (Dial. entre Discip. e Mestre 
Catechizante, cap. 83. fol. mihi 297. Dial. de la Fede: fol. mihi. Troghi 454, cap. 83.) sempre tiveram dominios dis- 
tinctos, porque até Herodes Ascalonita, em cujo tempo veyo Christo, foy dos Judeos 0 governo temporal de Judea. 
Os Romanos ficarfo vossos irmaos para vos defenderem, e vés unidos aos Romanos para os ajudares ; mas sempre 
na religiio totalmente differentes, porque em vés ficou o culto do verdadeyro Deos, e nos Romanos a cegueyra da sua 
idolatria.. Tudo isto he certo sem duvida nem controversia, porque além de o sabermos nds todos, e todo o mundo 
o saber, consta esta verdade do livro dos Machabeos, aonde consta a confederacao que fizestes com os Romanos, 
conservando vos sempre na observancia da vossa ley, e no governo do vosso reyno, até que faltando a amizade vos 
mandério os Romanos governar por Herodes, e por outras pessoas de toda a sua confianca; depois querendo os 
Romanos acabar com vosco, vos mandarao destruir a vossa cidade. 

46. No tempo pois em que 0 ferro do imperio Romano estava misturado com o barro do reyno dos Judeos, huma 
piquena pedra, diz o profeta, destruiu ao barro e ao ferro, e em seu lugar se levantou hum reyno, que senao ha-de 
destruir, nem entregar a outra potencia, porque o seu imperio ha-de ser em todo o mundo, e o seu dominio em toda a 
terra, e permanecer por toda a eternidade: “In diebus regnorum illorum suscitabit Deus coeli regnum, quod in eter- 
num non dissipabitur, et alteri populo non tradetur. Comminuet autem et consumet universa regna hec, et ipsum 
stabit in eternum.” Dan. cap. 2, ver. 11. Esta he a profecia, e della vimos a colher, que destruido o imperio dos 
Caldeos, dos Persas, dos Gregos, e que durando ainda o imperio Romano, isto he o ferro misturado com o reyno 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 105 

dos Judeos, isto he, com o barro se havia-de levantar outro reyno ou imperio, que havia-de destruir a estas duas 
potencias. E que este imperio, que se seguia aos dous destruidos, havia-de ter dominio eterno, sem successdo de 
tempo, nem passar a outrem o seu governo ; porque a pedra que destruio aos demais imperios para fundar este, que 
se havia-de levantar das suas ruinas, 0 acrescentaria com tal excesso que a sua grandeza encheria a toda a terra: 
“ Consumet universa regna hec, et ipsum stabit in eternum: secundum quod vidisti, quod de monte abscissus est 
lapis sine manibus, et comminuit testam, et ferrum, et es, et argentum, et aurum.” 

47. Que esta profecia de Daniel se entenda do Messias he cousa assentada entre os vossos Rabbinos. Assim o 
confessao no livro Midras Thellim, que he 0 commentario dos Psalmos, expondo o titulo do Psalmo 17 : “ Quando 
Messias veniet, non erunt dicentes canticum, donec cadat coram ipso habens digitos, id est, regnum (verss. 44. 45. 
Apud Zech. Bover. 1. 2. fol. mihi 116.) Romanorum, de quo dictum est Daniel secundo, Et digiti ex parte ferrei, 
et ex parte testel; ex parte regnum solidum, et ex parte frivolum. In diebus regnorum illorum statuet Deus cceli 
regnum, quod in eternum non dissipabitur, conteret omnia regna ista, et ipsum stabit in eternum. Iste est Rex 
Messias, sicut dictum est in Bereschit Rabba.’ O mesmo se lé no livro Bereschit Rabba no commento do capitulo 42 
do Genesis : “ Rex verd nonus est ipse Cesar Augustus, qui universo orbe imperavit, sicut dictum est Daniel secundo, 
Et regnum quartum erit forte sicut ferrum. Rex decimus est Messias, qui regnabit a fine mundi, usque ad finem ejus, 
sicut dictum est: Lapis qui percussit statuam replevit universam terram.” O mesmo aflirmaio Rabbi Naham, Rabbi 
Moyses Hadarsan, e Rabbi Saadias, neste mesmo lugar: “Lapis qui percussit statuam est regnum Messie filii 

David.” Supposta esta intelligencia escrita nos vossos livros, e confessada pelos vossos Rabbinos, entremos agora a 
fazer-vos huma demonstracio evidente desta vossa profecia. 

Cox, 

48. O Messias, segundo diz o profeta, havia-de vir quando ainda o imperio Romano estava misturado com os 
Judeos. E a vinda do Messias igualmente havia-de destruir nos Judeos o barro de seu reyno, que nos Romanos o 
ferro do seu imperio; porque das ruinas destes dous dominios se havia-de levantar o reyno do Messias, o qual havia 
de ser eterno, e estendido por todo o mundo. Logo ou esta profecia he falsa, o que nao podeis dizer, porque 
Daniel foy profeta verdadeyro ; ou 0 tempo destinado para a vinda do Messias ja passou? O imperio Romano ja 
hoje nao esta misturado com o reyno dos Judeos, nem o reyno dos Judeos misturado com aquelle imperio, porque 
ambas estas duas potencias estado ja destruidas. O reyno de Christo esta dilatado por todo o mundo: logo implica 
que o Messias haja de vir depois desta destruigio, que a destruic&o se havia-de seguir 4 vinda, ou isto he verdade, ow 
huma de duas consequencias he infallivel ? Ou haveis de conceder que inda durao estas duas potencias misturadas, ou 
que o Messias nao havia-de vir durando ainda a mistura dos Romanos e Judeos? Se concedeis que o Messias nao 
havia-de vir neste tempo, mentio o vosso profeta, o que nao admittireis. Enganarao-vos os vossos Rabbinos, o que 
nao haveis de confessar. Se concedeis que ainda estas duas potencias se conservao florentes, e misturadas ambas de 
duas ainda 'com dominio, estais obrigados a nos mostrar aonde estd 0 vosso reyno, e em que parte da Judea ou do 
mundo tendes hoje o vosso governo. KE haveis de desmentir a todo 0 mundo e a vés mesmos, porque vés 0 confessais, 
e todo o mundo sabe, que ha 1632 annos, que 0 vosso reyno se destruio, 0 vosso governo em Judea se acabou, e em 
todo o mundo nao ha lugar algum aonde tenhais dominio, haveis de confessar que sois mentirosos em dizer, que ja 
nao tendes reyno, que ja nao tendes sceptro, e que j4 a Judea acabou para vés. He evidente que jé nao tendes 
nada disto, e tudo isto haveis de ter até o Messias vir: logo como esperais que o Messias venha, se tudo isto prova 
que j4 veyo o Messias? O imperio Romano misturado com vosco ja 14 vay; do vosso reyno jé nao ha fumo. O 
reyno que hayia-de succeder a estas duas potencias esta estabelecido ha tantos annos, e estendido ha jé tanto tempo 
pela Europa, pela Africa, pela Asia, epela America. He logo ja passado 0 tempo que a profecia assinou ao Messias 
para a sua vinda. Logo o tempo da vinda do Messias j4 passou. O tempo que jd passou nfo pode ainda estar por 

vir. Logo he impossivel ser ainda futuro o tempo que jd he preterito. Logo a vossa esperanca implica com o 

tempo em que havia-de vir o Messias. 

49. Huma unica difficuldade tem esta demonstracao, mas a difficuldade nasce da pouca intelligencia que tendes 
das Escrituras. Por esta profecia o Messias havia-de fundar ao seu reyno quando viesse, destruindo o reyno dos Judeos 
e 0 imperio Romano. Este ainda esta dominante, e nao destruido. Logo ainda o tempo do Messias vir nfo chegou. 
Este argumento, que he commum entre os vossos Rabbinos, vendia por seu o desgracado Miguel Henriquez, assim 

2E 

106 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

chamado entre nés em quanto se fingio Catholico, e Mizael Henriquez entre vés depois que se declarou Judeo, e 
como tal foy relaxado nesta cidade em 11 de Mayo de 1682. Mas esta he a vossa cegueyra, quererdes por vossa 
vontade entender mal todos os textos da Escritura. O Messias nao havia-de destruir materialmente ao imperio 
Romano, porque se fallasse desta destruigao o profeta, bem se vé que diria hum grande disparate em affirmar que 
huma pedra pequena e sem maos, cahida de hum monte, havia-de destruir materialmente a huma ‘potencia, cujo 
dominio se estendeo a todo 0 mundo: e que a pedra que cresceo a hum monte, que encheo a toda a terra, Fallou 
logo o profeta da destruigao espiritual, e da destruig&o da religifio, e da idolatria que observavam os Romanos. Com 
a de Christo acabou a idolatria em todo o mundo, aonde os Romanos estenderao o seu culto, e assim acabou a 
religido dos Romanos em todo o mundo. Logo na vinda de Christo se destruio espiritualmente este imperio. Que- 
reis ver esta verdade? - Ora, ouvi. 

50. O Messias havia-de destruir 0 imperio Romano, como consta desta profecia, para fundar ao seu imperio. O 
imperio do Messias havia-de ser espiritual. Logo a destruicaéo do imperio havia-de ser como o imperio que havia 
de fundar o Messias. Provo a mayor deste syllogismo, que he sé a que necessita de prova. O reyno do Messias, 
segundo diz o profeta, havia-de ser eterno, “stabit in eternum.” Nunca havia-de acabar, porque por toda a eter- 

> 

nidade se nio havia-de destruir, “in eternum non dissipabitur ;” nao havia-de ter successao, “ alteri non tradetur.” 
Nenhuma cousa temporal ou material pode carecer de successao, deyxar de ter fim, e ser eterna. Logo se 0 reyno do 
Messias havia-de ser eterno, nao havia-de ter fim, nem havia-de ter successiéo0, porque nao havia-de passar a outrem; 
nao podia ser temporal este reyno. Logo a destruigao, que o Messias havia-de fazer no imperio que havia-de 
destruir havia-de ser espiritual, porque espiritual havia-de ser o reyno do Messias que se havia-de seguir 4 destruicaio 
dos outros reynos; e de facto, quanto ao espirito, o imperio Romano acabou com a vinda de Christo, porque a ido- 
latria do imperio Romano acabou com a sua vinda em todo 0 mundo, assim o tinha profetizado Sophonias : “ Horri- 
bilis Dominus, et attenuabit omnes deos terre.” O mesmo confessais vés no vosso Talmud, no livro chamado Zohar. 
Na mesma verdade contesta Rabbi Moyses Egypcio, affirmando que Jesus de Nazareth foy bom varao, porque 
destruira a idolatria em todo o mundo; “Jesus Nazarenus fuit vir bonus, et destruxit idolorum adorationem.” Logo 
se conforme aos vossos Rabbinos, ao vosso Talmud, e ao vosso Sophonias profeta, esta era a destruicéo que o 
Messias havia-de fazer quando viesse; e no imperio Romano de facto fez o verdadeyro Messias Christo Jesus esta 
destruicio, nao pode deyxar de ser esta destruicéo a que o profeta Daniel diz que o Messias havia-de fazer no im- 
perio Romano, esta foy espiritual : logo de destruicao espiritual fallou o profeta. 

51. Ku, porem, para vos convencer com toda a evidencia, pelo mesmo caminho que escolheis para vos con- 
servar no vosso erro, quero ser mais liberal do que sao os expositores, que explicio a este lugar. E assim vos 
quero admittir, que materialmente havia o Messias destruir ao imperio Romano; porque vos quero mostrar com 
mayor clareza que a luz do meyo dia, que de facto este imperio esté hoje materialmente destruido. Dizei-me: Esta 
florecente 0 imperio Romano? Direis todos que sim. Com tantas victorias do Turco, com tantos triunfos dos seus 
inimigos, quem duvida que esta florecente este imperio? Pois enganais-vos, porque materialmente o imperio Romano 
esta destruido j4. Primeiramente o imperio Romano em quanto durou tinha dominio em todo o mundo, sujeicéo em 
todos os reynos, obediencia em todos os reys, exercicio de jurisdiccio em toda a parte. Tudo isto j4 hoje nao he 
assim, nem vds 0 podeis negar sem que vos desminta o mundo todo. Logo ja materialmente esta destruido o imperio. 
Romano. Mais: todo o mundo era tributario a este imperio: ja nao he asim hoje. Logo materialmente estd o im- 
perio Romano acabado. Mais: tudo o que hoje tem o imperio, como imperio, he tam pouco que tiradas as con- 
quistas e heran¢as (que supposto sao da caza do Imperador, que hoje he, nao sao bens do imperio) o que hoje he do 
imperio somente, no he por si sé capaz de sustentar ao Imperador; nao digo eu com o fausto da sua dignidade, mas 
nem ainda como principe particular. Porque se hoje fizissem Imperador aquem da sua casa nfo tivesse nada, nio 
se podia sustentar como imperador com todos os bens que sao do imperio. Esta he a mesma verdade. Est4 logo 
0 imperio Romano ja hoje destruido materialmente : pois como esperais que o Messias venha, se isto mesmo prova 
que ja veyo o Messias? Quereis continuar na vossa esperanca, e por isto arguis com ridicularias as nossas demon- 
stragdes. No canceis 0 vosso juizo, se nos haveis de responder assim, porque para serdes Judeos, menos vos custard 
negar aos vossos profetas, que trabalhares tanto para responder aos nossos argumentos. Porem como a vossa 
cegueyra he tao grande, depois de ouvireis aos vossos profetas, ouvi agora aos yossos Rabbinos, porque vos quero 
mostrar com a doutrina dos vossos Mestres, que o tempo de vir o Messias nao estd por vir, mas que jd passou. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 107 

§ XI. 

52. Lede ao vosso Talmud, no livro Sabbat, e no livro Sanhedrin, e ahi achareis que Rabbi Tanhuma pergun- 

tando porque razao:o profeta Isaias, no capitulo 9, aonde diz, “ multiplicabitur ejus imperium ;” que em Hebraico 
em lugar de “multiplicabitur” esta a diccio Lemerbe: pergunta pois este Rabbino, porque causa no meyo da diccao 
Lemerbe se pés a letra 0, Mem, fechada, quando a tal letra se nado costuma por no meyo de alguma dicc&o Hebraica, 
mas bem sim no fim. Nd&o achou na terra esse Rabbino quem lhe respondesse a esta duvida, e assim se diz no 
vosso Talmud, que ouvira huma voz do Ceo, que assim lhe respondera, Hazil, Razilz, cujas palavras traduzidas de 
Hebraico em Latim querem dizer, “Secretum meum mihi, secretum meum mihi :” O meu segredo he para mim, he 
para mimo meu segredo. Deste facto assentarao muytos dos vossos Mestres, que desde o tempo do vaticinio de 
Isaias, no capitulo 9, até a vinda do Messias, se havido-de passar 600 annos. Vejamos agora quantos annos tem 
passado desta profecia até o presente, e quando cabalmente estes 600 annos se satisfazem, ou se satisfizerao, para 
vermos se tem vindo, ou ha-de ainda vir o vosso Messias, estando pela conta dos vossos Rabbinos. Para vos 
convencer melhor, (apud Boverio, 1. 2. art. 8. f. mihi 135) n&o seguirey outra chronologia que aquella mesma 
que seguem os vossos Rabbinos. 

53. O tempo desta profecia foy no quarto anno del rey Achaz, deste anno até o undecimo anno del rey Sedecias, 
segundo 0 computo do vosso Rabbi Salamam, passarao 150 annos. Neste anno se queymou o primeyro templo, e 
fostes cativos para Babylonia. Da destruicaio do primeyro templo até a destruicéo do segundo, pela conta do mesmo 
Rabbino, passarao 490 annos, os quaes juntos a 150 fazem 641 annos. Destes devem-se tirar 41 depois em que Christo 
morreo. Logo pela conta deste Rabbino, no anno da morte de Christo se comprirao os 600 annos desde 0 tempo 
que Isaias profetizou. Logo nesse tempo havia-de vir o Messias. Desde que Tito vos destruio sao j4 passados 
1632 annos. Dvestes até o anno quarto de Achaz correrao 600. Logo desde a profecia até 0 dia de hoje tem pas- 
sado 2232 annos: tiray destes 600; logo ha j4 1632 annos que, conforme ao vosso Talmud, havia-de vir o 
Messias. E depois de 1632 annos de sua vinda, supposta a vossa conta, ainda o esperais? Logo contradizeis ao 
vosso Talmud, e todos os que 0 contradizeis estais incursos em pena de morte, porque este castigo se impde neste 
livro aos que negarem o que nelle se diz. 

54. Lede ao mesmo Talmud, no livro Sanhedrin Guazit, cap. col Israel, e vereis o termo que os vossos Rab- 
binos, pela sua caballa, assinaraéo para vir o Messias. Os Hebreos tem vinte duas letras; pelas quaes conto os 
seus numeros, e quando as poem de maneyra que nao fazem sentido, como a do nosso A, B, C, sao letras numeraes. 
A primeyra letra he Aleph, corresponde ao nosso A, quer dizer ou val hum. A segunda he Beth, corresponde ao- 
nosso B, val dous. A tercera Ghimel, corresponde ao nosso C, val tres. Daleth he a quarta, corresponde ao nosso 
D, val quatro. A quinta He, corresponde ao nosso E, val cinco. Vau he a sexta, corresponde ao nosso F, val seis. 
A setima Zain, corresponde ao nosso G, val sete. A oitava Chet, corresponde ao nosso H, val oito. Teth hea 
nona, val nove, corresponde ao nosso I. Jod he a decima, corresponde ao nosso L, val dez. Caph he a letra unde- 
cima, corresponde ao nosso M, val vinte. Lamech he a letra duodecima, corresponde ao nosso N, val trinta. Mem, 
fechado, corresponde ao nosso O, he a letra treze, val quarenta. Num val cincoenta, he a letra quatorze, corresponde 
ao nosso P. Samech val sessenta, corresponde ao nosso G, he a letra quinze. Hain val setenta, corresponde ao nosso 
R, he a letra dezaseis. Pe val oitenta, corresponde ao nosso §, he a letra dezasete. Tsadech val noventa, corres- 
ponde ao nosso T, he a letra dezoito. Coph val cento, corresponde ao nosso V, hea letra dezanove. Resch val 
duizentos, he a letra vinte, corresponde ao nosso X. Shin, val trezentos, corresponde ao nosso Z, he a letra vinte e 
huma. Tau hea ultima letra, corresponde ao nosso Til, val quatrocentos. De todas estas letras usao os Hebreos 
nao sé quando escrevem letra commum, mas quando escrevem os numeros arithmeticos, e todas as vezes que querem 
computar o tempo do Messias futuro. A primeyra letra que poem hea letra Aleph, ea ultima Tau, e todos os 
nomes intermedios entre a letra Mem e a letra Aleph, juntao a estas tres letras, e fazem 605 annos. A letran, Mem, 
fechada, como jé dissemos, contém em si o segredo da vinda do Messias, porque no capitulo 9 de Isaias profeta em 
© numero 600, que na letra Mem se contém, se enserra 0 tempo em que o Messias ha-de vir. Estes ja passardo: 
logo o Messias ja veyo. 

55. Rabbi Moyses Ben Maimon, na sua celebre epistola escrita aos Rabbinos de Africa, refere que por antiquis- 
sima tradi¢&o dos Hebreos, o Messias havia-de vir no anno da creacio do mundo 4474, Hoje estamos, segundo o 
vosso computo, no anno da creacéo do mundo 5465. Logo se o Messias havia-de vir no anno de 4474, ha logo hoje 

108 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

ja 991 annos que veyo o Messias, e por consequencia depois do tempo de vir, he que vés 0 esperais. (Tirio Hadr. 
l. 4. cap. 12. 

56. No Talmud, no cap. Coelec, no livro Sanhedrin Guazit, se acha escrito, e tambem no livro Cederolam, que 
o mundo sé ha-de durar seis mil annos: “ Machina mundi hujus annorum sexies mille, et non plures persistere 
debet.” Assim o dizem os vossos Rabbinos por tradic&o antiga desde o tempo dos discipulos de Elias. Os pri- 
meyros dous mil com a ley natural, e sem a escrita; os segundos dous mil com a ley de Moyses ; e os dous mil 
ultimos com a ley do Messias. Jaé 14 vao os dous mil da ley natural ; j4 passarao os dous mil da ley escrita: logo sé 
faltao os ultimos dous mil da ley do Messias ; segundo o computo com que vés os Hebreos contais as idades do 
mundo, estamos hoje nos ultimos dous mil, que ao Messias pertencem, e delles pela vossa conta ja sao passados 535, 
porque pelo vosso computo estamos hoje no anno 5465 da creacio do mundo. Logo pela vossa conta ha 535 annos 
que o Messias havia-de vir, porque entaéo era a tempo da sua vinda. Logo he impossivel vir 535 annos depois 
quem he ja vindo ha 535 annos. 

57. Oitenta e sinco Jubileos, diz o vosso Rabbi Elias, filho de Rabbi Judas, Talmudista de summa authoridade 
para vés, diz assim, “ Non minus octoginta quinque Jubileis mundus stabit, et in ultimo veniet Messias.” Oitenta 
e cinco Jubileos ha-de durar 0 mundo, e no ultimo ha-de o Messias vir. _O vosso Rabbi Salamam, explicando estes 
oitenta Jubileos da duracdéo do mundo, diz, fundado na Escritura, que cada Jubileo consta de cincoenta annos, e que 
todo juntos compdem o numero de 4250 annos :. “ Octoginta Jubilza faciunt annos quatuor mille ducentos et quin- 
quaginta.” Pela conta deste Rabbino o mundo ha-de durar 4250 annos, e no ultimo Jubileo, isto he, nos ulti- 
mos cincoenta annos, ha-de vir o Messias. Pela vossa conta estais hoje no anno do mundo 5465. Logo pela vossa 
conta tem j4 vindo o Messias ha 1215 annos, porque se havia-de vir no ultimo dos oitenta e cinco Jubileos, isto he, 
nos ultimos cincoenta annos, que era o Jubileo ultimo; fazendo todos os Jubileos 4250 annos, estando nés ja, pela 
vossa conta, no anno da creacao do mundo 5465, he evidente que ha 1215 annos que ja veyo o Messias, porque tantos 
tem passado desde o anno 4250 até o presente. Pois como esperais ainda ao Messias, se pela vossa conta ha ja 
tanto tempo que o Messias veyo? MHiavia-de vir no ultimo Jubileo quando ja o mundo tivesse de duracéo 4200 
annos, e entrassem os ultimos cincoenta com que se cerrasse o numero de 4250 da sua duracéo. Lstais hoje em 
5465 e ainda nao chegou o tempo de vir o Messias? Se vés considerareis a for¢a desta razao, tomareis sem duvida 
o conselho do vosso Rabbi Samuel, que convencido com esta razéo renunciou a vossa crenga, e adorou a Jesus 
Christo: “Stupeo, ac credo Jesum verum Dei Filium extitisse Messiam, et jam venisse. Revolvendo scripta prophe- 
tarum, manifesté intelligo Christum esse Dei Filium nobis in terram missum ad redemptionem nostram.” Ku, diz este 
Rabbino, pasmo, e creyo que Jesus, verdadeyro Filho de Deos, foy o Messias que ja veyo. Porque revolvendo tudo 
o que dizem os profetas, claramente entendo que Christo foy o Filho de Deos mandado ao mundo para nos redemir. 
Este Rabbino conheceo a verdade, porque depés a teyma; tambem vés se deposereis a obstinac&o, abjurando sincera- 
mente ao vosso erro, podieis crer este artigo. Rabbi Anima Voluntas, ou Rabbi Moyses Egypcio, que tudo he o 
mesmo, reconheceo tambem esta verdade, como consta do Sanhedrin Guazit na distinccio Helech, o-porque pergun- 
tando-lhe os Judeos pelo tempo da vinda do Messias; considerando este Rabbino o dilatado da sua e da vossa espe- 
ran¢a com 0 tempo em que o Messias havia-de vir, respondeo aos Judeos com este desengano: “ Vanum est atque 
inane 4 Judzis Messiam expectari, sed sola redemptio consistit in poenitentia.” He frustraneo e vio, diz este Rab- 
bino, esperarem os Judeos ao Messias, porque a estas horas sé na penitencia podem ter a sua redempcao os Judeos. 
Ora desenganai-vos, meus irmfos, j4 que os Rabbinos vos desenganio. Desenganai-vos, e resolvey-vos em que a vossa 
esperanca he huma fabula, porque o tempo do Messias vir j4 passou, e depois de passar nao pode tornar a vir. E se 
vos nio desenganais com esta verdade, que bastou para desenganar aos vossos Rabbinos; para que acabemos este 
discurso, respondei me a este argumento. . 

58. Dizei-me : Quantos Messias tem vindo ao mundo, que vés recebestes sem dificuldade nem controversia? Se 
o nao sabeis, como na verdade ignorais, eu vos direy todos os Messias que vierao, de que eu tenho noticia. Antes 
de Christo se declarou Theudas por Messias verdadeyro. Receberao-no publicamente os Judeos, e dentro em Jeru- 
salem se aggregarao quatro centos Judeos, que persuadidos de que lhes havia-de fazer passar o Jordao a pé enxuto 
0 seguirao com toda a sua fazenda. O que sabido pela guarnicao dos Romanos, que presidiavao a cidade, o forao 
destruir, e a todo o seu sequito, entrando ao depois por Jerusalem triunfantes com a cabeca de Theudas, e coma 
destruigao de todo o seu sequito. Assim o diz 0 vosso Josepho. Este foy o primeyro Messias que recebestes sem 

difficuldade nem controversia, e viestes a parar no vosso Messias, e vos em pagares com a vida o vosso engano. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. | 109 

59. Quando Christo nasceo, veyo outro Messias, que foy Judas Galileo; persuadio-vos que nao pagasseis 0 tri- 
buto a Cesar quando mandou fazer a descripcdo universal por todo o mundo. Recebeo-o, e aceitou-o todo 0 povo 
Judaico com grande alvoroco. Tivestes vés, e Judas vosso Messias, o mesmo fim de Theudas. Depois no tempo de 
Felix, procurador de Judea, veyo o terceyro Messias chamado Egypcio ; recebeste-lo com gosto, e mettendo-vos na 
cabega lancar o jugo dos Romanos fora de Jerusalem, com quatro mil homens quiz commetter a cidade, e oppondo-se- 
Ihe Felix, levou o sequito e o Messias o mesmo fim que os primeyros dous Messias tiverao. Passado pouco tempo 
vierdo mais dous Messias, hum chamado Jodo, e Sim4o outro. Aceytaste-los com alegria, e pagastes com a vida a 
facilidade da vossa crenca. Depois da morte de Christo veyo 0 sexto Messias, chamado Barcosbas, ou como dizem 
outros Bencosbas, ou como outros querem Barchossiba ; aquem seguio o mayor letrado que entao tinhao os Judeos, 
Rabbi Haquibba, como consta do vosso Talmud. Aceytaste-lo, disse-vos que vos rebellasseis contra os Romanos, e 
o fruto que tirastes do vosso Messias foy a destruigao que vos fez Tito e Vespasiano. Quarenta e oito annos depois 
desta destruicio veyo 0 setimo Messias chamado Ventozora, aquem muytos dizem que foy o mesmo Barchossiba, 
outros que foy diverso. Accytaste-lo com muyta pressa, fizestes-vos com elle forte em Bithera ou Bither, e 1a vos 
foy segunda vez destruir Adriano, e matar-vos a vés e ao vosso Messias. 

60. Com o tempo veyo 0 oitavo Messias chamado Mahir. Aceytaste-lo com jubilo, e sahio-vos, (4 ibid. cap. 21. 
Vinto in Isai.) cara a vossa aceytagao. Em Sicilia veyo 0 nono Messias*: aceytaste-lo sem repugnancia, fez-vos en- 
tender que vos havia-de levar pelo meyo do mar como Moyses crestelo ; e ficou a mayor parte dos que 0 seguirao 
sepultada nas aguas, e se teve por sem duvida que fora 0 demonio este vosso Messias. No anno de 1666 veyo o 
decimo’ Messias chamado Sabbatai Essevi; e depois de 0 receberem os Judeos que de todo 0 mundo tinhao ido 
a buscar ao seu Messias, em Constantinopla o Messias e a mayor parte dos Judeos forao justicados pelo Turco. E 
para que o nosso Portugal no ficasse de fora, porque para isto sois pintados, vos veyo da India hum Judeo, a quem 
depois as nossas historias chamarao o Judeo do Zapato ; disse-vos que era o Messias, e depois de se ter publicado por 
tal aos Judeos entre Eufrates, vos vinhaa vés dar esta boa nova; correstes todos ao vosso Messias, porque cuydaveis 
ter nelle a vossa India, e ao depois sendo prezo nos carceres do Santo Oficio 0 vosso Messias e mais vos ficastes 
todos escarnecidos neste reyno. O vosso Josephe traz outros tres Messias, Judas Gaulonites, Judas filho de Eze- 
chias, e Athronges pastor do campo, que todos tres tiveréo o mesmo fim dos outros Messias. 

61. A qui tendes quatorze Messias, aquem aceytastes, (Costa contra a Prestdia, Costa contra a perf. Judaic. 
cap. 5. fol. mihi 47. Joseph. de Antiquit. 18. cap. 1. lib. 1. cap. 12. lib. 22. cap. 2. e 6.) Ora dizei-me agora por vida 
vossa: quando aceytastes estes Messias, era chegado o tempo do Messias vir ou nao era chegado? Se nfo era 
chegado 0 tempo, como aceytaste a estes Messias antes do tempo chegar? Se era chegado, e por isto os aceytastes, 
como dizeis que ainda nao chegou o tempo para o Messias vir? Para todos os Messias era ja chegado 0 tempo da 
sua vinda, e s6 para Christo ser o Messias inda o tempo nao chegou? Que respondeis a esta demonstragao? Mas 
que haveis de responder, se nao dar-vos por convencidos, porque esta demonstragio nao pode ter outra reposta? Ou 
vos hayeis de desenganar, que pelo tempo he impossivel 0 vosso Messias vir: ou fechar os olhos a toda a razao para 
vos conservares Judeos. Oh, nao seja assim, meus irm&os, porque se esta fora a vossa resolucdo nao podeis ter des- 

* Tt would be very desirable to know a little more of the history of the ninth or this Sicilian Jewish Messiah, who persuaded his countrymen 
that if they followed him he would conduct them through the midst of the sea like another Moses. Here seems to be a clear tradition of the 
Jews having undertaken an expedition from Sicily in search of a new settlement. But over what sea, it may be inquired, did they sail, and whither 
did they proceed? The latter part of the question is answered by the archbishop, who says that they were drowned on the voyage, although it 
would have been satisfactory to have been informed who brought back the intelligence. He also says that it was generally believed that this Mes- 
siah was the devil; and Torquemada declares that it was under the guidance of the devil that the Tultecas quitted the habitation of their ancestors, 
and sailed over the ocean in quest of Tamoancha or the terrestrial paradise, a place whither it is very likely that this pretended Messiah boasted 
that he would lead his credulous countrymen. It is not improbable that the archbishop might have read the “ Indian Monarchy” of Torque- 
mada, and other more curious histories preserved in the archives of the Inquisition, and hence have been inclined to believe that this Messiah was 
Totec or the devil, and that, like Nunez de la Vega, the bishop of Chiapa, who consigned to oblivion the history of Votan, he dissimulated his know- 
ledge of a mysterious piece of history, contenting himself with merely hinting to the more knowing Jews in Europe, that the church was acquainted 
with what if they suspected they would not dare avow, and that it was not without reason that, reverencing the dead letter of the old law, she fulmi- 
nated anathemas against those who persisted in their obedience to its precepts. It is a remarkable fact that ancient Hebrew inscriptions have been 
discovered in the Canary Islands, which is a clear proof that the Jews in early ages passed the Pillars of Hercules: there would be nothing there- 
fore improbable in the supposition, that the Jews who embarked from Sicily meditated a voyage over the Atlantic. The opposite shores of Africa 
were certainly much too near Sicily to entitle an expedition thither to any celebrity under whatever auspices undertaken, although it must be 
confessed that the Jews are the last people in the world who would attend to the admonition, “‘ Nec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus,” 

2F 

110 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

graca mayor ; pois continuara o vosso cativeiro, durara 0 vosso desterro, apertar-se-ha 0 vosso carcere, porque nunca 
ha-de chegar o vosso Messias, porque ja 14 vay 0 tempo de vir quem vos podia libertar, e necessariamente continuarA 
0 infortunio com que vos ameagou 0 vosso profeta: “Ipse autem populus direptus et vastatus ; laqueus juvenum 
omnes, et in domibus carcerum absconditi sunt ; facti sunt in rapinam, nec est qui eruat, in direptionem, nec est qui 

dicat Redde.” 

6 OME 

62. Somos chegados, bem que tarde, mas ainda mais tarde seria se eu vos referisse tudo o que notey para este 
sermaéo. Somos pois chegados 4 terceira parte da nossa demonstracao, em que vos hey-de provar que o Messias por 
quem suspira 0 vosso dezejo, e a quem espera a vossa teyma ha tantos annos, he impossivel pelos sinaes que ha-de 
ter o Messias, porque ja todos estao verificados em Christo, e depois de verificados huma vez, nao he possivel verifi- 
carem-se outra. O Messias ha-de ser hum sé ; assim 0 confessarao todos os vossos Rabbinos antiguos, e eu nao tenho 
tempo para provar este artigo, que negao alguns dos vossos Mestres modernos. O Messias pois havia-de ser hum 
sé. Logo se duas vezes em diversos tempos se verificassem em duas pessoas 0s mesmos sinaes, que Deos deu sé 
para hum, necessariamente haviao-de ser dous os Messias ; porque senao daria mayor razo para que o Messias fosse 
hum, e nao fossem dous. Isto nao pode ser, porque hum sé foy o Messias que Deos prometteo ao mundo. Mais, 
se em diversos tempos omnimodamente se vissem em dous Messias 0s mesmos sinaes de hum Messias sé, engana- 
va-nos Deos, porque fazia verificar em dous Messias aquelles sinaes que erao sé proprios de hum Messias. Deos nio 
he possivel que engane, como dicta a razao natural: logo em duas pessoas, em diversos tempos, he impossivel que se 
verifiquem os mesmos sinaes omnimodamente, porque huma destas duas pessoas era verdadeyro Messias e outra falso ; 
porque em ambos estavao os sinaes que a hum sé podiao competir, e havia-de ser hum sé. Outro seria, e nao seria 
o Messias. Seria o Messias, porque tinha os seus sinaes. Nao seria o Messias, porque dous Messias erao impossi- 
veis. Mais, em dous Messias, em diversos tempos, com os mesmos sinaes, estava disculpado quem adorasse a hum 
que n&o fosse o verdadeyro, e quem adorasse ao outro que o verdadeyro nao fosse: porque em ambos estayao omni- 
modamente os mesmos sinaes, e nao havia mayor razao para que fosse verdadeyro hum Messias, e 0 outro o nao 
fosse. O Messias, aquem Deos mandou adorar como a seu Filho, era hum, e a nenhum outro Messias mais que a 
este se devia semelhante adoragao. Consta expressamente do texto sagrado, segundo a vossa mesma raiz Hebraica: 
“ Osculamini,” ou “adorate Filium ejus, ne forte irascatur Filius ille, et omnino pereat qui illius viam non sequitur.” 
Logo, que providencia era a de Deos em prometter a hum sé Messias com sinaes certos e infalliveis; e pdr esses 
sinaes emdous Messias? Logo, a verificacao em dous he impossivel. Hste argumento prova com toda a clareza que 
he impossivel o Messias por quem esperao os Judeos, porque os sinaes do Messias estao desmentindo aos Judeos a 
sua mesma esperancga. Todos os sinaes que Deos revelou, que havia de ter o Messias, ha 1705 annos que se prin- 
cipiarao a verificar na pessoa de Jesus Nazareth (Psal. 2. vers. 12.) e ha 1632 annos que se acabdrao todos de cumprir 
na sua pessoa, porque tantos ha que se destruio j4 a vossa cidade. és ainda esperais a outro Messias fora da 
pessoa de Christo : logo pelos sinaes que Deos deu para o Messias verdadeyro, he impossivel 0 vosso Messias. 

63. Para vos fazer esta demonstracio, he necessario perguntar-yos se esperais vés o Messias com aquelles mesmos 
sinaes com que a Escritura e os profetas o descrevéréo, ou com outros de quem vés nem nés temos noticia? Nao 
podeis dizer que com outros o esperais fora daquelles que Deos revelou: logo ha-de vir com os sinaes que consta 
da Escritura. Todos estes, sem dissonancia de hum sd, est&o ja verificados em Christo: logo he impossivel fora da 
pessoa de Christo tornarem-se a verificar. Ora discorrey commigo, nao por todos os sinaes, que isso he impossivel 
com hum sermao, mas pelos principaes, que Deos revelou que havia-de ter o Messias. 

64. Hum dos sinaes do Messias, diz Deos pelo profeta Isaias, no cap. 8. era que quando o Messias viesse ao 
mundo, havia-de ser o escandalo dos Judeos e a ruina da sua cidade: “ Et erit vobis in sanctificationem: in lapidem 
autem offensionis, et in petram scandali duabus domibus Israel; in laqueum et in ruinam habitantibus in Jerusalem.” 
A parafrazi Caldea, ou o Targum de Jonathas lé, “Et erit vobis Messias in scandalum duabus domibus Israel.” 
Se negais que este sinal era do Messias, e que do Messias fallasse o profeta, negais ao Targum, e ao vosso Talmud, 
porque do Messias entende elle a este texto no Tratado de Sanchedrin, e no livro Jalcut, na exposicio deste mesmo 
lugar : “Non veniet filius David quousque non consumentur due domus Patrum Israel, sicut scriptum est Isaia 
cap. 8.” Omesmo afirma o vosso Rabbi Salam4o, na exposicao do cap. 5. de Micheas: “Iste dominator est Messias 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. Thiel 

filius David, de quo scriptum est, Et erit in petram scandali.” Dous sinaes, diz o profeta, ha-de ter o Messias. Ha- 
de ser escandalo dos Judeos, e os Judeos hao-de ser arruinados no seu dominio e na sua cidade, quando o Messias 
vier : isto supposto, dizei-me agora: verificou-se em Christo este sinal, ou nao se verificou? Se se nao verificou, 
como vos escandalizastes tanto de Christo, que por ser o vosso escandalo o perseguistes até o crucificares ? Como vos 
escandalizais oje tanto delle, que por escandalo nfo lhe podeis ouvir fallar o nome? Se se nao verificou, como esta 
ja destruida a vossa cidade, e perdido 0 vosso governo, que se conservava no magistrado da vossa nacao que tinheis 
em Jerusalem? Se se nfo verificou, como estais oje destruidos? Se se verificou, para que esperais o Messias, e para 
que quereis a.sua vinda? Para o crucificares? JA tendes feito. KE tambem vos vay a vos com cada dia matares 
o Messias? Para que o quereis, e para que o esperais? Para perderes ao vosso reyno? Ja esta perdido. Para que o 
esperais, e para que o quereis? Para ser ruina da vossa cidade? Ja os Romanos a destruirao. Para que o quereis, e 
para que o esperais? Para vos tirar 0 governo da vossa Judea? Ja esta tirado. Para que o esperais, e para que 0 
quereis? Para ser o vosso escandalo a pedra da vossa offensa? Ja tropegastes nelle, e j4 delle vos escandalizastes, 
porque o matastes como culpado sendo elle a mesma innocencia. Apertemos mais este ponto, e dizeime : este Mes- 
sias que esperais, ha-de ser 0 vosso escandalo? Ha-de sera vossa offensa ? Ha-de ser a vossa ruina? Ha-de ser a vossa 
destruicio ? Todos dizeis que nao, porque o Messias ha-de ser a vossa adoragao, 0 vosso obsequio, 0 vosso respeito : 
o Messias vos ha-de restituir a libertade, reparar a vossa cidade, conduzir-vos triunfantes a Judea, e dar-vos outra vez 0 
dominio da Palestina. Sim? E este ha-de ser 0 vosso Messias? Logo o Messias que esperais ha-de ser hum Mes- 
sias falso, e nao verdadeyro ; porque o verdadeyro Messias ha-de acabar 0 vosso dominio, destruir a vossa Judea, 
arruinar a vossa cidade, e ser o vosso escandalo, como diz 0 vosso profeta, e com elle os vossos Rabbinos. Logo o 
vosso Messias nao ha-de ter estes sinaes do Messias verdadeyro, e por consequencia sd Christo foy o verdadeyro 
Messias, e falso 0 que esperais que depois de Christo ha-ja de vir. 

65. De Isaias passemos a Oseas, e seja de passagem, porque se 0 quizeremos ponderar de assento, elle sé bastava 
para todo o sermam. O profeta Oseas, no cap. 3., nos deu outro sinal por onde o Messias se havia-de conhecer 
quando o Messias viesse: “ Dies multos expectabis me, et ego expectabo vos.” Quando vier o Messias, diz 0 pro- 
feta, os Judeos hao-de espera-lo, e o Messias ha-de esperar aos Judeos. E porque os Judeos o nao hao-de aceytar, 
ficarad sem rey, sem principe, sem sacrificio, e sem altar: “Sedebunt filii Israel, sine rege, sine principe, sine 
sacrificio, et sine altari.” Depois de ficarem neste estado os Judeos, reconhecerao o seu erro, e 14 nos ultimos dias 
adorarfio ao Messias aquem nao quizerao aceytar quando tinha vindo: “Et post hec revertentur filii Israel ad 

b) 

Dominum Deum suum, et ad David regem suum.” Nao podeis fugir a esta profecia, negando com alguns dos vossos 
Rabbinos, que se nao entende do Messias este texto, mas de David, porque alem de que o Targum, livro sagrado. 
para vos, do Messias o explica; “ Post hee obedient Messiz filio David:” e os vossos Rabbinos confessarao que 
o Messias na Escritura se explica pelo nome de David, como consta do livro Midras Misle, que he a gloza dos 
Proverbios no cap. 19. e do livro chamado Sohar, na exposicao do.cap. 10. do Levitico; alem pois da doutrina dos 
vossos Rabbinos implica com a Escritura, e com a razao, que de David se possa explicar este texto. (Oseas, cap. 3. 
verss. 3, 4, 5.) 

66. Implica com a Hscritura, porque della consta que David morreo ha muitos annos. Implica com a razio, 
porque he evidente que depois de David morrer, nem ja David vos pode esperar a vés, nem vos esperais a David até 
o fim do mundo. Porque he claro que David depois de morrer nfo pode tornar, e por consequencia nfo pode ser 
esperado, nem esperar-vos, porque os mortos nao esperao aos vivos: logo de David nao falla o profeta; mais, ao 
profetizado vés haveis de espera-lo, “Expectabis me.” Elle ha-de esperar-vos a vés, “ Ego expectabo vos.” Se vos 
ha-de esperar, logo ja tem vindo: porque se nao tivera vindo, bem o podeis vés esperar a elle, mas elle nao vos 
podia esperar a vés. Vés nao esperais a David, porque David j4 veyo. David nao vos espera a vés, porque jd mor- 
reo. Logo nao se entende de David esta profecia. Mais, vés haveis-de buscar ao profetizado como a vosso Deos: 
“ Querent Dominum Deum suum.” Nenhum de vis busca a David, porque ja veyo; nem confessa que David foy 
Deos: logo he falsa a vossa exposicao. Mais, ao profetizado haveis-de nega-lo, e depois, no fim do mundo, vos 
haveis-de converter a elle, “ Post hec revertentur.” NHaveis de adora-lo como a vosso Deos, diz o Targum, “ Re- 
vertentur ad cultum Dei sui.” Logo aquelle aquem negastes quando a primeira vez veyo era Deos. A David nao 
o negastes pelo passado quando yveyo, nem o haveis-de adorar por vosso Deos no fim do mundo quando ha-de 
resuscitar David. Logo David nao foy o profetizado por Oseas. 

67. Menos podeis fugir 4 forga desta profecia explicando-a do cativeyro de Babylonia; porque no cativeyro de 

LN SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

que falla o profeta, nem haveis-de ter rey, nem profeta, nem sacerdotes. Em Babylonia tivestes sacerdotes, que foy 
Josedech, como consta de Daniel cap. 13. ; tivestes reyes e principes, sacerdotes e sacrificios. Tudo consta do cap. 1. 
de Baruch vers. 10.; tivestes sacrificio e sacerdotes : “ Facite manna, et offerte pro peccato ad aram Domini Dei 
nostri.” ‘Tivestes rey, que foy Johachim ; tivestes principes, que forao Zorobabel e Salathiel. Logo nao falla do cati- 
veyro de Babylonia o profeta, Isto supposto, e estabelecido por certo, e que do Messias falla o profeta, vamos agora 
a verificagao destes sinaes. 

68. He verdadeyra esta profecia? Todos sois obrigados a confessa-la por verdadeyra. Logo j4 veyo o Messias. 
Porque se o Messias vos espera, “ Expectabo vos,” nao vos pode esperar sem ter ji vindo. eyo, nao o aceytastes, 
€ por isso nao tendes rey, nem principe, nem altar, nem sacrificio, nem sacerdote. Hayeis-vos-de converter para 
elle, “Revertentur.” Haveis-de busca-lo, “Querent Dominum Deum suum.” Haveis-de-vos converter a elle? Logo 
delle vos avertestes quando veyo. (Baruch cap. 1. vers. 10.) Haveis-de busca-lo? Logo quando veyo. 0 deyxastes. 
Verificou-se ja este sinal, ou nao se verificou? Se se nao verificou, como nio aceytastes a Christo quando veyo? 
Como estais sem sacerdote, sem altar, sem sacrificio, sem principe, sem rey, se haveis de ficar assim por nao acey- 
tardes ao Messias quando viesse ? Se se verificou jé, como se ha-de verificar depois? Ao vosso Messias haveis-de 
nega-lo quando vier? ‘Todos respondeis que nao. Logo nao se ha-de verificar nelle este sinal de verdadeyro Mes- 
sias, porque ao verdadeyro Messias quando viesse, havidio-de nega-lo os Judeos. Logo se este sinal se nao ha-de veri- 
ficar, he porque em Christo estd ja verificado: logo he impossivel tornar-se a verificar, e por consequencia 0 vosso 
Messias, aquem ainda esperais, he impossivel, porque nao ha-de ter este sinal do verdadeyro Messias. Na vinda do 
vosso Messias haveis-de perder 0 reyno, o sacrificio, e 0 sacerdocio? Nao: porque tudo isto vos ha-de restituir 0 
Messias. Logo nao se ha-de verificar no Messias este sinal. Logo Christo em quem se verificou, foy o Messias, e 
aquelle aquem esperais o nao ha-de ser, porque este sinal ha-de faltar no Messias que dizeis que ainda ha-de vir. 
Para que quereis, e para que esperais ao Messias? Para o negar? Jao tendes feyto. Para ficares sem rey, sem 
principe, sem sacrificio, sem altar, e sem sacerdote? Ja estais ha tanto tempo assim: e se com sua vinda assim nao 
ficares, nao he possivel que o Messias que esperais seja Messias verdadeyro. No Messias aquem esperais nada disto 
ha-de succeder ; em Christo verificou-se tudo isto. Logo Christo foy o Messias verdadeyro, e 0 que esperais ha-de 
ser hum falso Messias. 

69. De Oseas vamos a Malachias, para vermos outro sinal do Messias verdadeyro, que tambem ja esta verificado, 
e he impossivel tornar a verificar ja, “Non est mihi voluntas in vobis. Munus vestrum non suscipiam de manu 
vestra. Ab ortu enim solis usque ad occasum magnum est nomen meum in gentibus, et in omni loco sacrificabitur 
mihi oblatio munda.” Quando o Messias vier, diz Deos pelo profeta Malachias, depois da sua vinda, nao me hao- 
de ser agradaveis as pessoas dos Judeos, nem delles quero receber sacrificios, porque desde donde o sol nasce até 
onde o sol morre sera 0 meu nome grande nas gentes, isto he na gentilidade, e em toda a parte se me sacrificard 
hum sacrificio limpissimo. Isto assentado por profecia certa, dizei-me : estais ja reprovados vés, e os vossos sacrifi- 
cios? Entrarao ja os gentios na vossa heranga? Recebe hoje Deos de vis sacrificio algum, ou culto externo? Ha 
alguma parte no mundo aonde a gentilidade convertida nao sacrifique ao Deos verdadeyro? Nada disto podeis 
negar, porque todo o mundo o sabe. ‘Todo o mundo sabe (Malach. cap. 1. verss. 10, 11.) que vés sacrificais hoje, 
porque para nao sacrificares fora de Jerusalem tinheis preceyto. ‘Todo o mundo sabe que os vossos sacrificios e 
vés estais reprovados, porque nem tendes altar nem sacerdote. Todo o mundo sabe, e vos mesmos o chorais com 
lagrimas irremediaveis, que entramos na vossa heranga nds os gentios. Todo o mundo sabe, que no ha lugar em 
o mundo, aonde a gentilidade convertida nao adore ao verdadeyro Deos, e lhe nfo sacrifique hum culto limpissimo, 
e huma oblagao agradavel. Ou esta profecia esta satisfeyta, ou nao? Se nao esté satisfeyta, ainda hoje nao pode haver 
sacrificio em todo o mundo, e sé em Jerusalem ha sacrificio ; 0 que he falso ; porque ainda que hoje haja Jerusalem, 
ja em Jerusalem nao ha templo aonde sé podeis sacrificar. Se nao est§ satisfeyta, alem do profeta mentir, o que 
nao concedereis, vindes a dar em hum notayel absurdo. Mentio o profeta, porque disse duas cousas, que havifio-de 
succeder ao mesmo tempo. A primeyra, que Deos havia-de reprovar, e pdr fim aos vossos sacrificios. A segunda, 
que feyta esta reprovagao, em todo o mundo lhe havia-de sacrificar a gentilidade. Vés j4 nao sacrificais, como vés 
mesmos dizeis; nds nao sacrificamos, como porfiadamente teymais : logo huma de duas haveis de admittir, ou que 
mentiu o profeta em dizer que 4 extincio dos sacrificios Judaicos se haviio-de seguir os dos gentios, ou a que tenda 
faltado ja os vossos, deviado de entrar os nossos sacrificios. Nao podeis dizer o primeyro: logo haveis-de confessar 
o segundo. Mais; se nds agora nao sacrificamos, dais em hum notavel inconveniente, e vem a ser, que Deos esté 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 113 

hoje no mundo sem sacrificio nem culto. Porque vés nao lho dais, os Mouros menos. Nés tambem lho nao 
damos, como vés dizeis : logo j4 nao ha no mundo quem sacrifique a Deos com o culto verdadeyro. Isto he impos- 
sivel. Logo esté jd verificado este sinal, e por consequencia nao se pode verificar j4. Para que esperais, e quereis 
ao Messias? Para perderes a vossa primogenitura? JA est4 perdida. Para que quereis, e esperais ao Messias ¢ 
Para os Gentios entrarem na vossa heranca? Jd4 entrario. Para que esperais, e quereis ao Messias? Para Deos 
vos reprovar? Ja estais reprovados. Ha-de vos succeder tudo isto, quando vier o vosso Messias? Haveis de 
ser reprovados? THaveis de perder a vossa heranca e a vossa primogenitura? Respondeis que nao, porque 0 
vosso Messias vos ha-de restituir tudo isto de que hoje estais privados neste vosso cativeyro. Logo ou o vosso 
Messias que ha-de vir, nunca ha-de chegar; ou se vier, nio pode ser Messias verdadeyro ; porque com a vinda do 
verdadeyro Messias estas hao-de ser as vossas perdas; e como hoje estais no estado em que disserao os profetas 
que devieis estar depois do Messias vir, fica sendo impossivel ja a vinda de outro Messias. Ora abri os olhos, meus 
irmaos (nado tenho tempo para vos ponderar outros sinaes) havieis abri os olhos, e olhay para vés nesse miseravel 
estado em que cada hum de vés esta: e vede que em Christo Jesus estao compridos todos os sinais, que os profetas 
vos derao para conhecer ao Messias, e depois de satisfeytos, ndo se podem outra vez verificar. O estado em que 
estais he prova evidente do vosso erro; porque estais nesse estado, porque nado quizestes aceytar ao Messias, e em 
lugar de adorares a sua pessoa, lhe tirastes a vida em huma cruz. Este foy o vosso peccado, e por este peccado 
padeceis hoje este tam grande castigo, como confessa o vosso Rabbi Samuel: “ Paveo quod peccatum, per quod 
sumus in hac captivitate, sit illud, propter quod locutus est Dominus per Amos. Expavesco, quod iste Jesus sit 
ille Justus venditus pro argento.” 

70. Tomay esta mesma resoluc’o deste vosso Rabbino, e acabay de vos desenganar, porque ja he tempo. 
Acabay de vos desenganar, que a vossa esperanga he huma tontice ; o Messias por quem esperais he huma chimera ; 
e que fora da pessoa de Jesus de Nazareth, outro Messias he sonho, ou disparate. Porque s6 Christo teve os predi- 
cados intrinsecos de que se havia-de compér o Messias, e fora da pessoa de Christo he impossivel que outrem tenha 
estes mesmos predicados. Resolvey-vos, que Messias fora de Christo he impossivel, porque com a vinda de Christo 
ja passou o tempo de vir o Messias. Entendey, finalmente, que Messias fora da pessoa de Christo he impossivel, 
porque os sinais do verdadeyro Messias ja estao em Christo verificados. Se do corac&o vos arrependeis, e sincera- 
mente tendes abracado este desengano, venturosos de vés os que verdadeyramente abjurais ao vosso erro; porque 
conhecendo a verdade, deyxais as sombras da Synagoga pelas luzes da Igreja, o horror da heresia pela fermosura da 
fé. Consolay-vos, e consolay-vos muyto, porque ainda que 0 castigo fosse quem vos metteo a caminho, 0 castigo 
foy quem vos abrio os olhos, e tendes hum Deos tao compassivo, que inda que 0 negastes, em quanto Judeos, de ser 
vosso Pay, elle, se vos arrependeres, vos recebera de novo como filhos, porque vos redemio 4 custa de tanto sangue. 
Mostray que sois bons Judeos, porque se Judeo he 0 mesmo que confitente, confessay os vossos erros arrependidos, 
para verdadeyramente serdes Judeos confitentes. A honra que tendes perdido por estares ahi penitenciados ; ea 
fazenda que se vos confisca, por teres sido hereges, recuperay-a com huma grande dor do vosso coracao, n&o por 
vos ter a vossa desgraca reduzido a tanta miseria, mas por serem 0s vossos peccados quem em tam miseravel estado 
vos tem posto, offensas contra hum Deos, aquem deveis tantos benefissios. 

71. E vés, oh desgracados, que ahi estais entre esses confitentes para seres relaxado, abri os olhos, para que o in- 
cendio em que ha-de ser consumido 0 vosso corpo, nao chegue tambem a vos queymar a vossa alma. Oh filho do 
meu coracio, redemido com o sangue de Jesu Christo, criado em o gremio da Igreja, lavado em a agua do batismo: 
quem vos pudera com o sangue das propias veias remediar a vossa cegueyra! Que se fora possivel, nem huma so 
gota de sangue deixara de derramar para vos desfazer 0 vosso engano, e resgatar a vossa alma do cativeyro do de- 
monio, que assim vos tem obstinado! Quanto me magoa a vossa disgraga! E quanto me parte a alma a dor de vos 
yer em perigo proximo de condenacio eterna! Vede, meu filho, gerado no Evangelho, nascido entre Catholicos, e 
alumiado com a luz que vos deram tantas pessoas doutas antes de sahires ca fora. ede que estais enganado, e se 
tiveres a desgraca de morreres nesse estado, vos espera hum activo fogo por toda a eternidade, para vos abrazar a 
alma, depois que o fogo temporal vos tiver consumido o corpo. Estais convencido de Judeo pela prova de direyto, 
e v6s mesmo tendes confessado este crime, supposto que a vossa confissao foy diminuta. Depois déstes naquelle 
barbaro erro de professar o Atheysmo. Ora concorday estes dous pontos, seres Ateysta e Judeo. Se hoje houvera 
salvacio na ley de Moyses, o que nao ha, nem pode haver, sois tam disgracado que vos nao podeis salvar, porque 
morreis herege da mesma ley que professais. Sois Judeo Saduceo, nos termos em que vos tendes posto, e ja no 

2G, 

114 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

tempo em que ainda durava a vossa ley, era a profissdo dos Saduceos, seyta heretica entre os Judeos, porque esta 
negava 0. artigo da resurrey¢io, e por consequencia a immortalidade da alma. Vos ainda estais' de’ peor condicio, 
porque nao sé negais 4 alma a immortalidade, mas estais tao cego, que até negais haveralma. Dizeis que nao ha 
outra bemabenturatica mais que a vida:’ que o salvar he viver: que ‘o*perder nao he ir'ao inferno, porque’o nao ha}: 
mas qué sé em morrer consiste a perdicio. » Se vos‘ persuadis, ainda que enganadamente, que ‘isto he verdade,’‘como 
quereis ‘perder a vida em’ que no vosso parecer consiste‘a bemaventuranca ?:'Como quereis morrer’ por -vosso 
gosto, “se'a perdicdo, segundo: 0 vosso juizo, esté s6em’morrer? ‘Deixay-vos" convencer de'quem vos deseja salvar.’ 
Pedi imisericordia ao Tribunal do Santo Officio, que com tanta piedatle vos tern esperado ha dous' annos, e:com tanta’ 
paciencia vos tem soffrido agora confitente, logo revogante; e depois profitente'do:desgracado Atheysmo. « Confessay 
oS ¥O880s erros, nao com animo’de ‘salvar a vida, mas’s6°com os*olhos em’ a’ salvacao davossa alma.’ E se vos ‘resol: 
veres a’ itiorrer neste estado;'eu’ @aqui vos Cito’ para’ o dia‘do-Juizo, aonde' havemos de apparecer ambos ‘resuscitados' 
na presenca ‘do’ Deos verdadeyro. V6s resuscitado Judeo‘e herege, que he°o-estado em ‘que morreis: eeu, conforme 
espero na misericordia divina, resuscitado ‘Catholico, porque espero na’ Divina bondade, que hey-de morrer na ley de 
Jesu Christo, que hea unica em que’ pode ‘havér salvacdo.: Nés' ambos ‘havemos de estar diante do Supremo Juiz 
resuscitados, ‘e entao veréis que arguindo-meDeos pela grandezados'meus peccados, nao’ me’ ha-de arguir de ser 
falsa‘a minha ley. Arguir-me-ha'da poti¢a observancia que eu tenho della, mas da verdade, isso nam salvo se Deos for 
injusto, ‘0 que nao’he; ¢/a ‘vés'nao sé vos ha-de julgar pelas vossas culpas, mas’ vos*ha-de condenar pela observancia 
da vossa ley em que morreis. *Pondé-vos a' vés na presenca ‘dé Deos, sem mais' peccado, que guardar'a‘ley' de-Moyses: 
E ponde hum Christao na mesma presenca, sem outra culpa mais que a observancia'da ley de Christo. Se Deos 
condenar ao Christéo por amor da ley, e salvar ao Judeo por amor da mesma, :nao podia ser justo Deos, nem. podia 
satisfazer 4s razdes com que o Catholico: havia-de arguir a sua justica. Porque nesse caso haviaioCatholico de 
arguir a Deos desta ‘maneyra, ‘Juiz recto, eu:cri emChristo, porque elle teve todos quantos sinais vds revelastes 
pelos vossos profetas que havia-de ser vosso Filho. Fiz o que me’ mandastes, agora condenais-me por:isso mesmo. 
Pois como me podeis condenar por eu vos obedecer * Certamente nao tem reposta esta replica.’ Logo ‘he impos- 
sivel que’Deos condene'ao Catholico por ser Christao. Ponhamos agora ao Judeo, aquem Deos condena pela 
observancia‘da ley de’ Moyses, quando, digo, querendo arguir a Deos pelo condenar porser Judeo: » Dira :: Senhor 
ew cri no Deos‘de ‘Abraham, Isac, e Jacob. Eu observey a ley, que vés destes a Moyses, pois: para que me con+ 
denais > Pode: responder Deos,’‘ Mentes, que Abraham, Isac, e'Jacob icrerao;“e esperarao: o' Messias futuro, que 
havia-de ser meu Filho, e havia-de ter todos os sinaes que eu prometti para que o:pudessem conhecer. Histe! meu 
Filho foy ao mundo, virdo-se' nelle todos os sinaes revelados nas Escrituras. Tu tao fora estivestes de o admittir, ‘e 
de crer nelle que o'crucificaste. A ley que dey a Moyses havia-de acabar com a vinda de‘mew Filho, € elle havia-de 
promulgar outra‘ley, que se havia de abragar em todo o’ mundo. “Tw vistes. com os teus: olhos todos os. sinaisdo 
tempo em ‘que se havia-de promulgar esta ley. Se meu Filho nao fora ao’ mundo, nem sé satisfizessem as profecias 
tinheis ‘escusa, dizendo*que observastes a ley, que eu dey para sempre, e que erestes‘no Deos de Abraham, Isac; é 
Jacob. Mas agora; que tudo esta satisfeyto, eu sou o justo em te condenar,'e tu fostes‘o rebelde’ em ser Judeo. 
Ainda mal, meu irm&o, que isto que eu agora vos digo, assim o haveis-de experimentar entao 14 naquelle dia. Este 
he o'lago, em que voluntariamente vos prendeis. Esta he a réde; ‘que vos ‘tecérao'a.muytos de vés vossos filhos, 
voss0s pays, vossos parentes, e todos os vossos amigos, e os que tem o’vosso'sangue; porque esta-he a desgraca que 
vos vaticinaraéo os vossos profetas : Joan. cap. 15. v. 22. “TIpse autem populusdireptus, et vastatus: laqueus juve: 
num omnes, et in domibus carcerum absconditi sunt: facti sunt in rapinam, nec est’ qui eruat ;‘ in direptionem, nee 
est’ qui dicat Redde.” ie ryote 

‘72. Tenho acabado a minha demonstracio, e tambem com vosco tenho acabado, oh desgracado povo de Israel ! 
Mas’ porque acabey com vosco, agora com vosco principio. Ah! Deos e Senhor meu, crucificado pelos Judeos, tanto 
para © seu,’ quanto para o'nosso remedio! Abranday, Senhor, coragdes tad obstinados, j4 que aqui’ esta hum 

obstinado coracgéo entre este miseravel povo? ‘Se de sentidas se quebrarao’ as pedras, porque morrestes 5 ja que 
morrestes, quebray aquelles endurecidos coracdes, com que ainda vos ‘nao amaio os Judeos que vos mataram. Déste 
vista a hum’ cego, que vos meteu a lanca até o coragam: Day’ollios a'tanta gente cega, que querendo:vés' do coracio 
dar-Iha, ella ainda vos mete’a lan¢a até 0 coracdo ! « Lancay, Deos:de minha alma, langay nova agua, e novo sangue 
desse ‘vosso coracio enternecido sobre estes miseraveis homens,‘ que*podera’ ser: se arrependao, vendo ‘que hum 
coracéo offendido ‘com tam repetidos aggravos se desentranha’em finezas para quem nao’ merece tam grandes 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 115 

excessos. Rasgaste o véo do Templo, em sinal de que a vossa morte punha fim 4 Synagoga dos Judeos: rasgay 0 véo 
que os Judeos tem no coracao ha tantos annos, para que de todo o corac&o detestem os Judeos aos seus erros, pela 
efficacia da vossa morte. Estais esperando com os bracos abertos aos filhos de Judea ha 1705 annos, e por mais 
que os chamais com a cabeca inclinada, elles ingratamente vos dao as costas ; porque vos nao querem reconhecer pelo 
Messias verdadeyro que os veyo buscar para os salvar. Vdés sempre morrestes por morrer por elles: e elles sé por 
vos matar he que morrerao sempre. Lembray-vos, Deos e Senhor por natureza compassivo, lembray-vos destes 
vossos filhos, que em fim tem 0 vosso sangue, e vés os redemistes a elles 4 custa de tantas penas! Elles forao tao 
barbaros, que sendo vés seu pay, nao quizerao ser vossos filhos; mas as ingratiddes dos filhos sempre tiverao 
escusas no amor do pay. Ja os chamastes com beneficios, e forio ingratos aos favores. Agora buscay-os com os 
castigos, e até aqui o castigo nao melhorou aos Judeos. Fazey que reconhecaéo com toda sinceridade, que nesta 
sua desgraca ja nao tem outro remedio, mais que o fazerem penitencia do tempo que tem perdido com a sua espe- 
ranca: chorando ao seu erro, e detestando ao seu peccado, abominando a sua supresticao, e pondo fim 4 sua teyma ; 
para que assim regenerados na agua de seus penitentes olhos, renascao vossos filhos, j4 que pelo baptismo sao 

filhos vossos. 

LAUS DEO. 

Peep. 

i 
Hes Moke s 
hires Fae 
eee 

RESPUESTA AL SERMON 

PREDICADO POR EL ARCOBISPO DE CRANGANOR 
EN EL AUTO DE FE, CELEBRADO EN LISBOA, EN 6 SEPTIEMBRE ANO DE 1705. 

Por el Author de las Noticias Reconditas de la Inquizicion*, Obra Posthuma. 

Impresso en Villa-Franca, por Cartos VERO, 4 la Insignia de la Verdad. 

AL LECTOR. 

DEVO darte cuenta, amigo Lector, antes de empezar la prefacion, que la Respuesta deste Sermon que ahora im- 
primo, es obra posthuma de un insigne sujeto conocido en la republica literaria por sus excelentes y judiciosas 
obras, y aunque su larga edad, y sus impertinentes y molestos achaques no le davan lugar 4 controversias, no 
obstante por condescender con el gusto de algunos amigos de tan decantado Sermon, compilo la que sigue, dividien- 
dola en Articulos para responder 4 cada uno minutamente. El intento fue defender la religion Judaica, no ofender 
la Christiana, y mostrar que la calumnia que el Argobispo levanta contra aquel eminentisimo y docto Rabbino R. 
Salomon, de haver corrompido la Sagrada Escriptura, se deve atribuir con verdad al mismo Arcobispo, 6 4 algun 
Christiano antes del. 

Si el Author ha conseguido su intento, el que leyere y examinare el Sermon y su Respuesta, sin cegarse de la 
pasion ni del interes, reconocerd la verdad; me persuado que el que fuere capaz de balancear las razones de una y 
otra parte, hallard una distancia immensa entre el Sermon y la Respuesta; pues todas las razones que el Sermon 
alega son deducidas de falsas ilaciones, de conceptos predicables, de mal acotadas alegaciones, de alegoricos y tor- 
turados sentidos de lo literal; quando la Respuesta se compone de reales y verdaderas ilaciones, deducidas de sus 
premisas, de claras y evidentes prophecias explicadas literalmente, sin torcerlas ni alegorizarlas para aplicarlas 4 su 
intento como haze el predicador en su Sermon. Esto parecio acertado dezirte, oh amigo Lector, porque casi todos 
desean y esperan saber algo del Author, y de la obra. 

No hay cosa mas necesaria en la religion que la controversia, devese buscar y examinar con toda exactitud 
para poder con mas certeza establecer los fundamentos della ; pero el que quiziere opinar devese desnudar de todo 
el prejuicio que nos causa la educacion, deve considerar que el contrario tiene alma como él, y desea la suma feli- 
cidad, que es el fruto de la verdadera religion, deve suponer que no hay hombre en el mundo que si supiera que 
havia religion verdadera que no fuese la suya, que no se trasladase 4 ella; y silo hay, no merece el titulo de 
hombre ; quien se obstinara contra si mismo? Asentado este principio deve considerar, que si el fin que mueve 
4 la controversia es el persuadir (4 su parecer) 4 la verdadera religion 4 los que ignorantes estan remotos della, 
deve exercitar los medios que mas conducen al deseado efecto; deve emplear el estilo mas persuasivo, deve buscar 
las razones mas eficazes, los argumentos mas solidos, las ilaciones mas bien deducidas, y las consequencias mas 
bien sacadas, no deve mostrar parcialidad sino por la verdad, deve confesar la razon donde la hallare, deve mostrar 
sinceridad y neutralidad en todo, deve huir de subterfugios y ficciones, deve ser exacto en las acotaciones, y recto 
en dar el verdadero sentido 4 las alegaciones: no deve ofender con palabras ignominiosas, ni levantar calumnias 

* Nota.—Se presume por ser el estilo del lenguage tan heroyco y tan bien limado que esta es la causa que ha dado motivo 4 muchos y 4 mi 
tambien de dezir ser el Sefior H. H. hijo de Londres, el que ha sido el Author de la siguiente Respuesta, 
2H 

118 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

para poder mantener su systema, ni tampoco deve cantar la victoria sobre pasos contrarios al sentido literal. Desta 
forma sera la disputa acertada, y se aclarara la verdad, que es lo que se deve buscar; pero lo contrario no sirve 
mas que 4 exponer el credito de la persona que opina, y de la religion que defiende, pues viendo la parte con- 
traria que no sabe defender la religion, si no es ofendiendo al antagonista con calumnias y ficciones, atribuyen la 
falta de la persona 4 la religion, y concluyen que pues no alega otras razones no tiene otras que alegar ; y en 
vez de convertirse se fortifican mas en la creencia de la suya; y siendo una cosa que concierne tanto 4 todas las 
criaturas humanas, no se devia permitir que en los discursos de controversia, donde se pretende persuadir 4 otra 
religion, se usasen terminos indignos de hombres doctos y moderados: porque los hombres en vez de examinar 
las qiiestiones principales, se pasan 4 defender las injurias, 4 innovar otras contra el antagonista, y en esto se 
suscitan odios y malquerencias, en vez de la pretendida amistad. 

Soy de parecer que devemos estimar y venerar 4 qualquiera persona que pretendiere persuadirnos 4 su religion, 
sea la que se quiere, como quien procura (en su opinion) al mayor y mas elevado bien que podemos desear, y tra- 
tandonos con la cortesia devida 4 la pretendida sinceridad, devemos procurar responderle con los terminos mas 
corteses y adequados que seamos capazes ; y por lo contrario huir de todos aquellos barbaros que pretenden persuadir 
4 otros 4 su religion, violentando las razones y el sentido literal, solo porque ellos lo entienden asi, y despreciar- 
los como indignos de la sociedad humana, y como deshechados de la republica literaria. 

Pero reduzcamos todas las religiones del mundo 4 quatro. La primera que es la mayor parte del mundo, son 
las diversas religiones de Paganos, que suponen multiplicidad de Deidades, 6 ninguna Deidad. La otra parte, menor 
que la Pagana pero mayor que las siguientes es la Mahometana. La tercera es la Christiana, menor que las dos 
pasadas y mayor que la siguiente. La ultima y menor en profesores que todas, es la Judaica. 

Como no tenemos noticia de todas las religiones paganas, es preciso que las reyectemos, ademas que todos (4 
saber, Mahometanos, Christianos, y Judios,) vamos de acuerdo, que no hay mas que una sola eterna Causa, que 
crié, rige, y govierna este mundo : los Christianos y Judios acordamos tambien, en que solo las dos religiones son 
verdaderas, 4 saber, el Christiano mantiene ser la suya verdadera, el Judio substenta ser solo Ja suya. 

Dividese la religion Judaica en dos: la una (que la mayor parte de los. Judios profesa,) es la ley de Moyses, con 
la tradicion Rabbinica; la otra, que los Caraitas siguen, es la que reyecta esta tradicion ; competele pues al Christiano 
que se quiziere convertir, y que se persuadiere de la verdad de la religion Judaica, antes de profesar una de las dos 
religiones, el examinar con toda exactitud y diligencia las razones de ambas partes, y quedar persuadido de una dellas, 
para saber 4 que parte decidir, pues no estando informado de las razones en que una y otra parte se funda, mal podr4 
distinguir la verdad ; despues que se huviere informado minutamente y por extenso de las razones que obligan 4 una y 
otra parte 4 seguir su opinion, se podra hazer duefio de la qiiestion, y elegir la parte que le pareciere mas acertada. 

No sé como hay Judio que pueda persuadirse én su conciencia 4 pasarse al Christianismo, sin primero exa- 
minar por extenso todas las diferentes opiniones que huvo, y aun permanecen en esta religion, las razones que alegan 
en su abono, y las que se escrivieron en contra; en tanta distancia y division de pareceres, donde cada uno canta la 
victoria y se persuade que solo él profesa la verdadera religion, y las demas son sectas: quien sera tan docto, tan 
agudo, y tan gran theologo, que se atreva 4 decidir por esta 6 aquella opinion? quien se atreverd 4 elegir sin pri- 
mero balancear todas las opiniones una con otra? este oficio deven hazer los Christianos entre ellos mismos, y no 
devia de haver Christiano capaz de juzgar, que no huviese primero examinado todas las opiniones de su religion 
francamente, desnudandose del prejuicio que le puede causar el haver sido educado en diferente opinion. 

Pero para convertir 4 los Judios, era preciso que se formase primero un concilio general de todos los profesores 
del Christianismo, baxo qualquiera dominacion que fuere, sin exceptuar los Unitarios, y que despues que huviese 
acordado el concilio, qual de todas las opiniones era la que devian seguir, por convencion general de todos, (no por 
artes ni engafios, no por interes ni poder absoluto ;) entonces competia Iamar otro concilio, en que tuviesen los 
Judios libre acceso y plena libertad de deliberar claramente su parecer, sin miedo ni rezelo; pues se trataya de la 
salvacion de todos en general. Devian los Christianos provar primero, como Christo era el prometido Messias, en el 
Testamiento Viejo, por todas las prophecias que del verdadero Messias hablan literalmente, sin torcerlas ni alegori-~ 
zarlas ; devian provar de donde consta por las prophecias que ha de ser Dios y hombre; devian provar que Dios 
es uno y trino [como ellos dizen] por el Testamiento Viejo; devian provar que los Judios eran obligados 4 desistir 
de la ley de Moyses, por abrazar la de Christo; devian mostrar autenticamente qual es esta ley que Christo ordend; y 
despues devian con paciencia dar atencion 4 las razones que los Judios pudieran alegar en contra; replicar, y con- 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 119 

troversiar de una y otra parte, y unos y otros devian confesar la verdad donde estuviese, de la manera y con las 
circunstancias que pareciese; esta era la forma de hazer que todos confesasen la verdad, para cuyo efecto era pre- 
ciso que este concilio fuese mantenido del publico Erario, tanto unos como otros, y que fuesen hombres que no 
' tuviesen beneficios, ni de una ni de otra religion, porque no fuesen obligados 4 mantener su religion por conservar 
sus puestos. 

Pareceme, que solo desta forma se pudiera venir 4 aclarar la verdad, y 4 decidir la question que ha 1700 afios 
que dura, y sabe Dios lo mas que durar4, pero quererse persuadir el Arcobispo, que los Judios han de ceder por 
alegorias ; y que los Judios se persuadan 4 que el Arcobispo ceda, en quanto la Iglesia tiene que dar beneficios, es 
locura; siga cada qual su opinion, y sirva 4 Dios con pura y recta intencion, y no se aparte de lo que le ensefiaron 
(si no es capaz de decidir) ; y dexe 4 Dios el cuidado de su salvacion, que como misericordioso recevira su recta 
intencion quando las acciones no le sean acceptas. Crean los theologos lo que les pareciere, que esto es lo que 
yo creo, pues no me puedo persuadir que la Divina Misericordia repulse de su gracia 4 un recto y perfecto Maho- 
metano, que observa su religion porque cree que esa es la mejor forma de servirle. ; 

RESPUESTA AL SERMON. 
§ L. 

2. Vos sois aquelles, a quem a esperanga sendo tao larga, nao cansou a paciencia. 

VatcaME Dros! que pueda tanto la prevencion, que se atreva 4 detestar como crimen una heroyca virtud digna de 
los mayores encomios? Por esta tan heroyca esperanga es: el pueblo de Israel llamado Santo, porque no han podido 
captiverios, destierros, martirios, aflicciones, desgracias, é infortunios disuadirlos de la verdadera creencia; ni la 
esperanca. de futura grandeza, ni de aparente felicidad, fue bastante incentivo para removerlos de la sagrada y 
sempiterna religion; tal es su constancia en la verdad, y tal es la fuerca de su creencia, que posponiendo toda hu- 
mana consideracion 4 la divina, no dexan ni dexaran su Dios, ni su Ley. 

En semejante caso no hay duda que el Seftor Predicador y sus sequaces (pues que tan mal siente de la paciencia 
y esperanga de los Judios) hallaran mas adequado el perder con la paciencia la esperanga, y trasladarse de un Dios 4 
otro, y de una ley 4 otra, como hazen con los Santos, fixando la devocion en quien mas apriesa les responde. 

Pero para que vea el Sefior Arcobispo, quanto estima Dios esa virtud, y con que palabras la exalta, atienda 4 
las mismas del propheta Jeremias en el cap. 2. v. 2. donde afirma que no se olvidard de la paciencia con que el 
santo pueblo le siguio en el desierto quarenta afios. “ Recordor tibi benignitatis adolescentie, amoris sponsalium 
tuorum, te prosequutam esse me per desertum, per terram non satam.” Si la Divina Magestad se halla tan agrade- 
cida por solos quarenta afos depender de su Divina Providencia; que sera en tantos captiverios, destierros, &c. que 
padecié la Nacion en tantos siglos? Vos sois aquelles a quem a evidencia sendo tao clara, nao bastou a vos con- 
vencer 0 genio. Jer. 2. v. 2.—En llegando 4 las pruevas, se examinaré la fuerca desta evidencia. 

6. Vio o profeta Isaias no capitulo 42 dos seus Vaticinios, &c. 

Supone el Predicador que esta prophecia descrive las calamidades, extorciones, y vexaciones, que han de padecer 
los Judios despues de la venida del Messias, y sobre este fundamento paraphrasea el verso, “ Ipse autem populus 
direptus et vastatus,” &c. que quiere dezir, es un pueblo saqueado, y conculcado, &c. de aqui pues deduce que los 
Judios no tienen que aguardar el Messias con estas palabras. 

9. Pois se os Judeos no Messias futuro esperao a sua redemgao, e ainda hoje esperao ao Messias, como diz o profeta 
que naa hao de ter redemgao os Judeos? Por isso mesmo, porque os Judeos no Messias futuro esperao o seu re- 
medio, por isso hao de ficar sem remedio os Judeos, porque nunca para os Judeos ha-de chegar o Messias. E como o 
Messias he impossivel, por isso tambem he impossivel o remedio que no Messias esperao os Judeos. 

Notese que esta prophecia consta de dos partes, primera y segunda ; la primera es la alegada por el Predicador, 

120 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

la segunda es la omitida por el mismo; la primera representa los trabajos, miserias, y vilipendios, que padece Israel 
en la presente dispersion ; la segunda los bienes, grandezas, y felicidades, que gozard en la futura redempcion; y 
esto con expresiones tan afectuosas y tan amorosas, que provocan al Israelita 4 derramar lagrimas de alegria con- 
firmandose mucho mas en su esperanga, y regozijandose por el gran bien que sabe no poderle faltar. Aqui tras- 
lado las palabras pronunciadas por el santo Propheta con su acostumbrada elegancia, é inimitable energia. 

‘Y agora asi dize el Senor tu Criador, oh Jahacob, y tu formador, oh Israel, no temas porque ya te redimi, 
llamé por tu nombre, tu eres mio: quando pasares por las aguas yo estoy contigo, y si por los rios no te Ilevardn, 
si anduvieres en el fuego no seras quemado, ni la llama arderd en ti; porque yo soy el Sehor tu Dios, el Santo de 
Israel tu Salvador,” &c. Y con este mismo amor y carifio v4 siguiendo 4 consolar, y alentar 4 su amado pueblo 
Israel hasta el fin del capitulo, aunque pecador, ingrato y desconocido. Isa. cap. 43. v. 1. No sé pues como se 
afirma tan positiva y decisivamente por el Predicador, que el Propheta asegura que no ha de haver redempcion para 
la presente esclavitud de Israel, quando consta patentemente lo contrario ; no sé como no considerd que podia su- 
ceder que este Sermon viniese 4 manos de algun Judio, que cotejando el paso del cap. 42. hallase que el Predicador 
exagera los males amenagados en él, pretendiendo constituirlos irremisiblemente perpetuos, quando el Propheta no 
les d& mas existencia que por el solo tiempo de la captividad, disimulando la restauracion de los bienes anexos en el 
cap. 43. Que juizio hard este Judio de la candidez del Predicador ? Que concepto formaré de su doctrina? Apuremos 
mas estas importantes reflexiones. IE] Predicador afirma que no hay redempcion para Israel ; y Dios dize, ‘ No temas 

” 

porque ya te redimi;” el Predicador afirma que Dios tiene despedido y desechado 4 Israel de su proteccion y pa- 
trocinio, que no lo reconoce mas por su peculio y por su pueblo; y Dios dize, ‘Te llamé por tu nombre, tu eres 
mio; el Predicador afirma que Israel perdié por sus muchos excesos el glorioso titulo que gozava de que Dios se 
HNamava Dios de Israel; y Dios dize, “ Yo soy el Seftor tu Dios, el Santo de Israel tu Salvador :” Digame agora pues 
el padre Predicador, parecele que el Judio ha de dexar de creér 4 la palabra de Dios tan clara, tan patente, y tan 
inteligible, para creer 4 sus exageraciones, 4 sus disimulaciones, y 4 sus forjadas objecciones ? 

No considera el Sefior Argobispo, que el Judio que viere que las pruevas que pretende traer contra el esperado 
Messias y contra la decantada esperanca son las mismas que le aseguran aquel y le fortifican en esta? no es fuerca 
digo, que admirado y atonito el buen Judio prorumpa diziendo: Oh Dios de verdad! y estas son las pruevas que 
los Christianos alegan contra nos; Y estas se predican por sus mas eminentes pastores, se apruevan por los mas 
doctos prelados, y se dan 4 la publica prensa con authoridad suprema? Bendito seas tu, oh gran Dios de Israel, 
que me dexaste en mi verdadera creencia ; pues, qué mayor prueva de mi verdad y de su falacia que el no tener 
otras armas para vencerme, que disimulaciones, exageraciones, y omisiones, negando la verdad, y encubriendo lo 
que no le conviene relatar, y no necesitar yo mas razones para conyencerle, que alegar el mismo paso contra él, 
que él alega contra mi? 

8 LL 

13. Dize el Predicador que preguntandose 4 un Judio si el Messias que espera ha de ser solamente hombre, 
6 Dios y hombre, se ha de hallar muy confuso, y que por esto los Rabbinos tienen advertido al pueblo, que suce- 
diendo que alguno le proponga esta qiiestion, le responda que ni el Messias vino, ni deve venir. 

No comprehendo como puede nacer este embarago al Judio, quando tiene por articulo que el Messias ha de 
ser hombre, y no Dios y hombre, como se prueva adelante ; supongo pues que esta noticia le fue inculeada al Pre- 
dicador por algun malicioso neophito para acreditarse de gran theologo. 

Y si es que el Sefior Predicador la sacé de algun author, deviera, como acostumbra, acotar adonde viene este 
celebre consejo de los Rabbinos, pero siempre acontece en estas controversias donde el poder y la tirania pasan 
placa de authoridad, que lo mas esencial se supone sin prueva, y lo que poco importa se circunstancea, y exagera. 

14. Que los Judios estan divididos sobre la venida del Messias, creyendo algunos que no ha venido, y por 
consequencia lo esperan ; y afirmando otros que vino ha 1637 afios haviendo nacido luego que Tito destruyé 4 
Jerusalem ; asi lo dixo el Predicador en su Sermon, pero sepa que ningun Judio tal cree, ni creyé, ni aun los 
mismos Rabbinos que relatan su nacimiento, haviendo representado este chimerico ente como un real suceso, para 
insinuar al pueblo que el Messias estaria prompto toda vez que hizieren penitencia, como lo promete Moyses en el 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 191 

verso 29. del cap. 4. del Deuteronomio donde despues de haver amedrentado al pueblo con amenacas, y rigores, dize 
que no obstante su rebeldia si buscare 4 Dios con todo su coracon, y con toda su alma, lo hallard indulgente y 
benigno ; lo mismo ratifica 2b¢dem en el principio del cap. 30. 

Recelando pues los Rabbinos que considerandose la nacion derramada por las tres partes del mundo, destituidos 
de defensa, sin alianca ni amistad, sin rey ni reyno, sin templo ni sacrificio, immergida en una fatal consternacion, 
no se dexase llevar de una funesta desesperacion, juzgando que haviendo Dios indignado, renunciado su protecion, 
la dexava expuesta 4 extragos, 4 destrocos y 4 exterminios ; los Rabbinos pues como vigilantes y amorosos padres, 
precuraron animar y confortar al pueblo, insinuandole con metaphoras 4 imitacion de los Prophetas, que la libertad 
de la presente captividad era mas prompta que la de Egipto, y Babilonia, no haviendo otra prescripcion para ella 
que la penitencia ; constando por innumerables pasos del Pentatheuco y de los Prophetas, que hallandose Israel 
oprimido de angustias, persecuciones, y calamidades, en recurriendo 4 Dios con sincera y cordial contricion, serian 
redimidos y restituidos 4 su tierra, con prerrogativas y privilegios, mucho mas aventajados que en las dos vezes que 
la poseyeron ; puesto que una vez restaurados en ella no tienen que recelar de guerra, ni de enemigos, ni de tercera 
proscripcion. ; 

Replicaré el Predicador instando, que bien podian los Rabbinos ensefar este dogma de la promptitud del 
Messias, sin forjar un ente chimerico, para hazer creer al pueblo una cosa inexistente ; respondo, que imitaron en 
esto 4 los Prophetas, que descrivieron algunas metaphoras como si fueran reales sucesos. El Propheta Isayas 
descrive en el cap. 5. de su libro una vifia plantada por su amigo en un fertil suelo, donde edificé una torre, y cavé 
un lagar, esperando gozar una larga cosecha de regaladas‘uvas, mas que Ilegando 4 vendimiarlas, halld uvas silvestres 
en lugar de domesticas ; aqui se ve pues una pura alegoria, un puro ente de razon, representado por un ente real y 
existente, explicandolo el mismo Propheta que por esta vifia se entiende la Casa de Israel, de la qual esperava Dios 
una republica de pios y devotos, y la hallé de libertinos y disolutos. 

No mandé Dios al Propheta Ezequiel, cap. xvii. v. 3. que representase al pueblo una grande aguila de largas alas, 
de dilatados miembros, de pluma galantemente matizada, que havia desgajado del Libano una rama de un cedro, &c. 
aplicando esto 4 Nabuco, y al Rey de Juda*? Viendo pues los Rabbinos que Dios se sirve de typos para persuadir, 
hay quien pueda cengurarlos quando no hazen mas que imitar 4 Dios? 

* Reference to the first painting of the collection of Mendoza will show that the arms of the Mexican empire were a large eagle with rich 
plumage, perched upon a tunal tree, with one leg extended as if to pluck off a branch. The reason which the Mexicans alleged for taking those 
arms was, that Huitzilopuchtli commanded them to found the city of Mexico on the spot where the appearance of such an eagle signified to them 
the accomplishment of the oracle. Torquemada gives the following account, in the eleventh chapter of the second book of his “Indian Mo-’ 
narchy,” of the foundation of the city of Mexico :— 

“Ya decimos en el Libro de las Poblaciones, el origen, y principio, que tuvo esta ciudad de Mexico, apareciendo en él una pefia, y un tunal, 
nacido en ella, y un aguila caudal encima: Todo lo qual, parecio junto 4 unas aguas (segun algunos dicen) blancas, otros acules, 6 verdes, y 
mui profundas. Lo qual, parece cosa fabulosa, y mas mentira y patrafia, que historia verdadera, y no es esta Ciudad la primera, que con 
portentos, y prodigios, se dice, ha sido fundada en el mundo; porque de la Atenas dice el Glorioso Padre San Agustin, en los Libros de la 
Ciudad de Dios, citando 4 Varron, que quando querian fundarla los Atenienses, repentinamente aparecid, en aquel lugar, un arbol de Oliva; 
y en otro alli junto, una fuente, que rebento de agua. El Rei Cecrops, que vido las repentinas visiones, y no sabiendo el fin que representaban, 
aunque entendia, que era cosa importante y necesaria para la dicha fundacion, por no errar, embid a consultar el caso, al Templo de Apolo, en 
Delfos ; el qual respondio, que la Oliva, representaba la Diosa Minerva, y el Agua, al Dios Neptuno, y que los nombres de estos dos Dioses, 
se ponian a la eleccion de los que querian fundar aquella ciudad. Y como entonces entraban las mugeres en consulta y consejo junta- 
mente con los hombres (segun prosigue luego el mismo Padre Agustino) votaron los unos y los otros, por el nombre que se le avia de dar A 
la ciudad. Las mugeres decian que el de Minerva, y los hombres que el de Neptuno, y como estuviesen los yotos partidos, puestos los 
hombres a wna parte y las mugeres a otra, contaron los votos, y hallaron aver uno mas entre las mugeres, que entre los hombres, y pre- 
valeciendo su parecer, dieronle el nombre que pedian de Minerva, que en Griego quiere decir, Athenas; y de esta manera se quedo esta 
celebrada ciudad con este dicho nombre. De manera, que quando la ciudad de Mexico aya sido nombrada en sus principios con este 
nombre, Tenuchtitlan, no fue sin causa; pues tuvieron motivo de aver visto la piedra y tuna (como hemos dicho) que ambas cosas sig- 
nifican este nombre. En este lugar se ranchearon (como decimos en el Libro de las Poblagiones) haciendo unas pobres y pequefias chogas, 
rodeadas de carrigo y espadafias, que ellos llaman Xacalli, y en otras provincias, Bahareques; en las quales pasaban su vida estrecha y 
pobremente, por ser el lugar mui pobre, y desamparado ; y como gente pobre, y desamparada, y guerreada de todos los pobladores de la 
Tierra-Firme, comian raices de Tulli, y otras yervas, que en el sitio y en sus alrededores se criaban. Pero como la necesidad, es madre de 
toda invencion, é industria, ensefidles modo de pescar, haciendo redecillas, y otras invenciones de yervas, con que pudiesen sacar del pescado, 
que en esta laguna dulce se cria. Y aqui comengaron las pescas en esta laguna, que hasta este tiempo dicho, no sabian de ellas los otros mora- 
dores de la tierra: y como les avia sucedido bien, y tenian ya manera de poderse mejor sustentar, fueron continuando la pesqueria, de la qual 
tuvieron noticia los comareanos de la tierra: los quales, vivieron mucho tiempo, ignorantes de aquella poblacion; porque los Mexicanos estu- 
vieron trece afios, desde que llegaron al sitio del tunal, hasta que se dividieron en los dos barrios, que aora son Mexico, y Tlatilulco: Y en 

21 

122 — ._ SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Quien informé pues al Senor Arcobispo que hay Judios que afirman que el Messias vino luego que se destruyé 
el templo, y se perdié el ceptro, que son 1632 afios, era muy poco versado en lo que creen los Judios por lo que 
concierne al Messias, pues muy bien sabe la nacion que lo que quieren insinuar los Rabbinos, con representar al 
Messias nacido inmediatamente despues de la destruccion de Jerusalem, es indicar al pueblo que el tiempo de la 
redempcion est4 siempre prompto, no porque haya actual y realmente nacido, mas porque podia nacer. 

Y como havra Judio que crea que vino el Messias, creyendo él que su venida es para juntar su dispersion, para 
librarlos de la opresion y persecucion, para colocarlos en la cumbre de la felicidad y grandeza, reedificando su ciu- 
dad y restaurando su templo, uno y otro mas aventajado y sumptuoso de lo que era, no haviendo hasta hoy nada 
desto? Como se puede persuadir que haya Judio que crea 6 que afirme que vino el Messias ? 

Asentado pues este incontestable principio, queda desvanecido todo el resto del numero 14, y el principio del 

7 

numero 15. : 

15. Donde dize que los Rabbinos modernos afirman que el Messias ni vino ni vendra, porque Dios no lo per- 
mitié en las Hscripturas, no es articulo de fé para los Judios. 

Si el Predicador fuera mas versado en la creencia Judaica de lo que es, no dixera tal, pues el afirmar que la ve- 
nida del Messias no es articulo de fé, es opinion heretica en la nacion. No hay sin embargo que culpar 4 Francisco 
Antonio de Olivares que la seguia por falta de instruccion, viviendo en Portugal donde no se permite tener ni leer 
obras que informen de la Ley de los Judios; ademas, que una opinion particular ni haze dogma ni forma secta. El 

resto de este numero y del 16 se ventila en el 17. 

todo este tiempo no huvo noticia de ellos entre las gentes que vivian a estotra parte del Norte por tener creido que estaban presos y cautivos 
en la tierra de los Culhuas. Pero como los humos se divisaban, y algunos ruidos que debian de oir vinieron a conocimiento, de que en medio 
de estas aguas avia algunas gentes pobladas, aunque deseaban saber quienes fuesen, no se atrevian por respeto de estar en medio de las aguas 
(que entonces era esta laguna dulce mui honda) y por no atreverse a entrar en ella, por no saber modo de poder salir. Pero vinieron 4 entender 
que eran los Mexicanos los que aqui se avian rancheado y hecho su poblacion; y aunque muchas veces quisieron hacerles guerra, no osaban 
por la racon dicha. 

Cuentase, que el olor del pescado que comian los Mexicanos llegaba a las narices de las gentes comarcanas, y que embidiosos de ello, los 
quisieron desposeer del lugar, y que nunca se atrevieron, temiendo el valor Mexicano, y recelando perecer en las aguas, que eran hondas, y 
mui Ilenas de carrigos, y espafiasias; y que deseando comer de aquella comida y manjar que ellos no alcancaban, y no pudiendo por las diffi- 
cultades que se les ofrecian, vinoles un grande antojo, del qual antojo se hincharon las gargantas de todos los antojadigos, y murieron muchos 
de ellos. Esto dicho pase por cuento; pero si huviere quien quisiere creerlo por verdad, podra fundatse en esta ragon, que el Demonio que 
hacia favor 4 los Mexicanos usase de esta astucia, para poder con ella atraer a los otros idolatras que lo supiesen 4 maiores cegueras, y mas 
aventajados y diabolicos servicios suyos; porque pudo fingir aquel olor, 6 tomar algun pescado, y ponerlo invisiblemente en Jas narices de los 
que lo olian, y que de esto pudiese nacer naturalmente aquella enfermedad de garganta; y siendo la hinchagon de pujamiento de sangre, y no 
haciendole remedio ninguno (por no ser conocido el mal) muriesen de ello los que murieron. A esto ayuda, decir San Agustin, en el lugar arriba 
citado, que enojado Neptuno del agravio que le avian hecho los Athenienses, en no ayerlo recibido y honrado su nombre, dandolo a su ciudad, 
sac0 las aguas del mar de sus limites y cerco, y las derramé por sus campos y dehesas, y las destruid todas. Y dice luego, que esto no le 
es dificultoso al Demonio: pues si el mar (del qual dice el santo Rei David en el Psalmo, que le ha puesto Dios termino y cerco para que no 
pase punto adelante) salio tanto, que se derram6 por las tierras Athenienses, y hico tanto dafio en ellas, y esto por orden del Demonio: qué 
mucho, que en esta ocasion hiciese este engafio entre estos idolatras, sacando el olor del pescado, tan afuera de las aguas que Ilegd a las 
narices de los comarcanos? Porque si le concedemos el poder de sacar las aguas de sus quicios, (como el Glorioso Doctor San Agustin se lo 
concede) tambien hemos de conceder esto ; porque la misma fuerga es menester para lo uno que para lo otro; y el Sefior, que le did libertad para 
el un caso, se la daria para el otro: y esto por la manera y racon que ordenase y pluguiese a su Eterna y Secretisima Providencia y Sabiduria, 
que muchas cosas que sabemos, y no alcancamos su secreto, no es porque no es hacedero, sino porque como no lo sabemos todo, nos espantan sus 
efectos, y solo nos queda lugar y licencia de admirarnos de ellos. 

Puestos estos Mexicanos, en este lugar dicho, hicieron luego un altar 4 su Dios Huitzilopuchtli (como lo tenian de costumbre en todas las 
mansiones y paradas que hacian, en especial en esta parte, donde ya sabian que avian de tener su permanencia, y estar mui de asiento). Pero 
como gente pobre y descarriada, no les leg el posible adonde el deseo; y asi les sucedio, que el altar no fuese con aquel adorno, magestad, 
y grandeca, que ellos quisieran; pero formaronlo pobremente, segun pudieron; y colocado y puesto en él su diabolico idolo, festejaronlo con 
las solemnidades que acostumbraban ; y sucedid, que saliendo 4 caca un Mexicano, Hamado Xomimitl, en busca de algun animal irracional, que 
poder traer para ofrecer 4 su Dios, se encontro en el camino con un Culhua, llamado Tlacochichil, y rifiendo los dos, (porque eran mortales ene- 
migos, como ya hemos dicho, los de Culhuacan, y los de Mexico) vencid el Mexicano al dicho Culhua, y maniatandolo, lo trajo vivo con mucho 
contento, y le presentd a los demas que estaban en su pueblo; y acordandose todos de la burla que su Rei Culhua les avia hecho, quando le 
pidieron reliquias para su altar, en el barrio de Contitlan, les avia dado aquellas quatro cosas sucias y asquerosas, embueltas en un pafio, (como 
ya dejamos dicho) tomaron de esto ocasion para matar @ este cautivo, y poner su coragon, enmedio del altar-de su idolo, para que las reliquias, 
que usaban poner en ellos, fuesen las mas estimadas de la vida, que es el coragon, el qual es el primero que vive en el cuerpo humano, (como 
dice el filosofo) y el ultimo que muere. Hecho asi, quedaron todos mui contentos de vér el buen anuncio, y agiiero con que comengaban a fundar 
su ciudad, hechando en sus cimientos coragones de hombres vencidos, y vengandose juntamente de la que les hicieron en la burla dicha del 
altar.” 

We have inserted the above chapter at full length, because it records a variety of curious facts. ‘The corruption of ancient traditions, through 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 123 

§ Il. 

17. Isaias, cap. ix. ver. 5. “ Et vocabitur nomen ejus,” &c. 

Para que el Lector comprehenda el estado de la qiiestion, me parece no solo conviene, digo conveniente, mas 
aun necesario poner el verso de la controversia en Latin y Romance ; y despues explicar en ambos los modos, 
para que pueda el discreto Lector juzgar qual de las dos explicaciones es mas coherente y consistente con la letra 
y con la razon. El Latin del Predicador dize : ‘Infans natus est nobis, et filius datus est nobis, et erit principatus 
super humerum ejus : et vocabitur nomen ejus Admirabilis, Consiliarius, Deus Fortis, Pater Sempiternus, vel Pater 
Sempiternitatis, Princeps Pax, ad multiplicandum principdtum, et pacis non erit finis: super solium David et 
super regnum ejus sedebit ut confirmet illud, et corroboret in judicio et justitia, 4 modo et usque in sempiter- 
num.” 

Esta translacion difiere del texto Hebraico, y parece que el Sefior Predicador se olvidé de lo que prometié en el 
principio, de que los textos que acotase serian conforme al Hebraico nuestro no conforme 4 la Vulgata, digo 4 su 
Vulgata, pero como el Predicador no tenia el menor rezelo de que nadie le contradixese, pasose por alto ese texto, 
6 para mejor dezir, como sin esa adulteracion en el verso no tuviera cavimiento la controversia, era preciso abonar 
la Vulgata para poder formar la controversia. 

Primero. En el verbo “vocabitur,” que él lo pone en futuro pasivo, y segun eso se deve leer en el texto Hebraico 
veicare, que quiere dezir, y “sera llamado,” quando en el texto Hebraico se lee vaicré, esto es “vocavit,” que es el 
preterito del modo activo; y asi se deve transladar, “ y llamé.” 

Segundo. El pone todos los atributos en nominativo, aplicandolos todos al Messias, por donde infiere que el 
Messias es Dios, pues lo llama “ Dios Fuerte, Padre de la Eternidad.” 

Tercero, Difiere en el ultimo atributo, haziendo en las dos dicciones de que consta dos nominativos, leyendo 
“ Princeps Pax,” quando en el Hebraico la diccion “Principe” es el acusativo paciente del verbo “vocayit;”.y la diccion 
“ Pax,” esté en genitivo “ Principem Pacis,” que quiere dezir “Principe de la Paz,” y no dos atributos como haze el 
Predicador. Consta esto del Hehraico en el queselee Sar Salom, que quiere dezir “ Principe de Paz;” y el nombre 
Sar esti puntado con (-) Patah, que lleva el genitivo, quando si fuera atributo por si, devia estar puntado @) 
Gamez. No puedo pues comprehender como el Predicador mantiene con tanta confianza y desahogo la alegacion 
de este verso, afirmando ser, “‘conforme ao vosso texto Hebraico.” 

the interpretation ad libitum of the Mexican paintings, is no less conspicuous in what is related at its commencement of the coloured waters, than 
the diligence of Torquemada in noticing the relations, which he even believed to be fabulous, of those who were his contemporaries or lived in the 
preceding age; little doubt can be entertained but that the fiction of the coloured waters was invented by some monk, into whose hands had 
fallen a painting of the city of Mexico founded in a Saint Andrew’s cross, the arms and sides of which were, as is not unfrequently the case in 
the crosses represented in Mexican paintings, of different colours, and that this furnished occasion for a miraculous narration. ‘The remarks which 
follow respecting the antiquity of the custom of choosing an ominous site for cities are deserving of attention, although Saint Augustine has shown 
himself not a little credulous in the story which he has told, of the votes of the Athenian women in favour of Minerva outnumbering those of the 
men in favour of Neptune by one; but when do the early Fathers ever neglect an occasion of turning the manners of the Greeks and Romans and 
their mythology into ridicule? The latter part of the chapter, which treats of the first arrival of the Mexicans in the island of the lake of Mexico, 
in which they afterwards founded their city, and of their concealing themselves there for thirteen years, their retreat remaining all that time undis- 
covered by the Indian tribes who dwelt in the neighbourhood, is very curious, because it would argue that the ancestors of the Mexicans were 
strangers and refugees, or such a description of persons as a band of shipwrecked men fighting their way through savage tribes would be likely to 
be. That they were more civilized than the surrounding Indian tribes, is evident from their knowing how to construct boats and to catch fish; and 
that they were of a very different religion from them, may be guessed from the insulting present of a dead bird which the king of Culhuacan sent 
to them on their demanding from him some offering for their altar, which was probably in derision of the god Huitzilopuchtli, who in the similitude 
of a bird spoke from the bush to Mexi and Tecpatzin. It deserves to be noticed that Acosta and Torquemada both liken the servitude of the 
Mexicans under Coxcox, the king of Culhuacan, to that of the bondage of the children of Israel in Egypt; and it would also appear that the 

above-mentioned king, like Pharaoh, consented rather through fear (as the Mexican annals assert) than any generous motive, to their departure 
from his state. If the ancestors of the Mexicans were Jews, it may easily be imagined that a fanatical enthusiasm once having taken possession 
of their minds, they might have felt disposed to react the part of the children of Israel under Moses towards the king of Culhuacan and his subjects ; 
and on this supposition the sacrifice of the Culhuacan by Xomimitl would closely resemble the murder of the Egyptian by Moses, as recorded in 
the second chapter of Exodus. As regards the story of the Mexicans placing a human heart in the centre of their altar as a relie, it is analogous 
to the account given by Bernal Diaz of what took place at the first dedication of the greater temple of Mexico; but it is very singular that the 
Mexicans, like the primitive Christians, should have founded altars and temples over the remains of martyred or sacrificed persons. 

124 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

© We. 

24. Aqui suelta la rienda 4 la censura contra R. Abenezra, y contra R. Salomon porque explican esta prophecia 
del cap. ix. de Isaias diziendo que el texto habla del Rey Ezechias. El primero dize que hallandose convencido por 
el texto, que el Messias era Dios, y rezelando que lo echasen de la sinagoga dixo que hablaba del Rey Ezechias y 
no del Messias. Segun estas aserciones del Predicador, Abenezra creia que el Messias deve ser Dios; siendo asi 
pues, por qué rezelava que lo echasen de la sinagoga? Renunciara la Ley Judaica, y pasarase 4 la Ley Christiana, 
donde huviera sido muy bien recebido, agazajado, festejado, y aplaudido, siendo insigne Gramatico, celebre Astro- 
nomo, y excelente Comentador Literalista, nada inclinado 4 lo Alegorico, como se vé en el Comento que hizo 
sobre toda la Biblia. 

Deme licencia el Reverendo Padre Predicador de preguntarle, por que via alean¢é su Paternidad 4 saber que R. 
Abenezra quedava convencido que el Messias devia de ser Dios? Que lo supiese del mismo Rabbino no puede ser, 
porque son mas de 500 afos que murié. No puede dezir que el Rabbino revelase ese secreto, porque 4 quien lo 
revelaria? A] Judio no, por las consequencias que rezelava; al Christiano no, porque fuera gran desdoro para un 
hombre tan sabio haver profesado una religion que no podia justificar, y en la que no se podia salvar. No se puede 
imaginar por que via penetré el Predicador el pensamiento deste famoso Rabbino. 

Es preciso que el Judio que sabe la verdad, y que reconoce que la intencion del Seftor Predicador no fue mas 
que sorprender 4 aquellos miserables que salian en el auto con ficciones, se regozije en su coragon al ver 4 quantas 
artes é invenciones son obligados 4 recurrir para mantener su systema, pero no es mucho, porque estava el Predi- 

cador empefado aquel dia, y era preciso salir del empefio 4 todo precio. 

E Rabbi Salamao, que para vos enganar foy entre todos os Judeos 0 vosso Salamao, &c. 

Esta horrible calumnia fue forjada en la oficina de Nicolao de Lira, Neophito Normando, por hallarse embara- 
cado con el “‘vocavit nomen ejus” del cap. 9 de Isaias. Admirome mucho como el Sefior Arcobispo, Catolico Apos- 
tolico Romano, se sirve desta calumnia, quando en la suprema Inquizicion de Roma no se admite acusacion de 
Neophito contra Judio. 

Admirome pues digo, que el Sefior Argobispo admita esta ridicula calumnia, quando Agustino, uno de los prin- 
cipales doctores de la Iglesia, afirma ser increible que los Judios hayan viciado los libros sagrados ; primero, porque 
parece imposible que conviniesen todos en tan mal proposito, estando esparcidos por todas las partes del mundo, 
sin hallarse entre ellos quien se opusiese 4 tan execrable enormidad y detestable sacrilegio, como fuera adulterar las 
cosas sacras. Ademas, que hallandose todos los codices Hebraicos, antiguos y modernos, conformes en todo y por 
todo, no obstante haverse escrito en varios tiempos y remotas regiones, indica una inviolable y exacta sinceridad. 

Ni tampoco se deve presumir (sigue el mismo Agustino) que quiziese un pueblo tan numeroso, que no tiene en 
su captividad otro bien que la posesion de los sagrados libros, falsificarlos, por satisfazer 4 la malevolencia y 
rencor que puede haver en ellos contra una nacion 6 pueblo: por donde concluye en el lib. xv. cap. 13, “ De Civi- 
tate Dei” que hallandose dos lugares diferentes, uno en el texto Hebraico, y otro en el Griego, se deve dar mayor 
credito al Hebraico, pudiendose creer que algun copiador Griego falsificé el Hebraico en la translacion. 

Dixe ridicula calumnia, y dixe bien, siendo como tal juzgada y reputada en todo el pueblo de Israel, quando ven 
que sien el Libro del Pentatheuco que se lee en cada dia de Sabado en la sinagoga se hallara una letra mas 6 
menos, aunque no sea mas que expletiva, y que no altere el sentido de la diccion 6 del verbo, se dexa aquel Penta- 
theuco y se saca otro. 

Mas adelante pasa-la exactitud Judaica en lo que toca 4 la palabra de Dios; que si acaso sucede que el Lector 
del Pentatheuco alterase por ignorancia 6 por descuido alguna palabra 6 accento que mudase el sentido, deve volver 
4 leer todo el verso; y si no cayé en el yerro, los que oyeron lo advierten y le hazen volver 4 leer como deve. Si 
esto pues se practica en la sinagoga por lo general de la nacion, por un yerro pequefio escrito 6 pronunciado, qué 
haria si supiese 6 presumiese que un Rabbino de los mas celebres de Israel, como fué Rabbi Salomon, huviese 
viciado el texto de Isaias ? | 

Pero si nuestro excelentisimo Rabbi Salomon declara esa prophecia por Ezechias (como real y verdaderamente 
es, y puede ver el que mirare las prophecias para entenderlas, no para torcerlas como adelante se explicara) que 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 1925 

necesidad tenia de viciar ni adulterar el texto? Quando dado que estuviese, como pretende el Predicador y la 
Vulgata, “vocabitur” (vetcare), no por eso se saca de alli consequencia alguna en contra de su exposicion, y podia 
dexar el “vocabitur” sin exponerse 4 la censura de Judios y Christianos. Haviendo pues R. Salomon declarado la 
prophecia por Ezechias, y dexado el (vaicra) “vocavit” como lo hallé, sacase por consequencia que R. Salomon ni 
necesitava viciar el texto, ni adulterarlo; y que Geronimo ti otro antes dél fué el que lo viciéd, por parecerle no se 
podia explicar la prophecia en preterito, y que con esa miserable enmienda dava un grande apoyo 4 su creencia. 
Pero sepa el Sefior Predicador que los Judios no necesitan de semejantes artes ni engaflos para apoyar su creencia, 
que siendo la misma palabra de Dios ella por si se mantiene y sustenta. Veanse todos los exemplares Hebraicos 
antiguos y modernos en todas las partes del mundo, y se hallara que no hay nada viciado, y que todos acuerdan y 
concordan en la verdad, lo que consta claramente al Judio que sabe que esto es asi; por donde reconoce que no se 
contentan con viciar y adulterar ellos el texto, sino que forjan una ridicula calumnia contra el mas fidedigno y exce- 
lente Expositor que huvo en el mundo, con razon estimado y venerado de toda la republica literaria por haver comen- 
tado toda la Biblia, 4 saber, el Pentatheuco, todos los Prophetas primeros y postreros, y todos los Agiographos, 
toda la Misna, y casi todo el Talmud que consta de 63 Tratados distribuidos en 12 tomos en folio, que contiene 
todo el Ceremonial, Moral y Judicial ; todo esto explicado con terminos adequados y proprios en un estilo laconico, 
inimitable, y peculiar 4 él, sin embargo claro é inteligible, tragado de modo que no se puede dexir por él 

“ Dum arctius esse volo obscurior fio.” 

Viendo pues digo que los vapores del enojo se ivan condensando en una opaca nube, cargado de un justo y 
fomentado sentimiento contra mi poco atento antagonista, resolvi reprimir los impetuosos impulsos de mi pro- 
vocada pasion, lisonjeandola con representarle que la fuerca de mis incontrastables pruevas y de mis irrefragables 
razones obligaran al Predicador 4 cantar la palinodia 4 favor del eruditisimo y doctisimo Rabbi Salomon, el qual 
fué un sapientisimo Salomon que ensefdé y explicéd, no que engafid (como falsamente afirma el Predicador) 4 todas 
las naciones literarias de la Europa viciando la Ley Escrita y Oral que creen y observan los Judios en su dispersion. 

Ratifica el Predicador su hypothesis, 6 para mejor dezir pretende ratificarla, con la Paraphrasis Caldaica del 
gran sabio Jonathan, hijo de Huziel, del precitado verso de Isaias trasladandolo como sigue: “ Et vocabitur nomen 
ejus Min Kodam, Deus fortis, permanens in secula seculorum, Messias :” omitiendo el fin del verso que dize: “In 
cujus diebus multiplicabitur Pax.” 

Dos reparos me ocurren; uno, por que no traduxo la diccion Min Kodam? otro, por que disimulé el fin del 
verso? En la respuesta destas dos qiiestiones se manifiesta quien fue el que vicid el verso, y quien fue el que in- 
tenté engafiar al pueblo. Los indicios son contra el Predicador, del qual, por lo que tengo notado atras, consta que 
suele alterar, reformar 6 mutilar el texto, dando 4 entender al auditorio que lo traduce pura y sinceramente del He- 
braico diziendo: “Isaias assim o descreve no capitulo nono dos seus Vaticinios, conforme ao vosso texto Hebraico : 
‘ Et vocabitur nomen ejus Admirabilis ...... Princeps Pacis.’” 

Valgame Dios! no censura arriba el Predicador 4 Rabbi Salomon diziendo que el verbo que estava en pasivo 
“vocabitur” y sera llamado, lo havia mudado el mismo Rabbi Salomon en activo “vocavit” y llamé, para que los 
primeros atributos fuesen nominativos agentes, y quedase el ultimo que es el Principe de Pax en acusativo paciente ? 
Aqui vemos el verso mudado, representado y traducido no conforme al Hebraico, mas conforme 4 la idea del Predi- 
cador. Lo mismo haze en la Paraphrasis Caldaica de Jonathan hijo de Huziel, donde trae el Min Kodam sin tra- 
ducirlo, y omite el fin del verso que dize: “In cujus diebus multiplicabitur Pax.” 

El verdadero texto pues de Jonathan hijo de Huziel dize como se lee aqui: “Et vocabitur nomen ejus a facie, 
vel ab Admirabili, Consiliario, Deo Potente, Patre Aiternitatis, Principe Pacis.” Y sera llamado su nombre de 
aquel, 6 por aquel que es Admirable, Consejero, Dios Potente, Padre de la Kternidad, Principe de la Paz, Messias, 
en cuyos dias se multiplicara la Paz. 

Los primeros quatro atributos son divinos, el ultimo humano que es paciente, que en el Hebraico esta en acusa- 
tivo, requerido del “vocavit” activo ; y en el Caldaico en nominativo regido por el verbo pasivo “vocabitur.” El 
Min Kodam es una preposicion ablativa la cual fue omitida por el Predicador porque no le convenia, no porque 
ignorase su interpretacion, pues en el cap. vil. v.11. del mismo Isaias dize el Propheta al Rey Achaz “ Pete tibi 
signum a facie Domini Dei tui.” Asi traduce Montano estas palabras que son del mismo Jonathan ‘ Pide sefial del 
Sefior tu Dios.’ 

2K 

126 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Ahora descubriremos la razon por que el Predicador omitié el Min Kodam sin traducirlo; la razon es porque si 
lo huviera traducido, el verso diria, “ Et vocabitur nomen ejus a facie Admirabilis, Consiliarii, Dei Potentis, Patris 
ARternitatis, Principis Pacis, Messias, in cujus diebus multiplicabitur Pax.” Que quiere dezir, ‘Y ser4 Mamado su 
nombre por el Admirable, por el Consejero, por el Dios Potente, por el Padre de la’ Eternidad, por el Principe, por 
la Paz, por el Messias, en cuyos dias se multiplicara la Paz. Segun esta traduccion todos los atributos son del 
Nifio, que es pasiente, y que supone ser Messias ;' pero queda todavia por saber quien es'el agente, quien es el que 
lama; quando poniendo el J&m Kodam 6 sea el ablativo, los primeros quatro atributos son de Dios que es el agente, 
que es el que llama, quedando el ultimo para el Nifio que es el pasiente, que es el llamado. 

De lo dicho, pues, quedara persuadido el discreto y desapasionado Lector, que el Predicador tiene alterados los 
textos, tanto del Hebraico como del Caldaico, colocando las palabras de forma que ee que dizen que el Messias 
ha de ser Dios y Hombre. 

Pero digame el Sefor Predicador, para que tomé el trabajo de mutilar y torcer versos tan reconditos, y por fin 
despues de todo concedido, no es mas que una alegoria mal fundada, pues se opone al primer articulo de la religion? 
Quanto mejor fuera y aun mas facil el buscar este primer articulo (fundamento principal de Ja religion Judaica) y 
darles 4 entender 4 esos desdichados presos por la tirania de la Inquizicion, que el verso que dize ‘ Oye Israel al 
Seftor tu Dios, El Seftor es Uno,’ en el original estava Tres y Uno, y que los Judios lo falsificaron y lo dexaron en 
Uno; que Rabbi Salomon 6 Abenezra 6 algun otro Rabbino de los que vinieron 4 su noticia, fue el que lo alteré 
primero ; que los primeros Judios asi lo creian, pero que los modernos, por odio que profesavan 4 los Christianos, 
adulteraron el texto : y aqui se podia su Ilustrisima dilatar, explayando su rethorica con aquel estilo regatero tan 
peculiar 4 él, que yo le prometo que huyiera encontrado con tanto aplauso y aprovacion como el que tuvo entonces, 
y que no tenia que rezelar la contradiccion ni de Christianos ni de Judios: del Christiano no, porque no le con- 
venia; de los Judios no, porque eran ignorantes y no sabian ; y quando no lo fuesen y pudiesen contradecirle, bien 
cierto estava el Senor Predicador que nadie tendria el atrevimiento de levantar los ojos, quanto mas la voz; antes 
estoy cierto que baxarian las cayezas para aprovar quanto dixese. El caso es que no han dado en esta mina, en 
dando en ella la han de poner por obra. 

Valgame Dios! y qué cosa tan ridicula a los ojos de las desapasionadas naciones parece, el que se ponga un 
hombre eminente en su profesion, de alto grado en la Prelacia 4 disputar con personas que no le pueden responder, 
a alegarles con libros que no les es permitido leerlos, y que con todo eso le es preciso torcer y mutilar los pasos de 
la Sagrada Escriptura para poder provar lo que pretende persuadir ! 

Apelo 4 los hombres doctos y desapasionados que:viven en tierras donde no es preciso circunscrivir sus ideas‘4 
la voluntad de quatro ignorantes Inquizidores, si no era mas adequado para una farsa que para un sermon; si no 
era mas proprio para un teatro que para un pulpito? Nos llaman ciegos porque no queremos someter nuestra 
razon 4 una alegoria mal fundada? porque no cedemos el primer articulo de nuestra Religion 4 sus comentos tor- 
cidos y mutilados? ‘Y qué se llamardn ellos que adulteran los sagrados textos, que toman parte de un capitulo, 
discurso, proposito 6 verso sin hazer mencion de la otra parte que declara el’ genuimo sentido para poder aplicar 
aquel giron 4 donde quieren? Y sobre esto cantan la victoria como si nos huvieran actualmente vencido. Le 
parece al Sefior Predicador que eso convence 4 algun Judio? Pues se engafia si tal cree, antes por la contra, forti- 
fica su creencia; y en vez de hazer como haze la Inquizicion, que prohibe los libros que discurren en contra su 
Religion, nosotros publicamos semejantes libros que contra nos se imprimen, y los'explicamos 4 nuestros hijos para 
que reconozcan la realidad de nuestras razones y la falacia de las suyas, para que se fortifiquen en la verdadera 
creencia, y que reconozcan 4 quantas artes es necesario que apelen los que quieren torcer la verdad, ya ‘Gueniies 
artificios y mahas estan obligados 4 recurrir, para mantener su opinion. 

Y para que vea el desapasionado Lector la verdad de la alegada prophecia de Isaias, aqui expongo él sentido 
genuino y literal della, sin torcer ni alegorizar, conforme la explican los mas famosos y authenticos Literalistas. 

Empieza el cap. vii. Havian Retzin Rey de Aram, y Pekach Rey de Israel sitiado la Santa Ciudad de Jerusalem, 
pero por la gallarda resistencia de los ciudadanos sitiados, les fue fuerza levantar el sitio; no obstante llevaron 
consigo grande botin y cantidad de prisioneros. Hizieron los Reyes confederados nueva alianca, proponiendo de 
nuevo el sitio con mayor pujanca de fuerzas y grande armacion de guerra, cuya confederacion puso en grande con- 
sternacion la Casa de David, temblando si venciesen, no pusiesen el ultimo periodo al Dominio y al Reyno; y no 
estava menos cobarde el pueblo que el Rey. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 197 

Manda Dios al Propheta Isaias que en compafiia de su hijo Scearjascub fuese 4 encontrar 4 Achaz, y le dixese 
de su parte que se sosegase, que alentase el abatido animo, y que recobrase los perdidos espiritus ; que no temiese 
de esos dos tizones de fuego, mas aptos 4 quemar y consumir 4 si mismos que 4 otros; que aunque ellos se propo- 
nian hazer una conquista general del Reyno para despues repartirlo entre ellos, les vaticinava que tal idea no tendria 
efecto ; mas que por la contra, Israel (es 4 saber los diez tribuz) concluido el termino de sesenta y cinco afos 
dexaria de ser Nacion, y quedaria totalmente esparcido y derramado; que en el interim, ni el uno ni el otro Rey 
dilatarian los terminos de sus dominios, quedando cada qual con lo que poseia. 

Manda Dios a Achaz que para que se asegurase de lo que predecia, pidiese una sefial 6 maravilla, 6 ya en lo alto 
del empireo, 6 bien en lo profundo de la tierra. Incredulo el Rey se excusa con el pretexto de la‘religion, de que 
no queria tentar 4 Dios, quando el verdadero motivo era la poca fe que dava 4 las palabras del Propheta. Quexan- 
dose pues este de su incredulidad dize que Dios (sin que ellos los de la familia Real lo pidiesen) daria una patente y 
manifiesta sefial para que se asegurase la Judea de la verdad desta prophecia, 4 saber; que la Moca estaba prefiada, 
que pariria un Hijo, el qual se llamaria Emmanuel; que antes que llegase 4 los afios de discrecion, los dos Reyes 
confederados serian totalmente exterminados. Pero que si la dureza y perversidad de ese incredulo Rey, en vez de 
penitente rendir gracias 4 Dios por tan notable deliberacion, le induxese 4 persistir pertinaz en sus iniquidades, le 
notificava, que irritada la divina Justicia al mayor grado, le obligara 4 castigarle con mayor rigor, haziendo que el 
formidable exercito del Rey de Assiria se apodere de todas las fortalezas y castillos de la Judea; dexando de tal 
forma desolada é inculta la tierra, tan falta y escasa de ganado, que el que Ilegare 4 pascer una ternera y dos ovejas, 
sera el que mas posea.’ Abundardn de leche por razon de que haviendo tanta escasidad de ganado, havra cantidad 
de yerba, pues donde antes havia mil vifias, agora sera un inculto campo, Ileno de espinos y cardos ; los montes de 
antes cultivados seran reducidos 4 pastos de ovejas y vacas por falta de quien los cultive. 

En el cap. viii. manda Dios al Propheta que tome un envoltorio, y tanto para confirmacion desta prophecia 
como para que se transfiera 4 los futuros escriva en él Maher-scalal-has¢-baz. Executa el Propheta la divina orden; 
toma dos testigos Uria y Zacharia; llegase 4 la Prophetisa, esta concibe y pare un hijo, y llamase por orden de Dios 
Maher-scalal hasc-baz ; significando, que antes que este Nifio llegare 4 saber llamar Padre y Madre, el Rey de 
Assiria venceria en batalla los dos Reyes confederados, y los captivaria llevando consigo los despojos de Damasco, 
y las riquezas de Someron. 

Pero como havia'en la Judea un partido que deseava venciesen Retsin y Pekach, y este se oponia al govierno de 
la familia Real, si no publica intrinsecamente, manda Dios al Propheta que les vaticine, que ya que ellos aborrecian 
el dulce y sosegado govierno de la Casa de David, que les traeria el formidable exercito del Rey de Assiria, el qual 
ocuparia toda la Judea hasta llegar 4 la Metropolis y cabeca del Reyno ; pero que no obstante, Dios asistiria 4 los 
buenos y los libraria de ese peligro. m MIE S9 

Vuelve el Propheta sobre el dicho asunto de los Reyes confederados, asegurando que todo su armamento no 
tendria efecto ; y asi, que por mas que diligenciasen, y que con summo trabajo alcancasen 4 juntar y amasar nume- 
rosos exercitos de diferentes naciones, no les serviria de provecho, por quanto su idea no vendria a efectuarse. 

Prosigue diziendo que Dios le amonesté no siguiese las veredas de aquellos que deseavan el govierno 6 estavan 
de la parte de los dos Reyes confederados; que exhortase 4 aquellos que defendian la verdadera causa 4 confiar solo 
en Dios, y 4 temer solo la divina Magestad que los protegia ; que cerrase y sellase esta prophecia entre los Doctos 
y Sabios hasta el tiempo de su cumplimiento. 

El Propheta dize: Aunque agora tiene Dios retirada 6 encubierta su providencia de nosotros, espero en su di- 
vina misericordia, y estoy confiado’en ella, que Ilegara el deseado tiempo en que se mostrara patente ; porque yo y 
mis nifios somos manifiestas sefiales de lo que ha de suceder 4 Israel; (4 saber Yesahya Salvacion de Dios ; S¢ear- 
jascub, Restauracion del resto, esto es, que el resto de Jehuda volveria 4 su pristino estado; Maher-scalal-hasg-baz, 
que de breve y en muy poco espacio de tiempo sucederia la presa y el despojo de los dos Reyes ; Emmanuel, que 
Dios estava con ellos.) Y asi quando vos induxeren 4 consultar los Idolos y Oraculos que solo hablan sin concierto 
ni acierto, respondedles que cada uno recurra 4 su Dios, y como tal vosotros quereis consultar los Prophetas y Pro- 
fesores de la santisima Ley. Esos Idolos y Oraculos responden 4 los que los consultan contra la verdad, y sin fun- 
damento ni realidad ; y quando el sequaz de esos Oraculos se ve aflicto y perseguido de su desventura, hambriento 
y sitibundo, miraacia los cielos, maldize su Dios por haverle engafiado en su vaticinio, 6 imputa su desgracia al 

mal govierno de su Rey ; y por fin, se ve en adelante perseguido y acosado de su desdicha, en grande aprieto, en 

128 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

tenebrosas y lobregas desgracias, sin luz de esperanga para salir dellas. Asi sucedio 4 los hijos de Zebulon y Neph- 
taly en su primer captiverio; y aun el postrero fue peor, quando fueron captivos al Poniente por Tiglath-Pileser, 
Rey de Assiria. 

En el Cap. ix. predize el Propheta que no sucederd lo mismo al Tribu de Jehuda, porque aunque se veria en la 
obscuridad del sitio, y en las tinieblas de la guerra que contra él moveria Sancherib, Rey de Assiria, tendria no ob- 
stante la luz de la salvacion, la claridad de la victoria que por el portentoso medio de su divina Providencia conse- 
guiria ; con lo qual se exaltaria la fama de la Nacion al summo grado de gloria y grandeza; que con indezible 
jubilo y contento alabarian y glorificarian al Kterno y Omnipotente Dios, en gracia de tan sefialada y portentosa 
victoria, con tantas muestras de alegria como suele regocijarse el labrador quando recoge su cegada, 6 como el 
soldado quando reparte la presa; que esta victoria no se conseguiria por vias naturales, y como sucede de ordinario 
con grandisimo estrago, riesgo y muerte de los vencedores; porque este summo y formidable exercito seria aniqui- 
lado y vencido por un efecto milagroso: que se pareceria esta victoria 4 la que consiguid Gedeon contra los Midia- 
nitas, con pocos soldados, sin muerte ni intervencion de los victoriosos ; pues sucederia milagrosamente por medio 
del Angel, el qual destruiria el exercito enemigo con tal impetu qual suele quemar el fuego en la materia combus- 
tible. Que esto sucederia por meritos de aquel Nifio (que ya havia nacido) en cuyos hombros el peso de la Monar- 
chia dignamente reposaria; cuyo nombre le seria impuesto por aquel que era Maravilloso Consejero, Dios Fuerte, 
Padre de la Eternidad, llamandole Principe de la Paz; (6 si quiere el Sefior Predicador) cuyo nombre le Ilamé Ma- 
ravilloso, Consejero, Valiente, Fuerte, Padre del Siglo, Principe de la Paz) ; que dilataria el Imperio, que gozaria 
una perpetua paz, con la qual se estableceria el ya vacilante trono de David, cuyo fundamento seria la Justicia y la 
limosna para siempre ; que el zelo del Seftor de los exercitos havia permitido que esto sucediese. Prosigue, que 
haviendo Dios castigado la Nacion Israelitica para que, penitentes, volviesen de sus pecados, los Someronitas y toda 
la Nacion con sobervia y arrogancia dirian (confiados en la alianga del Rey de Aram) que havian de volver 4 su pristino 
estado y aun mejor que antes; pero que Dios les mostraria el poco fundamento de su alianca, excitando los 
enemigos de Retzin contra él, y exaltandolos para que lo vencan en batalla; y que despues haria que los mismos 
Aramitas de una parte, y los Philisteos de la otra atacasen y venciesen 4 Israel con grandisimo estrago suyo, sin 
por eso aplacarse la divina ira. 

El nombre £/ en el Hebraico significa fuerte, y es atributo que indiferentemente se da 4 Dios, como se aplica/ 
a los hombres ; y quando se aplica 4 estos no significa Deidad, mas si Fortaleza, Grandeza, 6 Cargo de justicia ; 
como Ele Moab, Valientes 6 Principes de Moab; Netatija Elohim, El Parho Fedi, por Superior 4 Parho; Asher 
Yarshithun Elohim, lo que condenaron los Juezes. Con mucha propriedad pues se puede atribuir 4 Ezechias el 
titulo de H/ Guzdor, queriendo significar por él, que seria Valiente, Heroe, un Gran Capitan. Confirmase esto en 
ver que la Santa Escriptura le celebra de valeroso ; y esto de las palabras de Aisquiau, y toda su valentia, &c. 

El de 402: Had, que el Predicador traslada “ Patris A®ternitatis,” traslada B. Arias Montano en la Interlineal, 4 
la margen, “ Pater Seculi,” Padre del Siglo ; y es tan cierto que lo fué, que no hay mas que recurrir 4 las Sagradas 
Letras para quedar enterado dello. 

Despues que se separaron los diez Tribus de los de Jehuda y Benjamin, los pios y devotos. Reyes de Jehuda, 
como Assa, Jeosaphat, Jothan y otros, aunque solicitos procuraron restablecer el divino culto en su Reyno, abando- 
naron enteramente el de Israel, 6 ya por parecerles imposible el restablecerlo por la contumacia de sus Reyes, 6 por 
rezelo de que comunicando los Israelitas con los de Judea introduxesen en ella el infame culto de la idolatria. Pero 
el Padre del Siglo, el Padre Comun, tomando tanto cuidado de las distraidas ovejas que no estavan 4 su cargo como 
de las que pascian en su aprisco, escrivié cartas, despaché correos, envid proprios por todas las ciudades y lugares 
de Israel exhortando 4 los Israelitas 4 que volviesen 4 adorar el verdadero Dios, y dexasen los malditos Becerros; y 
con su maravilloso consejo se truxo 4 perfeccion esta grande obra, con que reconcilio 4 los distraidos Judios al 
verdadero culto. Consta esto del Libro ii. Paralip. cap. xxx. v. 1. 

Envié tambien Ezechias por todo Israel y Judea, y escrivié cartas 4 Ephraim y Manasse que viniesen 4 Jerusalem 
4 la casa de Ya para celebrar la Pascua 4 Ya Dios de Israel; y por aquel consejo maravilloso de trasladar la Pascua al 
mes segundo, como dize: ‘Y el Rey tomé consejo con sus Principes y con toda la Congregacion en Jerusalem para 
hazer la Pascua en el mes segundo, II Cron. cap. xxx. v. 2. dio lugar que todos juntos la celebrasen; y de que 
vinieron muchos de los Israelitas consta del mismo cap. xxx. y. 11. muchos varones de Asser, Manasse y Zabulon 
se humillaron y vinieron a Jerusalem. ‘Y en v. 18. se lee.’ Porque grande multitud de pueblo de Ephrain, y Ma- 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 129 

nasse, Isachar y Zabulon no se havian purificado, y comieron la Pascua no conforme 4 lo que era escrito, Ezechias 
oré por ellos diciendo: “-A’, que es bueno, sea propicio 4 todo aquel que ha apercebido su coragon para buscar 4 
Dios.” ease pues si dignamente le competen los titulos de Padre del Siglo, de Maravilloso Consejero, al que tanto 
cuidado tuvo de que se reconciliasen con Dios. 

Que fuese el Principe 6 Arbitro de la Paz no hay duda; pues, quien seria aquel que en aquel siglo quiziese 
oponerse al todopoderoso Dios, que con tantos portentos se havia declarado protector de Ezechias? Pues ya le 
enviava un Angel por general de sus armadas ; ya un Propheta por medico de sus enfermedades, mandando retroce- 
der el Sol de su diario curso para confirmar con ese portento sus vaticinios ; de que resulté que Berodac-Baladan 
Rey de Babilonia le mandase embaxadores para informarse del milagro, y para procurar su alianga. 

De estos tres capitulos literalmente transladados y aplicados 4 las verdaderas personas de quienes tratan, consta 
que la sefial que did el Propheta 4 Achaz fue de que la Moza havia concebido ; que pariria un hijo, el qual se Ila- 
maria Emmanuel. El suceso correspondié al vaticinio ; se llegd el Propheta 4 la Moza que era su muger; tomd 
testigos 4 Uria y Zacharia; parié la Moza un hijo; Ilamose Emmanuel; y antes que llegase 4 los aftos de discrecion, 
se rompieron los designios de los dos Reyes confederados. Este es pues el sentido literal de esta prophecia, y el 
querer disputar contra esto, es oponerse 4 la verdad; y 4 los ojos de los que estudian la Santa Escriptura sin pasion 
ni prejuicio de la educacion, es darse por vencido y es mostrar la flaqueza de su argumento; pues este milagro 6 
esta sefial se le did 4 Achaz y 4 la casa de David para que se asegurasen de que los Reyes de Samaria y Aram no 
conseguirian su intento, y que quedarian frustrados sus intentos y designios. Como pues se les daria una sefial 
que havia de suceder en cerca de 700 aftos despues dellos, para asegurarles de lo que havia de pasar de alli a dos 6 
tres afios? Y como podia dezir el Propheta “ Y sucederd que antes que sepa el Nifio (de aqui 4 700 afios encirca) 
distinguit del bien el mal, la tierra que tu aborreces ser4 dexada de sus dos Reyes.” No son estos dos Reyes 
Retzin Rey de Aram, y Pekach Rey de Israel? No significa que ambos serian deshechos y vencidos en batalla, y 
que perderian sus reynos? Como pues para asegurarles de lo que havia de pasar en su vida, les da una sefal que 
ha de suceder de alli 4 700 afios, y esto 4 un Rey incredulo é idolatra como Achaz? No seria eso exponer al Pro- 
pheta Isaias (cap. vii. ver. 16.) 4 la derision del Rey y su corte? Si por cierto, y esto no lo ignoran los muy doctos 
de los Christianos que estudian esta prophecia desapasionadamente, pues acuerdan ser el que se ha expuesto, verda- 
dero, literal y genuino sentido, y como tal lo confiesan Eusebio, Basilio, Geronimo, Cirilo, y Theodoreto entre los 
antiguos; y pocos de los doctos modernos hay que no acuerden en lo mismo, y aun confiesen que el sentido ale- 
gorico no es solo aplicable 4 Christo, mas que tambien se pudiera adaptar 4 qualquiera otro sin torcer ni forcar 
mucho el sentido ; por donde consta que estos Doctores, digo doctos y sabios varones, conocen ser forcoso el _ 
sentido alegorico, y como tal no ser suficiente para obligar 4 los Judios 4 admitirlo. Van de acuerdo que la pro- 
phecia literalmente explicada es clara y manifiesta, sin embaraco ni obscuridad alguna ; que se cumplié pocos afios 
despues, como lo vaticiné el Propheta, al pie de la letra. No es asi quando ellos mismos quieren aplicarla 4 Christo 
por un sentido alegorico, porque esta obscura, embaracada, y aun impropria; y es necesario recurrir 4 la corrupcion 
de la Vulgata para poderla aplicar, y ni con todo eso basta. Pareceme que he puesto esta prophecia 4 buena luz, 
para que reconozcan los de mi nacion (que es el fin y escopo de esta Respuesta) la poca razon que acompafia al 
Padre Predicador de cantar la victoria sobre este paso; y que solo lo podia hazer entre los que 6 la ignorancia no 
les dexava discernir la verdad, 4 el miedo del castigo les impedia el publicarla. 

Alega el Predicador para confirmar su hypothesis con el cap. xxiii. y el xxxiii. de Jeremias ; trae los versos 5 y 6 
del xxiii y los explica, aplicandolos al Messias, segun sus principios, diziendo que el Propheta dize que vendra un 
Rey Justo, &c.: y que 4 este Rey Ilamaran “Deus Justus noster ;” pero no hace mencion del cap. xxxili. bas- 
tandole dezir implicitamente que de los versos destos dos capitulos consta patentemente que el Messias ha de ser 
Dios y hombre. 

Que omitiese los versos 15 y 16 del cap. xxxiii. no me admira, porque asi hizo tambien en el § I. num. 6, que 
alega con el cap. xlii. de Isaias donde Dios amenaza & su pueblo con castigos y estragos, y omite el 43 inmediata- 
mente siguiente, donde le anima y conforta con amor y carifio, Examinemos pues estos dos versos, que por esa via 
penetraremos la verdadera causa desa omision. Dizen pues, ver. 16. “ In diebus illis salvabitur Juda, et Jerusalem 
habitabit confidenter, et hoc est nomen, vocabunt eum Dominus Justus noster.” 

No sé 4 quien refiere este “eum” masculino, quando el Hebraico dice /a que es por nombre femenino, y no hay 
otro 4 quien refiera sino 4 la ciudad de Jerusalem ; y siendo asi, como no hay duda, dize el verso que se llamara 

21L 

130 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Jerusalem, Dios es nuestra Justedad 6 Justicia; este mismo nombre se aplica al Messias en el cap. xxii; y dize 
el Predicador que en virtud de llamarse con ese nombre, es Dios y hombre. Digo yo tambien, que pues que Jeru- 
salem tiene el mismo nombre, Jerusalem es Dios y ciudad. Lo mismo digo del altar eregido por el Patriarca 
Jacob en Sehen. Gen. cap. xxxiii. ver.20. Lo mismo del edificado por Moyses por la victoria conseguida contra 
Amalek, que le llamo con el nombre quadriliteral ‘‘ Dios es mi Pendon,” Exod. cap. xvii. ver. 15. Lo mismo del 
altar de Gedeon que le Ilamé “ Dios es Paz,” Juezes, cap. vi. ver: 24. Lo mismo finalmente de Jerusalem, que dize el 
Propheta Ezechiel en el ultimo verso de su Libro, que Jerusalem se ha de llamar “ Dios esté alli.” 

Para concluir pues con este punto, sepa el Reverendo Padre Predicador que cada noche de Sabado y fiesta 
solemne se canta en la sinagoga aquel himno que él llama motete, y que verdaderamente es una confesion de los 
articulos de la ley que profesan los Judios. Entre estos el tercero es dezir: Que Dios no tiene semejanca de 
cuerpo, y por consequencia no es hombre. Este articulo se deduce de diversas partes de la Biblia. Moyses dize 
hablando con el pueblo: “Y hablé Dios 4 vos dentro del fuego ; vos palabras viades, mas semejanga no viades, sino 
es que la voz.” Deut. iv. ver. 12. Y mas dize: “ Y vos guardareis mucho por vuestras almas, que no visteis alzuna 
semejanga en el dia que vos hablé Dios en Horeb dentro del fuego.” Ibid. v. 15. Y prosigue encargando con 
mucha eficacia que no hagan figura de ningun genero de criatura. Balaam afirma, aunque Gentil, “Dios no es hom- 
bre para que mienta, ni hijo de hombre que se arrepienta.” ‘Non est homo Deus ut mentiatur, et filius hominis ut 
peeniteat eum.” Num. xxiii. ver.19. El santo Propheta Samuel dize al Rey Saul: “Tambien la Fortaleza de Israel 
ni mentira, ni se arrepentira ; porque no es hombre para arrepentirse.” “Et etiam Fortitudo Israelis non mentietur, 
nec peenitudine ducetur.” 1 Sam. cap. xv. ver. 29. zechiel dize 4 Hiram Rey de Tiro, que se jactava de ser Dios: 
“Por ventura. te atreverds 4 dezir delante de tu matador, Yo soy Dios? Entonces conocerds que eres hombre y no 
Dios en poder de tu homicida.” “ Nunquid dicendo Deus sum coram interfectore tuo? Tu autem homo es et non 
Deus in manu interfectoris tui.” Ezechiel xxviii. ver.9. YY finalmente dize Dios por boca de su Propheta: “No haré 
segun la ira de mi furor, no volveré 4 hacer dailo 4 Ephraim, porque soy Dios y no hombre.” “Non faciam secun- 
dum iram furoris mei, non revertar ad disperdendum Ephraim, quoniam Deus sum et non vir.” Oseas xi. ver. 9. 

Estas son las columnas donde se arrima ese importantisimo articulo de la incorporeidad de Dios, el qual si se 
negase por algun Judio, no se consideraria como herege, mas como renegado, perdiendo en la nacion el nombre y 
concepto de Judio. Considere pues si la nacion dexara de creer un articulo tan claro y reiterado por tantos Pro- 
phetas para seguir la explicacion contestada del Padre Predicador. Con esto queda vindicado el honor del sapien- 
tisimo Rabbi Salomon, y purgado de la execrable calumnia de haver falsificado las palabras de los Prophetas, pro- 
vandose por esta noticia que como theologo Judio no podia creer ni imaginar que en el cap. ix. de Isaias, ni en el 
XXill. y xxxiil. de Jeremias se dize que el Messias ha de ser hombre y Dios. Lo mismo digo por el grande Rabbino 
Abenezra ; lo mismo por Jonathan hijo de Huziel; lo mismo finalmente por qualquiera hijo de Israel, por necio, 
por idiota, 6 por ignorante que sea. 

Mas todavia me queda que admirar como el Predicador que quiere hazer dezir 4 Jonathan hijo de Huziel sobre el 
ver. 5. cap. 1x. de Isaias, “Infans natus est nobis,” que el Messias es Dios, no se vale de su autoridad y proteccion 
en los cap. xxiii. y xxxiil. de Jeremias. Como no se vale mas que del texto Hebraico, sin hazer mencion de la 
Paraphrasis Caldaica? Como emplea sus razones en calumniar otra vez al tan innocente como perseguido Rabbi 
Salomon, acriminandole que en el cap. ix. de Isaias falsificé el texto, afirmando que el verso dezia “ Y este es su 
nombre que llamardn, [no que lo llamara como dize el Hebraico,| que fue adulterado por Rabbi Salomon? Como 
cita el texto del cap. xxiii. ver. 6. Jeremias, donde dize el Propheta, segun él, que el Messias es Dios ; y no cita el 
del xxxiii. ver. 16, donde dize lo proprio de la ciudad de Jerusalem? Qué me responder4? Que el no pretende que 
la ciudad de Jerusalem sea Dios. Muy bien, siendo asi, para qué forma un axioma general donde afirma que el 
nombre Zetragramaton no se aplica sino 4 Dios, hallandolo aplicado 4 cosas insensibles como son altares y ciuda- 
des? Es fuerza, pues, segun su axioma, que todas estas cosas sean Dios. Procurar4 resolver mi dificultad diziendo, 
que el hombre, como el mas noble entre todas las criaturas, era solo capaz y digno de unirse con la Divinidad? 
Isaias, cap. vii. ver. 14. A eso se responde, que Dios dize por boca de su Propheta Oseas, cap. xi. v.9. “Yo soy 
Dios, y no hombre.” Lt hoc sufficit. 

25 y 26. Dize que los Rabbinos explican la prophecia del cap. ix. de Isaias por Ezechias, y la de los cap. 
Xxlil. y xxxili. de Jeremias por David, 6 por Zorobabel. Por lo que toca 4 lo de Isaias es verdad lo que dize el 
Predicador, que los Rabbinos lo aplican 4 Ezechias, y yo con ellos como se puede ver por la explicacion de la 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 131 

prophecia wt supra. Y vease que los primeros versos del cap. ix. no hablan de otra cosa que del milagroso triunfo 
que consiguié Israel contra Sancherib; y de esta manera se combina la segunda parte del capitulo con la primera, 
y no hay necesidad de explicarlo por el Messias, haviendo muchos pasages en toda la Biblia que hablan dél. Los 
dos capitulos de Jeremias, no sé que haya algun Rabbino que no los entienda por el Messias. 

Este Predicador emplea su tiempo en afirmar que Rabbi Salomon falsificé los textos, y en ridiculizar lo que 
dizen los Rabbinos, exagerando la grandeza del nombrado Jonathan, porque pasando una mosca sobre su escritura 
se quemava. S: el Predicador supiera que el estilo Rabbinico es muchas vezes alegorico, penetraria que lo que 
quieren entender por esto es dezir, que este grande hombre era tan aplicado y atento 4 la meditacion de la Ley, que 
si estando en esto se le representava qualquiera idea mundana, luego se disipava y desvanecia. 

27. Mucho forcejea el Padre Predicador para provar que el paso del cap. ix. de Isaias habla del Messias, y para 
eso alega con una esquadra de Rabbinos antiguos y modernos que lo afirman; el que huviere examinado sin par- 
cialidad nuestra exposicion atras, reconocera quan mal fundado va el Predicador en lo que pretende provar, pero 
sea asi, concedasele ; quiero ser tan generoso que quiero obligar 4 todo Israel que se lo concedan. Pero el punto 
principal, que es swmma rerum, es saber, si el Messias ha de ser Dios. 

Savas 

33. Dize que los Rabbinos hallandose embaracados por las dificultades propuestas por él, no hallaron otro medio 
de desempefio que el viciar el texto. No tenian necesidad de viciarle, puesto que el articulo precitado, no permite 
4 ningun Judio creer que Dios pueda ser hombre. 

34 hasta 39. Estos paragraphos quedan respondidos con el precitado articulo. Acordamos que el cap. xxiii. 
de Jeremias habla del Messias, mas no que diga ni se infiera de sus palabras que el Messias es Dios. 

41. Dos. Rabbinos nombra en este paragrapho, Rabbi Osseas el primero, y Rabbi Semiam Bem Jochay el se- 
gundo. El Rabbi Osseas jamas parecié 7m rerum natura, pues no huvo Rabbino de tal nombre. El otro que él 
afirma haver florecido muchos afios antes de Christo, no florecié sino mas de cien afios despues ; y en ninguno de 
los libros atribuidos 4 él se halla lo que dize el Predicador; y si acaso se hallara en algun libro que no ha venido 4 
nuestras manos (lo que absolutamente se niega) entonces se condenaré el tal Rabbino por renegado, y su doctrina 
no tiene fuerga ninguna. 

42. Lo mismo respondo sobre este paragrapho diziendo que quien cree 6 escrive que el Messias deve ser 
hombre y Dios, no es Judio; que quiere dezir, no profesa la Ley de Moyses; por donde su doctrina como tengo 
dicho, no puede persuadir 4 Judios. En el fin del mismo paragrapho vuelve 4 repetir lo que dixo en el numero 6, 
alegando con el verso 22 del cap. xlii. de Isaias : “Ipse autem populus direptus et vastatus,” &c. Ademas de lo que 
tengo respondido alla, remito el Lector al cap. xliii. el qual desvanece todo lo que tiene dicho el Predicador, diziendo 
claramente que Israel es de Dios, y que tiene redempcion, como queda dicho. Lt hoc sufficit pro presenti lectione. 

Re 

43 y 44. Jactase con mucha confianca de haver convencido 4 los Judios con el verso 10 del cap. xlix. Ge- 
nesis : “ Non auferetur sceptrum a Juda, nec scriba de femore ejus, donec veniat Silo vel qui mittendus est, et ipsi 
aggregatio populorum.” Sepa el Padre Predicador que muy engafiado est en la inteligencia desta prophecia: deve 
considerar pues, que el nombre de Juda representa quatro sugetos muy diferentes, 6 tiene quatro acceptaciones, 
como se dize en las escuelas. 1°. Tomase por Juda, hijo de Jacob como en el verso 8 de este mismo cap. xlix. 
donde dize, “Juda, a ti te alabaran 6 te cederan tus hermanos.” 2°. Tomase por el tribu de Jud4 solo, como en el 
verso 10 del precitado capitulo, donde dize, “No se tirara el ceptro de Judd.” 3°. Tomase tambien por los tribus 
Juda y Benjamin, despues de la division de los diez tribus, asi todos los Reyes que reinaron sobre los dos tribus se 
Ilamaron Reyes de Juda, comprehendiendo implicitamente el tribu de Benjamin. 4°. Tomase finalmente por los 
doze tribus que forman el cuerpo de todo Israel, como en el cap. xxxiii. de Jeremias, verso 16, donde hablando del 
Messias dize, “En aquellos dias sera salvo Juda, y Jerusalem estara en sosiego ;” donde el nombre de Juda aqui 
comprehende todo el pueblo Israelitico. 

Asentado pues este incontestable principio, es fuerga tomar el nombre de Juda en el verso 10 donde dize, que 
no se quitara el ceptro de Juda, por el tribu, no por la persona ni por el universal de la nacion: por la persona no, 

132 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

porque no devemos presumir que el Patriarca entendiese que su hijo Juda huviese de vivir y reynar hasta que 
viniese el Messias, y que la inteligencia de] verso 10 es: No faltara el ceptro de la persona de Juda hasta que venga 
el Messias; no por el universal de la nacion, porque bendiciendo Jacob sus hijos uno por uno como particular, es 
fuerga que a Juda tambien le bendixese como tal; con que en las palabras, “Non auferetur sceptrum a Juda,” pro- 
mete el Padre que el ceptro permanecera en su tribu sin pasar jamas 4 ninguno de los onze hermanos. Segun esto 
no puede argitir el Predicador contra los Judios que falté el ceptro en la nacion quando nacié Christo que fue el 
Messias segun su opinion, porque el ceptro de Juda havia faltado muchos afios antes en el Rey Zedechias, sin volver 
mas 4 Juda; y siendo asi como en efecto es, siguese irrefragablemente, 6 que la prophecia es falsa, 6 que no esta 
bien explicada. Para evitar pues estas dificultades devese advertir, que entendiendose esta prophecia literalmente 
como es razon que se entienda, se reconocera que no habla una sola palabra del Messias, ni excede el tiempo de la 
division del reyno de Israel y Juda; ni tampoco trata de los tribus como miembros del cuerpo de Ja nacion, sino 
es una vez, y esta por accidente indirectamente. 

Que no trate del Messias pruevase ; porque haviendo el santo Patriarca convocado 4 sus hijos, y ofreciendose 
4 manifestarles lo que les havia de suceder en el fin de los dias, Gen. xlix. ver. 1. parece intentava manifestarles algo 
del Messias, entendiendose siempre por este termino “El fin de los dias,” por el tiempo del Messias como consta 
del verso 2. cap. ii. de Isaias, donde descriviendo el Propheta la summa felicidad de aque! tiempo dize ; “ Y seré en 
fin de los dias, sera el monte de la Casa de Dios en la cumbre de los montes,’ &c. Esta prophecia misma hallase 
confirmada en Micheas cap. iv. ver. 1. con los mismos terminos, con las mismas palabras, “ Y sera en fin de los dias.” 
Del mismo termino usa el Propheta Jeremias, descriviendo la felicidad de Israel en tiempo del Messias en el verso 24 
del cap. xxx. Del mismo el Propheta Ezechiel en el cap. xxxviii. ver. 16. 

Usando pues el santo Patriarca deste mismo termino ‘parece’ que intentava tratar del Messias como queda dicho; 
pero Ilegando 4 examinar lo que dixo en aquella ocasion, no se halla que hablase del Messias, ni del Pueblo de Israel 
en universal. Esto patentemente consta por lo que dixo 4 sus hijos, pues 4 Ruben no hizo mas que reprehenderlo 
por lo que havia hecho con Billa; 4 Simeon y Levi por haverse arrojado contra Sechem por Dind; (4 Juda lo vere- 
mos adelante) 4 Zabulon prophetizé que la porcion de su tierra havia de ser maritima; 4 Asser que su tierra havia 
de ser fertil y regalada ; y finalmente no se habla del Messias. 

Es verdad que todos los comentadores Christianos, y muchos de los Judios explican “non auferetur sceptrum a 
Juda,” no faltara el ceptro de Juda, &c. alegoricamente por el Messias, pero los Literalistas Hebreos no lo entienden 
sino por la division del reyno de Israel del de Juda, explicando la prophecia desta manera. 

A ti Juda, te alabardn, 6 te cederén tus hermanos, porque eres intrepido como el leon, y asi todos te conceden 
la superioridad. El ceptro que poseerds sobre toda la nacion permanecerd indivisible hasta que venga el Silonita el 
qual apartar4 los diez tribus de los dos, y entonces 4 él, 4 saber 4 Juda, le quedard agregacion de algunos pueblos, 
que son los dos tribus de Juda y Benjamin, todos los Sacerdotes y Levitas que estavan derramados por todo Israel, 
que dexaron sus arrabales y posesiones recogiendose en Jerusalem ; como tambien muchos devotos Israelitas, que 4 
imitacion de los Sacerdotes y Levitas fixaron su habitacion en la provincia de Judea, para no dexar el santo y divino 
culto profesado por sus pios y devotos padres. 

Que este sea el genuino y literal sentido de la prophecia de Juda, no hay que dudar por muchas razones que 
apoyan esta explicacion; y por muchas irrefragables objeciones que nacen contra los que la explican alegoricamente, 
como se ira mostrando. 

La primera objeccion es, que los alegorisantes quieren por modo de extorsion torturar el nombre de Siloh, y 
hacer que diga Messias, quando se halla ser una ciudad famosa en Tierra Santa por haver reposado en ella el arca 
de Dios 369 afos, colocada alli por Josué, como consta del verso 1 del cap. xviii. de su Libro, en el cual es nom- 
brada 7 vezes; en el de los Juezes 6; en el Libro I. de Samuel 8; en el I. de los Reyes 2; en Jeremias 4; en los 
Psalmos 1; que son 28 vezes que se llama, digo que se halla nombrada en la Biblia. El Propheta Ahia Silohnita 
hallase nombrado en el I. Reyes, cap. xi. xii. y xiv. constando pues tan patente y literalmente lo que era Siloh, y el 
Propheta Ahia natural desa ciudad, no sé quien obliga 4 los alegorisantes 4 convertir el nombre de una ciudad tan 
conocida en otros tan remotos de su genuina significacion. 

La segunda objeccion que parece indisoluble, milita contra Jonathan hijo de Huziel, y Anquelos, por haver 
armado una alegoria sobre un principio no solo contestado, mas aun negado por la experiencia, afirmando que no 
faltaria el ceptro de Jud4 hasta que venga el Messias, viendo ellos que havia faltado en la captividad Babilonica ; 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 133 

que despues de restablecidos en Judea despues de haver vivido sugetos 4 Persianos y Griegos, sacudido y quebrado 
el duro y pesado yugo de los ultimos, alcancaron Reyes del tribu de Levy, no del de Juda, y extinguidos estos 
tuvieron 4 Herodes y sus descendientes por Reyes hasta casi el fin del segundo Templo, donde se terminé del todo 
el ceptro 6 reliquia del dominio en la nacion, hasta el presente tiempo. 

Para resolver pues esta fuerte objeccion es menester suponer primero, que dos famosos sabios como estos 
no se huvieran arrojado 4 forjar una alegoria tan contraria al sentido literal; de forma que si lo que representa 
la alegoria es verdadero, lo que dize el Patriarca es falso, como consta por lo alegado. Es fuerza pues explicar 
la alegoria de forma que no solamente no contradiga la prophecia, mas que se halle por lo menos significada 
en ella. 

Los sabios, Judios y Christianos, prefieren siempre el sentido literal al alegorico. Los Rabbinos dizen clara- 
mente en el tratado de Sabat cap. v. que el texto sagrado jamas puede salir de su literal; y Cornelio Alapide en 
sus Canones sobre el Pentateuco, Can. 40, dize : “In sensu literali omnis sententia omniaque verba debent explicari et 
accommodari rei significate ; id autem non est necesse in sensu alegorico.” Supuesto esto hallase que segun la Para- 
phrasis de Jonathan y Anquelos, el sentido literal de la prophecia del santo Patriarca queda contrario é incompa- 
tible con el sentido alegorico, porque segun este, desde que el Rey David empuiié el ceptro, no devia jamas haver 
faltado el imperio de la casa de David, que es lo mismo que dezir del tribu de Juda; sed sic est que falté desde 
Zedecias, ultimo Rey en la destruccion de Jerusalem, sin volver jamas 4 aquel tribu como se vid en la segunda casa ; 
ergo segun la alegoria destos dos sabios seria fuerca dezir, 6 que la prophecia del Patriarca era falsa (lo qual fuera 
detestable heregia y horrible blasphemia) 6 que los dos alegorisantes no supieron adaptar la alegoria 4 lo literal, lo 
qual fuera paradoxo, constandonos por muchos pasages de la Biblia, que parecen impenetrables, de la ciencia de 
estos dos, digo y de suficiencia de estos dos eminentisimos sabios. 

Ratificase mayormente la dificultad por ver que despues de la destruccion del segundo Templo hasta el presente 
siglo, ha faltado el ceptro en Israel. Como pues se puede jamas conciliar la alegoria con la prophecia? Como se 
atreve la alegoria 4 afirmar que jamas faltara el ceptro de Juda, quando el vaticinio ni tal promete, ni tal indica ? 

Para resolver pues esta formidable dificultad juzgo no haver otro medio que distinguir entre posesion y jurisdic- 
ction, y explicando, segun los alegorisantes, que el Patriarca hablé de la jurisdiccion, no de la posesion ; el sentido 
de la prophecia es el que ahora explicaré. 

Juda, (dize el santo Patriarca) tus hermanos te ceden la preferencia ; los de tu Padre se te humillan porque 
eres intrepido y valeroso como un leon; si alguna vez pues, Juda se hallare sin corona, y el ceptro pasare 4 otro 
tribu, le asegura el Patriarca que no tiene que rezelar, y que lo que perdié fue la posesion por un tiempo limitado, . 
haviendo quedado la jurisdiccion siempre intacta, y reservada para gozarla con la posesion perpetua en la persona del 
futuro Messias. Pero como la mayor parte de los comentadores, prevenidos de sus alegorias, juzgan que el 
vaticinio, non auferetur sceptrum a Juda, asegura 4 este tribu un imperio continuo sin interrupcion hasta la venida 
del Messias, hallo ser necesario desvanecer esta opinion provando por diversos pasages y vaticinios de la Sagrada 
Biblia, que Dios tiene amenacado muchas vezes 4 su incorregible Pueblo con la caida de su corona, y con la destruc- 
cion de su reyno. 

En el cap. xxvi. ver. 33. del Levitico dize Dios: “Vos esparciré en las gentes, desvainaré detras de vos la espada, 
y sera vuestra tierra desolacion, y vuestra ciudad sera destruccion.” Aqui vemos dispersion, desolacion de la tierra, 
y destruccion de las ciudades, cosas tmconsistentes con corona y ceptro. En el cap. iv. ver. 27. del Deuteronomio 
dize : “ Y esparciré el Sefior 4 vos en los pueblos, y quedareis pocos hombres en numero, en las gentes que guiard 
el Sefior 4 vos alli.” En el cap. xxviii. ver. 36. del mismo Libro dize Moyses: “Y Ilevara el Sefior 4 ti y 4 tu Rey 
que levantares sobre ti, 4 gentes que no conociste ni tu ni tus padres.” 

Por estos textos del Pentateuco claramente consta la destruccion total del reyno, y la total dispersion de la 
nacion. No sé pues donde reside esta jactada certidumbre de la perpetuidad del reyno de Juda hasta el Messias. Sé 
que me replicarén que esta promesa parece patente y clara en el cap. vil. ver. 15 y 16. II. Samuel, donde Dios dize 4 
David, hablando por su hyo Salomon: “ Y mi merced no se quitara dél como la quité de Saul, que quité delante de 
ti. Asi tu casa sera asegurada juntamente con tu reyno para siempre delante de ti, y tu silla sera compuesta para 
siempre.” En el cap. ix. ver. 3. hasta 11 inclusive, I. de los Reyes, en una vision que tuvo Salomon despues de haver 
dedicado el Templo dizele Dios, que havia admitido su dedicacion, y que su nombre, sus ojos y su coracon asistirian 
en aquella casa perpetuamente ; y que si él siguiere los vestigios de David su padre, sirviendolo con coracon perfecto 

2M 

134 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

y recto, observando sus preceptos que continuaria su trono perpetuo sobre Israel como havia dicho a su Padre 
David: “No serd tajado 4 ti varon de sobre la silla de Israel; pero si vos volviereis vos y vuestros hijos de mi, y no 
observareis mis preceptos, y sirviereis y vos humillareis 4 los idolos, tajaré 4 Israel de la tierra que les di; y 4 la 
casa que santifiqué para mi nombre quitaré de mi presencia, y servird 4 Israel de exemplo y de escarnio en.todos los 
pueblos ; y esta casa que era tan sublime, viendola el que pasare por ella se admirara y silvard, y dir4 por que hizo 
el Sefior asi 4 esta tierra y 4 esta casa? y le diran, porque dexaron al Seftor su Dios que sacé.a sus Padres de tierra 
de Egipto, y se pegaron con otros Dioses, y se humillaron 4 ellos, y los sirvieron, y por esto truxo Dios sobre ellos 
todo este mal.” 

Ksta revelacion y promesa explica la que Dios havia hecho 4 David, por la qual incontestablemente consta que 
la grandeza, la felicidad, y la prosperidad del reyno que Dios prometid a David y Salomon fue condicional no 
absoluta. ; 

Aunque secundum allegata et probata queda firmemente establecida mi hypotesis que sostiene no haver Dios 
jamas prometido al Patriarca Jacob, ni al Rey David, ni al Rey Salomon su hijo la perpetuidad de la corona, sino 
es despues del Messias ; quiero para concluir totalmente este articulo, y corroborarlo de forma que quede inexpug- 
nable é incontrastable, mostrar que no solamente no huvo tal promesa jamas, mas al opuesto Dios mostré a David 
la profanacion del Templo, la destruccion de Jerusalem, y el excesivo estrago del pueblo. Esto todo llora David 
con amargas y sensibles lagrimas en el Psalmo Ixxix. donde dize: “ Sefior, entraron los Gentiles en tu heredad, 
inmundaron el Templo, reduxeron 4 Jerusalem en ruinosos montes, expusicron los cadaveres de tus sieryos por 
alimento a las aves del cielo, y las carnes de tus pios 4 los animales de la tierra, derramaron su sangre como agua 
en los contornos de Jerusalem sin haver quien los entierre.” Todo el resto del Psalmo se emplea en deplorar las 
miserias de la nacion. 

Este Psalmo fue compuesto y dedicado por Asaph el Levita, uno de los musicos de la Casa Santa, al Rey David, 
6 fue compuesto por el mismo David y dedicado 4 Asaph su:contemporaneo como consta del cap. xxv. del I. Parali- 
pomenos: y como todos los Psalmos fueron divinamente inspirados, es fuerca dezir, que Dios quizo mostrar a 
David la ruina de Jerusalem. Ni puede valer el dezir que David habla de su tiempo, deplorando alguna perdida de 
batalla, cuyas consequencias son las desdichas que representa el Psalmista; no vale digo este frivolo: subterfugio, 
constandonos que David no tuvo batalla que no fuese triunfo, y es cierto é infalible que jamas en su tiempo entraron 
Gentiles en Jerusalem, ni inmundaron la santa ciudad, digo el Templo ; ni derrocaron la santa ciudad, ni huvo el 
estrago que descrive en el Psalmo; ergo ella fue una revelacion prophetica 4 David 6 4 Asaph: por donde nos consta 
que David sabia que la promesa de Dios para la perpetuidad del reyno en su familia era condicional y no absoluta. 

Para tapar totalmente la boca 4 la critica y que no tenga lugar de censurar, basta leer el Psalmo cxxxil. ver. 11. 
y 12. donde dize: “Juré el Senor 4 David con verdad irrevocable diziendole : fruto de tu vientre pondré sobre tu 
trono. Si guardaren tus hijos mi pacto, y este testamento mio que les tengo ensefiado, tambien sus hijos iz per- 
petuum se sentardn en tu trono.” Por estos versos consta que David mismo confiesa que la perpetuidad del reyno 
en su familia, para antes de la venida del Messias, era condicional y no absoluta. 

Pudiera tambien alegar con el Psalmo cxxxvii. donde representa el pueblo cautivo en Babilonia; pero como este 
Psalmo no tiene titulo, y hay algunos que suponen haver sido compuesto en Babilonia, por algun sentido devoto 
(aunque mi opinion no es esa) no lo cité, porque con lo alegado, tengo establecida mi hypotesis con inconcussibles 
fundamentos. 

45 452. Para provar su asumpto alega con la estatua del suefio de Nabuco explicando los tres primeros 
metales, oro, plata, y cobre, por las tres monarchias de Caldeos, Persas, y Griegos; la quarta de hierro Ja aplica 
a los Romanos, atribuyendo el barro al reyno de los Judios, el qual estaba mezclado con el hierro pero no unido ; — 
mezclado con Roma digo, por la alianca que havia entre los Romanos y los Judios, por cuya causa eran obligados 
los Romanos en ocasion de guerra 4 socorrerlos y defenderlos; sigue diziendo que la piedra sin manos que derribé la 
estatua y la reduxo en polvo, desmenuzé y disipé el barro, junto con los quatro metales. i ; 

Pregunto pues al Sefor Arcobispo, que supuesto que Israel haya quedado disipado y aniquilado, qué necesidad 
havia del Messias? Para quien havia de venir? Quien havia de gozar las grandezas y felicidades prometidas para 
el tiempo de ese incomparable monarca? Como se cumpliré la prophecia del cap. xxiii. ver. 5. de Jeremias que pre- 
gona: “Vendran dias, dice el Sefior, y levantaré 4 David un pimpollo justo, y reynara Rey, y prosperara, y hard 
justicia y limosna en la tierra. En sus dias sera salvo Juda, é Israel habitara con sosiego.” Lo mismo confirma 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 135 

en el cap. xxxiii. vet. 15 y 16, diziendo en el verso 17: “Asi dize el Sefior, no ser4 tajado 4 David varon sentado 
sobre el trono de la casa de Israel.” Si Israel, pues, quedé destruido en el barro del coloso, segun la hypotesis 
del Senor Arcobispo, sobre quien ha de reynar este tan justo y caritativo Rey? Quales serén los pueblos que 
gozaran de su dulce dominio? Qual sera la nacion que merecera alcancar los favores de su patrocinio ? 

Terrible cosa es pretender persuadir con algunas alegorias mal deducidas, mal explicadas, y mal aplicadas ; y par- 
ticularmente 4 una nacion gue no se sabe apartar del sentido literal, y con razon y justicia, siendo lo literal Palabra 
de Dios, pura, limpia, inalterable, inviolable, é inconcusible ; quando la alegoria no es mas que una idea humana, 
fragil, tal vez erronea, tal vez posible, tal vez imposible. Ademas de las incontestables pruevas alegadas del Pro- 
pheta Jeremias, pudiera aducir immenso numero de otras de todos los Prophetas; pero me reduzco solamente 4 
confutar la falsa proposicion que presume insinuar el Predicador, que el barro de la Estatua significa Israel ; con- 
venciendolo con la palabra del Propheta Daniel, en el verso 44. del cap. ii. ‘“ Porro tempore Regum istorum sus- 
citabit Deus cceli regnum quod in eternum non corrumpitur, et regnum istud populo alteri non relinquetur : 
comminuet et consumet omnia ista regna, et ipsum stabit in eternum.” Mas en los dias de estos Reyes, el Dios 
del cielo levantaré un reyno que eternamente no se corromperd; y este reyno no sera dexado 4 otro pueblo: des- 
menuzara y consumira todos estos reynos, y él permanecerd para siempre. Los dedos de los pies, parte de hierro 
y parte de tiesto, indica que parte del reyno sera fuerte, y parte serd quebrantada. No dize pues que son dos 
reynos, como supone el Predicador, mas solo que es un reyno, que parte dél sera fuerte, y otra fragil; ergo no 
puede afirmar que el barro es un quinto reyno que significa la corona de los Judios. 

Go xe 

48. Prosigue muy confiado que el Propheta vaticina, que la venida del Messias havia de ser quando el 
imperio Romano estuviera aun mezclado con los Judios, y que viniendo havia de destruir en los Judios el barro de 
su reyno, y en los Romanos el hierro de su imperio, porque de las ruinas destos dos dominios se havia de levantar 
el reyno del Messias, el qual havia de ser eterno y extendido por todo el mundo. De aqui arguye con un dilemma 
& los Judios, 4 su parecer indisoluble, diziendo: El imperio Romano ya hoy no esta. mezclado con el reyno de 
los Judios, ni el reyno de los Judios mezclado con aquel imperio, porque estas dos potencias estan destruidas ; 
el reyno de Christo esta dilatado por todo el mundo (sigue diziendo) ; luego implica que el Messias haya de venir 
despues desta destruccion, porque la destruccion se havia de seguir 4 la venida. 

Como el Predicador juzga su dilemma por formidable se persuade, que los Judios quedan convencidos y confu- 
tados sin tener que replicar ; pero no considera lo que se ha dicho y provado arriba, que en todo aquel coloso no 
havia materia alguna que significase Judios. Esto consta por lo alegado y provado ; veis aqui pues toda la chime- 
rica machina del dilemma del Predicador tan caida, tan derribada, y tan disuelta en menudo polvo como la estatua 
de Nabuco. 

Para ratificar pues esta irrefragable verdad, basta leer el principio del cap. vii. de Daniel, donde representa la 
vision que tuvo de las quatro monarchias que Nabuco havia visto de quatro metales, oro, plata, cobre, hierro, 
baxo quatro feroces animales, leon, oso, tigre, y otro cuya figura no descrive en otra forma que en lo monstruoso, 
horrible, y mas que formidable de su forma y aspecto. 

Si esta vision pues de Daniel fue la misma que la de Nabuco, con esta sola diferencia, que lo que para aquel 
fueron metales, para este fueron animales, siguese que asi como en Daniel no se cuenta mas que quatro animales 
representantes de las quatro monarchias, asi en la de Nabuco tambien el numero ha de ser quaternario. Pero yo 
me persuado que aunque el Padre Predicador afirma en su sermon que el barro de la estatua representa la ruina de 
los Judios, que lo asegura como Predicador, pero que no lo cree como Arcobispo. Quomodocumque sit, lo mismo 
que vio Daniel es lo que havia visto Nabuco. 

Entender de convencer 4 los Judios con alegorias es lo mismo que detener el agua en un cribo, porque la nacion 
Hebrea jamas se aparta del sentido literal de las Escripturas, considerando con razon que el sentido literal es la ver- 
dadera Palabra de Dios, pura, sincera, inviolable é infalible ; quando la alegoria no es mas que una conjectura, una 
idea, una presumpcion, una chimera fabricada en la oficina de la imbecilidad del limitado humano entendimiento. 
Este Predicador explica, segun los principios que le parecen convenientes 4 su proposito, los metales de la estatua 
de Nabuco, y representa el imperio Romano como destruido ya, lo qual es falible y no puede sustentar. 

136 _ SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Para comprender esta verdad bien notese, que los Persas que conquistaron la monarchia Babilonica, la destru- 
yeron y la aniquilaron de forma que quedé extra rerum naturam, como consta de las sagradas prophecias y por las 
historias de aquel tiempo, por donde quedé la estatua sin cabeca de oro. Ja monarchia de los Persas fue desmo- 
ronada y deshecha por los Griegos. La de los Griegos por los Romanos; alld van tres metales; no queda mas que 
el hierro con el tiesto; este significa el imperio Romano el qual subsiste y permanece. Es verdad que no con 
tanta extension ni dilatada jurisdiccion, como en los tiempos antecedentes, pero no se puede negar que no sea el 
mismo imperio Romano aunque cerrado entre muy cortos terminos, pues el Emperador de Alemania, se intitula 
antes de ser declarado Emperador en vida de su padre, “Rey de Romanos,” y despues de Emperador goza los mis- 
mos titulos y dignidades que gozavan sus Antecesores, llamandole Cesar y Augusto, y cediendole como tal, todos 
Reyes y Principes de la Europa la preferencia sin controversia de oposicion. Si los pies de hierro que represen- 
tan el imperio Romano subsisten es incompatible con que la Piedra Iene la tierra con su bulto, porque el Propheta 
dize : que despues de haver la piedra desmenuzado todos los metales, se convirtié en un immenso monte que llenava 
toda la tierra: en quanto subsiste pues el quarto metal, no puede haber piedra, porque no pueden existir juntos ; 
sed sic est que el metal existe ; ergo no ha parecido todavia la piedra ; ergo que el Messias no vino. 

Para corroborar su sistema que el Messias ha venido, alega con un Rabbino del Talmud, que dize, que la letra 
oO Mem cerrada en medio de la palabra /emerbe, Isaias, cap. iii. ver. 6, que significa seiscientos, y que tantos afios 
pasaron desde la promulgacion desta prophecia hasta la muerte de Christo; y que los Rabbinos afirmavan, que 
pasados estos seiscientos afios, havia de venir el Messias infaliblemente. .Advierta el Padre Predicador que el 
Rabbino que explicé asi la prophecia de la D Mem cerrada florecié cerca de ducientos afios despues de Christo. 
Haviendo pues él visto, que 4 los seiscientos havia venido el Messias (segun dize el Predicador) cé6mo no renuncié 
la Ley Mosaica para profesar la Ley Christiana? Me responder que por tema y por obstinacion. Adequada 
respuesta, digna de un hombre discreto y de letras ! 

Para derribar pues estas chimericas montafias, allanar y dilucidar este articulo representado como formidable é 
imaccesible del Predicador, sepa su Paternidad que los Judios no se apartan una jota del sentido literal*, ni admiten — 

* We have here the declaration of a learned Jew that the Rabbis never depart an iota from the literal interpretation of the text of Scripture ; 
and hence (openly be it asserted without fear of contradiction) the Bible has caused the Jews to believe for nearly two thousand years in the 
greatest absurdities. It would, perhaps, have been happy for mankind, if they had never understood the sacred text in a depraved moral and 
practical sense, as well as in an absurd theoretical one. We shall instance from the first two or three chapters of Genesis some of the many errors 
into which too close an adherence to the literal text of Scripture has led them; and first with respect to Adam, his stature and likeness, his form. 
The contemporaneous creation of his first wife, whom they supposed refused obedience to him, imagining herself his equal, and the after formation 
of his second wife Eve from his rib, have furnished matter for the most ludicrous controversies amongst the Rabbis, who professed to ground 
their inferences upon the twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh verses of the first chapter of Genesis, and the twenty-first and twenty-second verses of 
the second chapter; in which latter chapter they contend that the creation of a second wife for Adam is unequivocally declared. It may be 
proper to observe that they assert that the name of Adam’s first wife was Lelah, and of this woman the more superstitious amongst them entertain 
an extraordinary dread ; believing that when she forsook Adam she became a witch or evil spirit, who was greatly disposed to injure children in the 
cradle ; hence “ Lelah begone,” is a deprecatory phrase which the Jews pronounce over a new-born infant. It is probable that Lelah was known 
to the Mexicans under the name of Cioapipilti, and not impossible that she became in after ages the less formidable Queen Mab of Christians. The 
sixth chapter of the second apocryphal book of Esdras will show the theory to which the ninth verse of the first chapter of Genesis, relating to 
the gathering together of the waters and the appearance of dry land, gave rise in later ages amongst the Jews; where mention is made also of the 
Enoch or Behemoth, and the Leviathan ; the latter of which they believed would be slain by the Messiah and eaten at a feast to which they alone 
would be invited. We are not certain whether some of the Talmudical writers do not add fictions of their own to the Mosaic account of the 
creation of light, although the first chapter of Genesis says no more than that light was created on the first day, three days before the creation of 
the sun, the moon, and the stars. It is singular that the Mexicans should likewise have believed that the existence of light was previous to that 
of the sun, and it furnishes strong grounds for supposing that the Jews had communicated to them this peculiar tenet. Although heat be so grand 
an agent in the machinery of nature, its creation is no where mentioned in the first chapter of Genesis; but it may be inferred,—since plants cannot 
vegetate or their seed ripen without heat, and they were created on the third day,—that its existence was also independent of the sun. The Jews, 
though great astrologers, have always been wretched astronomers, which might likewise have been caused by their too literal interpretation of the 
text of Scripture ; since the fourteenth verse of the first chapter of Genesis possibly induced them to believe that the stars were minor luminaries, 
merely created for the purpose of giving light to the earth; although such an hypothesis at once divests astronomy of all its sublimity, whilst the 
phrase in the same verse, “and let them be for signs,” might have been understood by them to refer to judicial astrology, a study to which they 
have in all ages been addicted. The existence of the Terrestrial Paradise is also another article of Jewish faith, grounded upon the literal sense in 
which they understand the twenty-fourth verse of the third chapter of Genesis; although they would be at a loss for an answer if a reason were 
demanded of them, why the cherubim and the flaming sword were placed to guard against man’s access to a spot, the site of which he never 
would be able to discover. It is contrary to all received doctrine to suppose, since Scripture is silent on the subject, that there were two 
creations of animals ; the first, granivorous and herbivorous, which inhabited Paradise; the second, carnivorous, which was created after the fall 
of man: and yet, what must the logician think, who knows that modifications in form constitute diversity in species, and the anatomist, who is 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 137 

ni jamas convierten el literal en alegorico ; y ocurriendo algun paso que precisamente se conoce ser alegorico, pro 
curan reducirlo al mas proximo sentido literal que se pueda adaptar. Sepa tambien que el Talmud se compone de 
canones, dogmas, y methodos para lo ritual; y naciendo entre los Rabbinos alguna controversia sobre algun punto, 
despues de haverlo bien ventilado y agitado, se resuelve y se decide segun la opinion que parece mas real y mas 
adequada ; esa decision se guarda y se sigue entre Judios, como si fuera la misma Ley escrita infalible é inviola- 
blemente. 

Es cierto tambien que el mismo Talmud contiene un immenso numero de alegorias sobre toda la Biblia, donde 
nacen tal vez qiiestiones que se agitan y ventilan como las otras, pero jamas se determinan ni jamas se deciden; y 
sirven solamente para sacar conceptos morales para el pueblo, que bien sacados y bien aplicados en los sermones, 
suelen producir muy buenos efectos en el auditorio. Llegandonos pues 4 nuestro punto, determino comunicar mi 
conjectura sobre la 0 cerrada en medio de la diccion, que el Rabbino Talmudista quiere explicar, segun dize el Pre- 
dicador, por el valor del numero, no por la fuerea de la figura; quando yo la explicaré verosimilmente por la figura 
de forma que se combine bien con las circunstancias de aquel tiempo. ; 

Digo pues, que haviendo Dios prometido al pio y devoto Rey Ezechias una paz firme y solida, y una tranqui- 
lidad perpetua sin intermision no se contenté hazerlo con palabras solamente, mas tambien poniendo lab como 
queda dicho, en la mitad de la palabra, que es un perfecto quadrado, cerrado de todas partes, y viene a ser un gero- 
gliphico para el Rey, indicandole que asi como aquel quadrado es cerrado de todas partes, de forma que nadie lo 
puede entrar ni quebrar, asi la paz que gozaria no seria intermitida ni quebrada por toda su vida, como en efecto 
asi fué. i 

Aqui se ven dos alegorias, aplicadas 4 estan, y fundadas sobre dos conjecturas, ambas posibles, ambas plausi- 
bles, ambas adequadas*. Examinemos agora el valor y la fuerga de la alegoria Talmudica, hasta donde se extiende. 

Afirma el Rabbino Talmudista, segun atesta el Predicador, que el Messias devia venir seiscientos anos despues 
de] Rey Achaz, en virtud de la o cerrada, bien sea: pero es menester examinar la calidad deste Rabbino, cémo 
alcangé este tan recondito misterio, si por reflexion 6 por inspiracion divina: si fue por el primero destos dos me- 
dios, es una especie de prophecia, que era fuerca creer al pie de la letra; si lo alcangé por su reflexion, su idea no 
tiene mas fuerca ni mas vigor que qualquiera otra alegoria: y siendo asi como con efecto es, no hay obligacion de 
creerla y admitirla como si fuera vaticinio; antes el mismo author que la dixo, no la representa sino como una 
simple conjectura, creyendo el suceso posible, mas el tiempo prescripto no infalible. Pruebase, porque si la nacion 
huviera tomado este presagio por prophetico, reconociera 4 Christo por Messias, 4 saber, por el Messias prometido 
en la D cerrada ; sed sie est que no lo reconocié por tal; ergo, &c. 

aware that the internal and external organization of many animals, formed as they now are, only qualify them to be beasts of prey. In opposition 
to the Rabbis, we must contend that absurdity follows the interpretation of many texts of Scripture in a literal sense: they will not maintain that 
before the curse was pronounced upon the serpent, that reptile went erect upon its tail, and that its food is at present really dust, which is wholly 
devoid of nutriment. 

* The principle having been conceded that Providence never seeks to accomplish ends which are not wise, or employs means which are not 
adequate, it follows as a necessary consequence that types, which are so lauded by the Jews as the mode by which Heaven deigns to impart to the 
mind of man a glimmering light of truth, without at the same time vouchsafing to him the perfect knowledge of an event till after it has happened, 
possess little intrinsic merit ; since, considered as a means, they fail in their end if it be instruction, and viewed as collateral proofs, they are super- 
fluous if that which they foreshadow be already known; which not being the case, they do not afford, but themselves stand in need of, proof. Incon- 
sistencies in matters of Jewish faith and doctrine are so monstrous, that it would be idle to inquire of the Rabbis, why one of the severest charges 
which they brought against the ancient oracles was, that their answers were obscure, whilst their famous cabalistic art, as they well know, although 
derived from the theory of types and founded upon the supposed properties of letters, turns wholly upon equivocations, and was framed with the 
view of imposing upon the ignorant and credulous. These observations have been suggested by the absurdity of the supposition contained in the 
paragraph above, that God, not content with merely giving Hezekiah a verbal promise of a lasting and solid peace, signified the same to him also 
by the Hebrew letter 5, which served as a hieroglyphic, denoting by its square form, “that in like manner as that square was closed on all 
sides and of such a shape that none could enter or break through it, so the peace which he should enjoy would neither be broken nor interrupted 
during his whole life.” It would not be difficult to prove by an analogous mode of reasoning, that is to say, from the shape of the Hebrew letter, 
that Hezekiah instead of enjoying peace would be besieged, taken prisoner, and his body afterwards quartered by the enemy, since D might as 
well be the type of a siege, a prison, or the quartering of a body into four equal portions, as of peace and tranquillity. It would be reasonable 
to suppose that, far from using types, the Deity, if he deigned to communicate to mortals, for their good, the knowledge of the future would 
employ concise and plain language adapted to human comprehension. Longinus, who admired the emphatic brevity of the command that called 
light into existence, would have pronounced a very different judgment upon the D, which has given rise to so much foolish discussion amongst the 

Rabbis. 

2N 

138 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Xd 

Num. 55. Ridicula es la objeccion que haze en el fin del paragrapho 53, diziendo, que si los Judios niegan que 
la 0 de Lemerbe significa los seiscientos aos que pasaron desde el quarto afio de Achaz hasta Christo, que merecen 
muerte. Muy engafiado esta el Senor Arcobispo ; sepa pues, que la obligacion que tienen los Judios de creer los 
Rabbinos es en lo concerniente 4 lo dogmatico y ritual de la Ley, como consta del cap. xvii. del Deut. desde el ver. 8. 
hasta el 14; pero no estan obligados 4 creer todo lo alegorico. Tengo reparado que si un Rabbino dize alguna 
cosa, 6 explica algun paso de la Sagrada Escriptura alegoricamente, donde parece al Predicador que puede deducir 
algo 4 su favor, arguye con esto a los Judios como si fuera un articulo de religion, persuadiendose que los tiene 
convencidos, en lo qual vive muy engafiado como tengo dicho; y para que reconozca ser verdad lo que digo, vea 
como tengo explicado arriba la misma 0 alegoricamente ; y aunque dixera que no creo que esta 0 significa los seis- 
cientos afios alegados, no por eso mi nacion me havia de juzgar por herege 6 por scismatico, porque por fin como 
tengo dicho arriba, la alegoria no es mas que una idea humana, la qual puede ser facilmente falax; y asi el argu- 
mento del Predicador de los seiscientos afios de la D, ni tiene fuerca ni vigor, ni es digno de respuesta. 

EK] author desta Respuesta, cargado de edad y achaques, no tuvo lugar de ver el Libro citado por el Padre Pre- 
dicador ; pero haviendo buscado el alegado paso, hallé que el Arcobispo con su acostumbrado candor trae lo que 
dize el sabio Moyses Ben Maimon, sin acotar el principio deste Discurso que aclara la intencion del author; quien 
quiziere tomar el trabajo podra consultar el original Epist. ad Orient. Dize pues este author: “ Sobre lo que dizes 
de los tiempos en que puede venir el Messias, y lo que sobre ello explicéd R. Zehadya ; Primeramente deves saber, 
que el tiempo en que ha de venir el Messias precisamente, jamas podré alcancarlo hombre alguno, como declaré 
Daniel, cap. xii. ver. 9. ‘I dixo cerradas y selladas estan estas cosas hasta la hora del fin. Pero la mayor parte son 
ideas y opiniones de algunos Sabios que creen haverlo alcangado. Ya el Propheta tocd sobre este particular, 
diziendo : ‘Se extenderan muchos, y se multiplicara el saber :’ queriendo dezir que se multiplicaran las opiniones, y 
hayra diversidad de pareceres sobre ello: y ya Dios declaréd por sus Prophetas que algunas personas fixaran tiempo 
para la venida del Messias, y pasara el tiempo y no se afirmara. Y despues nos amonesté que no dudasemos por 
ninguna manera de la verdad dello, diziendo: No vos aflijais si no se cumpliere este supuesto computo, mas todo 
quanto se dilatare 4 venir, acrecentad vos la esperanca pues asi dize Habacuc: ‘Si tardare, esperale, que viniendo 
vendra, no se dilatara.’” Cap. ii. ver. 3. ! 

Nota, que el fin del captiverio de Egipto, al qual Dios fixé un termino, pues dize: “Sabe por cierto que tu pos- 
teridad habitaraé como extrangera en el pays de otros, y los serviran, y los afligiran por quatrocientos afios.” Gen. 
cap. xv. ver. 13. No se supo la verdad, y se dificulté el genuino sentido : algunos creyeron que estos 400 afios, se 
devian contar desde que baxé el Patriarca Jacob 4 Egipto; otros que desde que empezé el captiverio, 4 saber 70 
afios despues; otros fueron de opinion, que empezaba desde que el Patriarca Abraham tuvo esta revelacion ; y 
quando se cumplieron estos 400 afios salieron de Egipto algunos Israelitas, 30 anos antes que empezase la mision 
de Moyses, creyendo que ya havia llegado el tiempo de la redempcion, y los mataron los Egipcios, y les agravaron 
el yugo del captiverio. Esto es lo que nos noticiaron los sabios, y sobre esos hombres que erraron en la cuenta y 
creyeron que ya havia llegado el tiempo de la redempcion, y salieron de Egipto, dixo David: “Hijos de Ephraim 
armados, flecheros, dieron la espalda en dia de batalla.” La verdadera cuenta de los 400 afios fue del nacimiento de 
Isaac que es la sucesion de Abrahan, pues el ver. 12. del cap. xxi. Gen. dize: “ Porque con Isaac sera Mamado 4 ti 
generacion.” Y en el ver. 13. del cap. xv. dize Dios: “ Peregrina sera tu sucesion, en tierra que no sera de ellos, y 
los haran servir, y los afligiran 400 aftos.” El sentido literal deste verso es, que parte del captiverio dominaran sobre 
ellos, y los sugetaran, y los afligiran, y son 400 afios de peregrinacion, pero no de sugecion; y no se supo la verdad 
desto hasta que vino el gran Propheta Moyses ; hallase que desde el nacimiento de Isaac hasta la salida de Egipto 
pasaron 400 afios cabales. . 

Infierese pues por consequencia, que si en el captiverio de Egipto, que tenia tiempo fixo y limitado, no com- 
prehendieron quando devia terminar, que serd en este dilatado captiverio que por su larga duracion temblaron los 
Prophetas 4 tanto que uno dellos dize por exageracion, “ Has de estar irritado para siempre contra nos: Has de 
dilatar tu ira eternamente?” Psalm Ixxxv. ver. 6. E Isaias, relatando la duracion deste captiverio, dize: “ Y seran 
recogidos, recogimiento del encarcelado en la mazmorra, y seran encerrados en la carcel, y de multitud de dias seran 
visitados.” Cap. xxiv. ver. 22. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 139 

De los precitados articulos consta que este gran sabio era de opinion, que ningun hombre podra jamas alcangar 
a saber precisamente el tiempo de la venida del Messias. Para corroborar esta opinion, alega con el verso de 
Daniel, de que estaran cerradas.y selladas las prophecias hasta la ultima hora; y para fortificar mas esta verdad trae 
por exemplo el captiverio de Egipto, que no obstante que Dios se sirvid dar un preciso termino a ese captiverio de 
400 afos, huvo diversos pareceres y opiniones, por no saber quando se devia empezar 4 contarlos. 

Despues que este eminentisimo sabio se declaréd con tantas veras sobre este articulo, quando él mismo da un 
termino 4 la venida del Messias, havra alguno en el mundo (menos el Sefior Arcobispo) que crea que lo que propone 
es como infalible y no como posible? Sil Padre Predicador huviera sido tan sincero que huviese acotado con 
todo el paso, como yo hize, no le quedaria lugar de argumentar, pero estaba cierto no lo harian. Quien le havia de 
redarguir? Los que salian 4 quemar? Los penitenciados y Sambenitados ? 

56. En este paragrapho trae una sentencia de un sabio del Talmud, que dize que el mundo ha de durar solo 
seis ‘mil afios: “ Machina mundi hujus annorum sexies mille, et non plures persistere debet.” “Assim o dizem os 
vossos Rabbinos por tradigaon antiga desde 6 tempo dos discipulos de Elias.” Dos cosas asegura aqui este Predi- 
cador ; la una, que asi lo afirman los Rabbinos por tradicion antigua; la otra, que esta tradicion traia su origen de 
los discipulos de Elias, entendiendo por este Elias el Propheta conocido con este nombre y que fue trasladado vivo 
al Cielo ; pero para que se reconozca quan poco versado era en las Tablas Hebraicas, y lo poco que sabia del 
Talmud, mostraré que esa es una idea singular de un sabio, y no tradicion antigua recebida desde el tiempo de los 
discipulos de Elias, y despues se vera quien era este Elias. Primeramente es necesario saber, que en el Talmud 
quando un sabio propone su opinion, 6 bien deducida de su idea, 6 apoyada de algun verso de la Sagrada Escritura, 
si no pertenece 4 alguna parte de la Ley sea Ritual 6 Dogmatica, ni se ventila ni se decide; bien si, tal vez se traen 
opiniones de otros sabios.en contra, pero no se pasa adelante. 

El grande Rabbino Moyses de Egipto en el ultimo capitulo del Tratado de los Reyes, fatto sobre las diversas 
opiniones del Talmud de lo que ha de suceder antes y despues de la venida del Messias dize, que esas prophecias son 
muy cerradas y dificultosas de comprehender ; que aun los mismos Prophetas no las entendieron, y que los sabios 
no recibieron tradicion alguna sobre ellas, y que solo discurrian lo que colegian de los versos. Luego este gran 
sabio, eminentisimo en la inteligencia del Talmud, dize, que los sabios no tuvieron tradicion alguna sobre esos 
dichos y opiniones, y que solo se inclinavan conforme conjecturavan de los versos, 4 lo que sigue ¢] mismo diziendo: 
“Que no se deve aplicar mucho el tiempo en este estudio, pues son ideas forjadas en la oficina del entendimiento 
humano, que muchas vezes salen erroneas, y raras vezes reales.” 

De lo dicho consta que esta opinion no es recebida ni tradicional, y si pasare el termino de los seis mil afios, 
diremos que no acerté, 6 que quizo dezir algo baxo esas palabras que no sabemos comprehender ; y para que se 
reconozca que esta opinion no esta asentada en el Talmud, se hallar4 en el Tratado de Sanhedrin, en el capitulo 
Helech (tantas veces citado por el Predicador) otra opinion de un famoso Rabbino que dize: “ Que el reynado del 
Messias, despues de su venida, ha de persistir siete mil aflos, 4 saber, por él y su succesion.” 

La segunda parte de esta asercion estriba en afirmar que esa opinion de los seis mil aflos, era una antigua tradi- 
cion recebida entre los Rabbinos desde los discipulos de Elias, y para dar mayor fuerca 4 esta sentencia, da a 
entender que este era el Propheta Elias. Pero sepa el Sefior Arcobispo que este tal Elias no era mas que un 
Rabbino, en cuya casa se guardava la Academia, y quando se decia algo en su nombre deziase, se discurrié en la 
academia de Elias: y lo mismo en casa de R. Ismael, otro Rabbino en cuya casa se guardava tambien academia, y 
se traen sus dichos tambien en la misma forma; y asi como este no es Ismael hijo del Patriarca Abraham, asi aquel 
Elias no era el propheta Elias ; ergo no era tradicion antigua recebida desde los discipulos de Elias como afirma el 
Padre Predicador. 

No puedo callar una adulteracion que comete en el precitado dicho que acota, pues para poderlo hacer 4 su gusto 
y que nadie le pudiese contradezir (aunque no havia presente quien lo pudiese hazer) no trae el texto, sino dize que 
los sabios afirman que el mundo ha de durar solo seis mil afios: los primeros dos mil con la Ley natural y sin la 
escrita; los segundos dos mil con la Ley de Moyses ; y los dos mil ultimos con la Ley del Messias. El dicho del 
sabio es desta forma: “ Se dixo en la academia, 6 en la casa de Elias: Seis mil afios ha de subsistir el mundo, y mil 
ha de quedar destruido; dos mil en vano, dos mil con la Ley de Moyses, y dos mil el tiempo del Messias.” 

Vease pues, como este Predicador adultera el dicho, y le acrecienta lo que no dixo ; el sabio dize que los ultimos 
dos mil afios son quando el Messias puede 6 deve venir, 4 saber en todos ellos, 6 bien en el principio 6 en el fin; y 

140 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

el Predicador le haze dezir, que los ultimos dos mil afios seran con la Ley del Messias, para indicarnos que la Ley 
de Moyses devia cesar, y establecerse la de Christo. Pero el sabio Elias no hizo mencion alguna de la Ley del 
Messias, sino solo del tiempo del Messias. Vease que bien prueva su argumento, y que bien concluye con alterar 
y adulterar el texto, para con eso sacar una consequencia de que los mismos Rabbinos del Talmud creian en Christo. 
Los hombres que discurren de esta forma se exponen no solamente 4 la derision y burla de los Judios, mas aun de 
los mas doctos Christianos. 

57. Lo mismo se responde 4 la otra opinion que trae de los 85 jubileos, diziendo, que no son tradiciones rece- 
bidas, sino opiniones singulares, y como tales no obligan a la creencia. Afade que tomemos el consejo de un R. 
Semuel, el que convencido con la razon que alega renuncié nuestra creencia, y adoré 4 Christo. El tal R. Semuel 
dize que revolviendo todo lo que dizen los Prophetas, entendiéd claramente, que Christo fue el Hijo de Dios man- 
dado al mundo para redimirnos. Yo creo lo que él dize, que revolvié las prophecias, pero yo digo que las estudié ¢ 
hize profesion dellas algunos afios, y no hallo lo que ese neophito hallé; ni ninguno que quiziere estudiar las pro- 
phecias, sin revolverlas, hallara otra cosa; ni todas quantas pruebas alegé el Seftor Arcobispo han servido 4 otro 
que 4 mostrar la flaqueza de sus argumentos, y el poco fundamento de sus opiniones. 

Dixo que Rabbi Anima Voluntas, 6 Rabbi Moyses de Egipto, que todo es uno, reconocié tambien esta verdad, 
como consta del Sanhedrim-Guazit en la distincion Helech O, porque preguntandole los Judios por el tiempo de 
la venida del Messias, considerando este Rabbino lo dilatado de la suya y nuestra esperanca con el tiempo en que el 
Messias havia de venir, respondid 4 los Judios con este desengano: “ Vanum est atque inane a Judeis Messiam 
expectari, sed sola redemptio consistit in poenitentia.” No comprehendo quien es este Anima Voluntas, 6 este 
Rabbi Moyses Egipcio que reconocié esta verdad como consta del Sanhedrin Guazit en la distincion Helech O. El 
Predicador comete aqui un yerro de chronologia de 700 4 800 afios. El Talmud ha que se concluyé de 1200 4 1300 
afios; y el Rabbi Moyses de Egipto ha 600 aftos que florecid: no sé pues, cémo dize que R. Moyses de Egipto 
conocié esta verdad como consta del Sanhedrin en la distincion Helech. Lo que hallo en este capitulo es un dicho 
de un gran sabio nombrado Rab, que dize tratando de la venida del Messias: “Ya se cumplieron todos los ter- 
minos; y la cosa (4 saber la venida del Messias) no depende mas que en penitencia, y en obras pias.” Quiere 
dezir que este captiverio no tiene un termino fixo, como tuvieron el de Egipto y el de Babilonia, aquel de 400, y este 
de 70 afios: 6 bien, que aquellos terminos que havian dado, sea Daniel ti otro, havian pasado, y el Messias no havia 
venido, y que asi los Judios se devian desengafiar ; que la venida del Messias consistia y estribava en la penitencia 
y obras pias, y no dependia en termino fixo. No sé como de estas palabras se puede colegir que este sabio entendio 
que el Messias vino: si es asi, cémo no se hizo Christiano? y pues siguid en el Judaismo, ergo no creyé que 
Christo era el verdadero Messias. 

58 hasta 63. En estos paragraphos se cansa en relatar diferentes Pseudo-Messias que huvo en la nacion en el 
espacio de 1500 afios ; y pudiera él mismo responderse con ellos, pues aunque es verdad que la nacion corrid 4 
abrasar algunos por engafiarse creyendo podia ser el verdadero y esperado Messias, luego que vid que no se cum- 
plieron en ellos literalmente las prophecias que del verdadero tratan los reyecté y abandond, y fueron y son tenidos 
en la nacion por espureos y falsos. Y que hay que admirar que una nacion abatida y conculcada abrasase qualquiera 
ocasion de restaurarse, dexandose llevar de aquella confianca que siempre tuvo y tiene en Dios, y de aquella espe- 
ranca que conserva en su divina y santa Palabra que no puede faltar? Por ventura no huvo y hay en Portugal hasta 
el dia de hoy quien espera al Rey Don Sebastian? No huyo en los pasados siglos uno que se fingié serlo? Y no 
se escrivieron libros en su abono? Pues si esto sucede en una nacion libre solo por el ansia de rever un Rey que 
estimava, qué mucho padeciese semejante engafio una nacion oprimida, con la esperanga de ver un Rey que Dios le 
tiene prometido,? 

© MTL 

64. Pregunta seriamente 4 los Judios si esperan al Messias con aquellas mismas sefiales que la Escriptura y los 
Prophetas lo descriven, 6 con otras de que no hay noticia. Respondo al Seflor Arcobispo, que el Messias que espe- 
ramos es el mismo que esta descripto en las Sagradas Escripturas ; y si quisiere saber 4 que fin ha de venir y lo que 
ha de hazer lea las siguientes prophecias. Deut. cap. xxx. “Y sera quando te sucedieren estas cosas, la bendicion 
y la maldicion que yo he puesto delante de ti, y reduxeres 4 tu corazon en todas las gentes, en las quales te expul- 
sara el Sefior tu Dios; y te convirtieres al Sefior tu Dios, y oyeres su voz, conforme todo lo que te mando hoy, tu y 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 141 

tus hijos con todo tu coracon y con toda tu alma. Y bolverd el Sefior tambien tu captiverio, y te apiadara y tomara, 
y juntarte ha de los pueblos 4 los quales te huviere esparcido el Sefior tu Dios; y de alli te tomara y te traera el 
Sefior tu Dios 4 la tierra que poseyeron tus padres, y heredarla has, y hazerte ha bien, y te multiplicara mas que tus 
padres ; y circuncidard el Sefor tu Dios @ tu coracgon, y 4 coracon de tu succesion para que ames al Sefior tu Dios 
con todo tu-coracon y con toda tu alma para que vivas. Y pondra el Seftor tu Dios todas estas maldiciones sobre tus 
enemigos y sobre tus aborrecientes que te persiguieron ; y tu bolverds y obedecerds la voz del Seftor tu Dios, y 
observaras todos sus mandamientos que yo te ordeno hoy. Y hazerte ha el Sefior tu Dios abundar en todas obras 
de tus manos, en el fruto de tu vientre, en el fruto de tu bestia, y en el fruto de tu tierra para bien ; porque el Sefior 
bolvera 4 regozijarse en ti, en bien, de la manera que se regozijé con tus padres, si obedecieres la voz del Sefior tu 
Dios para observar sus mandamientos y sus estatutos escriptos en este Libro de la Ley, quando te convirtieres al 
Sefior tu Dios con todo tu coracon y con toda tu alma.” De todos estos versos se infiere, que aun despues de la 
venida del Messias se ha de observar la Ley de Moyses en su pueblo. 

Isaias, cap. ii. ver. 2.3. 4. “ Y¥ sucedera en el fin de los dias que sera compuesto el monte de la casa del Sefior por 
cabeca de los montes, y seré exaltado sobre los collados, y correrdn 4 el todas las gentes. Y vendran muchos 

pueblos, y dir4n: Venid y subamos al monte del Seftor, 4 la casa de Dios de Jacob, y enseflarnos ha sus caminos, 
| y caminaremos por sus sendas, porque de Sion saldra Ley, y de Jerusalem la Palabra del Seftor. Y juzgara entre 
las gentes, y reprehendera 4 muchos pueblos; y bolverén sus espadas en asadones, y sus langas en hoces; no 
bolveré espada gente contra gente, y no se ensayardn mas para la guerra.” 

Cap. xi. ver. 10. 11.12.13.14.15. “ Y ser4 en aquel tiempo que la raiz de Isai, la qual estara puesta por pendon 
4 las gentes, sera buscada de las gentes, y su holganca sera gloria. Y sera en aquel tiempo que el Sefior bolvera a 
poner su mano otra vez para poseer las reliquias de su pueblo que quedaron de Assur y de Egipto, y de Parthia, y 
de Chus; y de Persia, y de Caldea, y de las islas de la mar. Y levantara pendon 4 las gentes, y recogerd los dester- 
rados de Israel, y juntara los esparcidos de Juda de los quatro cantones de la tierra, y deshazerse ha la envidia de 
Ephraim, y los enemigos de Juda seran tajados. Ephraim no envidiara a Juda, y Juda no afligira 4 Ephraim, mas 
volaran sobre los hombros de Ios Philisteos al Occidente ; meterén tambien a saco 4 los del Oriente. Edom y Moab 
los serviran, y los hijos de Ammon les daran obediencia; y secara el Sefior la lengua de la mar de Egipto, y levan- 
tard su mano con fortaleza de su espiritu sobre el rio, y herirlo ha en szete riberas, y hara que pasen por él con 
zapatos. Y havr4 camino para las reliquias de su pueblo, los que quedaron de Assur, de la manera que lo huvo 
para Israel el dia que subié de tierra de Egipto.” 

Cap. lil. ver. 1. “Despiertate, despiertate, vistete de tu fortaleza 6 Zion ; viste los vestidos de tu hermosura 6 
Jerusalem, Ciudad Santa, porque nunca mas aconteceré que venga en ti zzcirewciso ni immundo.” 

Cap. Ixv. ver. 16. “El que echare bendicion en la tierra, en el Dios de verdad se bendicira ; y el que jurare en la 
tierra por el Dios de verdad jurar4, porque las angustias primeras seran olvidadas, y seran encubiertas de mis ojos.” 
Y en el mismo cap. ver. 19.20. “ ¥ alegrarme hé con Jerusalem, y regozijarme he con mi pueblo, y jamas se oira en 
ella voz de clamor. No havré alli mas voz de lloro, ni mozo de dias, ni viejo que no cumpla sus dias ; porque el 
mozo moriré de cien afios, y el que pecare de cien afios sera maldito.” Y asi sigue hasta el fin del capitulo. 

Cap. Ixvi. ver. 18. 19.20. “Porque yo entiendo sus obras y sus pensamientos, tiempo vendra para juntar todas 
las gentes y las lenguas, y vendran y veran mi gloria; y poudré entre ellos sefal, y embiaré de los escapados dellos 
4 las gentes 4 Tharsis, 4 Pul y Lud, que tiran arco, 6 Thubal y Grecia, las islas apartadas que nunca oyeron mi 
fama ni vieron mi gloria, y publicaran mi gloria entre las gentes. Y traeran 4 todos nuestros hermanos de entre 
todas las gentes por presente al Seftor en caballos, en carros, en literas, en mulos, y en camellos, 4 mi sancto monte 
de Jerusalem, dize el Sefior, de la manera que los hijos de Israel suelen traer el presente en vasos-limpios a la casa 
del Seftor.” 

Jeremias, cap. iii. ver. 17.18. “En aquel tiempo llamaran 4 Jerusalem silla del Sefior, y todas las gentes se con- 
gregaran 4 ella, en el nombre del Sefior, en Jerusalem, ni mas iran tras la dureza de su coracon malvado. En 
aquellos tiempos iran de la casa de Juda 4 Ja casa de Israel, y vendran tambien de tierra de Aquilon 4 la tierra que 
hize heredar 4 vuestros padres.” Y despues en el cap. xxxi. ver. 34. “Yno ensefiaré mas ninguno 4 su proximo, ni 
ninguno 4 su hermano diziendo, ‘Conoced al Sefior : porque todos me conoceran, desde el mas chiquito dellos 
hasta el mas grande, dize el Sefior, porque perdonaré 4 su maldad, y no me acordaré mas de su pecado.” 

Ezechiel, cap. xxxvi. ver. 25. 26. “Y esparciré sobre vosotros aguas limpias y sereis limpiados de todas vuestras 

20 

142 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

immundicias y de todos vuestros idolos vos limpiaré, y vos daré coragon nuevo, y pondré espiritu nuevo dentro de 
vosotros; y quitaré de vuestra carne el coragon de piedra, y vos daré coragon de carne.” 

Cap. xxxvii. desde el ver. 24 hasta 28. “ Y mi siervo David sera Rey sobre ellos ; y 4 todos ellos serd un pastor, 
y andardn en mis derechos caminos, y mis encomendancas guardaran y observarlas han; y habitaran sobre la tierra 
que di 4 mi siervo Jacob, en la qual habitaron vuestros padres ; sobre ella habitaran ellos y sus hijos, y hijos de sus 
hijos para siempre. Y mi siervo David le sera Principe para siempre, y concertaré con ellos concierto de paz, con- 
cierto perpetuo sera con ellos, y los estableceré, y los multiplaré, y pondré mi sanctuario entre ellos para siempre. 
Y estar4 en ellos mi tabernaculo, y seré 4 ellos por Dios, y ellos me seran 4 mi por pueblo. Y sabran las gentes 
que yo el Sefior santificqué 4 Israel, estando mi sanctuario entre ellos para siempre.” 

Cap. xxxix. ver. 27. 28. 29. “ Quando yo los bolveré de los pueblos, y los juntaré de las tierras de sus enemigos, 
y seré sanctificado en ellos en ojos de muchas gentes. Y sabran que yo soy el Sefor su Dios, quando los huviere 
hecho pasar en las gentes, y los juntare sobre la tierra, ni de ellos dexaré mas alla, ni mas esconderé de ellos mi 
rostro, porque mi espiritu derramé sobre la casa de Israel dixo el Seftor Dios.” 

Joel, cap. ii. ver. 27. 28. 29. ““Y conocereis que en medio de Israel estoy yo, y que soy el Seftor vuestro Dios y 
no hay otro, y mi pueblo no sera para siempre avergoncado. Y sera que despues desto derramaré mi espiritu sobre 
la carne, y prophetizaran vuestros hijos y vuestras hijas; vuestros viejos sofiaran suefios, y vuestros mancebos veran 
visiones. Y tambien sobre los siervos y sobre las siervas derramaré mi espiritu en aquellos dias.” Y despues en el 
cap. ili. ver. 16.17. “Yel Sefior bramard desde Zion, y desde Jerusalem dara su voz, y los cielos y la tierra tem- 
blaran ; mas el Sefior sera la esperanca de su pueblo, y la fortaleza de los hijos de Israel. Y conocereis que yo 
soy el Sefior vuestro Dios que habito en Zion, monte de mi santidad, y sera Jerusalem santa, y estrajios no pasaran 
mas por ella.” i 5 

Zacharias, cap. viii. ver. 23. “Asi dixo el Seftor de los exercitos, en aquellos dias sucedera que diez varones de 
todas las lenguas de las gentes, travaran de la halda del varon Judio diziendo: Vamos con vosotros, porque hemos 
oido que Dios es con vosotros.” YY despues en el cap. xiv. ver. 16. “ Y todos los que quedaren de las gentes que 
vinieron contra Jerusalem, subirdén de afio en afio 4 adorar al Rey, el Seftor de los exercitos, y celebrar la fiesta de 
las cabafias.” 

Daniel, cap. ii. ver. 44. “Yen los dias destos Reyes, levantara el Dios de los cielos un reyno que eternamente 
no se corromperd: y este reyno no sera dexado 4 otro pueblo, el qual desmenuzara y consumird todos estos reynos, 
y él permanecera para siempre.” 

Este es el indeleble character del Messias, y esta es la piedra de toque sobre que se han de provar los quilates de 
su perfeccion. Si se afirmaren en su tiempo todas estas prophecias, é infinitas otras que omito, lo reconoceremos 
por verdadero, y si no, lo tendremos por espureo; y no se entiende alegoricamente sino literalmente, porque si nos 
tomamos la libertad de alegorisar las prophecias que no carecen de alegoria, como podremos distinguir del falso al 
verdadero Messias? Qualquiera que quiziere aplicarlas asi, con torcer los versos y alegorisarlos 4 su proposito se 
puede levantar por Messias; pero esta cadena y eslabon de sucesos son el solo character por donde se ha de distin- 
guir el verdadero Messias ; ha de ser conocido y manifestado 4 ojos de todas las naciones del mundo ; han de cesar 
las guerras entre las gentes ; todos han de seguir una sola Ley, y adorar un solo Dios; y como no hemos visto 
alguna destas prophecias afirmadas hasta el dia de hoy, concluimos que el Messias no es venido. 

§ XII. 

64. El Predicador trae aqui el verso 14 del cap viii. de Isaias, alegorisandolo como suele. Ya se tiene provado 
que ese capitulo, los precedentes y los subsequentes tratan del rey Hzechias, et hoc sufficit. 

65 hasta 69. En todos estos paragraphos pretende provar que los versos 3. 4. y 5. del cap. iii. de Oseas tratan 
de Christo, y dize: “O profeta Oseas nos deu outro sinal por onde o Messias se havia de conhecer quando o Mes- 
sias viesse: ‘ Dies multos expectabis me, et ego expectabo vos.’ Quando vier o Messias, diz o profeta, os Judeos 
hao de esperar-lo, e o Messias ha-de esperar aos Judeos. E porque os Judeos o nao hao-de aceytar, ficarao sem 
rey, sem principe, sem sacrificio, e sem altar: ‘Sedebunt filii Israel sine rege, sine principe, sine sacrificio, et sine 
altari. Depois de ficarem neste estado os Judeos, reconhecerdo o seu erro, ¢ 14 nos ultimos dias adorario ao Mes- 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 143 

sias aquem nao quizerao aceytar quando tinha vindo: ‘ Et post hec revertentur filii Israel ad Dominum Deum 
suum, et ad David regem suum.” Para la mejor inteligencia desta prophecia, y para convencer al mundo de la poca 
razon que acompafia al Padre Predicador, es necesario acotar con la prophecia desde el principio hasta el fin, para 
ver de donde saca este ilustre Arcobispo estas consequencias tan bien deducidas. 

Oseas, cap. iii. “ Et dixit Dominus ad me, Adhuc vade, dilige mulierem dilectam socii et adulteram, secundum 
dilectionem Domini ad filios Israel, et ipsos respicientes ad deos alienos, et diligentes dolia uvarum. Et mercatus sum 
eam mihi in quindecim argentis, et chomer hordeorum et letech hordeorum: et dixi ad eam, Dies multos sedebis 
mihi; ne forniceris, et ne sis viro; et etiam ego ad te: quia dies multos manebunt filii Israel, sine rege et sine 
principe, et sine sacrificio, et sine statua, et sine Ephod et Teraphim. Postea revertentur filii Israel, et querent. 
Dominum suum, et David regem suum ; et pavebunt Dominum et bonum ejus, in noyissimo dierum.” Dixome 
Dios, ve aun otra vez y ama una muger amada de su compaifero y adultera, como el amor de Dios con los hijos de 
Israel, los quales miran 4 dioses agenos, y aman redomas de vino. la compré por quinze monedas de plata, y por 
un homer y medio de cevada: y dixele muchos dias estards por mia, no fornicard4s ni tomards otro varon; ni tam- 
poco yo vendré 4 ti; porque muchos dias estardn los hijos de Israel sin rey, sin principe, sin sacrificio, sin estatua, 
sin Ephod ni Teraphim. Despues bolverdn (en penitencia) los hijos de Israel, y buscaran al Seftor su Dios, y 4 
David su rey, y temer4n de Dios y de su bondad en el fin de los dias. 

Mandale Dios al Propheta que tome una muger, que fixe su amor en ella como verdadero marido no obstante 
que esta muger sea adultera. Aqui declara el mismo Propheta la prophecia, y la comparacion es; de la misma 
forma amé Dios y quizo 4 Israel, no obstante que estavan sumergidos en lia idolatria de Egipto, dioles la ley, que 
fue el casamiento ; pero ellos ingratos se dieron 4 la idolatria y 4 los vicios, y particularmente al vino. Dize el 
Propheta que tomé la muger por quinze pesos de plata y un homer y medio de cevada, que pactd con ella que estu- 
viese muchos dias sin conocer varon, ni tampoco él 4 ella. Declara la alegoria y la aplica diziendo: Porque de la 
misma forma que esta muger quedé sin marido y sin adultero en pena de su pasado adulterio ; asi quedaron tambien 
muchos dias los hijos de Israel sin rey (de la casa de David), sin principe (de los reyes de Israel), sin sacrificio 
(esto es sin templo), sin estatua (esto es sin idolatria), sin ephod (a saber, sin Urim y Tumim, que era el divino 
oraculo en quien consultava el Principe 4 Dios), y sin Teraphim (esto es los oraculos de la gentilidad) ; de manera 
que est4 el exemplo adequado, porque de la misma forma que la muger del Propheta devia estar muchos dias sin 
marido y sin adultero, asi Israel en este captiverio estara sin sacrificio y sin templo que es el marido; y sin estatua 
que es la idolatria, y significa el adulterio ; no gozara del Ephod, esto es la prophecia; pero ni tampoco se pegara 4 
los oraculos gentiles para saber lo futuro. 

Dize mas, que en pasando este tiempo en que Israel dé muestras de la mucha constancia y confianga que tiene 
en Dios, que entonces bolverd en penitencia de los pecados que cometid; y con eso obtendra el que se manifieste 
patente la divina providencia sobre él; que le bolvera el reyno de la casa de David, y el templo ; que esto sucedera 
en el fin de los dias. Este es el sentido literal desta prophecia: vease como la va adulterando (no ya alegorisando) 
nuestro Padre Predicador, pues quiere hacer creer que Dios dize: “Dies multos expectabis me, et ego expectabo 
vos ;” y sobre este forjado verso dize: “Quando vier o Messias, diz 6 profeta, os Judeos hao-de esperarlo, e o 
Messias ha-de esperar aos Judeos. E porque os Judeos o nao hao-de aceytar, ficaraé sem rey,” &c. 

De qué parte de la prophecia se infiere que los Judios havian de reyectar el Messias? De donde colige que 
porque los Judios no lo han de aceptar, han de quedar sin rey, &c.? No es la pena de estar sin rey, &c. el haver 
adulterado, esto es idolatrado? Lo que el Propheta dize es diametralmente opuesto 4 Io que infiere el Predicador, 
pues Oseas asegura que estaran muchos dias sin rey, sin principe, sin sacrificio, &c. y que despues bolveran en peni- 
tencia, y buscaran 4 Dios, y 4 David su rey: y el Predicador afirma que estaran sin rey, &c. despues de la venida 
del Messias, por no haverlo admitido. De donde infiere este Predicador, de las palabras del Propheta, que viniendo 
el Messias ha de ser reyectado por los Judios? De donde colige desta prophecia, que el Messias ha de ser Dios y 
hombre ? 

Para hazer constar patentemente de donde saca el Predicador estas dos consequencias, es necesario poner 4 buena 
luz estas corrupciones que comete en los versos este buen Predicador, por fuerca de las quales quiere obligar 4 los 
Judios 4 que crean lo que el dize. Veamos como acota él los versos del Propheta, y cotegemoslos con su original 

Hebreo y con la translacion de Pagnino. 

14.4 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Original Hebreo. Pagnino. Vulgato. 
85> oaWN DDN OM mMoN TDN) 3. 3. Et dixit ad eam, dies multos se- 3. Dies multos expectabis me, et ego 
PON NOD WN) YAN 8D) on debis mihi, ne forniceris, et ne sis expectabo vos. 

viro, et etiam ego ad te. 
Mx wl) $sqw) 22 aw amN 5. 5. Postea revertentur filii Israel, et 5. Post heec revertentur fil fsrael ad 
TNs DI) TT AN OTN TT querent Dominum Deum suum, et Dominum Deum suum, et ad Da- 
: DOT M2 10IN) TNS David Regem suum. vid Regem suum. 

Quiere este Predicador hazer dezir al Propheta, que los Judios han de esperar al Messias, y el Messias ha de esperar 
4 los Judios ; para cuyo efecto forja un verso nuevo en la Sagrada Escriptura que diga : “Dies multos expectabis me, et 
ego expectabo vos.” Muchos dias me esperareis, y yo vos esperaré 4 vos; significando con esto que vino ; que no fué 
admitido por los Judios, mas bien deshechado ; y que esta con paciencia muchos dias esperando por ellos, “et ego 
expectabo vos.” Pero primeramente, este verso es forjado por la pluma del Seftor Argobispo, 6 en la Vulgata, y no 
hay tal verso en la prophecia, y solo es una corrupcion para hazer que diga el Propheta lo que no dize, ni quizo 
dezir, ni le pasé por la imaginacion. Segundariamente, quando bien huviera tal verso, no era el Messias quien lo 
dezia, sino el Propheta, pues el Messias no habla en toda la prophecia; luego ni aun adulterando el verso, como 
haze, adelanta nada su systema. La prophecia no se puede entender por Christo en ninguna forma, pues dize que 
despues de estar los hijos de Israel muchos dias sin rey, sin principe, sin sacrificio, &c. bolveran en penitencia y 
buscarén 4 Dios y al Messias ; ergo, despues de estar Israel por mucho tiempo sin rey, &c. es que ha de venir el 
Messias. Quando vino Christo, no carecia Israel ni de Rey, ni de templo, ni de sacrificio ; engo no podia ser Christo 
el prometido Messias en esta prophecia. 

El otro verso que adultera es: “ Et postea revertentur filii Israel ad Dominum Deum suum, et ad David Regem 
suum ;” quando el original dize: “ Postea revertentur filii Israel e¢ guerent Dominum Deum suum, et David Regem 
suum.” Con faltar la diccion guerent haze que diga el verso, que los hijos de Israel bolver4n en penitencia 4 Dios y 
David su rey ; con esto le parece que tiene ganado su punto, y que el Messias ha de ser Dios y hombre, pues han 
de bolver en penitencia tanto 4 Dios como 4 David que es el Messias. Pero sepa el Seflor Arcobispo, que si no tiene 
otras pruevas que traer para apoyar su systema que esa, le ha de valer poco, pues en el original Hebraico y en todas 
las Biblias impresas y manuscriptas esta la diccion que quiere dezir, et guerent. De la misma forma esta en todas 
las translaciones de qualquiera lengua ; y lo mismo translada Pagnino, Arias Montano y muchos otros ; y Jonathan 
hijo de Huziel, en el Targum, dize, que bolveran en penitencia, que buscaran 4 servir al Seftor su Dios, y obede- 
ceran al Messias hijo de David; ergo que no lo tiene por Dios. 

Miserables pruevas son las que es necesario recurrir 4 la corrupcion para apoyarlas. Que lo prediquen no me 
admiro, pues no havria nadie que supiese 6 pudiese contradezirle ; pero que tengan atrevimiento de darlo publica- 
mente 4 la imprenta, sin verguenca de los que apruevan semejantes corrupciones en la divina Palabra, es de lastimar 
y aun de Ilorar la ceguedad de hombres que por solo el interes adulteran la divina Palabra, y despues pretenden 
mantenerla, sin considerar que es un crimen de lesa Magestad Divina, que no puede ser agradable aun a los mismos 
de su profesion que tienen el entendimiento libre para discurrir la verdad, y detestar semejantes medios de que se 
sirven ; y mucho menos para convencer Judios, que son el archivo de la divina Palabra y la Arca del Testamento 
donde se conserva pura, limpia, y sin macula, con cuyo original los hombres doctos entre los Christianos cotejan 
sus translaciones, y por él se guian, y a el apelan en sus dudas. 

70. Trae el Predicador la prophecia de Malachias, cap. i. ver. 10. 11. que dize: ‘“‘ No recibo contentamentos en 
vosotros, dixo el Seftor de los exercitos, ni de vuestra mano me sera agradable el presente. Porque desde donde el 
sol nace hasta donde se pone mi nombre es grande entre las gentes, y en todo lugar se ofrece 4 mi nombre perfume 
y presente limpio, porque es grande mi nombre entre las gentes, dize el Sefior de los exercitos.” El Predicador 
supone que este Propheta habla por el tiempo de Christo, y de alli deduce, que Dios tiene deshechada la nacion y 
los sacrificios ; y pretende provar que tiene instituido en su lugar un nuevo sacrificio limpio, el qual se sacrifica por 
todo el mundo, por cuyo medio el nombre de Dios es grande en todo el orbe, y que por él habla el Propheta quando 
dize : “ Porque desde donde nace el Sol hasta donde se pone mi nombre es grande entre las gentes, y en todo lugar 
se ofrece 4 mi nombre perfume y presente limpio.” La grande objeccion que forma contra los Judios, y sobre que 
funda la machina de su exposicion estriba en que en tiempo del Propheta no havia nacion que sacrificase 4 Dios, y 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 145 

que asi era preciso que hablase del tiempo de Christo, 4 cuyo nombre en todas las quatro partes del mundo (dice el 
Predicador) le sacrifican un sacrificio limpio. 

Para responder 4 esta formidable objeccion, es necesario saber que Malachias fue el ultimo de todos los Pro- 
phetas, y prophetizé en el principio del segundo templo, quando los sacerdotes eran sumamente ignorantes en su 
profesion, como consta del Propheta Aggeo su contemporanco cap. ii. ver. 12. 13. pues preguntandole una question 
de su profesion, manifestaron su ignorancia en la respuesta que dieron. Y no hay que admirar que haviendo estado 
setenta afios fuera del ministerio, perdiesen no tan solamente la practica pero tambien la theorica. Ademas de su 
ignorancia, se corrumpieron con las naciones circunvecinas, y tanto ellos como los demas de la nacion carecian de 
devocion ; y quando sacrificavan para Dios, buscavan el animal coxo, ciego, 6 el que robavan por no darlo de lo 
suyo: en tan poco aprecio tenian los holocaustos y sacrificios, que el peor les parecia bastava para el altar ; esto 
sucedia entre el vulgo. Los sacerdotes como los mas llegados y cercanos 4 Dios, de quienes se devia esperar corri- 
giesen al pueblo, y le hiziesen patente su yerro, eran los que mas encorajavan y animavan este pecado con despreciar 
el divino altar, con dolerse del trabajo, y con asquear el divino servicio; de forma que con su indecencia perdia el 
pueblo la devocion, y adquiria el divino enojo. 

Irritado Dios al mayor grado de la desatencion y mal oficio de los ministros, les manda corregir por este santo 
Propheta, recopilando el carifio que havia mostrado 4 la nacion desde su origen en el Patriarca Jacob. Empieza 
pues su prophecia dandoles en rostro el amor que siempre les havia profesado ab origine ; el odio que preservava 
contra Esau, no obstante ser hermano de Jacob ; que le havia destituido de su estado y reyno, y vuelto en horrible 
desierto su amena y fertil tierra, y que este estado de desolacion havia de permanecer eternamente ; de forma que 
por mas que procurase restablecerse y bolver 4 erigir sus conculcadas ciudades, jamas havia de conseguirlo, pues lo 
que ellos edificasen Dios derrocaria; de forma que su malignidad y pecados le havian adquirido la divina ira, y de tal 
seria conocido y apellidado entre las naciones; por el contrario, que restableceria 4 Israel y que los bolveria 4 su 
pristino estado. 

Despues que recopila los favores que le havia hecho, y aun continuava con ellos, pasa 4 relatar las ingratitudes 
con que le pagavan estos beneficios, tanto el pueblo como los sacerdotes; los unos en traer lo mas infimo y lo mas 
indigno por sacrificio; los otros en sacrificarlo y menospreciar el divino servicio, por cuya razon dize, “ No recibo 
contento con vosotros, ni de vuestra mano me serd agradable el presente.” 

Pero sobre lo que mas aprieta el Padre Predicador es sobre qué sacrificio era este que las naciones sacrificavan 
en tiempo deste Propheta, que era accepto 4 Dios como puro y limpio? Quien havia promulgado y predicado el 
nombre de Dios por todo el orbe, desde donde nace el sol hasta donde se pone? Pues afirma el mismo Dios que su 
nombre era grande entre las naciones ; por cuya razon concluye, que pues no puede ser en tiempo deste Prophcta, 
pues en ese tiempo no tenian conocimiento los gentiles de la primera causa, ergo que el Propheta habla por el tiempo 
de Christo. \ 

Pudiera responder al Padre Predicador facilmente, y derribar este coloso con la authoridad del Targum de Jona- 
than hijo de Huziel, el qual declara este presente y sahumerio limpio por las oraciones de los Judios en todas partes, 
pues dize : “ Desde donde nace el sol, y hasta donde se pone grande es mi nombre entre las gentes, y en todo tiempo 
que vosotros hiziereis mi voluntad, recebiré vuestras oraciones, y mi nombre grande se sanctifica por vuestra mano, 
y vuestras oraciones son como un sacrificio limpio delante de mi.” Luego este sabio entiende que este sacrificio son 
las oraciones de los Judios, y 4 ellas llama sacrificio limpio; y ellos (entiende este author) son los que sanctifican 
el Nombre grande de Dios entre las gentes. Pudiera con esta authoridad cantar la victoria contra mi antagonista, si 
fuera tan facil de cantarla como él; pero aunque Jonathan hijo de Huziel es un grave author, y su authoridad es 
grande, con todo no es suficiente para obligarnos 4 admitir su alegoria y dexar el literal; y asi digo que no obstante 
esa authoridad, el literal trata de los Gentiles y no de los Judios, y como tal 4 ellos se deve aplicar estos sacrificios 
y no 4 estos ; procuraremos pues responder 4 esa objeccion literalmente. 

Los authores literalistas Judios declaran este paso diziendo, que lo que significa aqui el Propheta es, que repro- 
chando la divina Magestad al pueblo Judaico y 4 sus sacerdotes por el desprecio que cometian en los sacrificios, 
dize que estimava mas el presente de los Gentiles, que el sacrificio de los Judios, pues aunque eran aquellos idolatras, 
tenian conocimiento y adoravan una primera causa como anterior 4 todo. Le tenian por ab eterno aunque le daban 
segundas causas; que estos Gentiles quando sacrificavan tomavan particular cuidado de que fuese lo mas excelente 

y limpio que podian adquirir, no obstante que sacrificavan 4 la idolatria: quando ellos aunque sacrificavan al verda- 
2P 

146 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

dero Dios, procuravan lo infimo y peor; por cuya razon dize Dios, que mas limpio era lo que presentavan los Gen- 
tiles, que lo que sacrificavan los Judios. Reparese cémo queda agora la prophecia, y vease como la adultera el buen 
Arcobispo, y la tuerce para forgarla 4 que diga lo contrario de lo que dize. 

La prophecia consiste en castigar y reprehender al pueblo por el poco comedimiento con que tratavan los sa- 
crificios ; reprochales que aun los Gentiles idolatras lo que presentavan en sacrificio era lo mas acendrado y limpio, 
siendo asi que ellos procuravan lo peor, y concluye en el cap. iii. ver. 4. que despues de la venida del Messias, seria 
accepto a Dios el presente de Juda y Jerusalem como dias de antes y como afios antiguos. 

Para librarse el Predicador del argumento de como los Gentiles de aquel tiempo sacrificavan 4 Dios, le es preciso 
suponer que aqui trata el Propheta del tiempo despues de la venida del Messias; que por no haver admitido los 
Judios a este Messias no seran ellos ni sus sacrificios mas acceptos 4 Dios, y que en su lugar admitira el sacrificio 
de la Misa (a quien él llama puro y limpio) que se sacrifica desde donde nace el sol hasta donde muere por la genti- 
lidad convertida. Esta es la exposicion que da 4 esa prophecia sin traer la coherencia y correlacion que tienen unos 
versos con otros, sin dar un declaro entero de toda la prophecia, mas si desmembrandola y despedacandola, haciendose 
ignorante de lo que trae antes y despues solo para poder explicarla 4 su proposito. ; 

Pero cémo quiere el Predicador que sirva de exemplo y comparacion, entre los Judios y Gentiles, lo que havia 
de suceder quatrocientos 6 quinientos aflos despues? El Propheta dize que en aquel tiempo era grande y famoso 
el nombre de Dios entre las gentes que en aquel tiempo se sanctificava a la Eterna Causa, y se sahumava 4 ella, y se 
le presentava un presente limpio ; y el Predicador no quiere que sea hasta quinientos afios despues. Notese que la 
prophecia no dize, que era suave 4 Dios el presente y los sacrificios de los Gentiles, mas dice que Dios lo recevia y 
lo estimava aunque ellos no lo dedicavan 4 Dios; y solo afirma que despues de la venida del Messias seria agradable 
a Dios el presente de Juda y Jerusalem ; ergo que no deseché Dios a los Judios ni 4 sus presentes, y que por lo 
contrario los estimara y le seran agradables despues de la venida del Messias. Los presentes de los Gentiles jamas 
le fueron agradables ni los estimé, y solo truxo la comparacion para minorar los sacrificios que en aquel tiempo 
llegavan los Judios, no para exaltar el presente de los Gentiles. 

He querido traer toda la prophecia y declararla para hazer constar patentemente, al que quiziere y deseare saber 
la verdad, las artes y corrupciones que emplea este Predicador para mantener su systema, y que reconozca el desa- 
pasionado Lector quan poca razon tiene de cantar la victoria sobre una prophecia que él tuerce y corrompe para 
hazer que diga lo que le conviene, como si no huviera hijos de Israel, como si no tuviera heredero. 

Pero faltanos provar que en aquel tiempo tenian los Gentiles conocimiento de la Primera Causa, y que aunque 
ellos suponian segundas causas, no obstante hazian una grande distincion de la Primera y Eterna. Aunque no era 
necesario provar lo que el mismo Dios afirma, pues quando no huviese llegado esa noticia a nosotros no por eso 
dexara de llevar la misma authoridad la Palabra de Dios, con todo alegaré algunas authoridades de Christianos y 
Gentiles para hazer constar que aun eso nos es notorio y manifiesto, y como tal se desvanece el argumento del Pre- 
dicador, y queda sin fuerca ni vigor, y la prophecia clara, patente, é inteligible. No embaracaré esta respuesta con 
multitud de acotaciones, bastandome con las que mas 4 proposito hazen, pues mi principal escopo no es otro que 
mostrar 4 los de mi nacion la poca razon que acompafia al Predicador 4 atribuirse la victoria sobre pasos tan con- 
_ trarios 4 lo que quiere deducir dellos ; y asi me contentaré con acotar solo aquellos que hazen al proposito, y que 
acuerdan poco mas 6 menos con el tiempo de aquel Propheta. El que quiziere ver la verdad podra conferir los 
originales. 

Eusebio en su libro De Preparatione Evangelica dize que havia leido en un libro de Zoroaster, antiguo philo- 
sopho de los Persas, las siguientes palabras: ‘Dios es el primero de los incerruptibles entes, Eterno, Inconcevible ; 
no es compuesto de partes, no hay ninguno que se le parezca ni que sea igual @ él; el es el Author de todo el bien, 
enteramente desinteresado, y el mas exaltado de los mas excelentes entes; el mas sabio de todos los intelectos, el 
Padre de la equidad, y Progenitor de todas las buenas leyes ; Omnisciente, Omnipotente, y e] Primer Formador de la 
naturaleza.” L 

Plutarco en el tratado de Isis y Osiris nos asegura, que los magos llamavan Oromazes al grande Dios 6 Prin- 
cipe de la Luz que produxo todas las cosas, y obra todo en todo; que admitian otro Dios pero de una naturaleza 
inferior, 4 quien Ilamavan Mithras, 6 el Dios inferior; no lo tenian por coeterno con el mismo Dios, pero si el primer 
producto de su poder. El mismo Plutarco hablando de los Egipcios (en el dicho tratado) dize: “Que Mlevavan 
por opinion, que como el sol era comun para todo el mundo, no obstante que tenia diversos nombres en diferentes 

mi 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 147 

regiones, asi no hay mas que una sola suprema idea y razon, y una misma Providencia que govierna el mundo, no 
obstante que es adorado baxo diversos nombres y que haya substituido inferiores entes por ministros suyos.” 

Iamblico dize, que conforme los Egipcios, el primer Dios existié en su solitaria unidad antes que todos los 
entes. 

E] author de la Argonautica dize: “Cantemos primero un himno sobre el antiguo chaos, cémo los cielos, la 
mar, y la tierra fueron de él formados. Cantemos tambien 4 aquel eterno, sabio, y perfecto amor, que reduxo este 
chaos en orden.” 

_ De Thales Milesio, uno de los siete sabios de Grecia, y que florecié 600 afios antes de Christo, dize Diog. Laert. 
en su Vida, lib. i. que creia que “ Dios es el mas antiguo de todos los entes ; es el Author del universo, el qual esté 
Ileno de admiraciones ; es la mente que quité el chaos de la confusion, y le puso en orden ; no tiene principio ni fin, 
y nadie se esconde de él; no hay quien pueda resistir la fuerca del hado, pero este hado no es otro que la razon 
immudable y el poder eterno de la Providencia.” 

Pythagoras nos da una idea de la Divinidad en las siguientes palabras: “No hay mas que un solo Dios el qual 
no esta (como algunos imaginan) sentado encima del mundo, y sobre el ambito del universo, mas siendo él en si 
todo-en todo. El ve todos los entes que Ilaman immensidad ; él es el solo Principio, la Luz del cielo, el Padre de 
todo; el produce todas las cosas, ordena y dispone todo; es la razon, la vida, y el movimiento de todos los entes.” 

Platon en su Republica dize que “ Dios est4 rodeado de una gruesa obscuridad, que ningun mortal puede pene- 
trar, y que el inaccessible Dios solo con el silencio se deve adorar.” 

Para mayor prueva desta verdad y que sea incontrastable, lease en Daniel la idea que Nabucodonozor tenia de un 
solo Dios, pues luego que Daniel le dixo el suefo de la estatua confesd que su Dios era el supremo Dios de los 
Dioses ; no dize que entonces supo que havia un Dios sobre todos los Dioses, mas afirma que con aquel portento 
conocié ser el Dios que Daniel adorava el verdadero Dios de los Dioses. 

En el II Paralip. cap. xxxvi. ver. 23. se hallan estas palabras de Ciro: “ El Sefior Dios de los cielos me concedié 
todos los reynos de la tierra, y me encomend6 le edificase el templo en Jerusalem que esta en Judea. Quien quiera 
que sea entre vosotros de su pueblo, su Dios sea con él, suba 4 Jerusalem, y edifique la casa del Sefior Dios de 
Israel, él es el Dios.” ’ 

Los Guibhonitas engafaron a los Principes de la nacion en tiempo de Josué con aquella sabida extratagema de 
dezir, que havian venido de una tierra, que era seis meses de camino, al nombre y a la fama de los milagros del 
verdadero Dios: y aunque fue engafio, es preciso que fuese verosimil de que aquellas remotas naciones tuviesen 
conocimiento de la grandeza de la Primera Causa, porque si no fuera asi, ni los Principes se engafiaran, ni los 
Guibhonitas se atrevieran a forjar el engafio fundado sobre una imposibilidad. 

E] mismo Dios afirma que los milagros y portentos que havia executado en Egipto, havian sido solo para que se 
publicase su nombre y fama por el mundo. “Y para que se relate mi nombre en toda la tierra.” Exodo, cap. ix. 
ver. 16. £7go, que el nombre y el conocimiento de la Primera Causa eran publicos y notorios en todo el orbe, y 
tambien adorada aunque baxo diversos nombres. 

No es mucho tuviesen conocimiento de la Primera Causa, haviendo mandado Nabucodonozor pregonar diversas 
vezes en su vasto imperio, que no havia mas que el solo Dios de los cielos, como consta por Daniel cap. iv. ver. 1. 
« Nabucodonozor Rey, 4 todos los pueblos, naciones, y lenguages que moran en toda la tierra, paz os sea multipli- 
cada. Las sefiales y milagros que el Alto Dios ha hecho conmigo, conviene que yo los publique. Quan grandes son 
sus sefiales, y quan fuertes sus maravillas! Su reyno, reyno de siempre, y su sefiorio hasta generacion y generacion.” 
Y en el cap. iv. ver. 37. quando le bolvié el sentido dize: “ Agora Yo Nabucodonozor alabo, engrandezco y glorifico 
al Rey de los cielos, porque todas sus obras son verdad, y sus caminos juizio, y 4 los que andan con sobervia puede 
humillar.” | 

Quando se libré Daniel de los leones, Dario Medo mandé publicar un edicto que contiene Daniel cap. vi. ver. 25. 
hasta 28. “Entonces el Rey Dario escrivié @ todos los pueblos, naciones, y lenguages que habitan en toda la tierra, 
Paz os sea multiplicada. De parte mia es puesta ordenanza en todo el sefiorio de mi reyno, que todos teman 
y tiemblen de la presencia del Dios de Daniel, porque él es el Dios viviente y permaneciente por todos los siglos; y 
su reyno que no se deshara, y su sefiorio hasta la fin. Que escapa y libra, y haze sefiales y maravillas en el cielo 
y en la tierra, el qual libré 4 Daniel del poder de los leones.” 

El Rey Ciro mandé se diese al sacro templo becerros, carneros, corderos, sal, vino, y aceite, para que se sacrificase 

148 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

por la vida del Rey y de la casa real. El edicto contiene Esdras cap. vi. ver. 29 y 31. “Y lo que fuere necesario, 
becerros, carneros, 6 corderos para holocaustos al Dios de los cielos: trigo, sal, vino y aceite conforme 4 lo que 
dixeron los sacerdotes que est4n en Jerusalem, les sea dado cada dia sin algun embargo: para que ofrezcan loores de 
holganga al Dios de los cielos, y oren por la vida del Rey y de sus hijos.” 

El Rey Arthaxerxes mandé dar al templo de Dios presentes considerables y todo lo necesario, como consta de 
Esdras, cap. vili. ver. 19 y 21. “Y por mi el Rey Arthaxerxes es dado mandamiento 4 todos los thesoreros que estan 
de la otra parte del rio, que todo lo que os demandare Esdras, sacerdote escrivano de la Ley del Dios de los 
cielos, sea hecho luego. Todo lo que es mandado por el Dios de los cielos sea hecho prontamente para la casa del 
Dios de los cielos, por que no sea su ira contra el reyno del Rey y sus hijos.” 

De todos estos exemplos se infiere, que el Nombre grande de Dios, y el conocimiento de la Primera Causa 
estava explayado y promulgado entre las naciones, y era venerado y estimado desde donde nace el sol y hasta donde 
se pone, pues se havian divulgado los portentos y maravillas que Dios havia obrado por mano de sus Prophetas y 
siervos, por via de aquellos tres Reyes, Nabucodonozor, Dario, y Cyro; siendo el Propheta Malachias muy cerca de 
esos tiempos, pues prophetizé en los principios del segundo Templo, no es mucho huviese en el mundo un verda- 
dero conocimiento de la Primera Causa ; y que aquellos Gentiles informados de la verdad, le ofreciesen incienso y 
presentes. A ellos pues, se refiere el Propheta quando dize: “Que en todo lugar Iegan sahumerio, y presente 
limpio 4 mi Nombre.” 

Haviendole pues provado por historias sagradas y profanas, que los Gentiles contemporaneos del Propheta 
Malachias tenian un entero conocimiento de la Primera Causa, y que muchos dellos le sacrificavan y davan pre- 
sentes, queda inteligible que la prophecia trata de su tiempo, y no es necesario torcerla, como haze el Predicador, 
para inferir della lo contrario del verdadero y genuino sentido. 

Exhortando el Predicador 4 uno de los presos que sacavan 4 quemar, dize estas palabras: “ Ponde-vos a vés na 
presenca de Deos, sem mais peccado, que guardar a ley de Moyses. E ponde hum Christaéo na mesma presenca, 
sem outra culpa mais, que a observancia da ley de Christo. Se Deos condenar ao Christao por amor da ley, e salvar 
ao Judeo por amor da mesma, nao podia ser jusso Deos, nem podia satisfazer as razdes com que o Catholico havia- 
de arguir a sua justica. Porque en esse caso havia o Catholico de arguir a Deos desta maneyra: Juiz recto, eu cri 
em Christo, porque elle teve todos quantos sinais vos revelastes pelos vossos Profetas que havia-de ter vosso Filho. 
Fiz o que me mandastes, agora condenais-me por isso mesmo. Pois como me podeis condenar por eu vos obedecer ¢ 
Certamente nio tem reposta esta replica. Logo he impossivel que Deos condene ao Catholico por ser Christao.” El 
Arcobispo habla muy confiado, como si fuera secretario de la divina Magestad, y como si le fuera notorio lo que 
en el cielo pasa, con tanta confianza y atrevimiento que dize, que si Dios condenase al Catholico por observar la 
Ley de Christo, y salvase al Judio parguardar la’ Ley de Moyses, que no podia ser justo Dios; y se adelanta mas 
diziendo, que no podria Dios satisfazer las razones con que el Catholico havia de arguir 4 su justicia. La unica 
razon que da es, que el Catholico cree en Christo porque tuvo todas quantas sefiales revelé Dios por sus Prophetas 
havia de tener su Hijo. 

Pero si Dios respondiese 4 este Catholico que su divina Magestad jamas tuvo hijo, y que en Christo no se afir- 
maron literalmente aquellas prophecias que del verdadero Messias tratan ; que ninguna dellas le supone Dios sino 
solo hombre ; y que si huviera examinado con imparcialidad las sagradas prophecias ellas mismas le huvieran in- 
formado de la verdad; si la divina Magestad se dignase mandar las leyese para que viese quan errado iva en su idea, 
qué diria este buen Catholico ? Que Dios era injusto por condenarle porque se havia dexado llevar de la ceguedad, 
porque se havia confiado de la ignorancia, porque havia creido al interes sin examinar lo que tanto importava 4 su 
salyacion, porque havia hecho lo que Dios no havia mandado ni ordenado ? 

Yo no tengo tanto atrevimiento como limitar las razones que Dios puede dar al Catholico para convencerle, 
porque podré su divina Magestad alegar otras sin comparacion mas convincentes que mi insuficiencia no alcanza ; 
pero solo digo que no en la presencia de su divina Magestad pero en la de qualquiera humano juez, bastarian las 
que yo he alegado para convencer la presumpcion del Arcobispo: y si el Judio deve dar cuenta de la manera que 
dize el Predicador ; si yo no tuviera que dar otra cuenta mas que el haver profesado la Ley de Moyses, desta forma 
lo hiziera : : 

Dios y Sefior mio, postrado ante tu divina presencia vengo genuflexo 4 dar cuenta de la religion que profesé en 
la otra vida y la razon por qué. Naci, Sefior, de padres Judios, fui instruido en la Ley de Moyses, profesela por 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 149 

educacion hasta que llegué 4 los afios de discrecion, quando por la lectura de los libros de controversia me instigé 
la obligacion 4 examinar, con toda la exactitud de que mi entendimiento era capaz, las razones de una y otra parte ; 
y haviendolas balanzeado sin el prejuicio de mi educacion, hallé, Sefior, que las divinas prophecias que del verdadero 
Messias tratavan, no se havian cumplido en algun hombre hasta el dia de mi muerte. Hallé, Sefior, que en tu divina 
Ley nos aseguras, que si nuestra dispersion fuese de un cabo del mundo al otro que nos has de juntar y nos has de 
llevar 4 la Tierra de Promision, y alli mismo encargas la observancia de tus divinos preceptos; cémo me trasladaria 
yo 4 otra religion que destruye y aniquila tu santisima Palabra, que se opone 4 tus divinos mandamientos que tu 
mismo pronunciaste en el Monte de Sinay, porque hay hombres que declaran algunas prophecias alegoricamente, y 
las aplican 4 cierta persona que ellos llaman tu Hijo? Y quando se ven convencidos por la fuerca de tu divina, clara, 
y patente Palabra que literalmente contradize lo que pretenden provar, se retiran al sentido alegorico ; qué prueva 
hay que ese sea el verdadero sentido y no otro? Cdémo haviamos de dexar aquella divina Palabra que oimos de tu 
santisima boca por explicaciones y alegorias de hombres que ni entre si acuerdan, que contradizen y se oponen 4 
la verdad recebida de tu fiel siervo Moyses, de tus santisimos Prophetas, y de toda la serie de sabios y doctos varones 
que en tantos siglos escrivieron conforme 4 aquella recebida verdad, que en todos sus escriptos confirman y nos 
exhortan a la estrecha observancia de tu divina Palabra? A estos, pues, he seguido, y creyendo te servia y adorava 
en la mejor forma y manera que posible era en el mundo, me ligué estrechamente con aquella religion que crei ser 
la unica y sola, y que reconoci por tu verdadera y eterna Palabra. Vivi Judio y mori Judio, en lo qual creo haverte 
servido como mandaste; y aqui estoy ante tu divina misericordia para que ordenes se haga conmigo lo que fueres 
servido. aorta nee aimee Ue 

Y despues aguardaria me diese la sentencia como fuera servido, si es que en el cielo se juzga con las mismas cere- 
monias que en la tierra ; porque 4 confesar la verdad no estoy tan perito en ello como el Arcobispo, ni me atrevo 4 
llamar 4 Dios injusto, ni 4 hablarle con tanta familiaridad, pues con la divina Magestad no hay burlas, como dize 
Job, cap. xiii. ver. 9. “Vos burlareis con él como quien se burla con algun hombre »” Ni devemos atrevernos 4 tra- 
tarle con insolencia y desacato, aunque sea suponiendolo. Esto me ensefia mi sagrada religion, como dize Moyses, 
Deuter. cap. x. ver. 20 y 21. “Al Sefior tu Dios temeras, 4 él adorards, y 4 él te llegarés y en su nombre juraras. El 
es tu alabanga y él es tu Dios, que hizo contigo todas las grandezas y portentos que vieron tus ojos.” 

EI se sirva por su divina misericordia abrir los ojos de todas las naciones para que unanimes y conformes le 
sirvamos igualmente, llamando todos a una voz por su santisimo nombre, como asegura el Propheta Sophonias, 
cap. iii. ver. 9. ‘ Entonces derramaré 4 los pueblos habla clara, para que todos ellos invoquen el nombre del SENor, 

y para que le sirvan de comun consentimiento *.” 

* Since the fury with which the Spanish Inquisition persecuted the Jews towards the latter end of the fifteenth century, during the entire of the 
sixteenth, and the earlier half of the seventeenth; has been recurred to as a strong argument to prove that the New World had in remote 
ages been colonized by their race, who had there attempted to verify the famous prophecy contained in the eighteenth verse of the Book of Oba- 
diah, “ And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in them, 
and devour them; and there shall not be any remaining of the house of Esau: for the Lord hath spoken it ;’—the discovery of which naturally 
excited the deepest feelings of indignation in the breast of the successors of Saint Peter, and led them to fulminate decrees against Judaism ina 
spirit of retaliation which betrayed more of hatred to the Old than love of the New Law ;—we judged it not improper to insert here the Arch- 
bishop of Cranganor’s Sermon, together with the Reply, in order to show that Portugal in her dealings with that people was actuated by a similar 
policy to that of Spain. Lest, moreover, the persecutions which they suffered in the New World should remain unknown, we subjoin two chapters 
from the nineteenth book of Torquemada’s Indian Monarchy, which, containing a brief history of the establishment of the Inquisition in New Spain, 
shows that the Jews were objects of its most vigilant care. The extract which follows, from an Italian MS. entitled “Prattica per procedere nelle 
Cause del S. Offizio,” (the twentieth chapter of which relates wholly to the Jews,) will furnish a ready reply to a question which is often asked, 
with a view of attaching something miraculous to the history of the Jews during the ages which have intervened since the Christian era; viz. 
Why, being the objects of relentless persecution, they have never forsaken the faith of their forefathers ? Volney, in his Meditations on the Ruins 
of Ancient Cities, ridicules the idea of attaching more importance to the obstinacy of the Jews than to that of any other fanatical sect, and appeals to 
examples to prove the absurdity of judging of the merits of any particular religious creed from the enthusiasm of its votaries. We have, however, 
here another solution of this mystery; since it appears that the Church, professing only to use persuasion to proselytize the Jews to Christianity, 
has by rigorous decrees always compelled them to remain within the pale of Judaism, or to profess themselves Christians ; and has by no means 
suffered them, by becoming infidels, to throw scandal on the faith of Abraham. The Jews are however now, what they never were in former ages, 
judges for themselves in matters of their religion, and if they remain still unenlightened, the fault rests alone with their own Rabbis. 

2Q 

150 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Estoria del Origen y Fundacion de el Santo Oficio, y de el tiempo que ha que paso a estos 
Reinos de la Nueva-Espana. 

Ex Santo Oficio de la Inquisicion si bien lo notamos desde sus principios, hallarémos que ha sido y es tan 
antiguo, que su origen viene deducido desde la creacion del primer hombre ; porque 4 pocas horas de esta dicha 
ereacion, hallamos, que pecd, quebrantando el mandamiento de Dios, y como transgresor fue luego buscado, y 
juzgado de ese mismo Dios, y sentenciado por su delito: como consta de la Sagrada Escritura. De manera que 
desde los principios de el hombre, poco despues de su creacion, sabemos aver avido actos inquisitorios, exami- 
nados y castigados por Dios 6 por ministros suyos, asi en el estado de la lei natural, como fue en Cain, y en el 
general anegamiento del mundo, como despues en el mismo estado de la lei natural: y en la escrita por manos 
de Moyses y otros sus ministros, en la adoracion del! becerro, y otros pecados, y alevosias, que tuvieron. Pero 
aunque es verdad, que en todas las edades del mundo los ha avido, con todo, parece averse ilustrado y engran- 
decido mas su autoridad en este estado de gracia y evangelico: en el qual el mismo Dios humanado, Jesu 
Christo Nuestro Sefior, hico entrega de él, 4 su Vicario San Pedro y 4 todos sus legitimos sucesores, como aquel 
que tenia comunicada ‘de su Padre Eterno toda la potestad en el cielo y en la tierra, como él mismo lo dice de si 
mismo, quando dixo 4 San Pedro, “ Apacienta mis ovejas.” Y en otra parte dice, “Tu convertido, confirma 4 tus 
hermanos.” Y asi se refiere en muchos canones del derecho, por lo qual, de todas las cosas pertenecientes 4 la Fé, 
son ellos los proprios y legitimos jueces, por particular y expresa comision de Dios que para ello tienen. Porque 
al Vicario umwversal de la Iglesia, & quien ese mismo hss tiene cometidas sus veces, conviene castigar con penas los 
pecados cometidos contra Dios. 

Esta potestad inquisitoria, aunque es verdad gue es propria y legitima del Sumo Pontifice y Vicario de Dios, 
que comengé en San Pedro* despues de Christo Nuestro Sefior, y se va continuando en sus legitimos sucesores, 
es tambien comunicada y derivada & los Arscobispos y Obispos, deducida de la que ese mismo Sumo Pontifice tiene, 
de legitimo y proprio oficio: porque como dice Anacleto Papa, que rigid la Silla Apostolica 4 los ciento y dos 
afios despues dela encarnacion de Christo Nuestro Seftor, faltando los Apostoles, les sucedieron en su lugar los 
Obispos ; 4 los quales los que los reciben y juntamente su Catolica doctrina, reciben 4 Dios en ellos. 

De aqui tuvo principio en la primitiva Iglesia, que en todas las provincias de la Christiandad se juntaban 4 
Concilio Provincial dos veces en el afio, donde se hacia examen € inquisicion juridica de todas las cosas tocantes 
y pertenecientes 4 la Fé y cosas eclesiasticas. Este uso y costumbre santa se guardé hasta la celebracion de el 
‘sexto Concilio Constantinopolitano, que se celebré el afio del Sefior de 681, donde se determind, que sola una vez 
en el aio se hiciesen estas inquisiciones regulares en los Concilios Provinciales. Y lo mismo se confirmé en el 
septimo Sinodo Niceno, en tiempo de el Papa Adriano, como lo afirma Zonaras, afio de 774, y est4 en el derecho. 

* It is surprising what wilful ignorance most Protestant writers display in treating of heresy, and the period when this imaginary crime, as even 
they are pleased to name it, became the subject of grave inquiry and led to the enactment of sanguinary laws. They contend that it was not punish- 
able in the early ages, but that the ambition of the Church of Rome first drew from its scabbard the spiritual sword, which was to subject to its 
will the thoughts and consciences of men. The first part of their assertion alone appears to be true; but not for the reasons which they would 
assign. In the early ages the pastors of the Church were in fact too weak to persecute, even if they had felt the inclination ; nor did Christians as 
a public body acquire any power till the reign of Constantine, who, although a wicked prince according to the testimony of profane historians, 
became from policy the first Christian emperor ;—one remarkable feature marking the progress of Christianity, that is to say, such a long succes- 
sion of emperors refusing to recognise it, and some even to tolerate it, although the founder of that religion was born in a province of the Roman 
empire; whom it would be as unreasonable to suppose could long have remained ignorant of an important political event which took place in 
Palestine, as that any novel circumstance occurring in Egypt could long be concealed from the sovereigns of the Ottoman empire. The latter part 
of their assertion is prompted by the hatred which all schismatic Churches bear to the Church of Rome. It is sufficient to say that it is false, 
and that the charge, if advanced, must recoil back on the primitive Church as soon as it became possessed of temporal power.. ‘The very name 
aipeots, which these writers profess to call a new-fangled term, which betrays its origin by its new signification, forgetting at the same time that it 
must be defended or condemned on the same grounds as the cognate term BAacd@nuwa, which, like aipeows, was anew name given by the early 
Christians to a new crime, is rather a proof of their ignorance or want of candour, than of their research and learning. The real truth of the 
case is, that the Church did exercise inquisitorial functions as soon as it became possessed of the power to do so; and that it did acquire that 
power in very early times is an historical fact: it is highly probable also, that the Jews and Christians, who in centuries immediately succeeding to 
the Christian zera, as well as at a later period, colonized America, introduced amongst the Enters many new modes of punishment for imaginary 
crimes, which gave a tincture of ferocity to the laws of the New World. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 151 

¥ lo mismo dice Lucio, Papa III. que rigid la Iglesia de Dios el afio de 1181 de la encarnacion de el Sefior. Asi 
lo ensefia el Sacro Concilio Universal Lateranense, celebrado en tiempo de Inocencio III. afio de 1215, y se dice en 
el derecho. Z tale 

Aunque lo dicho se fue continuando por este modo algunos afios, no permanecid, 6 por estorvos que huviese 
6 por negocios otros que ocurrian 4 ser estorvo 4 esta santa y general diligencia y examen. Por lo qual, el 
Sumo Pontifice, con madura deliberacion, acordé que otros varones doctos y sabios, Christianos y Catolicos, 
fuesen elegidos para que, como delegados de la Sede Apostolica, se ocupasen en este Santo y Catolico Oficio, y 
lo exercitasen con maduro y debido cuidado. Y de aqui parece aver tenido este Santo Oficio de la Inquisicion, 
origen y principio de las legacias Pontificias de tiempo aca de 400 afios, poco mas 6 menos, como lo prueba doc- 
tamente Ludovico de Paramo en su libro del Origen de la Inquisicion y Santo Oficio, porque antes de este tiempo 
los Obispos lo exercian con autoridad ordinaria. 

El motivo que huvo para elegir y nombrar Inquisidores (segun el mismo Ludovico) fueron las heregias de los 
Albigenses, que comencaron en la Galia Narbonense, y dice ser el primero que se llamé Inquisidor General, el 
Glorioso Padre Santo Domingo; y porque he visto controversia y question entre algunos, sobre qual haya sido este 
primer Inquisidor General con autoridad Apostolica, lo dexo por no ser mi particular intento controversiar y- 
contender con ellos, y paso 4 lo forgoso de mi racon; y digo, que solo ha sido de mi intento. decir el origen y 
principio de este Santo Tribunal, tan necesario en el mundo, para venir 4 tratar de él en estos reinos de la Nueva 
Espafia, donde pasé, despues de averse pacificado por nuestros Espafioles; de el qual tanto provecho se le ha 
seguido 4 la Christiandad, plantandose en estas nuevas tierras, por aver pasado é ellas gentes manchadas, que con 
su mala doctrina han querido contaminar el fortisimo muro de la verdadera Fé de Jesu Christo Nuestro Sefor, 
que Nuestra Madre la Santa Iglesia Catolica Romana tiene, con que reconoce y confiesa 4 su Celestial Esposo Jesu 
Christo, Redemptor Nuestro; por cuya misericordia se comengaron 4 descubrir y entender, luego que entré en la 
tierra las heregias y Judaismos que en ella se iban introduciendo; y fueron prendiendo y castigando los Sefores 
de este Santo Tribunal a estos contaminadores y obreros de maldad, que se iban despefiando por el camino errado 
de su ceguera y malicia. 

Vino, pues, el Tribunal de el Santo Oficio 4 esta Nueva Espaiia el afio de 1571*, reinando en Espaiia el Catolico 
Rei Don Felipe 11. de este nombre, de gloriosa y santa memoria, siendo Inquisidor General el Cardenal de Toledo, 
Don Diego de Espinosa, y governando esta Nueva Espafia el prudentisimo Virrei Don Martin Enriquez. Recibidse 
este Santo Tribunal con mui grandes fiestas y aparato. Fue primer Inquisidor'el Doctor Don Pedro Moya de 
Contreras, por aver muerto el Licenciado Juan de Cervantes que venia por Inquisidor, quedando el dicho Doctor 
Don Pedro Moya de Contreras, que despues fue Arcobispo de Mexico, Visitador de la Real Audiencia y Presidente 
de ella con voto, Governador y Capitan General de este reino (como en otra parte decimos), y bolviendo 4 Espafia 
con la visita, le mandé su Magestad que visitase el Real Consejo de las Indias, donde pasé 4 su Presidencia y 
murié Presidente en él. Fue en su tiempo Fiscal de este dicho Tribunal de el Santo-Oficio Don Alonso. Fernandez 
de Bonilla, y el aiio de 1563 el Consejo de su Magestad de la General Inquisicion,; Sede vacante, le did titulo de 
Inquisidor, y aviendo su Magestad dado la visita de la Audiencia de Lima’en el Peri, y asistiendo en ella, la misma 
Magestad Real le promovié 4 la Silla Arcobispal de Mexico, por ser hombre de singular valor y mui calificadas 
prendas. Didsele titulo de Fiscal al Licenciado Alonso Granero; y el afio de 1574, el Cardenal Don Gaspar de 
Quiroga, Arcobispo de Toledo, Inquisidor General, dié titulo al dicho Licenciado Granero de Abalos, de Inquisidor 
de Mexico, y poco despues fue electo Obispo de las Charcas en los reinos de el Peri, donde murié algunos: afios 
despues. . badieinat iad 

Al Licenciado Santos Garcia se le did titulo de Fiscal, y el afio de 1576 titulo de Inquisidor,'4 quien su 
- Magestad dié el Obispado de Guadalaxara en la Nueva Galicia, y murié en esta ciudad de Mexico, siendo Obispo 
de aquel Obispado. Didsele titulo de Fiscal al Doctor Lobo Guerrero, y el afio de 1579 el de Inquisidor ; y este 
mismo afio, de Fiscal al Doctor Martos de Bohorques ; y el de 94 se dié titulo de Inquisidor al Licenciado Don 
Alonso de Peralta, hombre mui calificado y eminentisimo en las cosas de este Santo Oficio, el qual en su tiempo 
las aumenté y autoricé en el sér y punto que aora tienen, con grandisimo exemplo y recogimiento de personas, 

® It would be a mistake to infer from this passage that the Inquisition was not known nor its power felt in New Spain before the year 1571 ; 
since it had been established at a much earlier period in the island of Saint Domingo, from whence its jurisdiction extended by delegated powers 

to Mexico and the other provinces of New Spain. 

152 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

saber, y letras mui aventajadas. Sirviendo este dicho Oficio, le hicgo su Magestad merced de el Arcedianato dé 
Mexico, para ayuda de costa de el immenso gasto que avia tenido en la exaltacion y aumento de este Santo Tri- 
bunal. Luego fue promovido a Arcobispo de la Plata en los reinos de el Perd, donde aora vive con gran nombre 
y loa de todos en aquella Santa Iglesia. Siendo Inquisidor, murié el Catolicisimo Rei Felipe II. de santa memoria, 
y despues de averle celebrado sus honras y obsequias la Audiencia con el Virrei y ciudad, con especial magestad 
y grandega en esta ciudad de Mexico, se hicieron otro dia por el Tribunal de el Santo Oficio en el insigne y reli- 
giosisimo convento de Santo Domingo, con tumulo y ornato tan autoricado que compitid con el de la ciudad ; y 
dex6 tanto nombre, que obligé 4 que de él se hiciese un mui copioso libro por el Doctor Ribera, Canonigo de la 
Catedral de Mexico, el qual anda impreso, que es de mucha elegancia y singular artificio, por averlo sido el tumulo 
que el dicho Inquisidor Don Alonso de Peralta ordend. En este acto asistié solo con el Fiscal Martos de Bohorques, 
por no tener 4 la sagon compaiiero; y porque anda de molde el dicho libro me remito 4 lo que en él se dice. 

En diez y siete de Julio de 1599, Don Pedro Portocarrero, Inquisidor General y Obispo de Cuenca, dié titulo de 
Inquisidor al Licenciado Gutierre Bernardo de Quirés, persona de grande suerte, de mucha virtud y prudencia, grandes 
letras y recogimiento, singular celador de la honra de Dios contra Judios y hereges ; ayudando con mui singular 
cuidado al dicho Inquisidor Don Alonso (que es aora Arcobispo de la Plata) en este Santo Tribunal, en el reparo y 
enmienda de grandes relaxaciones que se avian introducido en pechos poco temerosos de Dios, contra su santa lei 
y mandamientos, corrigiendo costumbres relaxadas, y castigando con fuego y otras penas, segun disposicion de el 
derecho, 4 los culpados. Aora esta en el mismo oficio con nombre y fama de prudentisimo varon. Fue promo- 
vido el Licenciado Lobo Guerrero al Arcobispado de el Nuevo Reino de Granada, y por ser persona tal, pasdé al 
de Lima en el Pert, donde al presente govierna aquella Iglesia. 

El ato de 1612, que vino la nueva 4 esta Nueva Espafia de el fallecimiento y muerte de la Serenisima Reina 
Dofta Margarita, muger de el Catolicisimo Rei Don Felipe III. de este nombre Nuestro Seftor, se le hicieron en 
esta dicha ciudad de Mexico las exequias por el Virrei y Audiencia en la Iglesia Mayor, como 4 tan Alta Magestad 
convenian ; y siguiendo Ja costumbre que en esto ha tenido este Santo Tribunal, las celebré tambien en el dicho 
convento de Santo Domingo el dicho Inquisidor Gutierre Bernardo, queriendose mostrar mui aventajado en ellas ; 
y asi lo estuvo el tumulo y aparato, puesto en medio de la capilla mayor de la dicha Iglesia (que es mui grande) tan 
adornado de pafios, de figuras, letras y geroglificos, plata y cera, que parece excedia en traca y adorno el arte 
humana. Asistid solo en los oficios de vigilia y misa los dos dias que duraron las honras con el Fiscal de el 
mismo tribunal, por averse muerto su compafiero Martos de Bohorques. Acompafiaronle todos los oficiales de el 
Santo Oficio, religiosos, clerigos, y seglares, que son en numero muchos, con otro mui grande acompafiamiento de 
gente que hico el acto mui lustroso. Y porque otro dirA por mas menuda cuenta y en mas larga relacion lo 
mucho que de este solemnisimo acto puede decirse, lo callo yo, engrandeciendo el valor y animo de su autor, 
donde mostro tenerle haciendo cosa tan grandiosa, y juntamente el piadoso sentimiento de pérdida tan grande con 
muerte de tan santa y soberana Sefiora. . 

Fue nombrado Inquisidor por el Cardenal de Toledo Don Bernardo de Roxas y Sandoval, Inquisidor General; 
el Licenciado Martos de Bohorques; y murié en el oficio 4 pocos afios despues.de su nombramiento ; y por Fiscal 
el Doctor Don Juan de Velasco, por el mismo Cardenal Arcobispo de Toledo, persona de mucha calificacion, mui 
docto en su facultad, mui prudente, y digno de mayores oficios. Por muerte de el dicho Martos de Bohorques, se 
le dié titulo de Inquisidor al Licenciado Juan Gutierrez Flores, que lo era de la Santa Inquisicion de Mallorca; é 
higo subida @ este Santo Tribunal de Mexico por el dicho Cardenal Don Bernardo de Roxas. Es hombre mui auto- 
rigado, y va con opinion de mui buen acertamiento por el mucho saber que ha mostrado en los oficios que ha 
tenido. Conserve Dios 4 los presentes en su santo servicio, y quiera que los que despues les sucedieren sean 
tales, como conviene, para la conservacion de su Santa Fé, exaltacion de su Santo Nombre, y acrecentamiento de 
sus alabancas eternas. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 153 

De los Autos Generales, que este Santo Oficio y Tribunal ha tenido en diversos tiempos en esta 
Nueva-Espana, despues que en ella entro. 

EL primer Auto de Inquisicion, que este Santo Oficio tuvo, fue el afio de 1574: celebrése en la Placuela de el Mar- 
qués del Valle, entre la puerta del Perdon de la Iglesia Mayor, y casas del dicho Marqués. Fue Auto mui so- 
lemne y autoricado; y como fue el primero, concurrieron 4 él muchas gentes de diversas partes y muchas leguas 
apartadas de esta ciudad, siendo inquisidores Don Pedro Moya de Contreras, y Don Alonso Fernandez de Bonilla. 
Huvo en él sesenta y tres penitentes : los veinte y uno reconciliados en persona, por la secta de Martin Lutero: y 
cinco, por la misma secta relaxados y entregados al braco seglar y quemados: los demas fueron penitenciados 
por diverso delitos. 

Luego el afio siguiente de 1575 huvo otro Auto publico, aunque no de tanta gente. Desde este afio, hasta el de 
1593 se celebraron otros siete Autos, en que huvo otra mucha copia de personas por varios delitos, que fueron desde 
el primero en numero nueve. 

El decimo Auto se celebréd en la Plaga Mayor de esta ciudad de Mexico, segundo Domingo de Adviento, dia de 
la Concepcion Purisima de la Virgen Madre de Dios Sefiora Nuestra, 4 ocho de Diciembre, afio de 1596, en que 
huvo sesenta y siete personas. Fue Auto mui famoso: por esta racon se pondran aqui algunas circunstancias de él. 
Celebrése siendo Inquisidor el Doctor Don Bartolomé Lobo Guerrero, electo Argobispo ‘del ‘Nuevo Reino, ‘y el 
Licenciado Don Alonso de Peralta, que ahora lo es de las Charcas, por otro nombre llamado de la Plata, siendo 
Virrei de esta Nueva-Espafia Don Gaspar de Ziiiga y Acebedo, Conde de Monte-Rei, que estuvo presente. Vino 
con los Sefiores de la Audiencia, hasta la puerta principal de la Inquisicion, despues de aver salido los penitentes, 
donde le recibieron los inquisidores, y fueron en la forma acostumbrada, llevando el dicho Virrei é Inquisidor mas 
moderno, en medio al Inquisidor mas antiguo, yendo el Virrei 4 la mano derecha. La Real Audiencia, luego por su 
orden, y al fin della el Doctor Martos de Bohorques, Promotor Fiscal del Santo Oficio, con el estandarte de la Fé, 
y 4 su lado izquierdo Don Juan de Altamirano, Caballero del hébito de Santiago, yerno de Don. Luis de Velasco, 
que ahora es Marqués de Salinas y Presidente del Real Consejo de las Indias, que Ilevaba una de las borlas del 
estandarte. Delante de él, el Secretario, Alguacil Mayor y Receptor del Santo Oficio. Luego el Capitan de la 
Guardia, y Alguacil Mayor de la Audiencia. Luego iba por su antigitedad el Cabildo Eclesiastico y Universidad ; 
4 la mano derecha, haciendo cabega, la dignidad que preside; 4 la izquierda, iba el Cabildo seglar, Corregidor, 
Alcaldes Ordinarios, Oficiales Reales, Regidores y Ministros de la Audiencia, mezclandose los unos con los otros, 
y adelante mucha copia de gente, que precedié con este orden, hasta su lugar, que le eligié en las casas de Cabildo 
de la Plaga Mayor, donde se ordené un sumptuoso asiento. Era su planicie un suelo, al nivel y parejo del pasa- 
mano, y baranda del alqueria que formaba un bocel corrido con sus molduras graciosas. En el vivo de esta cornija 
se puso en forma de estrado el asiento, quedando plaga bastante para las sillas de los sefiores, Virrei, inquisi- 
dores, y Audiencia. Por lo alto venia el dos el del Tribunal, que con el aparato de colgaduras de seda, y alfombras 
ricas y labradas, que se tendieron por los espacios y suelo del estrado, hacia gran magestad. 

Fue cosa marayillosa, la gente que concurriéd 4 este célebre y famoso Auto, y la que estuvo 4 las ventanas y 
placas, hasta la puerta y casas de el Santo Oficio, para ver este singular acompafiamiento y procesion de los 
relaxados y penitenciados, que salieron con sogas y corocas de llamas de fuego, y una cruz verde en las manos, 
llevando cada uno de estos un Religioso 4 su lado, para que le exortase 4 bien morir, y un Familiar de Guarda. 
Los reconciliados Judaicantes, con sambenitos y Familiares 4 sus lados. Los casados dos veces, con corocas pin- 
tadas significadoras de sus delitos. Las hechiceras, con corocas blancas, velas y sogas. Otros, por blasfemos, 
con mordagas en las lenguas, en cuerpo, descubiertas las cabecas y velas en las manos, todos en orden, siguiendo 
unos 4 otros. Los de menores delitos delante, y por este orden los demas, quedando los relaxados detras, y los 
dogmatistas y ensenadores dela Ley de Moysen, como capitanes y caudillos, los ultimos con sus caudas sobre sus 
corocas, retorcidas y enroscadas, significando las falsas proposiciones de su falso magisterio y ensehanca, con que 
fueron procediendo hasta su tablado, que hacia frente con el asiento del Tribunal, a cuyos pies havia gradas, donde 
se sentaron los Oficiales y Ministros del Santo Oficio, por su antigiiedad*. 

* It is singular that the Inquisition should have decreed that green as a colour for the dress, and the Greek letter T, which resembles a cross 
of spurious form, although more like in form to the Latin than is the Greek cross, as also Saint Andrew’s crosses, should be worn by Jews sentenced, 

2R 

154 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

El tablado de los penitenciados fue maravilloso; porque en su medio, monteaba una media pirdmide (que 
llaman media naranja) cefida de gradas de medio circulo, que subian hasta su extremidad, donde estuvieron por su 
orden los relaxados. Los Maestros dogmatistas en las mas altas gradas, y los otros asentados, como iban 
baxando ; y por este orden las estatuas de los difuntos y ausentes relaxados. Los reconciliados y los otros peni- 
tentes en bancos én la placa del tablado. El Alguacil Mayor del Santo Oficio tuvo silla en la planicie del tablado. 
Pusose pulpito al lado derecho del Santo Oficio, donde predicé el Argobispo de las Filipinas, Don Frai Ignacio de 
Santivafiez, de la Orden de mi Glorioso Padre San Francisco. Otros dos pilpitos se pusieron 4 los colaterales del 
Tribunal, en que leyeron los Relatores las sentencias, las quales no se ponen aqui por escusar prolixidad, que fueron 
varias, segun los delitos: solo digo, que cada uno de estos porfiados Judios, podia ser Rabino en una sinagoga. 
Celebrése con grande magestad, quedando el pueblo con no poco asombro de los ritos y ceremonias de estos 
hereges judaicantes, y delitos graves que alli se leyeron. 

El afio de 1602, se celebré otro Auto de Fé, siendo inquisidores el Lic. Don Alonso de Peralta, y el Lic. 
Gutierre Bernardo de Quirds, en el mismo lugar de la Plaga Mayor de esta ciudad con el adorno y aparato dicho, 
dia de la Anunciacion de la Virgen Santisima Maria, a 25 de Marco. Predicé el Arcediano de la Santa Iglesia de 
la misma citdad, Don Juan de Cervantes, Obispo que es ahora de Antequera, por otro nombre Guaxaca, que era 
Consultor del Santo Oficio. Por ser.el acompaftamiento y adorno del cadahalso y estrados el mismo que queda 
dicho en el pasado, no lo refiero; solo digo, que tuvo este Auto de aumento y afiadidura una procesion, que se 
hico el dia antes en la tarde, trayendo una cruz grande verde, desde las casas de la Inquisicion, hasta el cada- 
halso, que se puso en lo alto de la media naranja y lugar de los penitenciados. Fue Acto este de grande autoridad, 
y célebre en grandega: concurrid. 4 él infinito pueblo, y fue mui solemne su acompafiamiento : donde concurrieron 
tambien todas las Ordenes y Clerecia, con toda la Caballeria Mexicana, y muchas velas de cera encendidas. Toda 
aquella noche tuvo @ su contorno muchas hachas y blandones de cera encendidos; y la velaron Helge de las 
dichas Ordenes y otras gentes y ministros del Santo Oficio. . 

Huvo ciento y tantos penitenciados. Entre los que quemaron, fue un herege, que por su pertinacia y dureca 
le quemaron vivo. Huvo estatuas de relaxados, y muchos de ellos, por otros particulares delitos, algunos de los 
quales, los mas enormes y sucios que jamas se han oido; porque sabe el Demonio inventarlos, para engafiar 4 los 
hombres. Despues aca ha havido otros Autos, aunque no tan solemnes como los dos dichos, y cada afio, este Santo 
Tribunal acostumbra ya tenerlos, con la solemnidad que le parece convenir al Acto. 

Est4 mui ilustrada esta Santa Inquisicion, porque ultra de ser el Tribunal tan Santo y estar siempre proveido de 
personas mui dignas del Oficio, que cada dia salen de él para Obispos y Arcobispos de diferentes iglesias, tiene 
Calificadores, Clerigos y Religiosos, Consultores de los Sefiores de la Real Audiencia y otros particulares Letrados 
doctos. Tiene Patrocinadores, Alguacil Mayor, Familiares, Alcalde y otros Oficiales necesarios, para el buen 
despacho de los negocios. Hay carcel perpetua, cerca de las de la Inquisicion, mui cumplida, y abastecida de lo 
necesario. 

to be burnt alive for heresy ; since the same symbols were accounted highly honourable by the Mexicans ; and the question is curious, how the In- 
quisition, the Jews, and the Mexicans, should ever have come to share such corresponding antipathies. Sahagun informs us in the first section of 
the eighteenth chapter of the eighth book of his History of New Spain, not only that the Mexican priests were accustomed to wear a green vest 
when they offered incense to the gods, but that the dress likewise of the Mexican kings, when they were taken to the temple immediately after 
their election to be presented to Huitzilopuchtli, was entirely green, consisting of a green cowl or hood over the head, a green mantle, and green 
sandals. A cross resembling the Greek T frequently occurs in the Mexican paintings, undoubtedly as a religious symbol. The Indians of Yucatan, 
as well as the Mexicans, entertained a superstitious reverence for the cross named after Saint Andrew, placing it over the heads of infants in the 
cradle. Since there are many grounds for supposing that the Mexicans believed in a Trinity,—although whether with distinction of persons, or con- 
substantiation, will perhaps ever remain a mystery,—the assertion of Sahagun, in the eighteenth chapter of his eighth book, that the priests took 
the newly elected king of Mexico to present him to Huitzilopuchtli, and his insertion in the ninth chapter of his sixth book of the prayer which 
the new king addressed to Tezcatlipoca on the same occasion (being a prayer of thanksgiving for his election), render it very probable that Huit- 
zilopuchtli was considered by the Mexicans the same god as Tezcatlipoca. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 155 

Caritruto XX. della “‘ Prattica per Procedere nelle Cause del S. Offizio.” 
Delli Giudei et altri Infedeli in quanto alli Delittt che spettano al S. Offizio. 

Essenpo che alcune cose della S. Fede sono alli Cristiani e Giudei communi, quindi e, che se in esse si trovano de- 
linquenti i Giudei, il S. Offizio procede contro di loro. Le cose communi 4 Cristiani et 4 loro sono come: Dio 
essere uno, eterno, onnipotente creatore del mendo; che vi siano paradiso, e inferno, angeli, demonii, scrittura 
sacra, anima immortale, e simili; e perd se vengono nel S. Offizio indiziati di non credere, 6 tutte, 6 aleune di dette 
cose, 6 di avere proferite parole indecenti, sospezione di mala credulita intorno ad esse, si procede contro di loro a 
cattura e perquisizione de’ libri e scritture, esi tirano inanzi le cause con i termini della ragione, come si fa con 
altri, e confessando la mala credulita, si fanno abiurare, 6 de’ vehementi, 6 de’ levi, secondo la qualita dell’ indizii, 
parole proferite, e condizione delle persone, cioé se sono di pit 6 meno intelligente; e quanto alla pena, si condan- 
nano anco, come i Cristiani che si trovano in detti capi delinquenti, 6 a carcere, 6 4 galera, 6 esilii, 6 rilegazioni. 

Inoltre Gregorio Decimo Terzo del 1581 fece una constituzione, che comincia: “Antiqua Judeorum improbitas,” 
nella quale espresse alcuni altri capi particolari, ne’ quali ritrovandosi delinquere i Giudei et altri Infedeli, da facoltd 
all’ Inquisitori di procedere nelle cause della Fede, secondo la forma de’ sacri canoni e constituzioni dell’ Offizio 
della S. Inquisitione. Il primo caso, se alcuno di loro asserisse cosa contraria alle suddette, che sono communi alli 
Cristiani et 2 loro, 6 averanno predicata 6.instillata ad alcuno anco privatamente. 2°. Se averanno invocato e 
consultato i Demonii, procurato risposte da loro, fattoli sacrificii, espostoli preghiere, 6 per divinazione, 6 per 
altra causa, overo che abbino immolato cosa alcuna, 6 prestatogli qualsivoglia altro empio ossequio. 3°. Se 
con le parole, fatti, esempio, 6 in altro qualsivoglia modo averanno insegnato 6 indotto li Cristiani, 6 tentato 
d’ indurli 4 fare le suddette cose. 4°. Se averanno in ignominia, sprezzo, e corruttela della Fede Cristiana 
empiamente detto che il Salvatore nostro sia puro uomo, overo che sia stato peccatore, la Madre di Dio non sia 
stata vergine, 6 altre simili bestemmie, che si sogliono chiamare ereticali per se stesse. 5°. Se per opera, aiuto, 
consiglio, 6 favore di qualsivoglia di loro, aleun Cristiano ayverd apostatato dalla S. Fede, overo sari passato, 6 
ritornato alli riti, ceremonie, superstizioni, e sette de’ Giudei, et altri Infedeli, overo sara caduto in alcuna eresia. 
6°. Se averanno impedito, overo esortato in qualsivoglia modo alcun cattecumeno, 6 qualsivoglia altro di loro, 3 
@ altre sette d Infedeli, quali per inspirazione di Dio volesse venire alla Fede Cristiana, doppo aver dichiarato con 
cenni, parole, fatti, 6 in qualsivoglia modo la sua volonta a non pigliare il sacro Battesimo, 6 venire alla S. Fede. 
7°. Se averanno scientemente ricettato nelle case loro, nutrito, aiutato ne i viaggi e passaggi, apostati et eretici, 6 in 
qualsivoglia modo e luogo l abbino provisto di cibi, datoli 6 mandatoli doni e presenti, condottili da un luogo 
all altro, 6 accompagnatili, overo procurato che fossero condotti 6 accompagnati, 6 somministrandoli spese, guide, 
fattoli 6 datoli compagnia, 6 se averanno procurato che le cose fatte da detti apostati e eretici non si siino potute 
penetrare ne investigare, e di piu chi li avera in qualsivoglia modo occultati 6 difesi, 6 prestatoli aiuto, consiglio, 
6 favore. 8°. Se averanno tenuto, custodito, overo divulgato in qualsivoglia luogo, 6 portato libri eretici, overo 
Talmudici, 6 altri libri Giudaici in qualsivoglia modo dannati, e proibiti, overo in far questo, averanno prestato 
Y aiuto et opera loro. 9°. Se averanno deriso e schernito i Cristiani, et in sprezzo e ludibrio dell’ Ostia: salutare di 
nostra redenzione Cristo Jesu Signore Nostro immolato nell’ Altare della Croce, in qualsivoglia modo 6 tempo, ma 
specialmente nel Venerdi Santo averanno affisso et appeso in Croce agnello, 6 pecora, 6 altra cosa, et in essa 
sputato, e fatto altri atti di disprezzo. 10°. Se averanno, contro I’ instituto de’ sacri canoni, et altre constituzioni 
e decreti de’ Sommi Pontefici, tenuto Nutrici Cristiane, 6 tenendole, le averanno sforzate 4 gettare il latte nelle 
latrine, 6 cloache, 6 altri luoghi, in quel giorno che si saranno communicate, ne’ quali casi trovandosi alcun Giudeo 
6 altro Infedele colpevole, vuole il detto Pontefice, che l Inquisitori castighino, secondo la qualita, moltiplicatione, 
e consuetudine de’ delitti, condennandoli a fruste, 6 a galere, eziamdio perpetue, 6 4 publicatione de’ beni, bandi, et 
altre pit atroci pene, che possino servire ad esempio per spaventare gl altri scelerati ad astenersi da simili errori, 
delitti, e sceleraggini. 

Vengono anco alle volte denonciati i Giudei @ avere percorso 6 deturpato imagini de’ Santi, e nen é dubbio, 
che quando il Santo Offizio 6 l Ordinario previene, non vi si deve ingerire il Foro Laico, ma il dubbio sta, se quando 
il Laico previene, possa egli procedere nelle cause; si é fatto sopra di cid alcune volte matura riflessione nel 

156 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Santo Offizio, e con quest’ occasione é stato ancora discorso, se la Bolla suddetta, “Antiqua Judeorum” nella quale si da 
facolta a gl Ordinarii et Inquisitori di procedere nelli casi in essa espressi, 8’ intenda privative “ quoad Judices Laicos,” 
d pure cumulative secondo la ragione commune. Li pit voti anno inclinato sempre al privative, contenendo i detti 
capi materie meramente sacramentali et ecclesiastiche ; non é perd mai uscito decreto deffinitivo di questa questione, 
ma il pit sié pratticato il privative. Ha dato occasione alle volte di maggior dubbio il caso dell’ Imagini offese e 
deturpate, perché non si trova veramente espresso in detta Bolla; per gl’ esempi nondimeno che si hanno nel Santo 
Offizio, si vede essere stato molto pil pratticato conoscere simili cause privative quoad Laicos, che altrimenti, benché 
per degne cause qualche volta si sian permesse simili cognizioni al Laico. In simili casi I’ Inquisitori inferiori per 
fuggire le contenzioni in Laici, e caminare pit sicuro, devono sempre dar conto qua al supremo Tribunale di que. 
che occorre, et aspettare I’ ordine. 

Vengono inoltre tal volta denunziati li Ebrei, che si faccino accendere il fuoco da Cristiani il Sabbato, e provan- 
dosi il fatto li castiga il S. Offizio. Il fondamento di cid pensano alcuni essere, perché sia superstizione de’ 
Giudei il non volere accendere il fuoco in quel giorno, e perd il servirsi de’ Cristiani per questo effetto superstizioso 
sia delitto spettante al Santo Offizio, ma veramente non é superstizione, anzi € commandamento espresso della loro 
legge nell’ Esodo cap. xxxiv. “(Von succendetis ignem in omnibus habitationibus vestris per diem Sabbath”; e dice 
Lirano sopra il cap. xii. dell’ Esodo, che era proibito loro I accenderlo in tal giorno eziamdio per mano de’ Gentili, 
natione tenuta da loro per alienigena e serva, della quale si servivano in esercizii vili, per Iudibrio e contempto di 
essa e sua religione, e perché anche oggi di tengono i Cristiani per Gentili e servi, pero il servizio di essi in eser- 
cizii vili, come appunto é I’ accendere il fuoco, si presume che cid faccino in contumelia e sprezzo del nome Cris- 
tiano, mostrandosi in quel poco che possono, superiori e signori 4 noi, come altre volte erano, quando dominavano 
i Gentili, e tenevano captivi: conseguentemente si puniscono anco i Cristiani, che fanno alli Giudei simili esercizii 
vili, perché vengono a cooperare all’ empie intenzioni del Giudeo, et 4 fare atto indecentissimo alla dignita della 
Religione Cristiana, non essendo decente, che fil hbere serviant fils ancille. Clemente Ottavo poi nell anno 1593 
publicd contro de gl Ebrei uw’ altra Constituzione, che comincia, “Cum Hebraorum malitia;” nella quale alle Con- 
stituzioni di Gregorio IX., d Innocenzo IV., di Honorio IV., di Giovanni XXII., di Giulio IV., di Paolo IV., e Gre- 
gorio XIII., i quali pit volte avevano dannato il Talmud, et altri scritti e volumi detestabili, e proibito che non si 
tenessero, estermmandoli da tutte le provincie e regni della republica Cristiana, aggiunge la proibizione in 
perpetuo, che non possino tenere sotto qualsivoglia colore 6 pretesto, né leggere, 6 comprare, né vendere qualsi- 
voglia libro 6 codice Talmudico, et altri Cabalistici vanissimi tante volte dannati; né I’ opere, commentaril, trattati, 
volumi, 6 qualsivoglia scritto cosi in lingua Ebrea, come in qualsivoglia altra; né scritti traslati, né tradotti, stampati, 
6 che per l’ avvenire fossero per scriversi, tradursi, overo stamparsi, contenenti tacitamente, 0 espressamente eresie, 
6 errori contro la Sacra Scrittura dell’ antica legge, e Vecchio Testamento, contumelie, empieta, e bestemmie contro 
Dio, la Santissima Trinita, il Salvatore nostro Jesu Cristo, la sua Santa Cristiana Fede, contro la Beata Vergine, 
Angeli, Beati, Patriarchi, Profeti, Apostoli, et altri Santi, contro la Santa Croce, Sacramenti della nova legge, 
Sacre Imagini, la Chiesa Cattolica, la Sede Apostolica, e contro li Fedeli Cristiani, e specialmente Vescovi, Sacer- 
doti, et altre persone ecclesiastiche, et anco contro i novellamente convertiti alla Fede di Cristo, e Neofiti, 5 che 
contengono narrazioni impudiche et oscene, eziamdio sotto pretesto che siano espurgati, overo sino che si espur- 
ghino, 6 che siano stati stampati di nuovo, 6 mutati li nomi, 6 sotto pretesto di tolleranza, 6 commissione (come essi 
pretendono) del Secretario, 6 di qualsivoglia altra persona del Concilio di Trento, 6 dell’ Indice de’ libri proibiti di 
Pio IV., e di qualsivoglia altro indulto Apostolico, overo licenza concessa in qualsivoglia modo da Cardinali della 
Santa Romana Chiesa, eziamdio Legati, overo dal Camerlengo, 6 Camera Apostolica, 6 Nunzii eziamdio, che habbino 
la potesta di Legato a latere, overo de gl’ Ordinarii de’ luoghi, overo delel Inguisitori; e revoca ogni e Gualsmozlia 
facolta, lettere, permissioni, indulti, tolleranza di leggere, 6 tenere, 6 4 certo tempo sotto qualsivoglia pretesto, i 
suddetti scritti, volumi, libri, et altre opere proibite sopranominate concesse 4 qualsivoglia Giudeo in genere, overo in 
specie da suoi Predecessori, e dalla detta Santa Sede, overo da suoi Legati etiamdio 4 Latere, 6 Nunzii, 6 Inquisitori, 
overo Ordinarii, commandando alli Giudei di Roma, che fri dieci giorni doppo la pubblicazione di detta Constitu- 
zione dovessero consegnare all’ Offizio della Santa Romana, et universale Inquisizione, e fuori di Roma fra due mesi 
a gl Ordinarii et Inquisitori dei luoghi, quei libri suddetti, che si trovano avere, ordinando 4 gl Ordinarii, et Inqui- 
sitori, che subbito senz’ altro ordine della Santita Sua, e senza interposizione di alcuna dimora, si brucciassero. 

Commanda anco di pit cosi 4 Giudei, come a qualsivoglia stampatore, librajo, mercante, et ad ogni altro Cris- 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 157 

- tiano, sotto pena della perdita de’ libri, e publicazione di tutti i beni, da applicarsi al fisco del Prencipe nel suo stato 
si fossero trovati detti libri, et altre pit gravi pene, etiam corporali ad arbitrio dell’ Ordinario et Inquisizione, et 
anco quanto alli Cristiani di scommunica maggiore di lata sentenza, che non possono avere, leggere, evulgare, stam- 
pare, descrivere, copiare, portare, vendere, comprare, donare, commentare, 6 in qualsivoglia altro modo distraere 
overo alienare gli suddetti libri, et altri scritti; e che niuno ardisca di dare ajuto, consiglio, 0 favore in qualsivoglia 
modo alli Giudei per avere, scrivere, 6 stampare li detti libri, 6 per portarli, 6 farli venire d’ altrove, 6 per impetrar 
loro licenza di poterli leggere, sotto le suddette et altre pene, imposte da Sacri Canoni, et altre Constituzioni 
Apostoliche, contro li fautori delli Eretici et Apostati dalla S. Sede: e commanda a tutti gl Ordinarii et Inquisitori 
de’ luoghi ove abitano Giudei, che faccino diligentissima perquisizione, cosi nelle smagoghe, e luoghi publici, 
come privati, case, et officine loro, e trovando alcuno colpevole di ritenzione de’ suddetti libri, procedino all’ esecu- 
zione delle suddette pene, e pit gravi 4 loro arbitrio, castigando di pit li contradittori, e qualsivoglia inobbediente, 
e chi 4 questo prestasse ajuto, consiglio, e favore, con ogni opportuno rimedio di ragione, e di fatto posposta ogni 
appellatione, domandando anco per quest’ effetto (se fosse bisogno) il braccio secolare. EH veramente ¢ tanto perni- 
ciosa e contaggiosa la lezzione de’ suddetti libri, che nell’ occasione il Santo Offizio vi procede con ogni ragione di 
giusto rigore, ne si ammette la scusa, che ordinariamente adducono, che siino espurgati, 6 che si possino espurgare; 
perché sono inseriti fra essi con tanta artificiosa et astuta maniera gl’ errori e le calunnie contro la Religione 

Cattolica, che non si puonno separare, 6 restano affatto inespurgabili, e non si possono espurgare. 

HES sea yey 

HISTORIA 

. 

DEL ORIGEN DE LAS GENTES QUE POBLARON LA AMERICA SEPTENTRIONAL, 
QUE LLAMAN LA NUEVA-ESPANA ; 
con NOTICTA DE LOS PRIMEROS 
- - QUE ESTABLECIERON LA -MONARQUIA QUE EN ELLA FLORECIO DE LA NACION TOLTECA, 

Y NOTICIAS QUE ALCANZARON DE LA CREACION DEL MUNDO. 

| SU AUTOR mare 
) EL LICENCIADO DON MARIANO FERNANDEZ DE ECHEVARRIA Y VEITIA, 

CABALLERO PROFESO DEL ORDEN MILITAR DE SANTIAGO. 

DISCURSO PRELIMINAR. 

DIFICULTOSO empefio ha sido siempre escribir para la prensa dando 4 luz novedades de la antigiiedad solida- 
mente fundadas en monumentos seguros que las apoyen y satisfagan 4 los eruditos, mayormente en aquellos asuntos 
en que han trabajado y escrito muchos y graves autores que deven suponerse bien instruidos, y mucho mas en la 
era en que vivimos, en que exaltada la critica 4 su mas alto punto, no dan paso tan facilmente los criticos modernos 
a las novedades, como le dava la sencillez inculta de los antiguos. Cuanto pues crecerd esta dificultad en una 
materia en que el principal objeto de los que han puesto en ella la pluma, ha sido conciliar la atencion y deleitar los 
_animos de los lectores con referir noticias enteramente nuevas, raras y singulares, ya descubiertas por ellos, 6 ya 
adquiridas de buenos originales; Tal es la historia de la Nueva Espafia que emprendo escribir, de la cual desde que 
la nacion Espafiola logré su feliz conquista, son innumerables las plumas, tanto nacionales como estrangeras, que se 
han dedicado 4 satisfacer la curiosidad y el buen gusto de los literatos, ya con discursos y combinaciones de tiempos 
y costumbres para averiguar el origen del gran numero de naciones que poblaron este continente, de donde salieron 
y por donde pasaron, ya de sus monarquias, gobierno y religion, 6 ya finalmente de otros acaecimientos raros y pro- 
digiosos de que han tenido noticias los que hasta ahora han pasado a estas regiones, y los misioneros que por razon 
de su ministerio se han intimado mas con los indios, y pudieron adquirir por este medio algunas noticias de su 
antigiiedad. Siendo pues tanto lo que sobre este asunto se ha escrito, parece temerario mi empefio de escribir una 
nueva historia de este reino, dando 4 luz en ella, noticias nuevas y singulares ignoradas hasta ahora. Mas sin em- 
bargo hallara mi lector en el discurso de ella, una prodigiosa coleccion de noticias singulares, que 6 no han salido 
hasta ahora 4 la luz publica, 6 han salido totalmente desfiguradas de su verdadero ser. Los monumentos de donde las 
he sacado tienen toda aquella autoridad, solidez y recomendacion que es posible en el asunto, y son los mismos en 
que se han fundado los autores nuestros y extrangeros en las noticias que han publicado desfiguradas y dislocadas por 
falta de esplicacion 6 cautela de aquellos nacionales de quienes las huvieron. 

Fué muy ptblico desde los principios de la conquista que los naturales de este reino conocian y ejercitavan el 
arte de la pintura, y se servian de ella para figurar los sucesos, y asi hablan los autores de aquel célebre lienzo en 
que Teotlili, gobernador de Cempohualan hizo pintar las naves en que vinieron Cortés y sus compafieros, los trages 
y armaduras, los caballos, las armas de fuego y todo lo demés que le pareciéd necesario, para dar cuenta 4 su sefior 
Motezuma con la mayor puntualidad y especificacion. Mas no llegaron 4 comprender con toda claridad por entonces 
los espafioles que estas pinturas eran las que conservavan las noticias de su historia, los cddigos de sus leyes, las 
ejecutorias de su nobleza, los titulos de sus posesiones, el reglamento de su religion, la cartilla de sus fiestas, los 
calendarios de sus computos astrondémicos ; y finalmente que las figuras de estas pinturas les servian 4 ellos de letras 
y caractéres como 4 nosotros los que usamos, y que el saber formar y entender estos mapas, era una facultad que 
entre ellos se ensefiava y se aprendia como entre nosotros el leér y escribir. Componianse estas pinturas, no solo 
de todos los objetos visibles y corporeos, sino tambien de muchos invisibles é incorporeos que ellos figuravan con 
diversos caractéres para esplicar los sucesos. Veianse en ellas el sol, la luna y las estrellas: la tierra con sus 
montes, valles, rios y lagunas: todo genero de aves y animales, sin exceptuar los mas despreciables insectos: muchas 
figuras humanas de entrambos sexos, unas vestidas, otras desnudas: unos blancos, otros negros, otros matizados de 
varios colores: los mas de ellos adornadas las cabezas con innumerable variedad de insignias, unas parecen tiaras, 
otras mitras, otras coronas, otras penachos, borlas 6 fluecos, muchisimas de ellas con orejas de varios animales, ca- 
bezas de aves y fieras, y otras finalmente con adornos aun mas extravagantes, como son una pierna 6 mano de 
hombre, una calavera, una flecha y otras semejantes, que todas son simbolos 6 geroglificos que esplicavan el nombre, 

2T 

162 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

6 la dignidad de la persona sobre cuya cabeza estan. Como por exemplo la efigie del emperador Xolotl que tiene 
un ojo sobre la cabeza, la de Nezahualcoyotl que tiene unas orejas de lobo, la de Acamapichtli, una mano empu- 
fando unas cafias, la de Tizotzin una pierna atrevasada de una saeta, que son la esplicacion de los nombres de estos 
personages. Los negros eran los sacerdotes, y 4 los supremos 6 gefes principales les ponian una como tiara que 
denotaba su dignidad. Las borlas 6 cintas rojas denotaban 4 los caballeros Tecuhtlis: los pintados de colores eran 
los prisioneros de guerra, 6 aquellos miserables que destinavan 4 los sacrificios y 4 este modo tenian su propio, 
significado todas las demas cosas que en ellos se veian. 

Figuravan las locuciones, las quejas, las deprecaciones y otras cosas incorporeas al modo que nosotros figuramos 
4 los angeles y al viento: sefalavan los anos, los meses y los dias, y para todo esto tenian sus caractéres propios 
que colocavan en sus pinturas con orden y método segun su arte; de manera que todo este conjunto de figuras era 
significativo é intelegible: y asi por medio de estas pinturas conservavan las noticias de su historia, de las funda- 
ciones. de sus monarquias y ciudades, los titulos de propiedad de sus posesiones.. De éste modo tenian escritas sus 
leyes y las ordenanzas de su policia y gobierno: los reglamentos para la exaccion de tributos segun lo que devia 
pagar cada pueblo y lo que iva :pagando: y asimismo el orden y gobierno en la distribucion de la hacienda real: 
todo lo concerniente 4 su religion, fiestas y sacrificios: y finalmente todo cuanto les era necesario para su gobierno ; 
de suerte que estos mapas, 6 pinturas eran sus libros y cartillas: no todos sabian formarlos, ni entenderlos y muchos 
de ellos paraban en poder de personas que no los entendian, aunque los havian heredado de sus mayores, al modo 
que entre nosotros hay muchisimos que no saven leer, ni escribir, y se hallan en poder de ellos los titulos de pro- 
piedad de sus posesiones, 6 papeles de nobleza, 6 de otros negocios y comercios de sus antepasados, de quienes los 
heredaron; mas ellos ni los saben leér, ni los entienden. 

No era tampoco uno mismo el método y orden que guardavan en la formacion de estos mapas, 6 pinturas, porque 
los histéricos se formavan de un modo, de otro los titulos de posesiones,; de otro los de nobleza, de otro los de tributos ; 
y finalmente cada uno tenia su particular forma, de suerte que los inteligentes a la primera vista de un mapa conocian 
elasunto de quetratava. Lo que faltava de esplicacion 4 las pinturas, lo suplia la voz viva del maestro, instruyendo 
4 los discipulos en las tradiciones que juntas con los mapas, formavan una completa historia, 6 davan un entero y 
perfecto conocimiento del asunto. Para conservar estas tradiciones inventaron los cantares que se decian en todas 
las fiestas solemnes y en los bailes ptiblicos, por medio de los cuales se instruia bastantemente en los sucesos de la 
historia, y en los acaecimientos mas notables la gente vulgar, que no entendia el significado de las pinturas. 

Los primeros Espafioles que pasaron 4 estas partes, y principalmente los ministros evangélicos llenos de fervor 
por la religion, y por la conversion de esta gentilidad, firmes en el concepto de que estas gentes eran grandes idé- 
latras, viendo en los templos los bultos de sus idolos, y confrontandolos con estas pinturas, en que efectivamente se 
hallavan copiados muchos de ellos, especialmente-en las que tratavan de sus ritos y fiestas; creyeron que toda aquella 
multitud de figuras eran otras tantas falsas deidades que adoravan, cuyas efigies tenian en sus casas para tributarles 
culto: y sin mas averiguacion condenaron a las llamas estos mapas, dedicandose con el mayor esmero 4 recoger 
cuantos pudieron para ejecutar en ellos el ultimo suplicio, haviendo sido los primeros en sufrirlo los mas preciosos, 
que eran los que se guardavan en los archivos ptblicos de las ciudades principales, como eran los de Mexico y Tez- 
cuco. Mucho sentian los indios este estrago ; pero acobardados por una parte del terror de las armas, y por otra de 
las ex6rtaciones de los misidéneros que persuadidos 4 que eran figuras idoldtricas y supersticiosas, incompatibles con 
la verdadera religion que les predicavan, les vedavan su uso y retencion; no se atrevian a4 defenderlos, y aunque al- 
gunos lo intentaron no les davan oido, ni crédito ; de que tenemos pruevas irrefragables en la obra del R. P. Fr. Juan 
de Torquemada, que con.el titulo de Monarquia Indiana, escribid casi un siglo despues de la conquista, en que 
familiarizados ya los Espafioles con los indios, havian adquirido muchas noticias de su antigitedad, y de que el modo 
que tuvieron de conservarlas fueron estos mapas y pinturas, y sin embargo confiesa el P. Torquemada, que cuando 
comenzo a escribir esta obra, no le parecia posible que en estas pinturas pudieran contenerse tantas noticias de mas 
de mil afios de antigiiedad, y con tal orden y metodo: de donde podemos rectamente inferir cuan lejos estarian de 
creerlo aquellos primeros misioneros, que poco instruidos en el idioma, no pudiendo esplicarse mas que lo muy 
preciso para instruirlos en los misterios de la religion, carecian de todas las noticias que al cabo de un siglo havian 
ya adquirido los Espafioles, y mucho menos perceptible les podia ser el que estas figuras fuesen los titulos de sus 
posesiones, las ejecutorias de su nobleza, el volumen de sus leyes, sus libros de cuentas, sus calendarios y demas que 
contenian. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 163 

Sin embargo de esta sencilla confesion que hace el P. Torquemada en el lugar citado, tratando al capitulo sigui- 
ente de la arte divinatoria que usaban estos naturales, habla de la cuenta que seguian en la ordenacion de los periodos 
de a trece dias que tenian en lugar de nuestras semanas, y figuravan en sus mapas y ruedas cronoldgicas con los 
geroglificos y caractéres que dice, y porque no llegé 4 comprender enteramente el artificio con que la usavan, la 
califica de adivinatoria y supersticiosa: y aunque asienta que algunos decian que esta cuenta de trece dias eran se- 
manas, dice que no se deve creer, y se afirma en su dictamen de que es ilicita, muy perjudicial, muy supersticiosa y 
Ilena de idolatria, sin mas motivo que el de no haverla comprendido, como se hard manifiesto en su lugar. Seme- 
jantes a estos pudiera producir otros muchos pasages, asi en este autor como en otros que han escrito en cosas de 
Indias pasados muchos afios de su conquista, dandonos varias noticias que asientan ser sacadas de sus pinturas ; y sin 
embargo niegan otras que no alcanzaron a penetrar, y por lo comun no deponen el concepto de que estos mapas 
eran supersticiosos é idélatras. No niego por esto que los indios se sirviesen de la combinacion de estos gerogli- 
ficos y figuras para hacer sus prondsticos y adivinaciones, al modo que en el mundo antiguo se han servido para ello 
de ruedas, de lineas, de letras y de numeros, y aun de las mismas palabras y textos de la Sagrada Escritura: pero asi 
como estos no han contraido por eso infeccion alguna que les degrade de su sagrado caracter y santa inteligencia, ni 
los nimeros, letras y ruedas de aquel sano y licito uso para que fueron formados nada tampoco contraian de super- 
sticioso é idolatrico los mapas, puramente astrondémicos de los indios, porque los adivinos 6 sacerdotes se sirviesen 
de ellos formando las combinaciones de sus figuras y geroglificos para sus adivinaciones, pronosticos y ordculos, y 
mucho menos los mapas histdéricos, los de sus leyes, nobleza, tributos y otros que no se servian los sacerdotes y adi- 
vinos para sus cdbalas y supersticiones. 

Viendo pues los indios la desecha tormenta que corrian de sus escrituras, y la eficacia y actividad con que bus- 
cavan estas pinturas los ministros que no eran muy advertidos para quemarlas, procuraron ocultar algunas de ellas, 
especialmente aquellas que contenian repartimientos de tierras, y les servian de titulos de sus posesiones, y las que 
hallavan de tributos, y eran como nodminas de los tributarios de las provincias y pueblos, y por esta causa son de 
estas especies la mayor parte de los que se encontraron y han Ilegado hasta nuestros dias. Pusieron tanta diligencia 
en ocultarlos que muchos no se contentaron con encerrarlos en arcas y alhacenas, sino que los sepultaron debajo de 
tierra y en los huecos de las paredes, dejando con gran sigilo la noticia 4 sus descendientes, del lugar en que’estavan, 
y de este modo hallé muchos de los que recogié el Caballero Boturini, que me aseguré havia sacado un caxon de 
ellos del hueco encubierto de un paredon antiguo en el pueblo de Huamantla, cuya noticia tuvo de uno de los 
descendientes del que los oculté alli: y el ano de mil setecientos cincuenta y ocho estando yo en dicho pueblo me lo 
certificaron algunas personas que fueron testigos de este hallazgo, y me mostraron el paredon viejo de donde los sacdé. 
El] invento de estos y los demas instrumentos antiguos que recogid, fue 4 costa de mucha diligencia, intimandose y 
familiarizandose mucho con estos naturales hasta conseguir que se confiasen de él, y le descubriesen el gran tesoro 
de antigiiedades que recogio en nueve afios continuos que gasté en ‘esta dificil y molestisima empresa, viajando de 
unos pueblos 4 otros con imponderable trabajo 6 incomodidad, porque aun despues de los muchos afios que han pasado 
desde la conquista, se ha perpetuado de padres a hijos el encargo de ocultar con el mayor esmero y sigilo estos 
mapas y pinturas, para que no lleguen 4 manos de los espafioles ; sin embargo de que el dia de hoy ya no hay entre 
ellos quien los entienda, ni sepa esplicarlos, y de uno y otro tengo yo bastante experiencia en las diligencias que he 
practicado para descifrar los que pudiesen serme ttiles para esta historia. 

‘No solo han ocultado con suma diligencia estas pinturas, sino tambien muchos manuscritos en nuestros carac- 
téres, tanto en su idioma, como en el nuestro. Porque algunos de aquellos primeros convertidos que en los primi- 
tivos tiempos de la-conquista aprendieron a escribir en ellos, y otros en los tiempos posteriores, formaron varias 
relaciones de aquellas noticias que adquirieron 6 ya por tradicion de sus mayores, 6 ya por las canciones histdricas 
que componian y cantavan en sus fiestas que de padres a hijos se ivan conservando, y era uno de los modos de histo- 
riar que tenian estas gentes, ya finalmente por los mismos mapas que ocultavan, que sabian entender € interpretar 
y descifrando su inteligencia por medio de nuestras letras en'su idioma 6 en el nuestro: pero esto fue precisamente 
para dejar 4 sus hijos una instruccion privada con el mismo encargo de ocultarlos de los espafioles, y guardar el 
mayor sigilo en su contenido. De aqui’se han originado algunos errores y noticias trastornadas 6 dislocadas que se 
hallan en los autores que han escrito de la historia antigua de este reyno, porque en los tiempos posteriores @ la 
conquista, ilustrados ya los’ espafioles de que estas gentes tuvieron en su gentilidad policia y gobierno, reynos y 

monarquias poderosas, instrucciones cientificas, pericia militar y ejercicio de varias artes, han intentado algunos 

1604 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

curiosos en diversos tiempos indagar de los indios estas noticias : pero unos se dirigieron 4 sugetos, que 6 por ma- 
licia, 6 por ignorancia, 6 por pasion, 6 por falta de esplicacion les llenaron de fabulas 6 noticias trastornadas de su 
verdadero sentido, 6 dislocadas de sus tiempos y circunstancias. Otros aunque se dirigieron 4 personas capaces de 
instruirles, 6 por su edad, 6 por las pinturas y manuscritos que guardavan, no quisieron hacerlo, 6 lo hicieron muy 
superficialmente y de paso. 

De esto nos da un testimonio constante D. Fernando de Alba Yxtlilxochitl en sus Relaciones Histéricas que tengo 
entre manos para la formacion de esta obra. Era este sugeto descendiente de los emperadores de Tezcuco, y ejercia 
el empleo de intérprete del vireynato por los fines del siglo decimo sexto en que escribié estas relaciones, y sin em- 
bargo de tener presentes los mapas y pinturas antiguas que sabia interpretar, y de estar muy instruido en las noticias 
de su antigiiedad, asi por los cantares que havia aprendido desde nifio, como por otras tradiciones de sus mayores, 
dice que para escribir sus relaciones confirié con muchos sugetos ancianos y bien instruidos de ochenta, noventa y 
ciento y mas afios de edad, de quienes hace mencion con toda individualidad por sus nombres y circunstancias en la 
Relacion Quinta, quienes dice haver adquirido buenas y bien fundadas noticias: pero para prueva de mi asunto con- 
cluye esta Relacion con el parrafo siguiente que copio 4 la letra. 

“ Muchas historias he leido de espaftoles que han escrito cosas de esta tierra, que todas ellas son tan fuera de lo 
que esta en la original historia, y Jas de todos estos, y entre las falsas la que en alguna cosa conforma, es la de D. 
Francisco Gomara, clerigo, historiador que fué del emperador D. Carlos, N.S., que tenga Dios en su gloria; y no me 
espanto que como son relaciones de pasado, unos dicen cestas y otros ballestas, como se suele decir, por demas por 
decir una cosa dicen otra, hablando unos de pasion, otros de aficion y otros cuentan fabulas compuestas por palabras 
sucedidas y ciertas, y otros no entendiendo bien la lengua y lo que los viejos les dicen, como 4 mi me ha sucedido 
muchas veces con los naturales, siendo nacido y criado entre ellos, y tan conocido de todos los principales caciques 
de la Nueva Espafia, asi Aculhuas, Chichimecas, como Mexicanos, Tlascaltecas, Tecpanecas y Tultecas y otras 
naciones ; y es que como tengo dicho, unos hablan de aficion y otros de pasion: me sucedié lo que ahora contaré, 
sin otras veces que me sucedié casi lo propio, pero esta fue la mas notable. Yendo al pueblo de Cohuatepec, dos 
leguas de la ciudad de Tezcuco hacia la banda del sur 4 respecto de la ciudad, 4 ver 4 cierto amigo y caballero llamado 
D. Lope Zeron que tiene una labor muy buena en este pueblo, despues de haver Ilegado, holgandome en su casa 
toda aquella tarde, otro dia siguiente preguntando al D. Lope de la gente principal del pueblo, y de algunos viejos, 
me dio alguna razon de esto diciendome : que no havia ninguno sino era un mozo que 4 la sazon era gobernador, y 
un viejo que havia treinta 6 cuarenta afios que siempre lo hacian gobernador, por ser criado con los religiosos y muy 
ladino, aunque villano de nacion. 'Tomada esta razon me despedi de este caballero, y fui 4 su casa por preguntarle 
ciertas cosas de su pueblo, especialmente de una que en la original historia esté, que este pueblo fue cabezera de 
provincia, y de donde descendieron ciertos sefiores que fueron de ciertas partes de esta tierra como adelante haré 
relacion ; y llegado que fui pregunté, el cual me dijo tantos disparates como los que nuestros espafioles han escrito, 
diciendome que aquel pueblo siempre fue corte y cabezera de reyno, y Azcaputzalco y Chalco, y las demas partes 
eran pueblecillos sujetos 4 Cohuatepec, y que el primer sefior llamado Toxomilhuatzin que vino de los Chichi- 
mecas con otros vasallos suyos, siendo tan al revés; porque este sefior era tataranieto de Cuachuatlapal, uno de los 
seis seflores vasallos del gran Chichimecatl Xolotl, y los trajo consigo, y que era ya el cuarto sefior de este pueblo : 
y mas me dijo que Acamapichtli, sefior de Mexico, era hijo de Yllancueytl, una esclava, trasladada, 4 lo que los histo- 
riadores escriben, y que Nezahualcoyotl, sino fuera por los de Cohuatepec que le ayudaron, nunca libertara su 
ciudad y los seftores de Mexico sus tios, del poder del gran Maxtli tirano. Estas y otras fabulas, asi 4 los que los 
historiadores han escrito, y contradiciendole con las historias y cantos antiguos que le mostré y dije, y trayendole 
otras cosas 4 la memoria, no huvo remedio de conceder en lo que le decia, y mostrandole la original tampoco apro- 
vech6, antes se tenia muy tieso, al fin como villano; y conociendome é1 quien soy y que no ignoro cosa ninguna de 
lo que es esto, siempre me contradijo; lo cual todo como tengo dicho eran palabras de aficion y de pasion dichas de 
un villano, que si fuera noble, luego con la razon cayera en su falta. Estas y otras muchas cosas me han sucedido, y 
tambien muchos principales no quisieron decir el hecho de la verdad, viendo que cada dia les preguntavan, y jamas 
ven cosa que salga 4 luz como sucedié a cierto caballero descendiente de la casa de Tezcuco, que preguntando 4 un 
viejo principal de una historia de Tepetlaoztoc, que quien fueron los padres y abuelos de Yxtlixochitl padre del rey 
Nezahualcoyotl, él respondié diciendole, Yxtlixochitl no tuvo padre ni madre, sino que vino una dguila muy grande 
€ hizo un nido en un arbol grande que estava en la ciudad y puso un huevo muy grande, y de alli 4 cierto tiempo lo 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 165 

quebré y sacé un nifio y lo bajo del nido poniendolo en medio de la plaza de la ciudad, y viendo esto los Aculhuas 
lo criaron, y como no tenian rey lo alzaron por rey y le pusieron el nombre Ilamandole Yxtlixochitl : este caballero 
oyendo el disparate le dio grandisima risa diciendole al viejo que era necedad decir tales palabras, y el viejo le re- 
spondié que a él y 4 todos los que le preguntaran 4 cerca de esto, les havia de responder esta y otras cosas tales como 
estas, especialmente 4 Espafioles, y asi como tengo dicho los historiadores no tienen la culpa, que por haverles dado 
falsas relaciones han escrito lo que tengo declarado, y cierto que con tener,las historias en mi poder y saber la lengua 
como los mismos naturales, porque me crié con ellos, y conocer 4 todos los viejos y principales de esta tierra, para 
haver de. sacar esto en limpio me ha costado harto estudio y trabajo, procurando siempre la verdad de cada cosa de 
estas que tengo escrito y escribiré en la historia de los Chichimecas.” 

Si 4 un sugeto pues 4 quien (como él dice) todos conocian, sabian su estirpe, y que estaba bien instruido en las 
noticias de su antigiiedad, asi pretendieron burlarle sus mismos compatriotas, solo porque le consideravan adicto 4 
los Espafioles, que no havian con estos 4 quienes han mirado siempre y miran hasta el dia de hoy el comun de los 
Indios con desconfianza? _ Esta és la razon de haverse difundido tantos errores en los escritos de nuestros autores. 
E] principal asunto de la obra de Francisco Lope de Gomara es la conquista de este reyno, y por incidencia trata de 
las costumbres, leyes y ritos que observavan los Indios al tiempo del ingreso de los Espafioles, y de esto deve enten- 
derse la espresion de Alba, por que por lo respectivo 4 su historia antigua escribe muy sucinta y superficialmente, 
pero con mucho juicio como puede verse en dicha obra desde el capitulo 190, hasta el 224; no carece de errores, 
pues rara historia havia sin ellos, sino en la sagrada. El P. Torquemada, sugeto erudito y curioso, se empefidé 
grandemente en descubrir las noticias de la historia antigua de este reyno, y con la brecha que le abria su ministerio 
apostolico logré recoger muchisimas mas que otro alguno de los que hasta ahora han escrito; y efectivamente es el 
que se acerca mas 4 la verdad de la historia, pero sin embargo faltan muchas, y otras se hallan mezcladas de fabulas y 
se advierten no pocas contradicciones y anacronismos. Algunos apunto en el discurso de esta obra, y otros puede 
ver el curioso en la suya confrontandola con esta. Pero sin embargo es el unico que hasta ahora hé emprendido el 
empefio de escribir la historia de este reyno, porque todos los demas autores que escriben de ella, és 4 retazos super- 
ficialmente y los mas por incidencia, publicando cada cual aquellas noticias que adquiriéd, y copiandose unos 4 otros, 
y con todo es mui sucinto lo que escribe el dicho P. Torquemada de la fundacion y establecimiento del reino Tulteca, 
sus progresos y destruccion, que todo le comprende en un capitulo corto, que es el 14 del libro 1°, mezclando los 
sucesos verdaderos con otros fabulosos é inverosimiles, como veremos. 

El mismo D. Fernando de Alba que se lamenta de que no hayan salido a luz estas noticias de la historia antigua 
de este reino, escribié diferentes obras en diversos tiempos, que todas las tengo entre manos, de las cuales una en 
forma de memorial dirigida al Virey D. Luis de Velasco: el 2°, es bastante difusa y bien ordenada, y otra que intituld, 
Compendio de la Historia General de la Nueva Espafia, tambien esta bien coordinada y autorizada al fin por el gober- 
nador y alcaldes de la ciudad de Otompan 6 Otumba, y de los de los pueblos de Ahuatepec, Tizayucan, Amaqueme- 
can y otros, todas personas distinguidas en su nacion, ancianos é instruidos en su historia, y peritos en la interpre- 
tacion de sus pinturas que testifican que todo lo contenido en dicho compendio es sacado de las dichas pinturas que 
estan bien y fielmente traducidas é interpretadas, y con todo ninguna de estas obras did 4 la luz publica, sino que 
siguiendo el exemplar de sus compatriotas las dejé sepultadas en manos de sus descendientes, de donde logro sacarlas 
al cabo de casi un siglo el celebre matematico D. Carlos de Sigitenza y Gongora. 

Este sugeto floreciéd en Mexico 4 los fines del siglo pasado 17, y dejo una gran fama de erudicion en todo genero 
de buenas letras, pero mas particularmente en la instruccion de la historia antigua de este reino, por los muchos 
monumentos antiguos que logré juntar, y habiendo trabajado sobre ellos con esmero, se sabe que escribid algunas 
obras, pero ninguna llego 4 darse 4 la luz publica, 4 escepcion de sus pronosticos y calendarios anuales, que en al- 
gunos de ellos inserta tal cual noticia de la antigiiedad. En su muerte parece que se tocé a rebato con sus papeles, 
y cada uno se apoderé de los que pudo, de los cuales han resultado algunos en las bibliotecas de varias comunidades 
religiosas, y en poder de personas particulares, de donde los sacé la curiosa investigacion del Caballero Boturini ; 
pero me persuado 4 que han perecido bastantes de los que recogio, y seguramente faltan muchos de los que él 
escribiéd, que de unos solamente se han encontrado algunos fragmentos, y de otros nada mas que sus titulos y la 
noticia de haverlos escrito, sin embargo de las esquisitas diligencias que practicé el citado Boturini, y yo posterior- 
mente por haver 4 las manos dos con especialidad que se save haver escrito, una con el titulo del Wenix del Occidente, 

probando la venida y predicacion del apostol Santo Tomas en estas regiones, y la otra Esplicacion del Calendaria 
2U 

166 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Tulteca. Ninguna de las dos llegé 4 la prensa no sé por que motivos, pero yo hé conocido dos sugetos que alcan- 
zaron a Sigiienza y le trataron, y me afirmaron haberlas visto y leido. 

E] afio de mil setecientos treinta y cinco pasé 4 estos reynos, despues de haver girado una gran parte de los de 
Europa, el Caballero D. Lorenzo Boturini Benaducci, sefior de la Torre y de Hono, natural de la ciudad de Milan, 
de cuya gran literatura, profunda erudicion y alto talento, es un indice seguro de la obra que imprimié en Madrid el 
afio mil setecientos cuarenta y seis, con el titulo de Idea de una Nueva Historia General de la America Septentrional, 
que meditava escribir sobre el copioso material de monumentos antiguos que recogié en el discurso de nueve afios 
que empled en esta penosa empresa, haciendo muchos y trabajosos viages por diversas partes de este reyno. No le 
atrajo 4 él tanto el deseo de adquirir caudal, que ha sido y es el comun estimulo de algunos que 4 él han pasado, 
como stu genio curioso deseoso de ver y de saver, y haviendo Ilegado 4 el celebre Santuario de N.S. de Guadalupe, 
una legua distante de la imperial ciudad de Mexico, instruido del suceso de su milagrosa aparicion, concibié desde 
luego una tiernisima devocion 4 Maria santisima en esta su soberana Ymagen, supo al mismo tiempo que del admi- 
rable portento de su aparicion no havian quedado en el dia instrumentos autenticos que la comprobasen, aunque con 
sobrados fundamentos, y por las informaciones que posteriormente se han hecho juridicamente y con el mayor esmero, 
se creé que los huvo en aquellos primeros tiempos inmediatos 4 él, pero por una alta disposicion de la inescrutable 
providencia, se ignora absolutamente en el dia su paradero. Esto fervorizé su devocion y le hizo resolverse 4 tomar 
sobre él empefio de escribir una nueva historia de esta milagrosa aparicion, que con solidos fundamentos afianzase la 
verdad de este portento. Para esto se dedicé con el mayor esmero 4 solicitar y descubrir papeles antiguos y libros 
viejos coetaneos 6 inmediatos al suceso, que pudieran ministrarle las pruevas de la notoriedad publica en aquellos 
primitivos tiempos, y de la constante y continuada tradicion hasta los nuestros, sin la menor variedad ni discor- 
dancia, no solo en lo substancial de la milagrosa aparicion, sino tambien en todas las demas circunstancias del dia, 
mes, ao, nombres y calidades de las personas, y hasta de los mas pequefios adminiculos, y del sucesivo y perma- 
nente culto de la santa Ymagen; y en efecto en el elegante prologo galeato que dejé comenzado en lengua latina, 
y se halla entre sus papeles, asienta treinta y un fundamentos en que meditaya solidar la verdad de este portento. 

La solicitud de estos documentos, le puso en las manos algunos mapas y manuscritos de la historia antigua, que 
le incitaron 4 investigar con mayor eficacia y empefio cuanto pudiera ilustrarle é instruirle en esta materia, sin per- 
donar trabajo, molestia, ni gasto para adquirir el copioso cumulo de monumentos antiguos que recogid, y extsten en 
su archivo. Traté y conversé con todos aquellos sugetos asi Espafioles, como Indios, que creyé podian darle algunas 
noticias 6 luces para encontrarlas, emprendié jornadas de veinte, de treinta y mas leguas por caminos estraviados, 
solo por tratar con un sugeto que creia podia darle alguna noticia, 6 por la esperanza de hallar un mapa 6 un manu- 
scrito, con tales incomodidades por lo aspero de los caminos, por los temperamentos, especialmente calidos y abun- 
dantes de mosquitos y otros insectos molestos, y por la inopia de bastimentos, que aseguré que en una ocasion se 
mantuvo ocho dias enteros con chirimoyas, en otras con tortillas de maiz duras, y en otras con solo maiz tostado ; 
albergandose en las infelices chozas y tugurias de los Indios, y no pocas veces con temor y peligro de la vida, porque 
desconfiados ellos de su intencion sospechavan que esta fuese de robarles 6 hacerles otros perjuicios. 

Haviendo pues recogido ya una gran parte de este tesoro, se retiré 4 Guadalupe, y con la venia de los capellanes 
del Santuario, que aun no se havia erigido en colegiata, se fué 4 vivir 4 una pequefia capilla que entonces havia en 
lo alto del cerrillo, en el mismo sitio donde posteriormente se fabricé la que hoy existe. Tres afios se mantuvo en 
aquella soledad y retiro empleado todo en estudiar estos mapas, que segun me decia los tendia en el suelo y echado 
de pechos sobre ellos, teniendo 4 la mano los manuscritos de los Indios que los interpretavan y los apuntes que él 
havia formado de las noticias verbales que adquirié, pasava muchas horas del dia en su meditacion y estudio, parti- 
cularmente en los que tratavan de sus computos astronomicos y cronologicos para comprender sus sistemas ; pero 
como su principal objeto y el punto de vista 4 que se dirigian todas las lineas de sus deseos, era la historia de la 
aparicion de N. S. de Guadalupe, en la meditacion de ella y en hallar documentos solidos que la apoyasen, gustava 
la mayor parte del tiempo. 

Pero por uno de aquellos supremos juicios de la imescrutable providencia, que los hombres ven, y no pueden 
comprender, dispuso que la misma fervorosa devocion y afecto para con la Santisima Virgen, y del alto concepto 
que formé del estupendo prodigio que obré la Omnipotencia en la Soberana Imagen de Guadalupe, se le originasen 
todos sus trabajos y quebrantos. Deseava su fervor promover mas el culto y devocion de esta milagrosa Imagen, 
haciendola mas:celebre y plausible, y para esto creyé que fuese medio proporcionado el coronarla con la corona de 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 167 

oro que acostumbra conceder el Ilustrisimo Cabildo de la Sacrosanta Basilica Vaticana 4 imagenes taumaturgas, por 
legado y disposicion del conde Alejandro Sforcia Palavicino con ciertas ceremonias y solemnidades. A fin de obtener 
esta gracia para la sagrada copia de Guadalupe, hizo al dicho ilustrisimo cabildo un informe en que empené su lite- 
ratura y erudicion, nada vulgar, para provar con validos argumentos la certeza del milagro, la constancia de la tradi- 
cion, la continuacion no interrumpida del culto y la multitud de milagros que por medio de ella hd obrado la Santi- 
sima Virgen Maria. El informe surtié el efecto que deseava, porque luego le fue concedida la gracia por el ilustrisimo 
cabildo, y se espididé el despacho con fecha de once de Julio de mil setecientos cuarenta, dirigido 41 Sefior Arzobispo 
de Mexico ; con la instruccion del orden y metodo con que devia practicarse esta funcion. Luego que llegé 4 manos 
del caballero Boturini, la presenté a la real audiencia pidiendo su pase, que con efecto se le dio en primero de Marzo 
de mil setecientos cuarenta y dos. 

Gozoso con el feliz exito de su proyecto, se dedicé 4 preparar lo necesario para la solemnisima funcion que me- 
ditava hacer, pero careciendo de caudales que pudiesen sufragar 4 los costos de ella, determiné pedirlos de limosnas, 
no solo dentro de la ciudad, sino en todo el reyno por medio de cartas circulares. Aqui estuvo su error, porque 
procedio @ ejecutar su pensamiento sin captar la venia 4 los superiores; y como nadie vive sin emulos hallaron 
ocasion los de Boturini para acriminar la accion pintandola con odioso aspecto, cuando en el fondo nada tenia de 
malicia, sino de falta de instruccion, uniendo 4 ella la de haver pasado 4 estos reynos sin licencias siendo estrangero : 
Se le mando exivir lo que huviese recolectado de limosnas que hasta entonces solo era un poco de oro y unas esme- 
raldas para la corona que havia de labrar, se le mandé embargar sus bienes que todos se reducian 4 su museo, se 
arrest6 su persona en las casas de ayuntamiento, y despues de algun tiempo de prision, se le mandé regresar a 
Espana. ; 

Corria el afio de mil setecientos cuarenta y cuatro, en que con el motivo de la guerra que teniamos con Ingla- 
terra, estavan los mares infestados de corsarios ; embarcose en un registro mercante nombrado la Concordia, que 
acometido de dos fragatas Inglesas bien armadas en la altura del Cabo de S. Vicente, hizo alguna resistencia, pero 
finalmente huvo de ceder 4 la mayor fuerza y la apresaron: Ievaronla 4 Gibraltar, y alli echaron en tierra 4 los pasa- 
geros y tripulacion, despojados no solo de los caudales y equipages que llevavan, sino tambien de la ropa que tenian 
vestida. Perdid Boturini unos curiosos mapas que llevava en pieles de animales, y algunos manuscritos especiales 
que havia podido escapar del embargo, porque 4 la sazon los tenia fuera de casa, prestados 4 varios amigos, y algunos 
apuntes que havia formado de las noticias verbales que adquirié en los viages que hizo, y observaciones curiosas en 
ellos, y en cambio de la ropa decente que llevava sobre si, le dieron una camiseta y calzones marineros de lona. 

No pudo escapar otra cosa de esta tormenta que un escudo de oro de valor de dos pesos, y una carta que llevava 
de mi padre para mi, en que refiriendome por mayor sus apreciables prendas, y el motivo de su desgracia, me orde- 
nava que le atendiese en cuanto necesitase. Con este equipage tomé el camino para Madrid, 4 pie con los trabajos 
é incomodidades que es facil comprender: recivile y hospedéle en mi casa donde se mantuvo casi dos afios, en los 
que con la ultima y familiar comunicacion contrahimos una estrecha y verdadera amistad que duré hasta su muerte ; 
sin embargo de que por motivos de sus conveniencias huvo de separarse de mi compaftia. Lo mas del dia estavamos 
juntos, y regularmente girava la conversacion en los asuntos de-esta historia; con lo que logré aprovecharme de 
cuanto havia trabajado en ella, porque nada me reservava su amistad, antes por el contrario sentia no tener 4 manos 
sus documentos para instruirme con toda puntualidad en algunos asuntos en que le flaqueava la memoria, y para 
auxiliar la mia escribié varios apuntes de su pufio, que conservo en mi poder, los que despues le sirvieron 4 él para 
formar el libro que imprimié en Madrid el afto de mil setecientos cuarenta y seis, con el titulo de Idea de una nueva 
Historia General de la America Septentrional. 

No se proporcionaron las cosas segun sus deseos, para poder volver 4 este reyno como se le permitia 4 escribir 
la historia, no pudo conseguir la orden para que se le Mevase 4 Espafia su archivo, y haviendo dispuesto la Provi- 
dencia que 4 mi me fuese preciso restituirme 4 este reyno, el afio de mil setecientos cincuenta, me hizo el encargo 
de que solicitase con el mayor empefio sacarle copias de algunos instrumentos de los que encerrava su archivo, de 
que me dié minuta de su pufio, y de otros de que tenia noticia, y no havia podido haver 4 las manos, por si yé 
pudiese conseguirlas, con los cuales se lisongeava poder escribir desde alli la historia. Luego que llegué 4 Mexico 
y me dieron algunas treguas las ocupaciones del grave negocio que fué movil de mi viage, procuré satisfacer su 
encargo, y valido del favor del Sehor D. José Gorraez, secretario de gobierno, en cuyo oficio se halla depositado el 
museo embargado, y previa la orden y licencia del Excelentisimo Sefior Virey, Conde de Revilla-Gigedo, logré verle 

168 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

y reconocerle 4 toda mi satisfaccion, y sacar de él las copias que me pedia Boturini; mas como esto era dentro de 
la misma oficina donde yo no podia multiplicar amanuenses, y los instrumentos eran hartos y algunos confusos, 
duré mucho tiempo la operacion. No le perdia yé en solicitar los otros documentos que él no hayia podido 
adquirir, de los cuales consegui algunos, pero antes de concluirse las copias y poderselas remitir, tuve la sensible 
noticia de haver fallecido. 

Fustrada con esto mi esperanza de ver salir de su pluma esta historia, con todo el adorno de erudicion que pro- 
metia en su Idea, y huviera cumplido con ventajas su gran talento, hallandome yo con aquel cumulo de documentos 
que havia copiado y recogido, y lo que es mas instruido en sus doctrinas y reglas que de viva voz aprendi, me aco- 
metieron los primeros impulsos de tomar sobre mi, el empefio de escribirla. No me lisongeava mi amor propio de 
poder suplir la falta de Boturini, antes por el contrario, me acordava lo arduo del empefio muy superior 4 mis 
fuerzas, pero me era sumamente sensible, que estas noticias, que 4 costa de tantas fatigas y penalidades llegué 4 
adquirir, y de que yo me hallava en tanta parte instruido, quedasen otra vez sepultadas en el olvido. Batallando 
pues, entre estos afectos, vencid el segundo, y huve finalmente de resolverme 4 trabajar en este asunto. El se havia 
propuesto la idea de repartir la historia Indiana en tres edades: la primera la de los dioses; la segunda la de los 
heroes, y la tercera la de los hombres, siguiendo la celebre division de los tiempos que inventaron los Egipcios en 
obscuro, fabuloso, é historico, como los nombra Varron, comprendiendo en el primer periodo desde la creacion del 
mundo hasta el diluvio, al que por ignorado Ilamaron adelon: en el segundo desde el diluvio hasta la primer olim- 
piada, al que por lo fabuloso llamaron mityco; y en el tercero desde la primer olimpiada hasta nosotros, que és el 
que verdaderamente comprende los sucesos de los hombres, y por esto le Tlamaron historico. Mas y6 muy desigual 
& Boturini en el talento y erudicion no me propuse otro plan que el de una sencilla narracion historica, fielmente 
sacada de, los documentos antiguos que hé recogido, sugetandola en cuanto me fuese posible 4 las leyes y preceptos 
que deve observar un historiador sincéro é imparcial ; valiendome de las reglas y advertencias que de él aprendi para 
discernir lo fabuloso de lo real, y las noticias ciertas de las inciertas; porque tanto los historiadores nacionales 
antiguos que escribieron en sus geroglificos, como los modernos que los interpretaron, fueron hombres y de diversas 
naciones, entre quienes havia emulaciones y enemistades, ambiciosos de gloria cada uno respectivamente por la suya, 
y asi procuraron desfigurar los sucesos que no les son ventajosos, y pintar con mas relevantes colores los que les 
favorecen. 

Una de las materias que estimava por mas dificiles, y en que me decia que tenia mucho que trabajar, era la de 
los sistemas astrologicos y cronologicos para la perfecta inteligencia y esplicacion de las ruedas y calendarios de 
estos naturales; y 4 la verdad tenia razon y hablava con esperiencia, como quien havia tomada el pulso 4 la dificul- 
tad, pues sin embargo de girar yé sobre las luces y conocimientos que él adquirié, és imponderable el trabajo y 
tiempo que hé espendido en el estudio, confrontacion y combinacion de muchas de sus ruedas cronologicas y astro- 
nomicas de siglos, afios y meses, con las esplicaciones sucintas y confusas de sus interpretes, y de las epocas y fechas 
mas seguras de toda la historia, para llegar 4 comprender estos asuntos en el modo que los esplicé, que me parece 
el mas genisimo, siguiendo los mismos principios y reglas que aprendi de Boturini, y aunque me veo precisado 4 
contradecir algunas de sus observaciones por los motivos que espongo sinceramente al juicio de los lectores, no lo 
hago con presunciones de maestro, de quien me considero discipulo, sino que por una parte protesto con ingenuidad 
que no alcanzo otra cosa, y seria gran necedad empefiarme en esplicar lo que no comprendo; y por otra me consta 
plenamente, que él estava persuadido, 4 que no havia llegado todavia a entender en toda su perfeccion este y otros 
puntos de esta historia; por lo que me repetia con frecuencia que aun tenia harto que trabajar en ellos. Agregase 
4 esto, que la obra que dié a luz en Madrid, y yé cito en los reparos que hago, se la vi escribir dentro de mi propia 
casa, sin tener 4 la vista documento alguno de los que recogio por donde gobernarse, sino por una restitucion que 
le hacia’ su memoria de las especies que en ella havia depositado, en que és tan facil como regular padecer equivoca- 
cion. Mas no por esto quedo tan pagado de mi dictamen ni tan satisfecho de mi trabajo, que lisongeandome plena- 
mente del acierto, me persuado 4 que no havia otro ingenio que pueda adelantar mucho en esta materia; pero 
siempre creo que no lo sera inutil mi trabajo. 

No ha sido poco el que hé empleado tambien en ordenar la cronologia, adorno tan esencial de la historia, que 
sin ella se desluce en mucha parte la relacion de los sucesos, y le falta una cierta armonia que la dé su mas pulido 
complemento. Fueron muy exactos estos naturales en sefialar en sus mapas y pinturas los geroglificos y caractéres 
de los afios en que acaecieron los mas famosos sucesos, y en muchos de ellos los de los meses y dias, y aun de las 

Ni Sl 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 169 

estaciones del dia, que suplen 4 la division y reparticion de las horas que ellos no alcanzaron. Por esta causa los 
escritores que interpretaron estos mapas, por lo general concuerdan la asignacion de estos caractéres, pero varian 
infinito en la correspondencia. de sus afios, que son los de nuestros computos, porque no teniendo un siglo mas que 
cincuenta y dos afios, sefalados con unos mismos geroglificos, de trece en trece, como esplico en su lugar, era 
preciso que el caracter del alo que sefialan en la relacion de un suceso, se halle identico en cada siglo. Saber pues 
4 que siglo corresponde, y por consiguiente 4 que afio de los nuestros, esta es la dificultad en que se han enredado 
los interpretes, variando sus computes en dos, tres 6 mas siglos de 4 cincuenta y dos afios, que quieren decir dosci- 
entos, 6 trescientos respecto 4 nuestra cuenta. Para averiguar pues la verdad, y proceder en este punto con la 
mayor exactitud, havia resuelto Boturini formar tablas generales sobre el sistema cronologico de estos naturales, 
comprensivas desde la creacion del mundo, hasta la conquista, Jas que con efecto comenzé y se hallan en borrador 
entre sus papeles archivados. Valime de su doctrina, y haviendo copiado lo que él tenia travajado, las continué 
hasta el aho de mil quinientos treinta y uno, y van puestas al fin de este tomo para satisfacer al buen gusto de los 
curiosos que puedan por si mismos reconocer mis calculos, y por ventura enmendarlos y adelantar los pensamientos, 
advirtiendo que la regla’ que yo hé seguido para los que hé formado, h4 sido valerme de las epocas ciertas para contar 
aquellos-periodos que los Indios asientan haver pasado de unos 4 otros sucesos, atento siempre al caracter del afio 
en que sefalan aquel de que se trata, omitiendo los quebrados que resultan cuando cuentan por siglos hasta encon- 
trar el aiio que anotan. No solo hé seguido este calculo, corriendo desde la creacion hacia nuestros tiempos, por 
aquellas epocas y periodos fijos que establecen, sino tambien al contrario, contando desde el afio de que llegé Her- 
ndn Cortés 4 estas tierras, que fue el de mil quinientos diez y nueve, que contestan todos unanimes, que fué sefia- 
lado en la Xiumolpia 6 Calendario de estos naturales con el geroglifico de la cata, en el num? 1°, y por tanto es una 
epoca muy fija para girar hacia atras el calculo. 

Mas como quiera que en muchos acaecimientos notables, no solo sefialan los Indios los afos, sino tambien los 
meses y dias, no eran bastantes estas tablas para averiguarlo, y asi me fué preciso formar otras tres : la primera del 
orden en que colocavan los geroglificos de los veinte dias de cada mes, segun el caracter del afio ; la segunda de los 
dias de nuestros meses en que comenzava cada afio de los suyos, siguiendo la opinion que me ha parecido mas cierta 
entre la gran variedad que se halla en sus autores en asignar el primer mes de su afio, y 4 cual de los nuestros cor- 
respondia; y la tercera de los signos con que comenzavan y acavaban de contar los dias de todos los cincuenta y dos 
afios de cada siglo, inclusos los intercalares y bisextos, con respecto 4 el periodo de trece dias que tenian en lugar 
de nuestras semanas, cuya numeracion unian 4 los simbolos de los dias. Estas las hé colocado en el cap® 8°, porque 
para su inteligencia y uso es preciso estar instruido en todo su sistema cronologico, no solo del giro de los afios en 
el siglo por la repeticion de los cuatro caractéres iniciales, sino del de los meses, semanas y dias, cuya esplicacion se 
halla en aquel y los anteriores capitulos. 

Los sucesos historicos que nos refieren hé procurado examinarlos 4 la luz de una juiciosa critica, para asentar 
unos como ciertos y otros como falsos, 6 fabulosos, trabajando en indagar el origen que pudieron tener estas ficciones 
por la combinacion y confrontacion de unos escritos con otros, y de unos con otros sucesos, exponiendolo todo con 
sinceridad segun lo concibo y sin vanidad del acierto. Muchas cosas parecerdn estrafias y poco verosimiles, espe- 
cialmente 4 aquellas personas que no conocen estos paises y sus circunstancias, que ignoran el caracter de los 
naturales de ellas, 6 que viven todavia encaprichados en el concepto de que eran absolutamente barbaros ; pero sin 
embargo se hallan contestadas por los escritores nacionales de aquellos tiempos mas inmediatos 4 la conquista, 
apoyadas en mucha parte por las relaciones de aquellos primeros Espafoles que pasaron 4 estas partes, como son 
Hernan Cortés en sus cartas al Emperador, Bernal Diaz, Francisco Lopez de Gomara y otros que vieron su gobierno, 
supieron sus leyes y costumbres, su religion y ritos, sus artefactos y manufacturas, y aunque hablan de todas estas 
cosas de paso, superficialmente y con algunas equivocaciones, y muchos errores por falta de instruccion, es muy 
sobrado lo que dicen para autorizar las historias de los nacionales que comprendieron traducir sus pinturas, y con- 
servar en nuestros caractéres las noticias de su antigiiedad, tanto por lo respectivo 4 los sucesos, como por lo que 
mira 4 sus conocimientos cientificos, egercicio de las artes y regimen de su gobierno: y finalmente los:‘mismos mo- 
numentos antiguos son unos testigos irrefragables, que no solo corroboran poderosamente las relaciones ‘historicas, 
sino que las acusan de diminutas, haciendonos creér, que en algunos asuntos omitieron muchas cosas dignas de 
saberse, y cuya noticia ilustrandonos mas ampliamente excitaria mas vivamente la admiracion. 

Las arengas y razonamientos que pongo en boca de los heroes y personages, son sustancialmente las mismas 

2X 

170 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

que hallo en los. escritores, y algunas literalmente copiadas ; en otras solo hé corregido el estilo de un tosco y mal 
usado. castellano, que por ser de aquellos naturales que no le hablavan con perfeccion estén mal coordinadas y Ilenas: 
de repeticiones, pero estas mismas ‘en los autores que escriben en. su propio idioma, son muy elegantes 4 juicio de. 
los sugetos peritos en él, de quienes me hé-valido, porque mi instruccion en el Mexicano es muy corta, sin embargo 
de que con el ausilio de artes y vocabularios hé trabajado en la version de muchos nombres y frases para la inteli- 
gencia y averiguacion de la verdad en algunos pasages de la historia, como se vera en ella, sugetando despues mis 
producciones 4 el examen de los inteligentes, sin cuya aprobacion no me huviera atrevido 4 sentarlas en esta obra. 
No seme culpe de que traiga en ella muchas voces de la lengua Nahuatl 6 Mexicana, porque me ha parecido 
conveniente hacerlo asi para la mejor y mas clara esplicacion, pero todas las cosas las traduzco 4 nuestro idioma y 
repito muchas veces la traduccion para que el lector no.tenga que ir 4 buscar 4 otra parte el significado. En muchos 
vocablos doy la etimologia, especialmente en los compuestos de que abunda mucho este idioma, particularmente en 
la nomenclatura de personas y lugares, que todos son significativos, y por tanto me hé valido muchas veces de ellos 
para la averigiiacion de algunos puntos de la historia, y no puedo negar que fué esta una de las reglas que aprendi 
del Caballero Boturini que se havia propuesto 4 seguir en su obra esta. maxima. Algunas de estas tradiciones, ni 
son.mias; ni de los sugetos inteligentes de quienes me hé valido, sino de los mismos escritores nacionales, y asi las 
pongo; sin embargo de que los peritos del idioma con quienes las hé conferido no las comprenden, y todos contestan 
en que el idioma Nahuatl ha variado mucho de lo que era en tiempo de la gentilidad, pero discordan en el motivo, 
porque los unos creen que esta diferencia proviene de corrupcion de él, y otros defienden que nace de haverse pulido 
y perfeccionado. Lo cierto es que las canciones del Emperador Nezahualcoyotl que pongo en su idioma, no hé 
hallado alguno que perfectamente las traduzca, porque hay muchas voces que absolutamente se ignora el dia de hoy 
su significado, sin embargo de haverme valido del vocabulario del P. Fr. Alonso de Molina del orden de N. P. Sera- 
fico S. Francisco, que le tengo por el mas antiguo y se imprimié en Mexico el afio de mil quinientos setenta y uno, 
en el cual se hallan muchos verbos, nombres y frasismos que el dia de hoy no estén en uso, ni hay alguno de los 

naturales que los entienda. 

LIBRO I. 

ORIGEN DE LAS GENTES QUE POBLARON LA AMERICA. NOTICIA DE LAS PRIMERAS QUE SE ESTABLECIERON EN 
LA NUEVA ESPANA, Y DE LA PRIMERA MONARQUIA QUE EN ELLA FLORECIO’ DE LA NACION TOLTECA. 

Caritruto I. 

Sttuacion de la Nueva Espana, venda de sus primeros Pobladores y noticias que alcanzaron de la 
Creacion del Mundo. 

EL rico y fertil reyno de la Nueva Espaiia, cuya Historia antigua emprendo 4 escribir, fue llamado de sus antiguos 
havitadores Anahuac, esto es, tierra que esta entre las aguas, por ser su situacion entre los dos mares, llamados hoy 
del Norte y del Sur. Esta tierra pues es una considerable porcion de la America, y esta una de las cuatro partes en 
que los geografos dividen el orbe terraqueo, dando 4 todo el vasto continente que se describe en la mitad del globo 
el nombre de America, tomado de Americo Vespucci, Florentino que descubrié su costa Septentrional el afio de mil 
cuatrocientos noventa y siete, y sin embargo de que cuatro afios antes havia descubierto Cristoval Colon las tierras 
Meridionales, se llev6 Americo la gloria de dar su nombre 4 todo el continente, el que en el uso comun de hablar 
aman las Indias; y en la dicha division que hacian del orbe en cuatro partes, la sefialan por una de ellas, sin em- 
bargo de que comprendiendo en ella sus yslas, casi iguala en su tamafio 4 las otras tres juntas, Asia, Africa y Kuropa, 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 171 

a las que llaman algunos el mundo viejo, y 4 la America el nuevo mundo, por haverla tenido oculta la Divina Pro- 
videncia al conocimiento de los Europeos hasta estos ultimos siglos. Si los nombres de America é Indias son pro- 
pios 6 impropios, impuestos con justo motivo, 6 sin él, es asunto en que se funden algunos escritores. Yo prescindo 
enteramente de la cuestion como nada conducente 4 mi asunto, y acomodandome al uso comun de hablar y entender 
la daré cuando se me ofrezca la ocasion los nombres de America 6 Indias, y 4 sus naturales antiguos y descendientes 
de ellos, Ilamaré Indios 4 diferencia de los hijos y descendientes de los Europeos que han nacido en. estos paises 
despues de su descubrimiento y conquista, 4 quienes llamaré Indianos 6 criollos, siguiendo tambien el uso comun de 
hablar. 

Este, pues, dilatadisimo pais de la America se estiende por el Sur hasta el Estrecho de Magallanes, en 52 grados y $ 
de altura del polo antartico, por el Norte aun no se sabe fijamente su termino: las cartas modernas nos demarcan los 
ultimos descubrimientos, hasta en altura de 70, 6 75 grados del artico, en cuya suposicion su largo de Norte 4 Sur 
aborda a dosmil y doscientas leguas; de ancho por donde mas se estiende, tiene mil doscientas setenta y siete del 
Este al Oeste, que es desde Terranova al cabo de Mendocino, y por lo mas angosto tiene diez y ocho leguas, que es 
desde Panama 4 Nombre de Dios. Dividen pues todo este terreno en dos partes 6 grandes peninsulas, que cerca de 
Panama se unen en un istmo de tierra que és lo mas angosto y estrecho de ella entre los dos mares: A la parte que 
corre desde alli hasta el Estrecho de Magallanes, llaman America Meridional, porque la mayor parte de sus tierras 
estan situadas desde la equinocial al antartico, y en ellas se comprenden los reynos del Perd, Brasil y Chile. Desde 
Panama para el Norte, en la otra parte 6 peninsula 4 que llaman America Septentrional, porque todas sus tierras 
estan situadas desde la equinocial al Norte, y estaés la que abraza las dilatadas provincias que hoy se conocen por 
Nueva Espafia; aunque algunos quieren que el reyno del Pert se estienda hasta Quauhtemalan; pero no admite 
disputa que Hernando Cortés, conquistador de la Nueva Espafia, penetré hasta Honduras, y hasta alli estendié su 
descubrimiento y gobierno, ni menos el que hasta alli llegava el pais que los Indios lamaron Anahuac por estar 
situado entre los dos mares, y las noticias que de estas tierras dieron 4 Cortés en Mexico, fueron las que le movieron 
a emprender su descubrimiento; y siendo constante en la historia que voy 4 escribir, que Quauhtemalan y toda su 
dilatada provincia fueron feudales de los emperadores de Tezcuco, supremos monarcas de este pais, con justo titule 
devo yo comprender bajo del nombre de Nueva Espajfia todo el terreno que se demarca desde el istmo de Panama 
para el Norte. 

Si toda la America fué 6 no habitada antes del diluvio, es otra cuestion muy agitada entre los autores que han 
escrito, 6 de todo su continente, 6 de algunas de sus partes. Tampoco tomo partido en la disputa, porque no hallo 
razon que me convenza en favor de la una 4 de la otra opinion, y aunque los defensores de la afirmativa se fundan 
en los textos sagrados, “ Crescite et multiplicamini, et replete terram (*),” “Repleta est terra iniquitate 4 facie eorum (°),” 
y otros semejantes que exponen 4 su proposito, me parece que para su:verdad y perfecta inteligencia no es preciso 
que toda la tierra materialmente estuviese habitada y Ilena de gentes, ni que de haver sido en toda ella universal el 
diluvio que la anegé, se infiera bien que toda estava poblada, pues aun en sola aquella parte que nos consta por el 
texto sagrado que estava habitada, havia muchos montes y dilatadisimos desiertos enteramente inhabitados, como 
los hay el dia:'de hoy. Ni por el contrario seme ofrece dificultad en que asi como hallaron paso 4 estas tierras los 
que:las poblaron despues del diluvio, le huviesen encontrado otros hombres antes de <l, y poblado copiosamente estas 
regiones ; pero-ni por uno ni por otro lado se presenta razon ni fundamento solido que convenza; ni en los monu- 
mentos antiguos de.los Indios, de que hé de valerme en el discurso de esta historia, se halla noticia alguna en este 
asunto; y como quiera que el mio no es otro que dar al publico las que hé podido recoger y alcanzar de su historia 
antigua en la multitad de naciones que poblaron estas regiones y grandes monarquias, que florecieron en el recinto 
de la Nueva Espafia, las que con tanto cuidado, esmero y primor procuraron ellos conservar en sus pinturas y mapas 
historicos, poniendolas con la mayor claridad y pureza que me sea posible, para deshacer los errores, implicancias y 
confusiones en que hdn incurrido los autores, en lo poco que hasta ahora han escrito en esta materia, me és de poca 
importancia que la America estuviese 6 no poblada antes del diluvio. 

La gran dificultad entre los autores ha sido el averiguar por discursos 6 ilaciones cual fué el origen de tantas y 
tan diversas naciones como se hallaron pobladas en estas regiones, de donde vinieron y por donde pasaron; si por 

vA 

mar 6 por tierra, si con destino cierto, 6 incierto. _Unos los hacen Judios de las diez tribus dispersas en tiempo de 

a Gen. i. b Gen. vi. 

172 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Salmanazar Rey de Asiria, que los sacé de Samaria para poblarla de Babilonios: otros los hacen Espafioles que 
pasaron 4 estas tierras de las Islas de Barlovento, que dicen estavan pobladas de Espafioles en tiempo del rey Hespero 
que las poseyé; otros dicen que vinieron de Irlanda los primeros pobladores ; otros que fueron Tartaros, y en fin 
cada uno discurre 4 su modo y produce las pruevas y congeturas que apoyan su opinion, que puede ver el curioso 
casi en todos los autores que han escrito de Indias, y con mas facilidad lo hallar4 recopilado en el erudito libro que 
escribié el P. Fr. Gregorio Garcia, Dominicano, con el titulo de Origen de los Indios, donde vera todo cuanto en este 
asunto se ha dicho, los fundamentos de cada opinion, y las dificultades y obgeciones que se le oponen. Que yé 
entre tanto sin tomar partido en ninguna, por especulaciones y discursos, sino arreglado 4 los manuscritos y monu- 
mentos antiguos que hé recogido en interpretacion de los mapas historicos de los Toltecas (que entre todas estas 
naciones fueron los mas sabios), digo que el origen y primeros padres de todas ellas fueron siete familias, que en la 
dispersion de gentes por la confusion de lenguas en la Torre de Babél, se unieron por hallarse de un idioma que 
llamaron Nahuatl, y se conoce por lengua Mexicana, y peregrinaron hasta estas partes, donde se establecieron y 
multiplicaron, y se fueron dividiendo en pueblos y naciones. 

La nacion Tolteca, entre todas las que poblaron estos paises, fué la mas instruida, y la que mejor supo retener 
las memorias de su origen y antigiiedad, hallando su talento el modo de conservar y pasar 4 sus sucesores las noticias 
de su historia, ya inventando geroglificos y caractéres, que ordenados con metodo y regla los figuraban en sus mapas 
que formavan sobre pieles de animales, sobre papel de maguei 6 de palma en diferentes maneras, ya con nudos en 
hilos de diferentes colores, 4 que dieron el nombre de Nepohualtzitzin, que quiere decir cuenta de los sucesos ; ya 
finalmente con cantares, unos sencillos y otros alegoricos, y pasando de unos 4 otros el arte de historiar, entender é 
interpretar estos mapas, nudos y cantares ha llegado hasta nosotros su noticia, porque esta era entre ellos facultad 
que se ensefiava 4 los nifios del estado noble, como entre nosotros 4 leer y escribir. Estos pues alcanzaron con cla- 
ridad el verdadero origen y principio de todo el universo, porque asientan que el cielo y la tierra y cuanto en ella se 
halla, es obra de la poderosa mano de un Dios supremo y unico, 4 quien davan el nombre de Tloque Nahuaque, que 
quiere decir Criador de todas las cosas : llamavanle tambien Ypalnem-chualoni, que quiere decir, por quien vivimos y 
somos, y fue la unica deidad que adoraron en aquellos primitivos tiempos, y aun despues que se introdujo la idolatria 
y el falso culto, le creyeron siempre superior 4 todos sus dioses, y le. invocavan levantando los ojos.al cielo, y en 
esta creencia se mantuvieron constantes hasta la llegada de los Espaitoles, como afirma Herrera *, no solo los Mexi- 
canos, sino tambien los de Mechoacan, y lo que es mas se hallé la misma noticia en todo el reyno del Peru, aunque 
el Inca Garcilaso de la Vega niega que este fuese el Viracocha, y atribuyé este y otros errores de los'escritores Espa- 
oles en orden 4 la multiplicidad de dioses, su culto, é idolatrias, 4 falta de noticia y poca inteligencia del idioma, que 
es muy verosimil porque lo mismo les sucedié en mucho de lo que escriben de Nueva Espaia, -y dice, que el verda- 
dero nombre que le davan al Dios criador era: Pachacamac, que significa el hacedor y sustentador del universo, de 
donde se colige que fue uno mismo el origen de todos los pobladores de ambos reynos, como-afirman los Toltecas ; 
y en aquella primera edad no tuvieron mas adoracion y culto que al Tloque Nahuaque, porque la idolatria y multi- 
plicidad de dioses nacio mucho despues entre estas gentes, como se verd en su lugar. 

Asientan igualmente que este Ente supremo criéd un hombre y una muger en un ameno jardin, y que de estos dos 
solos individuos se propagé todo el linage humano, y los pintan en sus mapas casi del mismo modo que nosotros ; 
pero en cuanto al pecado que cometieron y porque fueron desterrados de aquel delicioso sitio; en ninguno de cuantos 
escritos tengo en interpretacion de estos mapas historicos, se halla mencion alguna, mas no por eso me persuado 4 
que los antiguos Toltecas lo ignoraron, antes bien tengo positivo fundamento para creer que consérvaron esta noticia, 
y fue una de las que con mayor cuidado intentaron que pasase 4 la de su posteridad por medio de la pintura, porque 
entre los mapas que hé visto hay uno que denota ser muy antiguo, formado sobre papel muy basto de maguey, en 
que se figura un huerto, y en él un solo arbol, desde cuyo pie se enreda una culebra que en medio de su copa 
descubre, la cabeza con rostro de muger, y esta misma figura se halla en otros mapas, y los que esplican su signi- 
ficado dicen que es una de las diosas que adoraron despues en el tiempo de su idolatria, 4 quien dieron el nombre de 
Cihuacohuatl, que quiere decir la muger culebra. 'Torquemada asienta como sabida esta noticia, y concuerda con las 
historias de los Indios que dicen que esta fue la primer muger que parié en el mundo, y de quien proceden todos los 
hombres, y asi la davan el nombre de Oxomozco que otros escriben Otzomozco y le traducen la prefiada golosa, hacien- 

* Herr. dec. 3, lib. 2, cap. 15, pag. 85, col. 2. ite: dec. 3, lib. 3, pag. 119, col. 1. ite: dec. 5. lib. 4, cap. 4, pag. 114, col. 1, lib. 6, cap. 30, 
lib. 1, cap. 4. 

FROM. SPANISH AUTHORS. 173 

dole compuesto de la voz otztli, que significa prefiada, y moxipthuani golosa. Davanle tambien los nombres de 
Titiel que significa nuestra madre, 6 el vientre de donde salimos, y Teoxaomuiqui, que quiere decir la diosa que recoge 
las almas de los difuntos: 4 su honor dedicaron uno de los meses del afio en que celebravan una fiesta en com- 
memoracion de sus difuntos y se erlgieron famosos templos, como verémos en su lugar. Todo esto me hace creer 
-que los antiguos Tultecas tuvieron perfecto conocimiento del pecado del primer hombre, cometido 4 sugestion de la 
muger engafiada de la serpiente, que la brinds con la fruta del arbol vedado, que fué el origen de todos nuestros males, 
y por donde entré la muerte en el linage humano, y que esto fue lo que ellos quisieron esplicar en estas pinturas 
simbolicas, para que por medio de ellas pasase esta noticia 4 sus descendientes; mas desfigurandola despues la igno- 
rancia introdujo fabulas y errores con que ofuscé la verdad y trastornd el verdadero culto: I acaso la confusion y 
horror con que en aquellos principios miravan estas figuras simbolicas, que les traian 4 la memoria la culpa del primer 
hombre, causa de la mayor desgracia del linage humano, raiz de todos los males que sufre, y origen de la muerte, did 
motiyo 4 la ignorancia para que degenerando en idolatria el justo horror de esta desgracia, se fingiesen esta deidad 
que recogia las almas de los muertos. ‘Tambien hallo otra congruencia en el nombre que desde lo antiguo hasta el 
dia de hoy le dan 4 la serpiente, que es Cohnatlahueliloc, que quiere decir culebra demonio, y este es nombre mas 
general que dan 4 la serpiente en lengua Mexicana. 

Dicen que en aquellos principios del mundo se mantenian los hombres solamente con frutas y yerbas, hasta que 
uno 4 quien Ilaman Tlaomuiqui, que quiere decir el que maté con fiecha, halldé la invencion del arco y la flecha, y que 
desde entonces comenzaron 4 egercitarse en la caza, y mantenerse de carnes de los animales que matavan en ella, 
y asi lo acostumbraron en adelante, hasta la venida de los Espafioles, todos los habitantes de este vasto continente ; 
de suerte que aunque despues se dedicaron al cultivo de varias semillas, y 4 criar algunos animales y aves para su 
alimento, no por eso dejavan de hacerlo igualmente de la caza, y en todos los pueblos tenian dias sefialados en que 
hacer sus batidas y cazas generales para proveerse de este mantenimiento, usando para ello el arco y la flecha, pues 
aunque despues para sus guerras inventaron otras armas ofensivas y defensivas, para la caza no usaron jamas de otra 
que el arco y la flecha. 

Carrruto II. 

De la noticia que alcanzaron del Diluvio y de la Torre de Babel, y Confusion de Lenguas, y de las 
Stete Familias del idioma Nahuatl, que vimeron a poblar estas Regiones. 

EsraBiecipa pues la creencia de que el mundo fué criado por el Tloquenahuaque, comenzaron 4 numerar sus epocas 
desde el aio de su creacion. A este le sehalaron con el geroglifico de un pedernal en su sistema cronologico, de 
que daré noticia adelante, y desde él comenzaron la cuenta de los tiempos y numeracion de los afios, y dicen que 
pasados treinta y tres siglos de los suyos (que eran de cincuenta y dos afios) de la creacion del mundo, que hacen mil 
setecientos veinte y seis afios, en otro que fué tambien sefialado con el mismo geroglifico de un pedernal, padecié el 
genero humano una horrible calamidad de copiosisimos aguaceros con rayos y truenos, que anegaron toda la tierra, 
quedando sumergidos en las aguas los mas altos montes, caxtolmelictli, que quiere decir quince codos, y que de esta 
general calamidad solo escaparon ocho personas en un tlaptlipetlacalli que quiere decir casa como arca cerrada, y 
en sus mapas la figuran 4 semejanza de una barquilla con toldo, por encima del cual asoman ocho cabezas, y asi estan 
que de estas ocho personas volvié a propagarse el genero humano. 

Segun las tablas cronologicas que dejé comenzadas el Caballero Boturini, (las que yo hé continuado hasta el afio 
de mil* ........ cuarenta y tres de Cristo y van al fin de este tomo) sobre el sistema que seguian estos naturales 
contando los siglos de cincuenta y dos afios, deve fijarse el diluvio en el aio de mil setecientos diez y siete de la 
creacion del mundo, que és el primero que se halla sefialado con el geroglifico de un Pedernal, pasados (como ellos 
asientan) los treinta y tres siglos de la creacion. Bien sé, que el comun sentir de los expositores coloca este suceso 
en el afio de mil seiscientos cincuenta y seis del mundo, pretendiendo deducir esta cuenta del mismo texto sagrado 
por las edades de los patriarcas antediluvianos, en que solo se nota la diferencia de sesenta afios de uno 4 otro com- 
puto, que no es de la mayor consideracion: no me parece muy dificil concordar uno con otro, mas no siendo mi 
animo en esta obra ingerirme en estas disputas, ni menos imponerme en conciliar su cronologia con la nuestra, como 

* This blank occurs in the original MS. 

2UYs 

174. SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

parece que la intentava hacer el Caballero Boturini, solo referiré con pureza y fidelidad lo que hallo escrito en sus 
historias, colocando los sucesos en los aos que corresponde’en dicha tabla segun las epocas que ellos asignan, y el 
numero de afios que cuentan de unos sucesos 4 otros, atendiendo siempre al caracter 6 geroglifico con que sefialan los 
afios, porque haviendo sido ellos en esto muy exdctos, no puede haver en ello variacion, y es preciso colocar los 
sucesos con los que corresponden al caracter que sefiala. Y devo advertir aqui para lo que voy 4 tratar en los par- 
rafos siguientes, que en las dichas tablas, que como ya dije dejé comenzadas de su propio pufio el dicho Caballero 
Boturini, anota el diluvio al margen del mismo ajio de mil setecientos diez y siete del mundo, sin duda porque en 
todos los manuscritos que recogio hallé uniforme y contexte esta noticia, como 4 mi me ha sucedido, sin embargo 
de que en muchas de las epocas posteriores hay notable variacion en la cronologia, no solo de unos 4 otros monu- 
mentos y de unos 4 otros autores, sino en uno mismo, que és D. Fernando de Alba Yxtlilxochitl, uno de los mas 
bien instruidos y mas autorizado en las diferentes relaciones que escribié en diversos tiempos, en las que refiriendo 
los mismos sucesos en todas, sin la menor alteracion en los hechos y en los caracteres 6 geroglificos en que los Tul- 
tecas sefialaron los aos en que acaecieron, es notable la variacion que tiene en la confrontacion con nuestros com- 
putos, nacida sin duda de no haver formado tablas, y sin embargo el diluvio en todas le coloca en el mismo afio de 
mil setecientos diez y siete, y lo mismo egecutan los demas autores que hé visto. 

Del celebre matematico D. Carlos de Sigitienza y Gongora, sugeto muy instruido en las antigtiedades de los 
Indios, y en sus calendarios, tengo un pronostico 6 lunario que imprimio para el afio de mil seiscientos ochenta y 
uno, en que pone una nota cronologica que comienza asi: Corre este presente afio de cincomil seiscientos cuarenta 
y uno de la creacion del mundo ; despues del diluvio tresmil novecientos ochenta y cinco; del descubrimiento de las 
Indias Occidentales hecho por Colon ciento ochenta y nueve ; de la fundacion de esta ciudad de Mexico por los Aztecas 
Mexitzin trescientos cincuenta y cuatro, siendo el presente en su xiuhmolpia 6 calendario el ano Chicuazen Tecpatl, 
6 sexto de la segunda indiccion 6 triadecaterida de Acatl. Segun esta nota, no podia colocar Sigiienza el diluvio en 
el afio de mil setecientos diez y siete del mundo, porque desde este 4 el cincomil seiscientos cuarenta y uno de la 
creacion que asienta concurrir en el de mil seiscientos ochenta y uno de Cristo, solo hay tres mil novecientos veinte 
y cuatro afios, y es la diferencia de sesenta y un afios, que haviendoles de descontar de los mil setecientos diez y siete 
para completar los tres mil novecientos ochenta y cinco que asienta haver corrido desde el diluvio, corresponde colo- 
car este en el afio de mil seiscientos cincuenta y seis del mundo, que es la opinion comun de los expositores, mas este 
en las tablas cronologicas seguidas sobre el sistema de estos Indios, fué sefialado con el geroglifico de la cafia en el 
n°. 5°. y asi no puedo comprender como concordava este computo con los caracteres del calendario de los Indios que 
asientan contestes que el caracter del afo en que acaecidé el diluvio fue Ce Tecpatl, un pedernal. Tambien se mani- 
fiesta en dicha nota que dava al mundo menos edad de la que ya le asigno en mis tablas, cuando encarné el Verbo 
divino, porque segun estas el afio de cincomil seiscientos cuarenta y uno concurrié con el de mil seiscientos y 
ocho de la era cristiana, y desde este al de mil seiscientos ochenta y uno con que el asienta haver concurrido, hay 
setenta y tres afios de diferencia, que estos menos devia tener el mundo segun su computo, y por consiguiente deveria 
colocar el nacimiento de Cristo en el afio de tres mil novecientos sesenta y uno, que segun las tablas fué sefialado por 
los Indios en el geroglifico del pedernal en el num®.9, y sin embargo de esta gran diferencia dice en la misma nota, 
que el dicho afio de mil seiscientos ochenta y uno fue sefialado en el xiuhmolpia 6 calendario Indiano con el simbolo 
Chicuazen Tecpatl (seis pedernales) en que por lo respectivo al caracter del afio, solo hay uno de diferencia de sus 
computos a los mios, segun los cuales el dicho afio de mil seiscientos ochenta y uno fue Chicome Calli (siete casas) 
que es el que immediatamente se sigue al Chicuazen Tecpatl como puede verse en las tablas: pero en esto mismo hallo 
otra grave dificultad, porque colocado el nacimiento de Cristo en el afio de tres mil novecientos sesenta y uno del 
mundo, y contando desde el de dosmil seiscientos ochenta y uno de la era Cristiana, se concluyen estos en el afio 
Matlatliomome Tecpatl, esto es, doce pedernales, que concurrié con el cincomil seiscientos cuarenta y uno del mundo, 
como manifiestan las tablas, y desde él al primero que se halla seftalado con el caracter de Chicuazen Tecpatl 6 seis 
pedernales, que es el de cincomil seiscientos sesenta y uno, hay veinte afios de diferencia. Vuelvo 4 decir que por 
mas que hé trabajado no hé podido comprender esta cuenta, ni el modo en que formava estos computos, mas haviendo 
sido un sugeto tan docto y bien instruido, que su fama dura y durard en esta Nueva Espafia, no me lisongeo de 
enmendarle y puede estar en mi el error, por la limitacion de mi talento, y otro mas elevado podra decidir: pero 
advierto que la mayor parte de las epocas que iré sefialando en los sucesos de la historia, arregladas 4 mis computos, 
estan conformes con las de Sigiienza, y esto me hace sospechar que huviese padecido algun equivoco en esta. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 175 

Volviendo pues 4 cobrar el hilo de nuestra historia digo, que multiplicado considerablemente el linage humano, 
dicen que temerosos los hombres de otro diluvio, y queriendo hacer su nombre famoso, emprendieron la fabrica de 
una torre muy alta, 4 que din el nombre de Zacualli, y que pasadas cuatro edades (que son ocho siglos de los signos 
de 4 cincuenta y dos afios) desde el diluvio, en un afio que sefalan tambien con el geroglifico de un pedernal, cuando 
mas empefados estavan en la fabricacion de su torre, de repente se les confundieron las lenguas, de. modo que unos 
a otros no se entendian, con lo que cesé la fabrica y todos se dividieron, esparciendose por toda la redondez de la 
tierra. Esta noticia tan puntualmente anotada por la nacion Tulteca, de cuyos mapas historicos la sacaron los 
autores que escribieron en estas monarquias de Mexico y Tezcuco, se hallé conforme y sin variacion entre los Indios 
de Chiapa, como lo asegura el Sefior D. Fr. Francisco Muiioz de la Vega, obispo de aquella diocesi, en el prologo 
de sus Constituciones diocesanas, que afirma guardarse en su archivo un antiguo manuscrito de los primeros. natu- 
rales de alli, que supieron escribir en nuestros caractéres, en el cual consta que mantuvieron' siempre la memoria de 
que el padre y progenitor primero de su nacion se llamé Teponahuaste, que quiere decir el Sefior del palo hueco, y 
que este se hallé en la fabrica de la gran pared, que asi llamavan a la torre de Babél, y vid por sus ojos la confusion 
de las lenguas, despues de lo cual lo mandé el Dios Criador venir 4 estas dilatadas tierras 4 repartirlas entre los 
hombres. 

Este suceso segun sus computos y confrontacion de las tablas, deve colocarse en el afio de dosmil ciento treinta 
y tres del mundo, y cuatrocientos diez y seis despues del diluvio, porque contando los ocho siglos de 4 cincuenta y 
dos afios, desde el de mil setecientos diez y siete en que asientan haver sido el diluvio, el primer afio que se halla 
sefialado por el geroglifico del pedernal en el num?. 1°., es el de dosmil ciento treinta y tres, como puede verse en 
dichas tablas: en esta epoca varian algo mas de nuestros computos, porque la opinion comun de los expositores no 
establece esta confusion de lenguas de Babél tantos anos despues del diluvio, pero todos fundados en meras conge- 
turas. El] Caballero Boturini en la obra que did a luz en Madrid el afio de mil setecientos cuarenta y seis con el 
titulo de Idea de una nueva Historia de la America Septentrional, que meditava escribir por los monumentos que 
recogio, y de que yo me hé valido para esta, toca este punto en el parrafo 16, folio 124; y parece que se inclinava 
4 seguir la opinion de los Setenta que fijan el diluvio en el afio dosmil doscientos cuarenta y dos del mundo, y con- 
tando las cuatro edades que llaman ciclos en el modo en que las cuenta y esplican las fojas anteriores establece como 
la que mas le agrada la opinion de haver sido esta confusion de lenguas el afio de dosmil cuatrocientos noventa y 
siete del mundo. Y6 me hé instruido y tenido entre manos todos los monumentos antiguos que él recogié, y ni en ellos, 
ni en los que despues hé juntado, hé podido encontrar la esplicacion que él hace 4 la foja 122, ni hé podido entenderla ni 
acomodarla 4 las epocas de los sucesos de la historia. Dice pues, “‘ que cuando los Indios cuentan en sus calendarios 
por este numero de ce uno v. g. Ce Tecpatl un pedernal, se entiende una vez cada cuatro ciclos, por que hablan 
entonces de los caractéres iniciales de cada ciclo, y asi segun el artificio de sus ruedas pintadas, entra Ce Tecpatl tan 
solamente una vez en los principios de los cuatro ciclos; por cuyo motivo puesto en la historia algun caracter de 
estos iniciales, es fuerza que pasen cuatro ciclos Indianos de 4 cincuenta y dos afios cada uno, que hacen doscientos 
ocho afios antes de poderse hallar en adelante, porque de esta manera no se cuenta por los caractéres que estan en 
el cuerpo de los cuatro ciclos, y aunque se encuentren en ellos los mismos caractéres no hacen al caso. Digo pues, 
que en ninguno de los monumentos antiguos, que el recogid, y hé reconocido, hé hallado semejante esplicacion, ni se 
me hace perceptible este sistema, ni alguno de los historiadores Indios se vale de este computo para sefialar las 
epocas de los sucesos de la historia, por mas celebres que sean, sino del que esplicaré adelante, sobre el cual hé for- 
mado yé los mios para la confrontacion de sus afios con los nuestros, como se vera en el discurso de esta obra. Y 
porque despues hé de volver 4 tocar este punto cuando esplique sus calendarios, baste por ahora lo dicho para esta- 
blecer que segun los computos de estos naturales, el diluvio acaecié el aito de mil setecientos diez y siete del mundo, 
y la confusion de lenguas en Babél, cuatro cientos diez y seis afios despues del diluvio, que corresponde al de dosmil 
ciento treinta y tres del mundo como dejo sentado, y me parece muy verosimil porque es un medio entre los dos 
computos que el mismo Boturini trahe en el lugar citado; esto es el comun de Hebreos y Latinos y el de los 
Setenta. . 

Segun el primero acaecié la confusion de lenguas el afio mil ochocientos setenta y tres del mundo, y segun el 
segundo el afio dosmil cuatrocientos noventa y siete, y asi el de dosmil ciento treinta y tres en que yo la establezco 
segun el sistema de los Indios, es un medio proporcionado entre uno y otro. 

Este suceso de la confusion de lenguas le figuravan en sus mapas, pintando un cerro redondo en cuyo frontispicio 

176 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

se vé colocada una medalla, y en ella gravado un rostro como de un anciano con barba larga, y por fuera de la me- 
dalla muchas lenguas que la rodean y forman orla. Este modo de pintarla en forma de cerro, conviene bien con las 
noticias que nos dan los viageros antiguos y modernos, que asientan haver visto los restos que han quedado de ella, 
y sobre la autoridad de estos asienta el P. D. Agustin Calmet en su disertacion de la torre de Babél, al principio de 
su Comentario sobre el Genesis, y en su Diccionario Biblico en la voz Babél, que esta torre era maziza por dentro 
y mas parecia un monte que un edificio. Subsiste en estos tiempos un monumento irrefragable, asi de la constante 
y perfecta noticia que tuvieron estas gentes de la fabrica de esta famosa torre y el artificio de su construccion, como 
descendientes de aquellos que intentaron poner en practica tan arrogante proyecto. Esta és la famosa torre de 
Choloyan fabricada por la nacion Ulmeca, una de las primeras que poblaron el pais de Anahuac, con el mismo 
sobervio fin de hacer famoso su nombre, y dura en nuestros dias porcion considerable de sus ruinas en dicha ciudad 
de Choloyan 4 una legua de la Puebla de los Angeles en figura de cerro mazizo con la subida por la parte esterior. 

En esta confusion pues de lenguas, dicen que se hallaron siete familias de un mismo idioma que era el Nahuatl, 
y hoy se conoce por lengua Mexicana, y como entre si se entendieron se unieron, y juntos emprendieron su pere- 
grinacion por diversas tierras y paises, 4 la ventura y sin destino cierto, hasta hallar terreno que les pareciese acomo- 
dado y 4 proposito para hacer asiento, y haviendo caminado una edad que entre ellos era el espacio de ciento cuatro 
afios, atravesando entonces montes, rios y brazos de mar que sefialan en sus mapas, llegaron al sitio donde hicieron 
su primera poblacion a la parte septentrional de este reyno, a que llamaron Tlapalan, que se interpreta la bermeja, 
por ser aquella tierra de este color, y efectivamente dan en todos los mapas modernos el nombre de Mar Bermejo 
a el que sittian entre la costa oriental de la California, y la occidental de las provincias del Nuevo Mexico y Sonora; 

-y al rio que desagua en él por la parte septentrional Maman el Rio Colorado. A esta ciudad Ja llamaron en los 
tiempos subsecuentes Huehuetlapalan, que quiere decir Tlapalan la vieja, 4 distincion de otra que se fundo muchos 
afios despues con el mismo nombre, como diremos en su lugar. 

Los montes, rios, valles y mares por donde pasaron, es punto menos que imposible sefalar individualmente cuales 
fueron, porque careciendo sus mapas de rumbo y dimensiones, como que ignoravan el uso de la aguja y el compas*, 
no es facil acertar 4 decirlo. El nacimiento del sol era todo su gobierno; esto no en todos los mapas se halla 
demarcado, y en los que se halla no es suficiente 4 inducir la situacion de los paises, ni el terreno cierto por donde 
caminaron. Pero con todo, la uniformidad de los mapas de itinerario de tantas diversas naciones que quisieron con- 
servar la memoria de su origen y peregrinaciones hasta estas tierras, la universal asercion de todos los interpretes 
de estos mapas que eran descendientes de ellos mismos, la existencia de muchos lugares y terrenos que hasta 
nuestros dias conservan los mismos nombres, la generalisima noticia que los Espafoles hallaron en todas estas 
gentes de sefialar su antigua patria 4 la parte del norte de la Nueva Espaia, la existencia de la poblacion de Tlapalan, 
sea la primera 6 la segunda de este nombre, que en esto hay variedad como diré despues, y finalmente el no hallarse 
rastro alguno de que puedan haver venido por otro lado, convencen plenamente que la venida de estas siete familias 
(que supongo ya entonces numerosas) desde el campo de Senaar 4 estas regiones, fue por la Tartaria, a entrar por lo 
mas septentrional del continente de la America, siguiendo unas cuadrillas el rumbo por la tierra firme, y otras por la 
peninsula de California, de donde pasaron al continente atravesando el estrecho que intermedia, y en los mapas de 
estas sefialan el sitio donde aportaron de este otro lado, que le llaman Culchuacan, que significa lugar de la Culebra, 
en el que despues fundaron una poblacion del mismo nombre, que aun permanece, y es la primera de la tierra firme, 
situada en frente de la dicha Peninsula de California, y conservaron tanto la memoria de esta poblacion de 

* The Mexicans described concentric circles, especially in their representations of the sun, with so much precision that it would be difficult to 
decide that they were unacquainted with the compass. 

+ Boturini imagined that the Tultecas colonized the western coast of North America, having crossed the narrow straits which separate that 
continent from Asia; and that continually migrating to the south, some of them penetrated into California, and others reached the more central pro- 
vinces situated to the north of Mexico. He was of opinion that the Aztecas, the ancestors of the Mexicans, were those who settled in California, 
who, like the children of Israel, beginning their migration by crossing the Red Sea, (for the Gulf of California was otherwise named Mar Bermejo by 
the Spaniards, perhaps with the design of veiling by an equivocal adoption of names the real history of the Mexicans), proceeded on their pilgrimage 
to the land of Anahuac. He also presupposes a long journey undertaken by the Tultecas through Tartary from central Asia, such as other authors 
have believed that the Jews of the lost tribes took to arrive at America. ‘To this supposition it may be objected, that Montezuma assured Cortes 
in the presence of all his nobles, that his ancestors had arrived at Mexico from a country situated towards the rising sun: that Sahagun declares 
in the general preface to his History of New Spain, that a colony which had navigated the ocean in early ages disembarked in the port of Panuco, 
which is situated on the shores of the Mexican Gulf: that the native traditions of the people of Guatemala, (who claimed, as being descended from 
the Tultecas, consanguinity with the Mexicans,) recorded that theix ancestors were J ews who had quitted Palestine, or that part of Arabia which is 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. ee loge 

ta 

Culchuacan, que despues fundaron los Tultecas una famosa ciudad del mismo nombre, que llego 4 ser corte y 
capital de un reyno que se llamé tambien de Culchuacan, de la que igualmente permanecen las reliquias en nuestros 
dias en una pequefia poblacion, que mantiene el nombre cerca de Mexico, 4 orillas de la laguna de Chalco, como lo 
esta la otra 4 las riberas del mar de California. , 

Dice Boturini en su citada obra, que D. Fernando de Alba Yxtlixochitl en sus relaciones historicas refiere los 
nombres de los gefes 6 padres de estas siete familias que se unieron en la dispersion de Babél, y peregrinaron desde 
el campo de Sennaar hasta estas regiones. Y6 tengo todas las relaciones historicas de Alba, copiadas de las que 
recogio dicho Boturini, y no hé hallado en ellas esta noticia; 4 mi me parece que padecié equivoco y lo confirmo 
de sus mismas espresiones, porque dice que siete Tultecas que asistian 4 la fabrica de la Torre, viendo que no se 
entendian con los demas, se apartaron con sus mugeres é hijos, y despues de haver peregrinado en Asia vinieron 4 
establecerse a la tierra de Anahuac, y esto es confundir las siete familias de la dispersion de Babel, con las siete que 
despues de establecidas ya estas gentes en la parte septentrional de estas regiones, se rebelaron contra sus soberanos, 
y haviendo salido huyendo en demanda de otras tierras en que poblarse, vinieron 4 establecer su monarquia en 
Toyan y todo el territorio que hoy comprende la gobernacion de la Real Audiencia de Mexico, de cuyos gefes de 
familia trahe los nombres el referido Alba como diré en su lugar. ; 

Los rios, estrechos 6 brazos de mar que describen en sus mapas haver pasado en toda su dilatada peregrinacion 
desde el campo de Sennaar hasta llegar a la California, son sin duda los mismos que se han ido descubriendo en estos 

contiguous to the Red Sea, and had crossed the Atlantic to America; that Votan is said to have come from the old to the new continent; and that 
Quecalcoatl, when meditating his return to the country from which he came, proceeded in an eastern direction, and arriving at Coazacoalco, a 
province of New Spain which borders on the Atlantic Ocean, there embarked. ‘To the reasons which have been enumerated for dissenting from 
the opinion of Boturini and Echevarria that America was colonized on its north-western side by tribes crossing from Tartary, and that the ances- 
tors of the Mexicans were descended from them, we shall add another, which, if it be of a negative description, will still be found to possess as 
much weight as any of the foregoing: it is contained in the following passage, which is taken from a work of Torribio de Benavente Motolinia 
preserved in manuscript in the library of the Escurial, who there says that the inhabitants of Tlascala and many other provinces of New Spain 
had a tradition that their ancestors had migrated from a province situated to the north-west of Mexico, but that that tradition, wanting the corro- 
borative evidence of the Mexican language being spoken in any of the provinces discovered by the Spaniards as far north as Sibola, was not entitled 
to credit, and that it was therefore to be inferred that the Mexicans were “of a strange and unheard-of race.” ‘Los de Tezcuco, que en anti- 
guedad y sefiorio no son menos que los Mexicanos, se Jaman hoy dia Aculuaques, y toda su provincia junta se lama Aculua; y este nombre les 
quedo de un valiante capitan que tubieron, natural de la misma provincia, que se llamé por nombre Aculi, que asi se ilamo aquel hueso que va 
desde el codo hasta al hombro, y del mismo hueso Ilaman al hombro aculi. Este capitan Aculi era como otro Saul, valiente y alto de cuerpo, tanto 
que de los hombros arriba sobrepujaba 4 todo el pueblo, y no habia otro a él semejante. Este Aculi fué tan animoso y esforzado y nombrado 
en las guerras, que de él se llamo la provincia de Tezeuco Aculuaca. Los Tlaxcaltecas que recibieron y ayudaron 4 conquistar la Nueva Espafia 
4 los Espafioles, son de los Nauales, esto es de la misma lengua que los Mexicanos: dicen que sus antecesores vinieron de la parte del norueste, y 
para entrar en esta tierra navigaban ocho 6 diez dias; y de los mas antiguos que de alli vinieron tenian dos saetas, las cuales guardaban como pre- 
ciosas reliquias, y las tenian por principal sefial para saber si habian de vencer la batalla, 6 si se debian de retirar con tiempo. Fueron estos 
Tlaxcaltecas gente belicosa, como se dira adelante en la tercera parte: cuando salien a la batalla llevaban aquellas saetas dos. capitanes los mas 
sefialados en esfuerzo, y en el primer reencuentro herian con ellas 4 los enemigos arrojandolos de lejos, y procuraban hasta la muerte de tornarlas 
4 cobrar, y sicon ellas herian y sacaban sangre tenian por cierta la victoria, y animabanse todos mucho para vencer, y con aquella esperanza 
esforzabanse para herir y vencer 4 sus enemigos; si con las dichas saetas no herian a nadie ni sacaban sangre, lo mejor que podian se retiraban, 
porque tenian por cierto aguero que les habia de suceder mal en aquella batalla. Volviendo al proposito, los mas ancianos de los Tlaxcaltecas 
tienen que de aquella parte del norueste, y alli sefialan y dicen, que vinieron los Nauales, que és a principal lengua y gente de la Nueva Espafia, 
y esto mismo sienten y dicen otros muchos : hacia esta misma parte del norueste estan ya conquistadas y descubiertas cuatro lenguas, hasta Ja pro- 
vincia de Cibola, y y6 tengo carta deste mismo afio hecha, como de aquella parte de Cibola han descubierto infinita multitud de gente, en las 
cuales no se ha hallado lengua de los Nauales, por donde parece ser gente estraita y nunca oida. Aristoteles en el libro De Admirandis Nature 
dice, que en los tiempos antiguos los Cartagineses navigaron por el estrecho de Gibraltar hacia el occidente navigacion de sesenta dias, y que hallaban 
tierras amenas, deleitosas y muy fertiles; y como se siguiese mucho aquella navigacion, y alla se quedasen muchos hechos moradores, el senado 
Cartaginense mandé sé pena de muerte que ninguno navegase ni viniese la tal navigacion por estas tierras 6 islas. Pudieron ser las que estan antes 
de San Juan, 6 la Espafiola, 6 Cuba, 6 por ventura alguna parte desta Nueva Espafia: pero una tan gran tierra y tan poco poblada por todas 
partes, mas parece traer origen de otras estrafias partes, y aun en algunos indicios parece ser del repartimiento y division de los nietos de Noé. 
Algunos Espaiioles, considerados ciertos ritos, costumbres y ceremonias de estos naturales, los juzgan sér de generacion de Moros; otros por 
algunas causas y condiciones que en ellos se vén, dicen que son de generacion de Judios; mas la mas comun opinion és que todos ellos son gentiles, 
pues vemos que lo usan y tienen por bueno. Si esta relacion saliere de mano de vuestra ylustrisima sefioria, dos cosas le suplico en limosna por 
amor de Nuestro Sefor: la una que el nombre del autor se diga ser un fraile menor y no otro nombre ninguno: la otra que vuestra sefioria la 
mande examinar en el primer capitulo que en esa su villa de Benavente se celebrase, pues en él se juntan personas asaz doctisimas; porque 
muchas cosas despues de escriptas aun no tube tiempo de las volver 4 leer, y por esta causa sé que va algo vicioso y mal escrito. Ruego 4 nuestro 
Sefior Dios que su santa gracia ‘more siempre en el anima de vuestra excelentisima sefioria. Hecha en el Convento de Santa Maria de la Con- 
cepcion de Teozaan, dia del glorioso Apostol San Mattias, afio de la redencion humana 1541. Epistola proemial de un fraile menor al Tlustrisimo 
Sefior Don Antonio Pimentel, Conde sexto de Benayente.” 

2Z 

178 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

ultimos tiempos, y nos demarcan las cartas mas modernas, y cada dia vemos que se van descubriendo por este lado 
nuevas tierras, que asi como nos han desengafado de no ser isla la California, espero que verifiquen ser estas 
regiones continentes con aquellas de que se creian tan apartadas y estar separadas de ellas solamente por cortos 
estrechos. Afirman los Indios el modo que tuvieron para pasar estos estrechos, brazos de mar y rios que demarcan, 
fue en balsas cuadradas formadas de carrices, 6 palos ligeros y en canoas chatas, 4 que dan el nombre de acalli que 
significa casa de agua, y asi las pintan y sobre ellas las personas que pasan, unas sentadas y otras echadas 6 tendidas 
4 lo largo de la balsa 6 canoa; pero en ninguno de cuantos mapas hé visto, demuestran el modo con que las gober- 
navan, porque ni se vé persona que 4 nado la guie, ni remo 6 pala con que desde encima de ella la gobernasen, ni 
sobre esto hé hallado noticia alguna en los manuscritos ; pero no siendo creible que se arrojasen al arbitrio de las 
aguas, Ni que sin remo 6 remolque pudiesen pasar, debemos suponer que de uno u otro modo lo egecutaron, aunque 
no lo describen, sino es que se sirvieron de los brazos en lugar de remos, que 4 esta sospecha me guia el ver, como 
hé dicho, que las personas que pintan en la balsa, unas estén sentadas y otras tendidas, y de estas hé visto en tal cual 
mapa, que parecen tener los brazos estendidos por fuera de la balsa, con lo que quieren acaso denotar que estos les 
servian de remos para guiarla. 

Llegados al sitio que les parecid mas comodo para su habitacion, fundaron su primera ciudad, 4 que dieron el 
nombre de Tlapalan, que quiere decir colorada, y despues la llamaron Huehue Tlapalan, esto es, Tlapalan la an- 
tigua, para distinguirla de otra que, huvo mas moderna: sefialan' su fundacion-en un afio del mismo. caracter 6 gero- 
glifico de un pedernal, que segun las tablas parece haver sido en el de dos mil doscientos treinta y siete del mundo, 
porque es el primero que se halla en las tablas con el caracter de un pedernal, pasados los dos siglos desde la con- 
fusion de Babel. Esta ciudad dice que subsiste en nuestros tiempos, aunque reducida 4 corta poblacion conocida 
por Huetlapalan de Cortes, porque asientan que hasta ella penetré este conquistador, movido quiza de las noticias 
de ellos, que conservaron siempre en su memoria haver sido esta la primer ciudad que fundaron despues de su 
destierro : pero me parece que en esto puede haver equivéco, y que Cortes no Ilegase a esta antigua ciudad, sino 4 la 
otra del mismo nombre que despues fundaron los Tultecas, porque la situacion de aquella es, segun asientan los 
mismos interpretes muy al norte, mas all4 de las naciones Apaches, donde no se sabe que internase Cortes: la otra 
parte que esta muy hacia la costa del sur, no lejos de la boca del rio colorado, y hasta aqui puede que Ilegase. Fijados 
pues, en aquella su primitiva poblacion, comenzaron 4 multiplicarse y en aquellos primeros tiempos fue populosisima 
ciudad. Fueron despues estendiendose en toda aquella vasta region, y fundando otras muchas poblaciones de que se 
formé el grande imperio Chichimeca, 4 que dieron el nombre de Chichimecatlali, esto es, tierra de los Chichi- 
mecas. Unos dicen que el motivo de haver tomado este nombre de Chichimecas, fue porque el principal caudillo 
que los condujo desde el campo de Sennaar se Iamé Chichimecatl ; otros quieren que este haya sido su primer rey, 
despues que se establecieron en este continente, y despues de haverse separado algunas cuadrillas de gentes que inter- 
naron por varias partes de el; otros piensan diversamente como diremos adelante. De este imperio, pues, fué Huet- 
lapalan la famosa corte, y de él fueron despues saliendo en bandadas 6 cuadrillas en diversos tiempos para poblar 
dilatadisimas regiones, tomando cada una diverso nombre, segun el gefe 6 padre de familia que la gobernava, y ha- 
ciendose con el discurso del tiempo naciones distintas, con diferentes lenguages 6 dialectos. De manera, que segun 
la creencia de estos naturales y su historia, de estas siete familias tienen su origen y principio todos los habitadores 
de este Nuevo Mundo, y esta ciudad de Huetlapalan tiene la gloria de haver sido la primera fundacion que en él se 

hizo despues del diluvio, y cuna de todos sus pobladores, cuya memoria conservaron siempre los de la Nueva Espaiia, 
llamandola la antigua patria. 

Capriruto III. 

Dase noticia de dos memorables sucesos que fueron el origen de dos fabulas. 

Posuapa la ciudad de Huetlapalan, y notablemente aumentados sus moradores, no cabiendo ya en ella comenzaron 
como hé dicho 4 estenderse por todos sus contornos, dividiendose en pueblos y vecindarios, y comenzé 4 nacer el 
gran imperio Chichimeco, del cual procedieron despues tantas poderosas monarquias. Las casas en que habitavan, 
asi en la ciudad como en las demas poblaciones, no eran otras por entonces y muchos siglos despues, aun cuando 
tuvieron ya reyes’ y gobiernos, que las cuebas que hallaron hechas por disposicion de la naturaleza, 4 cuya semejanza 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 179 

formavan otras, y estas eran todas sus habitaciones. Su mantenimiento las frutas, yervas y caza, y sw vestuario 
las pieles de los mismos animales que cazavan, dispuestas 4 manera de un braguero que llamaron maxtli, con que 
precisamente cubrian las partes mas vergonzosas de su cuerpo. 

Pasadas tres edades de la fundacion de su ciudad capital de Huehuetlapalan, hacen mencion de un singular suceso, 
cuya memoria quedé entre ellos tan viva, que le tomaron por epoca en la relacion historica de los futuros. Dicen 
pues, que en afio que fué sefialado con el geroglifico de siete conejos, se quedé el Sol suspenso en su carrera por 
espacio de un dia natural, de que se originaron tan excesivos calores, cuales jamas havian esperimentado, y de esto 
mismo tal abundancia de mosquitos que no les dejavan en sosiego. Sobre este suceso fabricaron despues una fabula 
diciendo, que viendo el mosquito tan suspenso el Sol se le presenté y le dijo: Seftor del mundo, porque estas tan 
suspenso y pensativo y no haces tu oficio como és de tu obligacion? Acaso quieres destruir al mundo con tu fuego 
y reducirlo 4 cenizas haciendote sordo 4 las suplicas de los hombres? Anda, muevete y cumple con el cargo del 
oficio que tienes. Mas como el Sol no se moviese 4 sus razones, se le acercé y picandole en una pierna le obligé 4 
moverse y 4 continuar su acostumbrado giro. \ 

Una edad entre ellos constava de ciento cuatro afios, y asi las tres edades que dicen havian pasado desde la funda- 
cion de su ciudad hasta este suceso, componen trescientos doce afios, que contados desde el de dos mil doscientos 
treinta y siete del mundo, en que dejo establecida la dicha fundacion, vienen 4 concluirse las tres edades en el aio 
dos mil quinientos cuarenta y nueve, que fue sefalado con el geroglifico de un pedernal, como se vé en las tablas, 
mas diciendo ellos espresamente que el caracter del afio en que acaecié esta suspension del Sol, fué el de siete conejos, 
parece que debe colocarse en el afio de dos mil quinientos cincuenta y cinco del mundo, que es el primero que se 
halla sefialado con este geroglifico, despues de las tres edades. Este suceso que los Indios conservaron en su historia, 
se semeja mucho 4 lo que nos refiere la escritura al cap. 10 del lib. Josue asi en el tiempo como en la duracion de 
la suspension del Sol, pues esta segun se dice al n. 13 del mismo cap. “Stetit sol in medio ceeli et non festinavit oc- 
cumbere spatio unius diei;” y en cuanto al tiempo los mas autores la sefialan con poca diferencia en el mismo que 
los Indios. Vease la erudita disertacion del P. Calmet 4 el principio de su Comentario sobre el libro de Josue donde 
pone esta suspension del Sol en el afio dos mil quinientos cincuenta y tres del mundo, que solo hay dos afios de dife- 
rencia del computo de los Indios. 

A los mil setecientos diez y seis afios del diluvio, y pasadas ocho edades de la suspension del Sol, en un afio que 
sehalan con el mismo geroglifico de un pedernal, refieren haver padecido otra terrible calamidad de unos furiosos 
uracanes que derribando multitud de arboles en los montes, y derrocando las pefas hicieron en los hombres un 
horrible estrago, muriendo muchos miles de ellos, y escapando solo los que se mantuvieron encerrados en sus 
cuebas, y acabado el temporal dicen que saliendo de ellas hallaron la tierra cubierta de monos, animal que hasta 
entonces no havian visto ni conocian, y como al mismo tiempo echasen de menos tanto numero de personas como 
habian perecido con el uracan, inyentaron otra fabula de que los hombres se havian convertido en monos, y en los 
tiempos posteriores lo creyé tan de veras la ignorancia, que hasta el dia de hoy no faltan algunos del necio vulgo 
que lo afirmen, y afiadieron que estos eran los ociosos y vagamundos que en castigo de su olgazaneria fueron con- 
vertidos en monos. Creian que sabian hablar y que el no hacerlo era porque no les obligasen 4 trabajar. Segun la 
confrontacion de las tablas con sus computos parece que debe fijarse este suceso en el afio tres mil cuatrocientos 
treinta y tres del mundo. Dicen que en esta calamidad perecié la mayor parte de los gigantes que habitavan el pais 
de Anahuac, y que solo escaparon algunos pocos de los que’ mas se havian internado en la tierra, y vivian hacia las 
riberas del rio Atoyac, entre la ciudad de Tlaxcalla y la de la Puebla de los Angeles. 

Algunos de nuestros autores Espafioles que escribieron de cosas de Indias, y llegaron 4 tener la noticia de haver 
havido gigantes en estos paises, se empefian en probar con razones y autoridades sagradas y profanas la real existencia 
de ellos, tanto en este nuevo mundo como en el viejo: mas yé siguiendo el metodo propuesto, y separado de dis- 
cursos y especulaciones refiero sencillamente lo que hallo en las historias de estos naturales. Asientan todos con- 
testes la existencia de ellos y haver habitado en varias partes de este continente. i su origen és el mismo que el de 
las demas naciones que le poblaron, esto es, aquellas siete familias que se unieron en la dispersion de Babél, 6 es 
diverso, no es facil de averiguar. Algunos de los historiadores nacionales dan el mismo origen y dicen, que en la 
dilatada peregrinacion de las siete familias desde el campo de Senaar, se adelantaron algunas cuadrillas de ellos, que 
por ser mas corpulentas y fuertes caminaron con mas velocidad y llegaron antes 4 estas regiones, y que los demas 
siguieron sus vestigios, y por las sefias de su caminata Ilegaron 4 é1 muchos afios despues y los hallaron ya estable- 

180 _ SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

cidos en estas partes. Boturini parece que les da diverso origen, porque dice que son de los descendientes de Can, 
hijo de Noé, que en la confusion de lenguas se esparcieron por varias partes, y algunos de ellos peregrinaron hasta 
establecerse en la America. Sea como fuere, lo cierto es, que cuando llegé a estas tierras el grueso de gente oriunda 
de aquellas siete familias despues de su dilatada peregrinacion por el Asia, hallaron ya establecidos en ellas 4 los 
gigantes que en muchas partes les resistieron el paso y les impidieron ocupar la tierra. Y porque despues hé de 
volver 4 tocar este asunto cuando trate de su total extincion, baste ahora decir que esta calamidad y destruccion que 
padecieron los gigantes con los uracanes, les fué muy plausible 4 los demas moradores de estas regiones, porque 
siendo (como los describen) gente fiera, barbara y brutal, que solo vivia de lo que robava, haciendoles otros muchos 
dafios, trahia 4 estas otras gentes en un continuo movimiento para ver de repelerlos y ponerse 4 cubierto de sus 
insultos. Este fué el origen y principio de su milicia y donde comenzaron 4 hacer de soldados y capitanes. 

La repentina aparicion de los monos (animal que hasta entonces no havian conocido) immediatamente despues 
de los uracanes, manifiesta con evidencia haver sido efecto de los vientos, 6 ya que su impetu los arrojase a estas 
tierras de las otras comarcanas inhabitadas de donde hasta entonces no havian salido, 6 ya que este animal como de 
tanto instinto huyendo de esta intemperie fuese 4 buscar sitios mas abrigados donde guarecerse. Pero no me per- 
suado 4 que la fabrica de estas dos fabulas sobre los dos sucesos referidos fuese invencion de estos tiempos, sino de 
los posteriores, en que se sefialé en habilidad y talento la nacion Tulteca; porque al mismo tiempo que fueron muy 
sabios é industriosos, fueron tambien muy trabajadores y tan enemigos de la ociosidad y holgazaneria (que es el 
vicio que reprende la moralidad que de una y otra fabula se deduce) que perseguian acerrimamente 4 los ociosos y 
vagamundos echandolos de sus ciudades y poblaciones, y asi no dudaria yo creer, que al modo que inventaron otras 
fabulas de que daré noticia en sus propios lugares sobre otros hechos, asi ciertos como fabulosos, para reprender 
varios vicios, inventasen estas sobre estos hechos ciertos de su historia, para condenar la ociosidad. _Y tanto estas 
como las demas fabulas las adopté despues la ignorancia en su material sentido con una ciega credulidad, 4 que 

contribuyé mucho la supersticiosa persuasion de sus hipocritas sacerdotes, como se vera en adelante. 

Cartruto IV. 

De la junta que hicieron para la correccion de su Calendario y enmienda de los tiempos, y se da 
noticia de otras dos fabulas que inventaron del origen del Sol y la Luna. 

Con la destruccion de los gigantes quedaron en reposo estas gentes libres ya de unos enemigos tan molestos que les 
obligaran 4 vivir en un continuo sobresalto, y comenzaron 4 dedicarse con mayor esmero al cultivo de la tierra ya 
la observacion de los astros. No nos dicen puntualmente cual era el sistema que seguian ni el orden que por 
entonces guardavan en su calendario, pero es constante que haviendo observado atentamente desde los primeros 
tiempos que el afio natural comenzava al mismo tiempo que los campos empezavan a poblarse de nueva yerva, que 
esta mantenia su verdor hasta que los frios del invierno la marchitavan y destruian, y que pasados estos volvia 4 
vestirse de nuevos retofios, fijaron el curso del afio natural desde una a la otra nueva produccion, y le dieron el 
nombre de xihuitl, que significa la yerva nueva, numerando los ahos y midiendo el curso solar por el retofiez de la 
‘yerva, y el nombre xihuitl, que desde entonces dieron 4 el aio, es el que siempre mantuvo y conserva hasta nuestros 
tiempos, sin que tenga en la lengua Nahuatl otro con que esplicarlo: y ensenandoles la esperiencia tantas veces 
repetida cuantos afios corrian, que del orden invariable y regulado movimiento de los astros se originava la variedad 
de estaciones, temperamentos y producciones de la tierra, comenzaron 4 dedicarse @ la observacion de ellos, y con 
especialidad al sol y la luna, cuya magnitud 4 su vista les presentava con mas facilidad la observacion de su 
movimiento. 

_ No entiendo por esto que hasta estos tiempos huviesen vivido tan brutos, que ignorasen totalmente el curso de 
estos astros y sus influencias en la tierra, cuyas producciones y diversidad de estaciones se hacen sensibles hasta 4 
los irracionales, sino que por estos tiempos comenzaron a sobresalir entre ellos algunos hombres mas especulativos 
y atentos al estudio de los astros, que se dedicaron 4 arreglar los computos anuales. _Y siendoles mas perceptible el 
giro de la luna por sus visibles diarias mutaciones, por él arreglaron su afio, repartiendole en neomenias de 4 
yeinte y seis dias, que las dividian en dos partes iguales, cada una de 4 trece dias: contavan la primera desde el dia 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 181. 

que la luna aparecia en el cielo y la Ilamavan Meztozoliztli, esto es desvelo de la luna. Fenecidos los trece dias, 
comenzavan 4 contarla segunda parte que Ilamavan Mezochiliztli, esto es, suefio de la luna. No hallo autor que 
diga de cuantas de estas neomenias se componia entonces el afio, pero es indubitable que las tuvieron en lugar de 
meses, y asi despues de su correccion no dieron otro nombre al mes que el de metztli, que significa la luna, y aun 
en su nuevo reglamento continuaron la cuenta de los dias de trece en trece como se vera, conservando aunque en 
diverso modo la division de la neomenia que hicieron al principio. Tambien creen algunos que y4 desde estos 
tiempos numeravan los afios por olimpiadas, esto es de cuatro en cuatro, sefialandolos con los cuatro geroglificos 
simbolos de los elementos, de que usaron despues para sus computos, y esto parece verosimil que fuese asi, 4 lo 
menos en aquellos tiempos immediatos antes de la correccion y reglamento de que voy 4 hablar; pero con certeza 
nada puede asegurarse, ni saberse 4 punto fijo cual era el sistema que seguian, ni hasta donde havian llegado sus 
conocimientos y reglamentos cuando se hizo la correccion. eos 

Lo que nos dicen es, que nueve siglos despues de los uracanes, en un afio que fue sefialado en el geroglifico de 
un pedernal, que segun las tablas parece haver sido el de tresmil novecientos y uno del mundo, se convocé una gran 
junta de astrologos en la ciudad de Huehuetlapalan, que ya era famosa y numerosa poblacion para hacer la cor- 
reccion de su calendario, 6 reformar sus computos que conocian errados, segun el sistema que hasta entonces havian 
seguido. Concurrieron 4 esta junta no solo los muchos sabios astrologos que havia en aquella ciudad, sino 
muchisimos otros que vinieron de las demas poblaciones que ya 4 este tiempo tenian en considerable numero, 
haviendose estendido mucho por toda aquella region. Y haviendo conferido largamente sobre los errores que havian 
reconocido en sus computos, quedé en esta junta establecido que la duracion del mundo devia dividirse en cuatro 
espacios 6 edades, que cada uno havia de fenecer 4 violencia de uno de los cuatro elementos. La primera desde su 
creacion hasta el diluvio, en que al desenfreno de las aguas havia padecido tan gran calamidad, y asi Ilamaron 4 esta 
edad Atonatiuh, que literalmente quiere decir sol de agua, y alegoricamente espacio de tiempo que acabé con agua. 
La segunda desde el diluvio 4 los uracanes, en los que al impetu terrible de los vientos havian padecido la segunda 
calamidad, y asi la llamaron Echecatonatiuh, que literalmente quiere decir sol de ayre, y alegoricamente espacio de 
tiempo que acabé con ayre. La tercera en que estavan, digeron, que havia de acabarse con furiosos terremotos en los 
que padeceria el genero humano la tercera calamidad, y asi le llamaron Tlachitonatiuh 6 Tlaltonatiuh, que quiere 
decir sol de tierra 6 espacio de tiempo que ha de acabar con terremotos ; y que despues de esta seguird la cuarta y 
ultima edad del mundo, que havia de acabar 4 violencia de fuego, en que todo quedaria consumido, y asi la llamaron 
Tletonatiuh, que quiere decir sol de fuego 6 espacio de tiempo que acabaria con fuego. 

Las voces Tonatiuh, que significa el sol, 6 tonalli, que significa el calor del sol, fueron las primeras de que se 
valieron para esplicar el dia, de suerte que contavan tantos dias cuantos soles, y aunque despues se inventaron las 
voces tlacatli, que significa dia, 6 cehilhuitl, que quiere decir el espacio de un dia, siempre quedaron con poco uso 
y hasta nuestros tiempos lo general del vulgo no entiende ni se esplica por otras voces que las de Tonatiuh 6 To- 
nalli. Estas mismas voces las estendieron despues 4 significar un periodo como se vé en las referidas arriba, del 
mismo modo que se valieron de la voz xihuitl, que significa la yerva nueva, para nombrar el afio, como dejo dicho, 
y de la voz Metztli, que significa la luna, para nombrar el mes hasta el dia de hoy: de estos espacios de tiempo en 
que dividieron la edad del mundo, dieron a los dos primeros como preteritos duracion fija, sefialando 4 cada uno mil 
setecientos diez y seis aflos, pero no hallo en cuantos monumentos hé reconocido que sefalasen ni predigesen la 
duracion de los dos futuros ; mas sin embargo yo me persuado 4 que ellos creyeron que havia de ser igual 4 la de los 
dos pasados. En los tiempos succesivos hacen memoria de haver padecido otra gran calamidad de horrendos terre- 
motos de que tratarémos en su lugar, pero la sefalan seiscientos treinta y tres afios despues del uracan, y no se halla 
que hagan memoria de otro alguno universal hasta nuestros tiempos, con que si huviesemos de creer su predicacion 
y fijar en él la duracion de la tercera edad, huviera sido esta mucho menor que las dos precedentes. 

El Caballero Boturini en su citada obra al parrafo 1°, pag. 3, habla de esta division de los tiempos, colocando 
diversamente los periodos. Pone el primero sol de agua, desde la creacion al diluvio; desde este 4 los terremotos, 
sol de tierra; de este 4 los uracanes, sol de ayre; y el ultimo sol de fuego. Confieso y siempre hé confesado su 
grande inteligencia y profundo conocimiento en esta historia, adquirido con indecible trabajo y continuo estudio, 
que recaia en una no vulgar erudicion en todo genero de buenas letras: confieso igualmente que las primeras luces 
que tuve de esta materia, y lo poco que de ella puedo hablar, lo devo 4 su instruccion verbal, y 4 los documentos 
que él recogié con tanto trabajo y esmero, pues aun de aquellos que yo hé aumentado para poder escribir esta histo- 

3 A 

182 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

ria, le devo la noticia. Pero asi como no puedo acomodarme 4 su sistema de que hablé en el cap® 2°, no puedo 
seguirle en este punto, ni en otros que verémos. Para no seguirle en este tengo otras razones: la primera que en 
todos los manuscritos que tengo, hallo colocados estos periodos del modo que los hé puesto, escepto en dos de ellos, 
que son el uno unas apuntaciones historicas muy sucintas.de autor anonimo, que son de poco momento y tiene 
otros errores manifiestos ; el otro es la Historia Chichimeca del celebre D. Fernando de Alba Yxililxochitl, que ver- 
daderamente tiene mucha autoridad en el asunto, pues de este mismo autor tengo las relaciones historicas de la 
nacion Tulteca, en que las pone como yo las hé colocado, y es de notar que esta obra es, para mi, la mas apreciable 
de este autor, porque dice haverlas sacado de los mismos mapas historicos que sabia: interpretar, y asi estan muy 
circunstanciadas y espresivas, y al fin de la quinta relacion trahe un catalogode sugetos ancianos. y bien instruidos 
y de: monumentos de que se valié para perfeccionar su interpretacion, refutando los errores de los autores Espafioles, 
especialmente 4 Gomara, que habla de esta division de edades, y coloca el periodo de sol de tierra en segundo lugar 
como Boturini. Agregase a esto, que en dichas relaciones trata Alba espresamente esta materia, y en la historia 
Chichimeca la trahe en el primer capitulo sucintamente y de paso como. noticia preli.minar, para entrar 4su asunto, 
y pudo padecer equivocacion: la segunda. razon que tengo para no seguirle, es el que colocados.los periodos como, 
los coloca Boturini, se oponen 4 la misma narracion historica y cronologica de los sucesos, como se vé en el capitulo 
anterior; pues la primer calamidad de que hacen mencion despues del diluvio, és el urac4n que destruyé tantas gentes 
que creyeron haverse convertido en monos, y este és el periodo Ehecatonatiuh, 6.sol que acabé con ayre, y muchos. 
siglos despues hacen mencion del terremoto que es el Tlaltonatiuh, 6.sol que acabé. con terremoto. Por esto me 
persuado 4 que el Caballero Boturini padecid equivocacion (como ha padecido en otras cosas) que.no es de admirar 
haviendo escrito dicho libro sin tener 4 la vista los documentos que havia recogido para la formacion de su historia; 
y asi dice en el prologo, que este su trabajo es una restitucion que hace la memoria de lo depositado en ella; y 
propiamente escribid de memoria el dicho libro del cual soy testigo, y selo vi escribir en mi propia casa, donde le 
tenia hospedado. . Antes bien me admiro, y me admirar4 siempre su gran retentiva con que pudo referir, no solo tanto 
cumulo de noticias, sino lo que*és mas, tantas voces, nombres y frases de la lengua Mexicana, para él tan estrangera, 
y que no la poseia, sino que aquellas voces y sus significados los havia aprendido'en los manuscritos que recogié. 

La tercera és el que como vamos 4 ver luego se sirvieron estos naturales de los geroglificos de los cuatro 
elementos para clavo de todos sus computos y calendarios, y colocaron en primer lugar el fuego, en segundo 4 la 
tierra, en tercero al viento, y en cuarto al agua; y la razon de haverlos colocado en:este orden fué porque estimaron 
al fuego por el mas sublime y poderoso; despues de el y en inferior grado de poder 4 la tierra; menos que 4 esta 4 
el viento, y ultimamente al agua, y 4 proporcion del poder de cada uno creian que devia ser el estrago que causase 
la naturaleza hasta que el fuego como mas poderoso lo aniquilase todo. Contando pues estos mismos elementos en 
el mismo orden vice versa, deve colocarse primero el periodo de la calamidad que ocasioné el agua; despues la del 
viento ; en tercer lugar la de la tierra, y ultimamente la del fuego; y no siendo asi, se invierte este orden contra todas 
las razones que dejo espuestas, y no hallo alguna en todos sus monumentos que indique, 6 persuada esta inversion. 

Gomara* alcanzé alguna noticia de esta division de edades, pero tan confusa y desfigurada, que manifiesta bien, 6 
que la huvo de persona vulgar, nada instruida en su historia, 6 en él falta de inteligencia del verdadero sentido de la 
noticia. Porque entendiendo la voz tonalli por el sol material, nos dice que estas gentes creian que havia havido 
cinco soles, que el primero perecié en las aguas, el segundo cayendo el cielo sobre la tierra, el tercero se consumié 
en el fuego, el cuarto se acabé con ayre, y que cuando aparecid el quinto, se murieron los Dioses, con otras fabulas 
que mezcla, cuya creencia es muy posible que estuviese introducida entre algunos de la gente vulgar é ignorante, pues 
de esto tenemos hartos egemplos en nuestro siglo, sin embargo de la mayor ilustracion 4 que ha Ilegado: oygase el 
vulgo como habla cuando se trata de. eclipses, cometas y otros fenomenos del curso de los astros, de las figuras y 
colores, de las nubes, de iris y otras cosas semejantes, y se hallara que estan imbuidos y encaprichados en una infi- 
nidad de fabulas y cuentos ridiculos. Pues que, si se habla de historia de noticias antiguas. y casos prodigiosos ? 
no se halla cosa mas comun en cada nacion y en cada pueblo aun de los mas pulidos, sin esceptuar las cortes, en 
que la gente vulgar no esté preocupada de inumerables fabulas y disparates increibles. Tambien pudo ser que de 
intento engafiasen los Indios a el que de ellos quiso informarse, como lo hicieron en otras muchas cosas, y esto fué 
muy comun en aquellos primeros tiempos inmediatos a la conquista, de que trae algunos egemplos el mismo D. Fer- 
nando de Alba en la citada quinta relacion. 

* Cron. dé Ja Nueva Espafia, cap. 32. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 1838 

Antes de pasar adelante me ha parecido conveniente dar aqui noticia.de otra celebre fabula que inventaron sobre 
el origen del sol y laluna. Hicieron estas gentes un alto concepto del sol, considerandole como 4 centro del fuego, 
el mas estimado de los elementos entre ellos. Miravanle como 4 fuente de la luz que la creian una con él, como:4 
padre de todos los vivientes animados, y como 4 principio activo principalisimo en todas las producciones de la tierra, 
y asi para celebrarle inventaron una fabula heroica, diciendo, que agradados los Dioses de las virtudes que algunos 
mortales egercitavan en alto grado, quisieron premiarlas para excitar 4 los demas 4 su imitacion. Para esto, dicen, 
que en un gran campo en medio del cual havia una hoguera 6 boca que vomitava formidables llamas, convocaron é 
hicieron juntar a todos los sabios, virtuosos y valientes de la tierra, y les digeron, que los que tuviesen animo y 
esfuerzo para arrojarse en aquella hoguera, serian transformados en dioses y seles darian los honores divinos. Oida 
la propuesta por los hombres quedaron_suspensos y comenzaron a disputar entre si 4 quien le tocava arrojarse pri- 
mero. Entre tanto que ellos disputavan, el dios Cinteotl, dios de los maizes, 4 quien davan tambien el nombre de 
Ynotpiltzin, esto es, el dios huerfano solo y sin padres, se acercé 4 uno de los concurrentes que havia muchos anos 
que padecia de bubas 6 mal galico, tolerando con gran -paciencia y constancia sus dolores, y le dijo: Que haces tu 
aqui? como no te apresuras 4 echarte 4 las llamas, mientras tus compajieros se detienen en disputas inutiles? -Arro- 
jate en esa hoguera para dar fin a tus males, que con tan heroyca constancia supiste tolerar tantos afos, y lograras 
gozar neaperaamente tus honores divinos... Alentado el buboso con esta esperanza, arrastrandose como pudo se 
acercé 4 la hoguera y se arrojé en ella. Grande fué el pasmo y admiracion que causé en todos los circunstantes 
accion tan generosa, y mucho mayor fue al ver que lentamente se iva derritiendo su cuerpo y transformandose en 
las mismas llamas, hasta no quedar vestigio alguno dé él. A este tiempo vieron bajar del cielo una aguila muy 
hermosa y corpulenta, que metiendose dentro de la hoguera y asiendo con las garras y el pico el globo de llamas en 
que se havia transformado el buboso, le llevé.a colocar a los cielos. 

Animado con este egemplo uno de aquellos sabios que se hallavan Daesnntee. deseoso de lograr aquella felicidad, 
se arrojé tambien en la hoguera, mas haviendo empleado ya. sus: llamas el mayor vigor en la transformacion del 
buboso, era mucho menos su actividad, y asi solo pudieron reducirle a cenizas que quedaron visibles en el-fondo de 
la hoguera, y el sabio era transformado en la luna y colocado en el cielo, pero en inferior lugar que el sol; Boturini 
siente que estas fabulas fueron obra de la segunda edad que llama de Jos heroes, y corresponde 4 estos tiempos de 
que hablamos, de que entre estos Indios comenzaron a sobresalir algunos mas sabios, prudentes y esforzados, que 
gobernando con justicia, moderacion y discreccion sus familias, se hicieron respetables, agregandose 4 ellos los vaga- 
bundos y huerfanos, ya movidos de la fama de estos heroes, 6 ya obligados de sus propias necesidades, les entregaron 
su libertad dandoles la obediencia, de donde tomaron principio los reynos y monarquias. Pero yo me persuado 4 
que la invencion de estas fabulas, fue en los tiempos posteriores, por que de ellas mismas se colige que ya havia 
nacido la idolatria y davan culto 4 varias deidades, y es constante en todas sus historias, que ni en estos tiempos, ni 
en muchos despues, adoraron mas deidad que al Dios Criador, como se vera adelante. 

Capitruyo V. 

Del modo en que repartieron el tiempo, y el sistema que establecieron para contar los signos. 

Hecua esta division de la duracion del mundo en las cuatro edades referidas, entraron los de la gran junta 4 
enmendar sus computos y corregir su calendario, dividiendo el tiempo en edades, siglos, indicciones, afios, meses, dias 
y noches, y aunque no alcanzaron la subdivision de las horas, sefialaron las cuatro estaciones del amanecer y medio 
dia, del anochecer y media noche. A:la edad llamaron Huehuetiliztli, que quiere decir, duracion vieja, y constava de 
dos siglos.. Al siglo llamaron Xiumolpia, 6 Xiuhtlalpilli, que ambas voces significavan atadura, 6 manojo de afios, 
y constava de cuatro indicciones, no de 4 quince sino de 4 trece afios que llamaron Tlalpilli, que quiere decir nudo 6 
atadura, que siendo cada Tlalpilli de trece afios, tenia el siglo cincuenta y dos afios, y la edad ciento cuatro. Al afio 
Ilamaron Xihuitl, que como queda dicho, significa la yerva nueva, y le dividieron en diez y ocho meses de 4 veinte 
dias, que entre todos componian trescientos sesenta, al fin de los cuales afiadieron otros cinco que llamavan Nenon- 
temi, que quiere decir aciagos 6 fatales, por el motivo que diré despues; y conociendo que aun con todo esto no 
llegavan 4 igualar el anual curso del sol, inventaron los bisiestos, afladiendo un dia mas cada cuatro afios, que se 
contava entre los Nenontemi 6 fatales. Continuaron 4 contar los dias de trece en trece, segun su metodo antiguo de 

184 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

neomenias, pero sin arreglarse 4, la aparicion de la luna, sino que estos periodos de trece dias les servian como de 
semanas, y asi cada afio constava de veinte y ocho semanas y un dia, y en este dia sobrante que en la revolucion de 
una indiccion componia una semana entera, consistia la mayor puntualidad de su cuenta. 

Todo el artificio de sus calendarios esta fundado en la repeticion continuada de cuatro simbolos, 6 geroglificos, 
que no eran los mismos en todas partes, aunque era uno mismo el sistema. Daré primero la esplicacion del calen- 
dario segun le ordenavan y anotavan los del. imperio de Tezcuco, reyno de Mexico y demas comarcanos, y despues 
diré la variacion que havia en otro. Los simbolos pues de que se servian en las dichas monarquias para la numeracion 
de sus afos eran estos cuatro: Tecpatl, que significa el pedernal, Calli, la casa; Tochtli, el conejo; y Acatl, la cafia de 
carrizo, y los figuravan en la forma en que se ven en las estampas que siguen. Los significados materiales de las 
voces son los referidos, pero los alegoricos que en estos simbolos querian esplicar eran los cuatro elementos que 
conocieron ser principios de todo compuesto material y en que todos havian de resolverse. Dieronle al fuego la 
primacia, estimandole por'el mas noble de todos, y le simbolizaron en el pedernal, sin duda porque aunque al golpe 
y confricacion de otras piedras y aun de un madero con otro resulta fuego, ninguno le arroja mas facilmente que el 
pedernal. En los tiempos posteriores de su idolatria y falsa religion, celebraron 4 este elemento dandole culto de 
deidad, bajo del nombre de Xiuhteutli. En estos mas sencillos se contentaron con dar el primer lugar entre los 
cuatro caracteres iniciales, que hicieron clave de todos sus computos astronomicos y cronologicos. En el geroglifico 
de la casa quisieron significar el elemento de la tierra, y le dieron el segundo lugar en los caracteres iniciales, y en el 
tiempo de la idolatria le dieron tambien culto de deidad, celebrandole con varios nombres y en diversas figuras, 
especialmente la de su famoso dios Tlaloc, que decian ser ministro del supremo Tezcatlipoca, simbolo de la Divina 
Providencia. . En el conejo simbolizaron el elemento del ayre, y estén muy discordes los escritores en dar la razon 
de haver escogido este animal por simbolo del viento ; unos dicen que por la viveza de su olfato, otros que por su 
ligereza en correr, otros que porque anuncia el viento saliendo de sus bocas 4 retozar cuando ha de hayer ayre. El 
Caballero Boturini en su citada obra dice, que acaso és porque la voz tochtli, que significa el conejo, la derivaron del 
verbo toca que significa caminar 6 correr el viento: yo creo que en esto padecid equivocacion, porque no es lo 
mismo toca que otoca. Los verbos otoca y ozlatoca significan correr, pero toca, no significa sino enterrar, y por 
estos significados los trahe Fr. Alonso de Molina en su celebre y estimado vocabulario antiguo, y sin duda seria mas 
natural y genuina la derivacion de la voz tochtli del verbo ¢oca por enterrar, porque el conejo vive siempre enter- 
rado en las cuevas subterraneas, que cava para su habitacion. Finalmente si 4 mi me es licito adivinar el motivo 
que tuvieron los Indios para simbolizar el viento en el conejo, diria que acaso fue por que en aquellos primitivos 
tiempos no le distinguieron de la liebre ligera como el viento en su carrera, como lo sintieron muchos de los 
antiguos naturalistas, teniendo por una sola entrambas especies, y asi Plinio el segundo dice, que hay en Espana una 
especie de liebres que Ilaman conejos. El mismo nombre les din Eliano y Estrabon Ilamandolos lepusculos por 
ser mas pequefios que las liebres. A este elemento del viento tambien le dieron culto de deidad en el tiempo ido- 
latrico con el nombre de Quetzalcohuatl y le representaron en diversas maneras, entre las cuales fue una la sagrada 
sefal de la Santa Cruz, por las razones que diré en su lugar. El cuarto caracter inicial, que es la cafia de carrizo, 
que es la que propiamente significa la voz Acatl, es geroglifico del elemento del agua y muy natural, porque es esta 
planta tan amante 4 ella que regularmente son los carrizales la sefa de hallarla. Tambien la celebraron despues 
entre sus deidades con el nombre de Chalchiuhzuetl. 

Eligieron pues estos cuatro simbolos para clave general de todos sus computos astronomicos, y para ordenar con 
ellos los aftos, repitiendolos por el orden en que van referidos, sin admitir jamas variacion, 6 alteracion, pero variando 
el guarismo desde uno hasta trece, y asi seflalavan perfectamente y sin equivocacion todos los anos de un siglo. 
Este le dividian como hemos dicho en cuatro indicciones 6 triadecateridas, sefaladas con los cuatro simbolos 
dichos, de suerte que en todo siglo la primera indiccion se sefialaba con el Pedernal, la segunda con la Casa, la ter- 
cera con el Conejo, y la cuarta con la Cafia. Veanse las tablas en que cada columna es un siglo de cincuenta y dos 
afios dividido en cuatro partes iguales de 4 trece afios, que cada una corresponde 4 uno de los cuatro simbolos con 
el qual comienza y acaba de sefialar los trece aiios de su indiccion. En esta manera comenzavan 4 contar los trece 
ahos de la primera indiccion del siglo que devia sefialarse con el primer caracter del pedernal y decian asi*. 

* The concluding portion of this chapter and the five following chapters treat of the Mexican method of computing time, of the division of the 

year into eighteen months of twenty days each, and of the various signs allotted to them. They are here omitted for the sake of brevity, and be- 
cause a full explanation of the Mexican Calendar will be found in the second book of Sahagun’s History of New Spain, 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 185 

Carituto XI. 

De las otras tres maneras de Calendarios de que usaban los Indios. 

No se gobernaban estos naturales por solo el Calendario solar 6 astronomico, sino que 4 mas de él usaban de otros 
tres, que eran el ritual, el politico, y el rural. Boturini le da al politico los nombres de civil y cronologico, y al 
rural, le llama natural. Estos tres Calendarios giraban siempre sobre los computos del afto solar, variando solamente 
en algunas cosas, y asi para ellos no formaban separadamente ruedas ni quadros, sino que siempre los mismos que 
servian para el gobierno del afio solar hacian sus signos y ponian sus geroglificos, y asi puede decirse que estos no 
eran propiamente Calendarios, sino cartillas para su gobierno tanto en lo ritual como en lo politico y rural. 

E] ritual sefialaba todas las fiestas del afio, de las cuales unas eran fijas y otras movibles; pero respecto al Calen- 
dario solar todas eran movibles, porque el afio ritual solo constaba de trescientos y sesenta y cinco dias, y no hacia 
los bisextos cada cuatro afios, sino que al fin de su siglo afiadian trece dias correspondientes 4 los trece bisextos que 
incluia el siglo, los cuales componian una semana entera y eran dedicados 4 ciertas solemnidades, como veremos en 
su lugar, y de este modo se volvian 4 igualar con el computo solar y Calendario astronomico ; pero en el discurso 
del siglo cada cuatro aftos se iban atrasando un dia, y por eso aunque sus fiestas fijas eran siempre en unos mismos 
dias, por razon de este atraso iban variando en el Calendario solar. Esto es lo que quiso esplicar Gemelli en el lugar 
citado, ‘ que el primer afio del siglo comenzaba el dia 10 de Abril, lo mismo el segundo y tercero, pero no el cuarto 
que era el bisexto, porque este comenzaba el dia 9 de Abril, y asi iban diminuyendo un dia cada cuatro afios, de 
suerte que el ultimo afio del siglo se concluia el dia 28 de Marzo, y despues de el seguian contando otra semana de 
trece dias de otros tantos bisextos que se habian diminuido en los cincuenta y dos afios del siglo, los que ocupaban 
en fiestas y sacrificios, y con este periodo volvian 4 igualarse con el curso del sol para comenzar el primer afio del 
siglo siguiente en el dia 10 de Abril’. Esta explicacion solo debe entenderse en el Calendario ritual, como ya dije, no 
en el astronomico en que no seguian este orden en la formacion de los bisextos, y aun hablando del ritual supone 
ya la confrontacion de los afos de los Indios con los nuestros, y como cosa sentada que el dia primero del primer 
afio de su siglo correspondia 4 el 10 de Abril, punto tan dudoso entre los escritores, y que de los que yo tengo solo 
uno sigue esta opinion, porque los mas siguen una de las dos mas comunes que son el dos de Febrero 4 el veinte de 
Marzo. Aun en esta suposicion es error decir que el ultimo afio del siglo se concluia el 28 de Marzo, y no debia 
decir sino el veinte y siete, porque si no habiendo de contar despues los trece dias de los bisextos desde el veinte y 
nueve de Marzo, no podian completarse hasta el mismo dia diez de Abril, y no comenzaria el afio subsequente en el 
sino en el dia 11 de Abril. 

Esta diferencia que tenian en formar los bisextos en uno y otro Calendario, ha sido la causa de muchos confu- 
siones y variedad entre los escriptores que han querido explicar sus Calendarios y ruedas para asignar los dias de sus 
fiestas. Tambien se ha originado de aqui la variedad de opiniones para confrontar el primer dia de su afio con el 
que corresponde en nuestro Calendario, y algunos para salvar la dificultad, dicen que el afio eclesiastico de ellos no 
comenzaba al mismo tiempo que el solar, y finalmente cada uno sefiala los dias de sus fiestas segun los hallé anotados 
en las ruedas 6 Calendarios que hubo 4 las manos, porque este ritual no se valia de diversas figuras para sefialar sus 
fiestas, sino es de las mismas ruedas y Calendarios que se hacian para el computo astronomico, 6 para entenderlo 
mejor, el Calendario astronomico denominaba sus meses por las solemnidades que sefialaba el ritual, y por este dicho 
que variaban en algunas partes los nombres de los meses segun la diversidad de fiestas que celebraban, y que por 
esto me persuado 4 que estos nombres no se les dieron 4 los meses al tiempo de la correccion del Calendario, sino 
muchos afios despues, cuando llegs al mayor auge su idolatria, como se manifiesta en la estampa n° 5, y lo 
hacian en este modo. La fiesta, por ejemplo de los nifos difuntos era fija y debia celebrarse en el duodecimo mes : 
supongamos ahora que el ano fuese del caracter primero pedernal, en que como queda sentado todos los meses 
debian comenzar por el la nominacion de sus veinte dias segun el orden en que los hemos puesto en la tabla del 
capitulo octavo, y supongamos que la fiesta se hubiese de comenzar el octavo dia del mes, en este caso lo que hacian 
era en la misma casilla de la rueda, en que se halla colocado en geroglifico del mes, 6 encima de ella por fuera de la 
rueda, colocaban el geroglifico de cohuatl, que es una culebra, y era el nombre del octavo dia de cada mes en afio de 
Pedernal, y esto queria decir que el dia ocho del duodecimo mes comenzaba la fiesta de los nifios difuntos. Pon- 

3B 

186 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

gamos ahora que 4 los cuatro afos debian sefialar la misma fiesta en afio del mismo signo pedernal ; entonces la 
seflalaban un dia antes con el geroglifico cuezpalin, que es la lagartija, porque el dia de atraso que ya lebaban 
respecto al Calendario solar, por no haber hecho el bisexto al fin del cuatro afio, y asi habia comenzado el mes duo- 
decimo un dia antes en el Calendario ritual: con esto se verificaba que esta era fiesta fija que se celebraba el octavo 
dia del mes duodecimo, pero por razon del dia de atraso la sefialaban en el Calendario astronomico en el sextimo 
signo de los dias del mes; por esta causa he dicho que respecto al Calendario solar todas las fiestas eran movibles, 
aunque hubiese muchas fijas en el ritual, porque la cuenta de este solo la Ilevavan los sacerdotes, y estos eran los 
que hacian las acotaciones en el Calendario solar para avisar y advertir al pueblo: cuando la fiesta era movible la 
sefialaban del mismo. modo, poniendo sobre la casilla del.mes el signo de la fiesta, que cada tenia su geroglifico 
propio especial y conocido, y al lado el del dia en que debia celebrarse. 

Algunos dicen que el Calendario ritual contaba diversamente los meses, esto es que no comenzaba su afo en el 
mes en que le comenzaba el solar; pero varian en asignar cual era, el primero del ano ritual; unos dicen que 
comenzaban por Xilomaniztli, que es el cuarto mes del afio solar, otros dicen que por Pachtzintli que era el decimo 
quinto, 4 quien tambien Ilamaban Teotleco 4 regreso de los Dioses, como dejamos dicho: pero en lasuposicion de 
que en los computos astronomicos no habia variacion, si para Jas anotaciones rituales usaban de distintas figuras, es 
de poca monta el averiguar esto, pues como he dicho, en la realidad no era distinto Calendario, sino una cartilla que 
formaban para su gobierno, sobre los computos del afto solar. 

Lo mismo digo de los otros dos Calendarios politico y ritual de que usaban; el primero sefialaba el tiempo de 
salir 4 campatfia y retirarse della, los meses y dias en que se habian de hacer las juntas 6 congresos que se formaban 
en varios lugares, los dias en que los reyes daban audiencia publica, y otras cosas semejantes concernientes al bien 
gobierno de sus republicas, En el ritual se anotaban los tiempos en que se habian de hacer las siembras del maiz, 
algodon, chian, chile 6 pimiento, y demas que cultivaban, y el tiempo de sus cosechas. Pero estas anotaciones las 
hacian siempre las mismas ruedas 6: Calendarios del afio solar en el mismo modo y por el propio orden que en el 
ritual, y con menos variacion, porque en estos dos ultimos no le habia en la formacion de los bisestos, sino que 
seguian los computos del solar. ; 

Tambien dicen algunos que en estos Calendarios comenzaban 4 contar el afio por distintos meses que el solar, y 
en cuanto al rural hay notable variedad en asignar el primer mes ; pero en el politico concuerdan los mas en que el 
primer mes era el ultimo del afio'solar, 4 quien llamaban Panquetzaliztli, que significa Vandera de pluma, y queria 
denotar que era el tiempo de salir 4 campafia, porque venia 4 ser por Enero que en ‘estos paises es el tiempo mas 
seco, y la retirada de campaifia era por el sexto 6 septimo mes del aiio solar que es entre Abril y Junio, porque es el 
tiempo en que estos paises comienzan las aguas.. Pero sea como fuere, esto es de poca monta para nuestro asunto, 
y vuelvo 4 repetir que estas no eran mas que cartillas para su gobierno; pero como algunos de los autores que han 
escrito de paso en este asunto, dicen por las noticias confusas que adquirieron, que estos naturales usaban de cuatro 
maneras de Calendarios sin dar mas explicacion, me ha sido preciso darles este nombre y esplicar lo que contenian 
para la perfecta inteligencia de sus computos. 

Ya se vé que ninguno de estos tres ultimos, pudo ser ordenado ni-dispuesto por los sabios astrologos que se jun- 
taron en Huchuetlapalan 4 hacer la correccion y enmienda de sus tiempos, smo muchos afios despues, porque 
entonces no habia mas adoracion que la del Dios Criador, ni sacrificios de sangre humana, ni guerras, ni puede ser 
que ni sementeras, 4 lo menos es cierto que no las habia de todas las semillas que despues cultivaron; y aun el 
Calendario solar como ya dije, me persuado que entonces ni tubo toda la perfeccion a que despues lleg6, y por lo que 
mira 4 los nombres de meses y dias, no admite duda que fueron puestos muchos siglos despues de esta correccion, 
ya obligados de las necesidades de la vida humana, demarcando los tiempos mas 4 proposito para sus siembras, cazas 
y pescas, y huyendo de los que habian conocido nocivos segun la diversidad de terrenos, variedad de climas, y tem- 
peramentos que en estos paises se esperimentan en cortas distancias, ya por la idolatria en que despues cayeron, 
inventando deidades 4 quienes daban culto en aquellos tiempos en que segun su falsa creencia necesitaban mas de su 
auxilio, y asi aunque en toda la Nueva Espafia era uno mismo el sistema, de que se prueba con evidencia la anti- 
giiedad de esta ordenacion 6 correccion de que hemos tratado, con todo no eran unos mismos los simbolos 6 gerogli- 
ficos de que sé servian en todas partes, como dejo advertido al cap® 6°, porque los de Oaxaca, Chiapa, Soconusco, 
en lugar de los cuatro caracteres principales pedernal, casa, conejo, y cafa, se servian de estos, Votan, Lambat, Been, 
y Chinax. Los de Michoacan se servian-de estos, Yuo Don, Yu Baui, Yuchon, Yu Thihui: no he podido averiguar 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 187 

ni en unos ni en otros cual era el caracter principe como el tecpatl de los Tultecas, pero su coordinacion la hallo 
constante en el modo referido en el fragmento de Calendarios de unas y otras naciones que he reconocido. 

Tambien he podido saber cuales eran los nombres con que los de Oaxaca, Chiapa, y Soconosco, sefialaban sus 
meses, pero si los de los veinte dias de cada mes se componian repartidos en las cuatro casas principales del mismo 
modo que los otros, en esta manera. 

Votan. Lambat. Been. Chinax. 
Ghanan. Molo. Hix. Cahogh. 
Abag. Elab. Tziguin. Agxual. 
Tox. Batz. Chabin. Mox. 
Moxio. Enob. Chue. Igh. 

De los de Michoacan, por un fragmento de Calendario he podido saber hasta catorce nombres de los meses, q ue 
son los siguientes, Yuthactri, Yudchuri, Yuthezauroni, Yuthurizahui, Yuthauhui, Yuiscathotohui, Yuratatohui, Ytz- 
bachia, Yuthoxiuhin, Yuthaxihni, Yuthechagui, Yutechotahui, Yuteyabeihierin, Yuthaxitohin, y 4 los cinco dias inter- 
calares llamaban Yutasiabise. Los cuatro meses que faltan son los que corresponden 4 nuestro Enero, Febrero, y 
Marzo, porque al manuscrito le falta la primer oja, y solo comienza desde el dia 22 de Marzo, y concluye en 31 de 
Diciembre confrontando sus meses con los nuestros. Los nombres de los veinte dias de cada mes los reparte del 
mismo modo en las cuatro casas principales, y son las siguientes : 

Yuo Don. Yu Bani. Yuchon. Yu Thihut. 
Yuic Ebi. Yu Xichani. Yu Tahui. Yui Xotziui. 
Yuetuni. Yu Chini. Yu Tzini. Yui Chini. 
Yu Boori. Yu Rini. Yu Tzoniabi. Yui Abi. 
Yuithaati. Yu Pari. Yu Tzciubi. Yu Tauiri. 

En cuanto al modo de contar sus semanas estos de Michoacan, no he hallado noticia alguna, porque el referido 
fragmento de su Calendario es sin duda formado en los tiempos posteriores despues de la conquista, y numera sola- 
mente los dias de nuestros meses sefialandolos y confrontandolos con los referidos nombres de meses y dias succesi- 
vamente repetidos por el mismo orden. Por lo que mira 4 los de Chiapa, dice el caballero Boturini en su citado 
libro, que contaban siete estrellas errantes correspondientes 4 los siete dias de su semana, no sé de donde sacé la 
noticia, ni entre sus manuscritos pudo hallar alguno que me instruyese de esto. 

Cariruto XII. 

De los Gigantes primeros habitadores de tierra de Anahuac, que es la que hoy Nueva Espana. 

Ax tiempo que se hizo este congreso de sabios astrologos en la ciudad de Huehuetlapalan para la correccion del 
Calendario, tenian ya estas gentes considerable numero de poblaciones, no solo en las inmediaciones de su primitiva 
ciudad, sino en toda aquella region en que estaban ya muy extendidos, especialmente hacia las costas del mar. Pero 
como fueron los Tultecas los historiadores, que nos conservaron estas noticias, no nombran otra poblacion que su 
ciudad principal, que dicen se llama Tlachicatzin, cuyos fundadores fueron todos hombres sabios y diestros artifices 
en todas las artes que hasta entonces conocian y ejercitaban, por cuyo motivo les dieron el nombre de Tultecatl, que 
en el idioma Mexicano quiere decir artifice, y parece que ya 4 este tiempo se gobernaban de por si los Tultecas por 
sus Sefiores y Jueces con independencia de los de Huehuetlapalan. Esta era ya corte y capital del imperio que 
llamaron Chichimecatl, porque el principal caudillo que los condujo, 6 el primer rey que eligieron para que les 
gobernase, (que en esto varian los escritores,) se lamé Chichimecatl, otros dicen que se llamé Zichen 6 Chichen, 
que significa hombre aspero y rigido, de quien tomaron el nombre de Chichimecatl ; y preciandose de una gran 
nobleza eran altivos y sobervios, y conservan de este tiempo hasta los nuestros este mismo caracter. Algunos dicen 
que no tomaron el nombre del caudillo, sino de una ciudad que fundaron llamada Chichen ; pero 4 mas de ser esto 
contrario 4 su comun estilo que era tomar el nombre de los caudillos y no de las poblaciones, no hallo en toda la 
historia que se haga mencion de semejante ciudad, ni en los antiguos ni en los tiempos posteriores, antes si encuentro 

e 

188 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

que al modo que los Egipcios Ilamaron 4 sus reyes Pharaones del nombre de un Pharaon, los Persas Asueros, y los 
Romanos Cesares, asi estas gentes daban 4 sus monarcas el titulo de gran Chichimecatl, prueba de que este nombre 
no le tomaron de la ciudad, sino de aquel primer caudillo 6 rey, y asi en todos tiempos- han hecho y hacenlos chi- 
chimecas gran vanidad de su nobleza, antigiiedad, y primacia de su imperio, teniendose por superiores 4 las demas 
naciones y padres de todas ellas. 

Algunos han dicho tambien que se les dio el nombre Chichimecatl, por la cruel costumbre de chupar la sangre 
humana, como lo hacen en nuestros tiempos los barbaros de estas naciones, y deducen la etimologia del verbo chi- 
china, que significa chupar, y mecayotl, que significa parentesco de consanguinidad, como si dijeramos los que 
chupan su propia sangre 6 la sangre de su propia especie: pero 4 mi no me agrada su pensamiento, lo primero 
porque en ninguno de los autores Indios y multitud de sus escritores que he reconocido hallo mencion alguna, ni de 
que en su mas retirada antigiiedad usasen esta crueldad de mantenerse de sangre humana, ni muchos siglos despues, 
antes por el contrario veremos en el discurso de esta historia, que aun cuando se introdujeron los sacrificios de sangre 
humana, los aborrecieron y detestaron los Emperadores de Tescuco, que eran los que se gloriaban y con razon de 
descender de los Chichimecas, y conservarse en ellos la ilustre sangre de sus monarcas, porque esta barbara costumbre 
de mantenerse de sangre humana de los Chichimecas que habitan hoy las tierras septentrionales de esta America, 
nacié mucho despues entre ellos por las razones que diré en su lugar, y asi no hay escritura alguna de los suyos que 
afirme que por esta costumbre se les dié el nombre de Chichimecatl, sino tan solamente las dos opiniones que dejo 
referidas, diciendo unos que le tomaron de un rey 6 caudillo suyo, y otros que de una ciudad. : . 

Lo segundo, porque el nombre no es Chichimecayotl, sino Chichimecatl, y si de este se ha de sacar la rigurosa 
etimologia, su significado es el que chupa cordel, haciendo compuesta la voz del verbo chichina, que significa chupar, 
y mecatl que significa cordel. “Lo tercero, porque aunque se diga que en sus nombres compuestos sincopan las 
voces como es cierto, y que mecatl es sincopa de mecayotl, no hay para esto mas prueba que un simple discurso, y 
aun siendo asi, no concederé que sea bien deducido el significado que le dan 4 la voz Chichimecatl, porque aun 
suponiende de que mecatl sea siempre sincopa de mecayotl, es necesario saber que el propio significado de la voz 
mecayotl es parentesco de consanguinidad, y asi siguiendo la noticia de los autores Indios que dicen haber sido 
Chichen el nombre de su caudillo 6 padre de familia, diria yo que la voz Chichimecatl se interpretaria mejor, diciendo 
que significa los descendientes por consanguinidad de Chichen, 6 la parentela de Chichen, y me parece que es mas 
natural y genuina esta etimologia de Chichimecatl, parentela 6 6 descendencia de Chichen, que no la otra que viene 
arrastrada, y no se conforma como esta con sus historias; pero yo me arrimo de mejor gana 4 los que dicen que su 
caudillo 6 primer rey se Ilamé Chichimecatl, y de el le tomaron, porque esto era entre ellos lo mas comun, como se 
ira viendo en el discurso de la historia. Aquellos pues que entre ellos se hallaron de natural pacifico y humilde, 
inclinados al estudio y observacion de los astros 6 al ejercicio de sus artes, no confrontaron con los otros, y asi resol- 
vieron separarse como lo hicieron, y fundaron su ciudad de Tlachicatzin, donde establecieron su gobierno con total 
independencia de los Chichimecas. A su ejemplo fueron haciendo lo mismo otras gentes, que bajo la conducta de 
un gefe que nombraban se separaban y formaban sus poblaciones, que estas no solo en estos tiempos, pero aun mas 
siguientes despues, como ya he dicho, no tenian casas sino cuebas unas que hallaban hechas por la naturaleza, y 
otras que fabricaban 4 su imitacion; y de esta separacion nacid con el curso del tiempo la variedad de naciones que 
se hallé y aun subsiste en este Nuevo Mundo, distintas en nombres, costumbres y titos, y con variedad de lenguages 
y dialectos, que se fueron formando unos por corrupcion del legitimo idioma Nahuatl, (que asientan unanimes los 
autores haber sido el primitivo,) y otros por invencion posterior de los hombres obligados de las necesidades humanas 
con variedad de tonillos y acentos, que algunos de ellos no hay letras ni silabas con que poderlos esplicar, porque no 
son otra cosa algunas voces que un sonido mudo gutural 6 narigal con la boca cerrada 6 abierta, y en ninguno de 
los idiomas hasta ahora conocidos entre estas gentes, se ha hallado la perfeccion, armonia, elegancia, y riqueza de 
voces, frases y esplicaciones, que en el Nahuatl 6 Mexicano. 

Aunque se habian estendido mucho y aumentadose grandemente las poblaciones en aquella region, no dicen que 
hubiese salido de ella gente alguna para poblar en otros paises hasta algunos afios despues de la enmienda de los 
tiempos, en que dicen que de las poblaciones maritimas salieron ciertas cuadrillas, que vinieron 4 establecerse 4 las 
riberas del rio Atoyac entre Tlaxcallan y Quetlaxcoapan, poblacion antigua que estuvo situada donde hoy esta la 
ciudad de la Puebla de los Angeles, de las cuales naciones hablaré luego. Antes me es preciso dar noticia de la que 

los Indios conservaron y refieren con este motivo. Dicen pues, que antes que viniesen estas naciones 4 establecerse 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 189 

a las riberas de Atoyac, estaban ya estas pobladas de gigantes, que eran las reliquias de ellos que habian escapado 
de la calamidad de los uracanes. Asientan pues, que estos habian sido los antiguos pobladores de estas riberas, que 
en la calamidad de los uracanes perecieron los mas de ellos, y de los pocos que escaparon se habian propagado hasta 
estos tiempos, en que los que habian quedado se hallaban ya sin esperanza de continuar su generacion por no haberles 
quedado muger alguna. Les dan el nombre de Quinametli, y en plural Quinametin ; no dan la medida de sus cuerpos, 
pero ponderan mucho su estatura y con razon, porque de los muchos huesos que se han sacado y todos los dias se 
encuentran en este terreno donde estubieron poblados, se conoce haber sido muy corpulentos. Yo he visto muchos 
de estos huesos y tengo en mi poder algunos, entre los cuales hay uno que se conoce perfectamente ser la cabeza 6 
parte superior del hueso del muslo que llaman de la zea, y segun su proporcion debio tener el cuerpo 4 que sirvidé 
mas de tres varas de alto, este le saqué de la barranca de Cachualapa en el camino de Tecali: tambien tengo una 
muela que se sacé con otros fragmentos de huesos en las riberas del rio Atoyac cerca del pueblo de Malacatepec en 
tierras de mis haciendas, que 4 su proporcion debid de tener el cuerpo cuatro varas de alto, y he sabido de personas 
muy fidedignas haber visto otros que por su integridad se conocian los huesos que eran, y de su proporcion haber 
servido 4 cuerpos mas altos. 

La noticia de haber sido gigantes los antiguos habitadores de estas tierras es tan comun en todos los autores que 
han escrito de cosas de Indias, que apenas se hallara alguno que no las refiera que al tiempo del ingreso de los Espa- 
fioles en estos paises la hallaron universalmente recibida y contestada entre los naturales ; pero cuando asi no fuese, 
la multitud de huesos * que posteriormente se han hallado y cada dia se descubren en el terreno mismo en que afirman 
haber estado sus poblaciones (y no hay animal alguno a cuyo cuerpo puedan adaptarse) y al mismo tiempo no hal- 
larse otros iguales ni semejantes en otros terrenos que no habitaron, verifica esta noticia que nos conservaron los 
Indios, y quita enteramente toda duda el hallazgo de esqueletos enteros que en estos ultimos afios se han descubierto, 
y testifican haberlos visto personas muy fidedignas}. Asientan pues los autores Indios como dejo ya dicho al cap. 3. 
que estos fueron los primeros habitadores de la tierra de Anahuac, conocida hoy por Nueva Espaiia, y tambien dejo 
insinuada la dificultad que hay en averiguar si fueron oriundos de las mismas siete familias que se unieron en la 
confusion de lenguas, 6 de diversas y de distinto origen. Algunos de los autores nacionales, y entre ellos Don Fer- 
nando de Alba Yxtlilxochitl, muy bien instruido en su historia antigua, dice en una de sus relaciones que estos 
gigantes eran de la misma progenie que los demas Indios, y descendientes de aquellas primeras siete familias que 
vinieron desde la dispersion de Babel 4 poblar estas tierras; y por esto he dicho en el capitulo 1°, que todas las 
gentes y naciones que poblaron la America Septentrional procedieron de aquellas siete familias. 

Y aunque el citado Don Fernando de Alba no lo dijese, 4 mi me parece que hallo en sus mismas historias, razones 
en que fundarlo. Supongo la existencia de los gigantes constante, y el dia de hoy se manifiesta evidente con la mul- 
titud de osamentos y esqueletos enteros que se han descubierto en este reino, y supongo tambien como de fe, que 
estos no tubieron distintos progenitores que los mismos Adan y Eva padres comunes de todo el linage humano, y 
que esta diversidad de estaturas como la de los colores es provenida de las varias disposiciones de la naturaleza, tem- 
peramento, clima, y semejantes accidentes, como 4 cada paso nos lo manifiesta la esperiencia, viendo nacer de los 
mismos padres unos hijos altos, y otros pequefios, unos blancos, étros morenos, unos rubios y otros pelinegros, con 
que no hay dificultad en que los gigantes de este nuevo mundo procedieron de aquellas siete familias primeras, y 
todas las historias de los Indios contestan en que la nacion Tulteca que indubitablemente procede de ellas, fue siempre 
sefalada en estatura, tanto que aun despues de muchos siglos que salieron de su patria y establecieron su monarquia 
en la tierra de Anahuac, y casi hasta los tiempos en que entraron los Espafioles, eran conocidos los Tultecas por su 
corpulencia, y todos los que han entrado la tierra adentro por el Nuevo Mexico, que fue donde hicieron sus primeras 
poblaciones, aseguran haber todavia algunas naciones de sobresaliente estatura, especialmente en los poblaciones de 
la costa del Sur. Yo tengo unas relaciones que escribio el P. Fr. Geronimo de Zarate Franciscano, de las entradas 

* Tt is not improbable that the bones alluded to were those of elephants, or of other antediluvian species of animals too large to enter into 
the ark of Noah, and therefore doomed to become an extinct species. This reflection has been suggested by an examination of a work of the cele- 
brated Kircher, entitled ‘4rca Noe,’ which is illustrated with many curious wood-cuts representing the different species of animals which entered 
into the ark, and the separate places provided for their accommodation. It deserves to be remarked, that Moses has been guilty of a slight inad- 
vertence in stating, in the second verse of the seventh chapter of Genesis, that God commanded Noah to receive seven of every clean beast into the 
ark; since we learn from the ninth verse of the same chapter that éwo was the number actually admitted. Discrepancies of this kind are however of 
such frequent recurrence in the Old Testament that they are scarcely worthy of observation. 

+ Acosta, lib. 7. de la Historia Natural de Indias, cap. 3. Torquemada, Monarquia Indiana, lib. 1. cap. 13. 

BS 

190 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

que se han hecho por el Nuevo Mexico desde el ato de 1538 hasta el de 1626, en que afirma como testigo ocular por 
haberlo: sido en algunas y empleadose mucho tiempo en aquellas misiones hallarse. naciones de estas de sobresaliente 
estatura, especialmente en las poblaciones maritimas, y en la relacion de la jornada de Don Juan Ofte 4 la Cali- 
fornia por tierra, el aio de 1604, da noticia de una giganta que era sefiora de una isla llamada Cimogachua, y 4-ella 
la daban el nombre de Cinacacocheta, que quiere decir sefiora 6 capitana, cuya estatura era como de hombre y 
medio de los de la costa con ser‘como son muy corpulentos. 

Supuesta esta noticia, no es inverosimil la opinion de algunos autores Indios que afirman que los gigantes que 
habitaban las riberas del rio Atoyac eran Tultecas, porque ya dejamos dicho al capitulo 3°, y se dira en otros lugares 
de esta historia, que estos Tultecas fueron en todos tiempos tan enemigos de la ociosidad que perseguian totalmente 4 
los ociosos hasta:arrojar los de sus poblaciones; y de estos gigantes que vivian en este territorio se dice que era gente 
tan perezosa y dejada que en nada se ocupaban, que vivian como brutos, desnudos enteramente, sin pensar mas que 
en comer y beber, sustentandose de caza y pesca cruda*, frutas y yerbas silvestres, porque nada cultivaban, y lo mas 
del tiempo-ebrios : con que ’si‘por las sefias hemos de hacer juicio, estos eran sin duda algunos de aquellos ociosos 
desterrados de las poblaciones Tultecas, que profugos y vagos llegaron hasta estas partes, en donde por ser el tempe 
ramento mas calido que el clima en que nacieron, 6 por la vida ociosa y brutal en que vivian, fueron sus sucesores 
aumentando en estatura hasta llegar 4 la corpulencia que se nota en sus esqueletos, que en esto sin duda hubo 
notable variedad, porque en los huesos que he visto, que son muy pocos respecto 4 los muchos que se han sacado, 
se nota en sus proporciones considerable diferencia en las estaturas. A esto se agrega lo que dicen, que aunque no 
era uno mismo el lenguage de los gigantes y los Ulmecas que fueron los primeros que vinieron 4 establecerse despues 
de ellos, y los hallaron en este territorio como diré luego, eran tan parecidos que unos 4 otros se entendian, y esto 
es una fuerte prueba de ser uno mismo el origen de ambas naciones ; y ultimamente entre los manuscritos que tengo, 
hay uno muy sucinto que parece ser bien antiguo; no tiene nombre de autor, su titulo es “ Historia de los Tultecas :” 
este comienza de esta suerte. “Los primeros pobladores de esta tierra fueron Tultecas ; despues de ellos vinieron los 
Ulmecas y Xicalancas que poblaron hacia lo que ahora es la Ciudad de los Angeles 4 las orillas del rio Atoyac, donde 
hallaron algunos pocos gigantes que habian escapado de las calamidades de la segunda edad,” &c. Luego si fueron 
Tultecas los primeros, ylos Ulmecas segundos, y estos hallaron algunos gigantes, estos sin duda eran de los Tultecas: 
corroborase esto con que el autor 4 renglon seguido: refiere la rebelion de los Tultecas en'su patria, y la salida del 
grueso desu nacion, viage, poblacion, y monarquia, hasta su destruccion: luego no son estos aquellos pobladores 
primeros sino otros de su misma nacion que vinieron antes. Y aunque dejamos dicho al principio de este capitulo, 
que no consta que antes de la correccion de los tiempos, hubiesen salido de su region: primera cuadrillas algunas para 
poblar en otros paises, esto no obsta para que hubiesen salido algunas familias de estos ociosos arrojados y desterra- 
dos de las poblaciones, que no todos vendrian 4 parar 4 la tierra de Anahuac, porque, en mi juicio, los primeros 
pobladores del reyno del Peru fueron de es os mismos vagamundos: vease al Inca Garcilaso de la Vega lo que refiere 
de las costumbres de los antiguos habitadores de aquel reyno antes del Inca, y se hallaran-muy conformes 4 las de 
los gigantes, y es de notar que tambien en el reyno del Peru se han descubierto muchas osamentas de gigantes, y los 
Indios de aquel reyno tuvieron mucha noticia y la dieron 4 los Espafioles de los gigantes antiguos habitadores de 
aquella tierra: vease lo que dice Herrera de los gigantes que en tiempos antiguos aportaron 4 la punta de Santa Elena, 
cuya memoria conservaban los naturales, y contaron 4 los Espafioles que vivian como brutos, comian por cincuenta 
hombres, y eran dados 4 la sodomia, y que cayé fuego del cielo y los consumid, 'y esto parece que fue aun despues 
de poblada aquella tierra de otras gentes. De todo lo dicho se convence que aunque es constante que fueron los 
gigantes los primeros habitadores del pais de Anahuac, hoy Nueva Espafia, su origen y descendencia era la misma 
que las demas naciones que se hallaron en este continente ; esto es, aquellas siete familias, que se unieron por la 
conformidad del lenguage, y juntos peregrinaron hasta estas partes como queda referido. 

* The Levitical ordinance which forbade the Jews to taste blood, would have been very likely to induce them to reproach other nations with 
eating raw flesh. The general remark is true, that whatever was forbidden to the Jews in the Pentateuch is sure to be laid by them to the charge 
of the heathen. As regards the accusation of sloth which they brought against the giants, it deserves to be remarked, that their destruction is said 
to have occurred about the same time that another portion of mankind was believed to have been changed into apes; which animal, naturalists have 
observed to be of a very lazy, gluttonous, and lascivious disposition; all which evil inclinations the prophet Ezekiel reprobates in the forty-ninth 
verse of the sixteenth chapter of his Prophecies,—a chapter, it must be confessed, very mortifying to the vanity of the chosen people of God. 

-FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 191 

Carituto XIII. 

De la venida de las Naciones Ulmeca, Xicalanca, y Zapoteca a la tierrade Anahuac : ultima destruc- 
cion de los Gigantes, con la que quedan duenos del pais y fundan la ciudad de Chollolan. 

Aucunos afios despues que hicieron la correccion de su calendario y enmienda de los tiempos, (aunque no numeran 
cuantos,) dicen que salieron de las poblaciones maritimas dos cuadrillas numerosas de gentes en busca de otros paises 
en que establecerse. El gefe de la una se Hamaba Olmecatl, y el de la otra Xicalancatl, y de ellos tomaron una y 
otra la denominacion. Si estas eran ya naciones distintas, 6 una sola dividida en dos trozos con dos gefes, de que 
despues se formaron, no es facil de averiguar. Lo que nos dicen es que salieron juntas, y algunos afiaden que vino 
tambien con ellas otra tercera, que del nombre de su gefe se Ilamaron Zapotecas. Las noticias que de ellas dan son 
tan escasas que apenas se puede percibir que su venida fue por mar, navegando en balsas y canoas chatas, costa 4 
costa hasta Panuco, puerto situado en la ensenada de Veracruz, que Ilaman el seno Mexicano, en diez y nueve 
grados de altura. Alli desembarcaron, y penetrando la tierra dentro, Ilegaron al territorio de la republica de Tlax- 
callan y Huexotzingo, en el cual y en el que hoy comprenden las jurisdicciones de Choyolan y la Puebla de los 
Angeles, determinaron hacer sus poblaciones, pareciendoles suave y apreciable su clima, buena y fertil la tierra para 
sus siembras de maiz, frijol, chile y chian, abundante de aguas con las corrientes no solo de los dos caudalosos rios 
Atoyac y Zachuapan, sino de otros varios arroyos que la riegan, y finalmente mucho monte poblado de maderas y 
abundante de caza que era uno de sus principales alimentos. En las riberas del rio Atoyac hallaron algunos gigantes 
que vivian en ellas mas como brutos que como racionales. Su alimento eran las carnes crudas de las aves y fieras 
que cazaban sin distincion alguna, las frutas y yervas silvestres, porque nada cultivaban, pero sabian el modo de 
extraer de la planta de maguey la bebida del pulque con que se embriagaban. Andaban enteramente desnudos, 
suelto y desgrefiado el cabello, y aunque para la caza de volateria usaban del arco y la flecha, para la monteria se 
valian mas frecuentemente de su ligereza y fuerzas, sirviendose de aquella y su gran corporatura para seguir y 
alcanzar las fieras, y de esta para combatir con ellas, y para este efecto usaban de gruesas porras de ramas de arboles 
que desgajaban con tanta facilidad como pudieramos nosotros desojarlos. Eran finalmente fieros, crueles y sober- 
vios ; mas con todo recibieron de paz a los forasteros, acaso temerosos de su gran numero siendo ellos tan pocos, y 
obstentando magnanimidad y bizarria les dieron permiso para que se poblasen en sus tierras: comenzaron ellos 4 
ejecutarlo asi, pero mirando siempre 4 los gigantes con terror y miedo. Esto lo conocieron ellos y fue causa de 
insolentarlos mas, y preciandose de sefores y duefios de la tierra, creian hacerles 4 los otros un gran favor en permi- 
tirles que poblasen, y en recompensa de el querian obligarles 4 que les sirviesen como esclavos, trayendoles de comer 
y beber con abundancia, de manera que ya no pensaban ellos en buscar la caza ni la pesca, las yervas ni las frutas, 
sino todo se lo habian de traer sus huespedes y con mucha abundancia, y en no siendo asi los maltrataban y casti- 
gaban cruelmente, con lo que vivian los nuevos pobladores en una durisima opresion y servidumbre. 

No era esto lo peor, sino que habiendoles faltado enteramente las mugeres 4 los gigantes, aun antes de la llegada 
de estas naciones, se habian entregado desenfrenadamente al pecado de la sodomia, y aunque estas gentes llevavan 
mugeres, no las apetecian aquellos barbaros por mas que los hombres se las ofrecian y entregaban 4 sus propias 
mugeres y hijas*, por libertarse del dato. Se ostigaron tanto con esto y con la opresion que padecian, que por dic- 
tamen de sus gefes y principales sefiores, resolvieron acabar de una vez con los gigantes. Para esto les previnieron 
un abundante y esplendido banquete a que todos concurrieron, y habiendo comido y bebido brutalmente, tan ebrios 
todos que tirados por el suelo estaban hechos unos troncos, acabaron con todos ellos en un dia, quedando libres de 
la esclavitud y sefiores de la tierra. El afio en que acaecid este suceso le sefalan con el geroglificio del Conejo en 
el n° 1°, que segun mi computo fue el de 3979 del mundo. 

Sefiores ya de la tierra los nuevos pobladores comenzaron 4 estenderse por todo el territorio que hoy es de Tlax- 
calla, Puebla de los Angeles, Chollolan, Atlixco, Itzucan, y por el otro lado hasta Thopellacan, Tecamachalco, Que- 
cholac, y Teculhuacan, que por aqui dicen que hicieron sus poblaciones los Zapotecas, hacia Atlisco y Itzucan los 
Xicalancas, y en el territorio de la Puebla, Chollolan, y Tlaxcalan, los Ulmecas, cuya primitiva y principal poblacion 

* Vide Genesis, chap. xix. ver. 8; and Judges, chap. xix. ver. 24, 

192 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

dicen haber sido la ciudad de Choyolan, y aunque no sefialan el afio de la fundacion de esta ciudad, que fue despues 
muy famosa y subsiste en nuestros dias, diciendo que fue la primera que poblaron, debe regularse su antigiiedad por 
lo menos desde el afio de la destruccion de los gigantes, que como llevo sentado fue el de 3979 del mundo, 107 afios 
antes de la era cristiana, y por consiguiente tiene la gloria de ser la mas antigua de toda la Nueva Espaiia. 

Nos dicen los escritores que cada una de estas naciones formé sus poblaciones con separacion, sin mezclarse la 
de la una con las de las otras y que se estendieron por todo este terreno, especialmente 4 las riberas de los dos rios 
Zachuapan y Atoyac. Nada dicen de la policia con que se gobernaban, ni dan noticia alguna de su religion y 
costumbres, pero parece por los posteriores sucesos de la historia que veremos, que cada pueblo tenia su sefior 
separado con total independencia de los otros, aunque los que eran de una misma nacion mantenian entre si grande 
union y amistad, para ayudarse y socorrerse en sus necesidades. Yo me persuado 4 que estas cuadrillas eran tam- 
bien de la nacion Tulteca, y todas sus sefias lo indican, porque era gente habil y industriosa, cultivaban la tierra y 
sembraban varias semillas para su alimento, por lo menos el maiz, chile y frijol; es constante en las historias que le 
sembraban los Ulmecas antes que viniesen 4 poblar los Tultecas. No habitaban en cuebas como los Chichimecas, 
sino en casas, que sabian el arte de fabricarlas de tanta macicez y fortaleza que en un fragmento de historia Tlaxcal- 
teca que tengo en mi poder, escrito per un mestizo de Tlaxcallan, Hamado Don Domingo Mufoz Camargo, que vivia 
por los afios de 1545, afirma haber visto las ruinas de algunos edificios antiguos de la nacion Ulmeca que manifes- 
taban haber sido sumtuosos y de mucha fortaleza. Sabian tambien el arte de tejer, y tegian mantas y lienzos de 
algodon y otras ropas de pelos de conejo, lievre, perro, y otros animales: su lengua era la Nahual que hoy llaman 
Mexicana y se tiene por madre, y esta fue la de la nacion Tulteca, y he oido decir a personas bien instruidas en este 
idioma, que en algunos pueblos que aun subsisten en nuestros dias conocidos por de la nacion Ulmeca, de que ellos 
hacen gran vanagloria, como es el pueblo de Nativitas que en su antigiiedad se llamo Yancuietlanpan, y su comarca 
cerca del Santuario de San Miguel del Milagro en jurisdiccion de Tlaxcallan, y otros, se habla esta lengua con mucha 
pureza y elegancia. Finalmente cuando vino a poblar la nacion Tulteca, se unieron 4 ella sin repugnancia ni con- 
tradiccion alguna estas otras tres, reconociendo y sujetandose 4 sus reyes, leyes y gobierno. Todas estas reflexas 
me hacen creer que estas tres primeras naciones que vinieron 4 establecerse y poblar en las riberas del rio Atoyac 
fueron Tultecas. 

Las poblaciones de esta nacion Ulmeca, y de las otras dos Xicalanca y Zapoteca que subsisten en nuestros dias, 
no es facil averiguar si son 6 no de las primitivas, y mucho menos si los nombres de ellas son los que en su primer 
fundacion les dieron, porque por estos tiempos no se habla de otra que de la gran ciudad de Chollolan que fue su 
emporio, y asientan que era muy grande y contenia inumerable gentio, y hasta el dia de hoy se hallan vestigios de 
su prodigiosa extension. En ella fabricaron los Ulmecas una elevadisima torre, algunos han dicho que para preser- 
varse de otro diluvio, mas otros afirman que no fue sino por ostentacion y grandeza de su poblacion, y por monu- 
mento y memoria a los futuros de haber sido Chollolan la primer poblacion de los Ulmecas, que 4 causa de su gran 
multiplicacion habian ya formado otras poblaciones en sus contornos y comenzaban a dividirse. Este gran edificio 
cuyas ruinas subsisten en nuestros dias, es otra prucba grande de la habilidad y industria de estas gentes, y no menos 
de sus noticias y instruccion en la historia del mundo, que no se sabe que las conservasen otros que los Tultecas. 
La dicha torre se les arruindé algunos afios despues como veremos; y aun la nacion Tulteca cuando dominé este pais 
la volvid 4 erigir; volvio tambien 4 arruinarse, pero aun subsiste en nuestros tiempos una gran parte de ella en pie, 
y 4 sus lados varios fragmentos de mucho tamaho, testigos de suruina. En la realidad no debe llamarse torre sino 
un cerro, porque est4 en su estructura, y en esto se asemeja mas 4 lade Babel, segun dejo notado al capitulo 2°. Yo 
la he reconocido por varias partes, el material de que es hecha es piedra menuda de la que llaman guijarro, y una 
especie de ladrillos muy grandes de barro crudo, mezclado con paja*, 6 yerva seca, que aqui los llaman adoves: un 
suelo 6 capa es de esto, un poco mas de media vara de alto, y otro de piedras y tierra suelta, y asi se v4 elevando en 
forma espiral. Sobre el pedazo que subsiste en pie, fabricaron despues los Indios un templo sumtuoso en honor de 
Quetzalcohuatl, y cuando entraron en este reyno los Espafioles se consagré 4 Nuestra Sefiora, cuya imagen, pequefa 

* The advantage of manufacturing bricks with straw is not very evident; neither is it the custom of modern times. The Old Testament, 
however, informs us that the Jews considered straw a necessary ingredient in brick, as fully appears by the command of Pharaoh to the Egyptian 
taskmasters in the seventh verse of the fifth chapter of Exodus: “ Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick as heretofore; let them 
go and gather straw for themselves.” Sahagun, in the fifth section of the twelfth chapter of the eleventh book of his History of New Spain, 
says that the Mexicans kneaded sword-grass with clay to make earthenware vessels. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 193 

de vulto, se mantiene alli en nuestros dias con mucho culto y veneracion; unos dicen que la trajo un religioso Fran- 
ciscano 4 quien se le aparecié en Roma, y le mando que la tragese 4 colocar la en aquel sitio: otros afirman que quien’ 
la coloco alli fué el mismo Don Fernando Cortes despues del castigo y matanza que hizo en Churolan en los que 
habian conspirado contra el, como nos refieren los historiadores de la conquista. Lo que no admite duda es que el 
culto y veneracion 4 esta santa imagen es grande, y viene continuado desde los primeros tiempos immediatos 4 la 
conquista. 

CapituLo XIV. 

Del gran Eechpse y Terremoto que refieren los Indios haberse observado en estas regiones, que parece 
haber sido el de la muerte de Jesus Cristo. 

Con gran puntualidad sefialan estos naturales en sus historias otro singular acaecimiento, que despues les sirvid de 
epoca fija para sus computos cronologicos. Dicen pues, que 4 los 166 afios de la correccion de su Calendario, 4 los 
principios de un afio que fue sefialado con el geroglifico de la Casa en el numero diez, siendo plenilunio, se eclipsd 
el sol al medio dia, cubriendose totalmente el cuerpo solar, dé modo que la tierra se obscurecio tanto que apare- 
cieron las estrellas y parecia de noche, y al mismo tiempo se sintio un terremoto tan horrible cual jamas le habian 
esperimentado, porque chocando unas con otras las piedras se hacian pedazos, y la tierra se abrid por muchas partes: 
confusos y aturdidos creyeron que era ya llegado el fin de la tercera edad del mundo, que segun predijeron sus sabios 
en Huehuetlapalan, debia fenecer en fuertes terremotos, a cuya violencia perecerian muchos vivientes, y padeceria 
el genero humano la tercera calamidad ; pero cesando enteramente el terremoto y volviendo 4 descubrirse perfecta- 
mente el sol, se hallaron todos sanos, sin que viviente alguno hubiese perecido, y esto les caus6 tan grande admira- 
cion que lo anotaron en sus historias con singular cuidado. . 

Siguiendo estos computos, y arreglado a la confrontacion de las tablas, debe colocarse este suceso en el aiio 
4066 del mundo, que fue sefialado con este caracter, como se puede ver en ellas, y justamente a los 166 afios de la 
enmienda del Calendario ; y no pudiendo por las circunstancias que concurren en este eclipse y terremoto ser otro 
que el que se observé en la muerte de Cristo N.S. habiendola padecido en el afio trigesimo tercio de su edad, parece 
que debe colocarse la encarnacion del Verbo en el afio de cuatro mil treinta y cuatro del mundo, que sefialaron los 
Indios con el mismo geroglifico de la Casa en el n° 4, y asi lo he notado en las tablas, y siguiendo este computo el 
orden cronologico que ellos observaban, contando los aos de uno 4 otro suceso memorable con la asignacion del © 
geroglifico del afio en que acaecian, he venido 4 salir conteste perfectamente con nuestros afios en el de 1519, en 
que aporté Cortes 4 Vera Cruz como se veré en el discurso de esta historia. 

No por esto se entienda que yo entro a decidir en punto tan dudoso, en que tan docta y eruditamente han puesto 
sus plumas tantos grandes ingenios, dando la preferencia 4 los Indios en el acierto sobre el gran numero de ilustres 
talentos que han tratado esta materia con sumo empefio y estudio en este asunto, aunque no fuera estrano que hu- 
biese Dios revelado 4 estos pequefios lo que escondié a los sabios, como lo hizo la invencion de los bisextos ; pero 
si digo que entre la multitud de opiniones sobre la edad que tenia el mundo cuando encarné el Verbo, hay la varia- 
cion desde tres mil y tantos afios hasta cinco mil y tantos, que son casi dos mil afios de diferencia, y este computo 
de los Indios es un medio perfecto entre estos dos extremos. El Cronicon de Auberte, el Padre Suarez* y los 
autores que cita, varian en pocos afios el computo de los Indios, y finalmente debiendo yo segun las leyes de histo- 
riador seguir el de estos, y su metodo cronologico en asignar los afios en que acaecieron los sucesos, y confrontarlos 
4 los nuestros 4 que correspondieron, por no caer en los anacronismos en que cayeron los autores de algunos de 
los escritos que tengo, por querer hacer la cuenta de memoria, tomé el material trabajo de perfeccionar las tablas, 
y sobre ellas he seguido mis computos, observando con puntualidad los geroglificos y numeros que asignan los 
Indios, como se vera en el discurso de la historia por las citas que iré haciendo para satisfaccion del curioso. 

El Caballero Boturini, en su citada obra, dice que los Indios primeros Cristianos que entonces entendian per- 
fectamente su cronologia, y estudiaron con toda curiosidad en la nuestra, nos dejaron la noticia como desde la 
creacion del mundo hasta el dichoso nacimiento de Cristo, habian pasado 5199 afios, que es la misma opinion 6 

* Snarez in 2 ~ortem, D. Tome, tom. 1. quest. 1. art. 6, disp. 6. sec. 1. 
21D 

194. SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

computo de los Setenta. Yo no he podido hallar, entre los monumentos que recogid, él que le ilustré con esta noticia, 
porque los mas escribieron sin cronologia, esto es siguiendo el metodo de los mapas historicos, refiriendo los sucesos, 
asignando solamente el simbolo 6 geroglifico del aio en que acaecieron, por ejemplo el diluvio en ato de Un Pedernal, 
la. suspension del sol en afio de Ocho Conejos, el gran terremoto en afio de Diez Casas, &c.; pero no se meten en 
averiguar 4 que afio de la creacion 6 de la era Cristiana corresponden, y los mas exactos solo dicen los siglos 6 los 
afios que habian pasado de uno a otro suceso, omitiendo regularmente los quebrados*. El] que mas esmero puso 
en la cronologia fue Don Fernando de Alba, procurando confrontar sus epocas y reducir sus afios 4 los nuestros, pero 
en cuatro manuscritos que tengo suyos, varia notablemente con diferencia de cientos de afios de unos a otros com- 
putos, y en cada una de sus relaciones se encuentra 4 cada paso manifiestos anacronismos; la causa fue haber hecho 
las cuentas y computos de memoriat y sin formar tablas, asi lo asienta el mismo Boturini en su libro, y me dijo 
repetidas veces que para escribir la historia que el meditaba y tenemos entre manos, era preciso ligarse 4 las tablas 
y ir sobre ellas, ajustando los sucesos con especial reflexa 4 los geroglificos de los afios, porque en asignar estos eran 
exactisimos los Indios, mas no en el numero de ellos que asignaban de uno 4 otro suceso, especialmente cuando 
contaban por edades 6 siglos, porque entonces omitian regularmente los quebrados sobrantes; y asi lo he experi- 
mentado como el lo decia; por lo que ante todas cosas procuré concluir las tablas que el mismo Boturini dejé 
comenzadas de su propio puiio, y ligado 4 ellas precisamente he sefalado las epocas, en que no le saco al mundo mas 
edad que cuatro mil treinta y tres afios cuando nacid Jesus Cristo, y lo que es mas digno de reflexion, el mismo Boturini 
en las expresadas tablas que dej6 formadas de su pufio, sefiala el afio de este modo: 3. Tecpatl—4033 (Matzvitatis 
Domini. De que se evidencia que el sacaba la misma cuenta, y por tanto desde el afio siguiente, que es el de 4034, 
comienza 4 sefialar los de la era Cristiana del mismo modo que yo lo ejecuto y se manifiesta en ellas. Y en el afto 
4066 pone al margen esta seflal * IHS, que quiere decir Crucifixion de Jesus, en cuyo tiempo acaecio el terremoto, 
y asi me persuado 4 que padecio equivocacion en esta asercion de su libro, porque como ya he dicho en otros lugares 
y el confiesa, escribio de memoria y sin tener presentes los documentos que recogid. 

CariruLo XV. 

De ta venida a estas tierras de un varon prodigioso, a quien dieron los nombres de Quetzalcohuatl, 
Cocolcan, y Hueman. 

PasapDos algunos aiios del gran eclipse, en uno que fue sefalado con el geroglifico de la Cafia en el numero 1° (que 
segun las tablas parece haber sido el 63 de Jesus Cristo) vino 4 estas regiones por la parte del norte un hombre blanco 
y barbado de buena estatura, vestido de una ropa talar blanca sembrada de cruces rojas, descalzo, descubierta la 
cabeza, y un baculo en la mano, 4 quien Ilaman unos Quetzalcohuatl, otros Cocolcan, y otros Hueman. Este pues 
dicen, que era justo y santo, que les ensefio una ley buena, aconsejandoles el vencimiento de sus propias pasiones y 
apetitos, del odio, del vicio, y el amor 4 la virtud ; les instituyé el ayuno de cuarenta dias, la mortificacion y penitencia 
con efusion de sangre, les did 4 conocer la cruz, prometiendoles por medio de aquella sefial la serenidad en el aire, 
la Iluvia necesaria, la conservacion de sus poblaciones, la salud coporal y el socorro de todas sus necesidades. Dioles 
noticia de un Dios trino y uno {, valiendose para esplicarles este misterio de piedras y palos triangulares y otras 

® By the expression ‘quebrados’ are meant the odd years over and above a Mexican age or century. 

+ Echevarria’s assertion, that Don Ferdinand de Alba Ixtlilxochitl and Boturini had both been guilty of anachronisms, from placing too 
much dependence on their memory in framing their chronological computations, should be understood of each of them in a different sense. He 
evidently means that the former writer had fallen into error, from not having formed tables such as he had himself made use of, the better to adjust 
the signs employed in the Mexican calendar to our years; and that the latter, when in Spain, could not have been able to consult the paintings 
which he had left behind him in Mexico. 

= Reserving for another place proofs from Clavigero’s History of California, of the Indians of that peninsula believing in a Trinity, and in an 
incarnation of the Son of God, we shall here only observe, that the doctrine of a Trinity was known in many parts of America: for example, in 
Mexico, Yucatan and Peru; in Nicaragua; amongst the Muyscas, a civilized people of New Granada; in Paraguay, and according to some accounts 
even in Chili and amongst the Indians dwelling on the banks of the Orinoco. Statements of this curious fact are to be found in the second chapter 
of the fourth book of the third part of Oviedo’s unpublished General History of the Indies; in the second part of the inedited Noticias Historiales 
of Pedro Simon; in Acosta’s Natural and Moral History of the Indies; in Remesal’s Chronicle of Chiapa; in Cogolludo’s History of Yucatan; in 
Torquemada’s Indian Monarchy; in the first book of the third volume of the Saggio di Storia Americana by the Abbé Gilii; in Calancha’s Chro- 
nicle of the Order of Saint Augustin in Peru; and in Garcia’s Predicacion del Evangelio en el Nuevo Mundo, Echevarria’s statement that the 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 195 

figuras semejantes, del parto de la Virgen, y otros misterios que despues mezclaron ellos de fabulas y desatinos como 
se vera en su lugar, y atravesando la tierra de Anahuac y poblaciones de los Ulmecas, hizo mansion algun tiempo 
en la ciudad de Choyolan. 

Aunque no dicen 4 punto fijo el numero de afios que habian pasado desde el gran eclipse 4 la aparicion de este 
venerable varon, sefialan el geroglifico del afio que fue la Cafia en el numero 1°, y en la suposicion de haber sido el 
eclipse el: quel acaecié en la muerte de Jesus Cristo y dejamos colocado en el afio 33 de la encarnacion, el primero 
que despues de el se halla sefialado con la Cafia en el numero 1° es el de 63 de Jesus Cristo, treinta afios despues del 
eclipse como se puede ver en las tablas. 

No hay autor entre cuantos han escrito de cosas de Indias que no hable de este varon prodigioso, pero todos con 
confusion segun las noticias que adquirieron, ya mezcladas con fabulas, ya esplicadas con alegorias dadas 6 por gente 
vulgar, 6 por personas bien instruidas y mal entendidas por los escritores: de suerte, que le hacen dios, rey, sacer- 
dote, magico, y finalmente se encuentran en estas relaciones mil estravagancias y contrariedades que causan notable 
repugnancia. Por esto me parece que debo declarar no solo lo que hallo en las historias manuscritas y monumentos 
autenticos que he recogido, sino tambien el dictamen que sigo en cuanto 4 este famoso varon, y los fundamentos 
que me lo persuaden, aunque parezca digresion del principal asunto, pues es no solo uno de los puntos mas curiosos, 
sino tambien mas precisos para entender el origen de muchos de los ritos y ceremonias que entre estas naciones 
hallaron establecidas los Espafioles al tiempo de la conquista, y no lo es menos para deshacer la multitud de equivocos 
que padecen los mas de nuestros escritores en las fundaciones algunas del ciudades, venida y establecimiento de 
varias naciones. 

» El Padre Torquemada*, que recogio muchas noticias antiguas, y las dié 4 luz en su Monarquia Indiana del mismo 
modo que se las dieron las personas de quienes se informé, sin detenerse en la critica de las dificultades y contra- 
riedades en que unas y otras pugnan, habla varias veces en su obra de Quetzalcohuatl, y dice que fue rey de Toyan, 
sacerdote, nigromantico, magico, embustero, supersticioso, humano y misericordioso, honestisimo, castisimo, perse- 
guidor de malhechores, sufridor de injurias, sabio astrologo, diestro artifice en obras de oro y plata, labrador muy perito 
que les ensefio el cultivo de muchas plantas ; y finalmente adornado de tantas prendas buenas y malas contrarias unas 4 
otras, que no caben en un sugeto. Y lo mejor es, que ni su magia ni su sabiduria le bastaron para que no le engafiase 
y venciese el hechicero Titlacachua, que primero le persuadié el viage al reyno de Tlapalan, y despues se lo queria 
estorbar sin saberse el motivo de lo uno y de lo otro. Finalmente la vida de este hombre y su caracter, segun este 
autor, en los diferentes lugares en que habla de él, es un conjunto de pasages que no caben en un sugeto, y mas si se 
afiade el que tambien asegura, que quedé tan permanente y tan venerable la memoria de este hombre, que no solo 
observaron la moral que les ensefio y los ritos y costumbres que introdujo, teniendo muy presentes sus profecias 
cuyo cumplimiento esperaban, sino que los que entraban a reinar en Mexico no recibian el reyno como sefiores 
propios, sino como tenientes de Quetzalcohuatl, siendo cierto y constante en todas las historias de los Indios, que ni 
fue rey de Thollan ni Thollan se fundé hasta muchos afios despues, y Mexico muchisimos mas, ni sus cuatro disci- 
pulos fueron los primeros fundadores de la sefioria de Tlaxcalla, sino otros muy distintos, como se vera en su lugar. 
Y aunque algunos de estos pasages confiesa este autor que son fabulosos, otros los dan por ciertos y asentados, equi- 
parandolos con sucesos de la Historia sagrada y profana. 

Antonio de Herrera dice-f- que Quetzalcohuatl, que quiere decir dios del aire, le hacen fundador de Choyolan, 

Mexicans adored a Trinity in Unity, receives great confirmation from the following passage of the first part of an inedited Treatise of Torribio de 
Benavente, which is preserved in manuscript in the library of the Escurial, who affirms that the people of Tlaxcala, Huexocinco and Cholula (three 
states contiguous to Mexico), worshiped one God under three names: “ Sin las fiestas ya dichas habia otras muchas en cada provincia y 4 cada 
demonio le servian de su manera con sacrificios y ayunos y otras diabolicas ofrendas, especialmente en Tlaxcala, Huexocinco, Cholola, que eran 
sefiorias por si. En tedas estas provincias que son comarcanas y venian de un avolengo, todos adoraban y tenian wn Dios por mas principal, al 
cual nombraban por tres nombres. ‘ Ritos antiguos, sacrificios é idolatrias de los Indios de la Nueva Espana, y de su conversion 4 la Fée.’” Diego 
Duran, another ancient Spanish author, whose History of Mexico was given by Juan de Tobar to Acosta, (although the latter no where acknowledges 
the obligation which he was under to a writer, from whom he appears to have borrowed almost all that he wrote concerning the ancient history of 
the Mexicans,) confirms in the following passage of that history the previous testimony of Benavente: “ Es de notar que la figura presente se 
solemnizaba en nombre de Padre que quiere decir Tota, paraque sepamos que reverenciaban al Padre y al Hijo y al Espiritu Santo y decian Tota, 
Topiltzin y Yolometl, los cuales vocablos quieren decir nuestro padre y nuestro hijo, y el corazon de ambos, haciendo fiesta 4 cada uno en particular 
y 4 todos tres en uno, donde se nota la noticia que hubo de la Trinidad entre esta gente.” 

* Torquemada, Monarquia Indiana, p. 2. lib. 6. cap. 7. Id. lib, 6. cap. 24. 

+ Herrera, dec. 2..lib. 7, cap. 2. Id. dec. 3, lib. 2. cap. 11. 

196 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

que vino de hacia el norte por la mar y aporté 4 Panuco con una quadrilla de gente nueva que penetraron hasta 
Thoyan, donde fueron bien recibidos, y no pudiendo subsistir alli por estar ya fundado Mexico y poblada toda la 
tierra, se pasaron 4 Choyolan donde se establecieron y despues se estendieron hasta Huaxaca y la Mixteca. Que la 
voz Quetzalcohuatl literalmente traducida signifique dios del ayre, no habra alguno medianamente instruido en la 
lengua Mexicana que tal diga; pero como en los tiempos posteriores los Cholloltecas adoraron 4 Quetzalcohuatl por 
dios del ayre, de hay es que Herrera 6 los que le comunicaron esta noticia quieren que lo signifique su nombre, y 
confundiendo la venida de los Ulmecas con la de los Tultecas, y a Huemac (otro sabio anciano que vino con los 
Tultecas) con Quetzalcohuatl, pospone la fundacion de Chollolan 4 la de Tollan y Mexico, y parece que 4 Quetzal- 
cohuatl y los suyos les apropia el nombre Toltecatl, que quiere decir artifice, porque en Thollan comenzaron a 
ensefar, aunque 4 Tollan llama Tula, y por decir Toltecatl dice Tuloteca. 

No fue, pues, Quetzalcohuatl rey ni.gefe de nacion que vino 4 poblar, ni magico, nigromantico, hechicero, ni 
embustero, sino un varon venerable justo y santo, que con obras y palabras ensefio el camino de la virtud por el 
vencimiento de las propias pasiones, la mortificacion, ayuno y penitencia, y la adoracion de un solo Dios: alumbré 4 
estos naturales el misterio altisimo de la augustisima Trinidad, la venida del hijo de Dios al mundo, el parto de la 
Virgen, la pasion del Sefor y su muerte en el madero santo de la cruz, cuya poderosa sefial les manifestdé, y les hizo 
adorar, inspirandoles una grande esperanza de conseguir por su medio el remedio universal de todas sus necesidades. 
Les hizo varias profecias, entre las cuales fueron muy sefialadas la de Ja destruccion de la torre de Chollolan, y la de 
la venida de unas gentes blancas y barbadas por la parte de oriente que se apoderarian de la tierra*, que una y otra 
se cumplieron perfectamente en todas sus circunstancias como veremos. Que quien hizo todo esto fue un magico, 
nigromantico 6 hechicero, ministro del Demonio, es cosa tan repugnante que por si misma se hace increible, y por 
el contrario segun el tiempo en que los historiadores Indios sefialan su venida, parece consecuente fuese algun apostol 
6 discipulo de Jesus Cristo, que despues de su pasion y muerte pasé 4 estas partes 4 extender en ellas la predicacion 
del Evangelio para verificar la profecia de David: “ In omnem terram exivit sonus eorum, et in fines orbis terre verba 
eorum|;” \lenar el precepto de Cristo 4 sus apostoles: “ Ite in mundum universum, et predicate evangelium omni 
creature xt,’ porque quien dice ‘universo mundo’, no excluye 4 la America que es la mitad del globo terraqueo, y 
quien dice ‘ toda criatura’, no excluye 4 los habitadores de ella, que entonces eran una muy considerable porcion de 
criaturas ; y que este precepto de Cristo 4 los apostoles se haya de entender en la generalidad que suena de mundo y 
criaturas, es opinion de San Gregorio, San Tomas, San Juan Crisostomo, Theofilacto, Euthimio, los Cardenales 
Hugo y Cayetano, y otros muchos expositores }, de los cuales algunos asientan que en el espacio de 40 afios, conta- 
dos desde la muerte de Cristo, predicaron los apostoles en todo el mundo, con que sefialando los Indios la venida de 
Quetzalcohuatl 4 los 30 aftos de ella, concuerda bien con esta opinion, y siendo toda la doctrina que ensefio conforme 
a la nueva ley evangelica, debemos creer que fue alguno de los santos apostoles, que no por obra natural sino 

milagrosa corrio todo este nuevo mundo, y en todo el predicé, dejando muchos rastros y sefiales que subsisten hasta 
nuestros tiempos como vamos 4 ver. 

CapituLo XVI, © 

Los vestigios que se hallan en Nueva Espana de Quetzalcohuatl, denotan haber sido alguno de los 
Santos Apostoles. 

La soberana sefial de la cruz, figura del crucificado, escandalo para los Judios y necedad para los gentiles segun el 
apostol||, es la insignia y caracter propio del Cristiano discipulo de Cristo y profesor de la ley evangelica, y esta 
fue la que manifests y dio 4 conocer Quetzalcohuatl 4 estos naturales, formando cruces en diferentes maneras que 
expuso y colocé en muchas partes para que fuese venerada, y esta noticia hallaron los Espafioles cuando llegaron 4 
estas partes, tan constante en todo este nuevo mundo por la tradicion de padres 4 hijos, como lo testifican todos 

* The prophecies here ascribed to Quecalcoatle, must remind us of Christ’s famous predictions respecting the destruction of the temple of 
Jerusalem and the conquest of Judea by the Romans. 

+ Psal. xxix. ver. 4. ~ Mare. xvi. ver. 14. 

§ Gregor. in Homil. sup. Mare. xvi. Thom. ad Bernar. 10. lect. 4. Chrisostom. Hom. 76. sup. 6. Matth. || 1 Corinth. i. 23. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 197 

nuestros escritores. Herrera dice*, que cuando Grijalva descubrié la Nueva Espatfia, se le puso este nombre por las 
muchas casas de cal y canto, torres y cruces, que hallaron en aquellas poblaciones que vieron. Cortes hallé una 
gran cruz en un hermoso cercado de piedra que de tiempos muy antiguos se adoraba en Acuzamil 6 Cozumel, y 
Gomara afirmat que era tenido este lugar por comun sagrario de todas las islas circunvecinas y que no habia pueblo 
alguno que no tuviese su sagrario de piedra 6 de otra materia: tambien se hallaron cruces en Chollolan, en Tollan, 
en Tescuco, y en otras partes, y generalmente era tenida la sefial de la cruz por Dios de la Iluvia entre todos estos 
naturales, porque siendo esta un bien tan necesario para el logro de sus sementeras, les ensend Quetzalcohuatl la 
impetracion de Dios por medio de la cruz, y de aqui nacié que en los tiempos posteriores, apagadas 6 obscurecidas 
aquellas primeras luces, la adoraron por Dios de la lluvia y del aire que la conduce. Finalmente todos contestan 
que este varon traia una ropa talar blanca sembrada de cruces rojas, y quien tanto se esmerd en ensalzar esta 
soberana sefial y sefialarse con ella, mas seflas da de Cristiano que de gentil, de apostol que de nigromantico, de 
santo que de magico y embustero. 

No ignoro que el Padre Torquemada‘ quiere persuadir que las cruces que hallo Francisco de Montejo cuando 
comenzé la conquista de Yucatan, especialmente en la provincia de Totolxiuh, y la que hallé Cortes en Acuzamil, 
fueron puestas pocos afios antes que llegaron alli los Espafioles, por un sacerdote gentil llamado Chilancalcatl a 
quien tenian por gran profeta, y que este fue el que les predijo que dentro de breve tiempo irian del oriente unas 
gentes blancas y barbadas que llevarian aquella insignia 4 la cual no podrian llegar sus dioses, y que esta gente 
sefiorearia la tierra ; pero sobre las inconsecuencias y repugnancias que incluyo esta persuasion, y la pone el Padre 
Fr. Gregorio Garcia§ en el libro que imprimié con el titulo de Predicacion del Evangelio en el Nuevo 
Mundo, afiade que es menester que pruebe que este mismo profesor corrio toda la Nueva Espafia y el Peru, 
plantando cruces y haciendo la misma profecia, pues uno y otro se hallé conforme en toda la America como se ve en 
todos nuestros historiadores de ambos reynos: pero como quiera, que mi asunto es solo de la Nueva Espafia, no 
saldré fuera de ella para mostrar los vestigios que dejé este venerable varon de la verdad evangelica. 

El mismo Padre Torquemada|| habla de la milagrosa cruz del lugar de Quautholco, que vulgarmente Ilaman 
Guatalac, que aunque dice que esta la ponderé en este parage el Padre Fr. Martin de Valencia 4 otro de 
sus compafieros en aquellos primeros tiempos, esta es mera conjetura arbitraria que la refuta con solidas razones 
el Padre Garcia en el lugar citado@, y el Padre Fr. Joachim Brulio en la Historia del Peru de su religion de 
San Agustin** afirma que era venerada esta santa cruz en aquel lugar desde tiempos muy antiguos: contesta en 
ello el Padre Fr. Gregorio Garcia que afiade el milagro que obré cuando el herege Francisco Drague que 
aporté alli, la quisé quemar y no pudo conseguirlo. Esta santa cruz se venera al presente en la ciudad de 
Huaxacac donde la trasladé el Sefior Obispo Don Juan de Cervantes, y en el Convento de Carmelitas descalzos dela 
Puebla de los Angeles se venera una cruz hecha de un brazo de esta, que llevé alli y colocéd en una capilla del 
presbiterio el Sefior Don Antonio de Cervantes Carbajal canonigo de aquella iglesia, sobrino del Sefior Obispo. 

El Sefior Don Fr. Bartolomé de las Casas Obispo de Chiapa, despues de hecha grave informacion del caso, 
afirma en una Apologia suya, que manuscrita se guarda en el Convento de Santo Domingo de Mexico, que consta 
por antiquisima tradicion de aquellos naturales que aquella cruz la trajo un hombre blanco y barbado, vestido hasta 
los artejos de una ropa talar blanca, que traia consigo otros discipulos, y que estos dieron noticia 4 sus abuelos de 
los misterios de-la Trinidad y parto de la Virgen, y les ensefiaron el ayuno y la penitencia: estas son las mismas 
sefias que dan los historiadores Indios de Quetzalcohuatl, y para convencer que la adoracion que daban 4 esta 
santa cruz. era tan antigua como el lugar, y no de los tiempos inmediatos 4 la conquista como quiere el Padre 
‘Torquemada, voy 4 dar una prueba irrefragable en el mismo nombre del lugar, pues como todos son significativos 
en la lengua Mexicana, muchas veces me he valido de ellos para salir de dudas, y siempre con buen efecto. El 
verdadero nombre de este lugar es Quauhtolco, asi lo escriben los autores Indios y los que saben y poseen 
perfectamente el idioma Nahual, no Quauhtochco como escriben los Padres Torquemada y Garcia, que este es otro 
lugar muy distinto cerca de Orizaba y la villa de Cordova, 4 quien los Espafoles corrompiendo la voz por no 
poderla pronunciar llaman Guatusco, y 4 Quauhtolco llaman Guatulco ahora, pues esta voz Quauhtolco es com- 
puesta de guahwitl, que significa el madero, del verbo éoléa que significa hacer reverencia bajando la cabeza, y la 
particula co que denota lugar, y asi Quauhtolco quiere decir, lugar donde se adora 6 se hace reverencia al palo; 

* Herr. dec. 2. lib. 3. cap. 1. + Gomara, p. 2. cap. 15. + Torquem. p. 3. lib. 15. cap. 49. § lib. 5. cap. 4. 
|| Torquem. p. 3. lib, 16. cap. 28. @ Garcia, Predic. del Evang. lib. 5. cap. 5. #* Brulio, Hist. de S. Agus. del Peru, lib. 1. cap. 5, 

3 E 

198 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

tan antigua pues como su nombre era en este lugar Ja adoracion de la cruz, y puede ser que mas, puesto que de ella 
tomé el nombre. 

E] Padre Garcia* hace mencion de otra prodigiosa cruz que se hallé en la sierra de Meztlitlan, y cita 4 Don Fr. 
Estevan de Salazar monje Cartujo, que antes fue religioso Agustino segun dice el Padre Calancha, cuyas palabras 
refiere que las copié de la dicha obra del Padre Garcia, y despues las ‘cotejé con el libro del Padre Salazar intitulado 
Discurso sobre el Credo, que es el que cita Boturini en su catalogo de documentos que recogio, y son estas: “En 
una punta de una altisima sierra en un lugar muy sefialado, que de la antigitedad y escultura que tiene en aquel 
pico tajado de la montafa tomé nombre el y todas unas pobladisimas y anchisimas montafias que llaman de Mez- 
tlitlan, porque meztli en lengua Nahuatl 6 Mexicana quiere decir luna, y tetl piedra 6 risco 6 pefia, y titlan sobre 
la pefa, de manera que Meztlitlan quiere decir la luna sobre la pefia. Est4 en aquella pefia tajada, al lugar altisimo 
y casi inaccesible, reelevada 4 la mano derecha del rio una cruz 4 manera de tau que es esta, T, labrada a cuadros 
como tablero de axedrez, un cuadro de color de la piedra que es blanquisima, y otro de un muy perfecto azul, de 
un codo en alto 4 lo que juzga la vista de gran distancia, y en frente de ella una media luna del mismo tamafio, 4 
la mafio izquierda de la pefia, reelevada tambien en ella y labrada de los mismos cnadros y colores. No hay entre 
aquella gente quien tenga noticia cuando, 6 por que manera, 6 por quien, fueron cortadas y grayadas aquellas 
figuras en aquel risco, ni 4 que fin, ni que sepa decir que significan. Porque haciendo yo mismo gran diligencia 
en aquel propio lugar, que esta encomendado al ilustre caballero Francisco de Merida y Molina, y hallando hom- 
bres de mucha edad en él, y entre ellos uno que 4 la menor suma que pudimos alli averiguar el religiosisimo 
Padre Fr. Antonio de Mendoza que hoy vive y es difinidor de aquella provincia de Nueva Espafia, hijo de los 
ilustres caballeros Luis de Marin de los mas principales conquistadores de aquel mundo, en quien se encomendo 
la provincia de Guazagualco, y Donna Maria de Mendoza tia del Conde de Aguilar, nuestro hijo dilectisimo en el 
Sefior, € yo, pasaba de ciento y cuarenta afios—no se puede saber ni sacar en limpio mas de que aquello estaba 
alli de tiempo immemorable, y que venia su memoria y la de sus padres y abuelos y progenitores, y bien muestra su 
antigtiedad el nombre del lugar, que como hemos dicho, se Ilamé en su lengua la luna sobre la piedra, siendo el 
pueblo antiquisimo: pero lo que mas me admiré en un espectaculo tan raro, fue, que nunca el matiz de aquel 
perfectisimo color azul con estar tanto tiempo descubierto 4 los temporales se hubiese deslavado ni gastado.” 

Esta prodigiosa cruz subsiste el dia de hoy del mismo modo y de la propia manera que la describe este autor, y 
asi me lo han asegurado personas muy fidedignas que la han visto, tanto eclesiasticos como religiosos y clerigos que 
han administrado de curas en esta sierra, como seculares, y entre ellos fue uno el Caballero Boturini, que hizo 
viage 4 este parage sin otro fin que el de ver y admirar este portento, y me aseguré que el parage en que estd, es un 
altisimo repecho del cerro llamado Tianguistepetl, tan eminente y escarpado y tan aspera la subida que no es creible 
que por industria y fuerzas humanas pudiese alguno haberla puesto alli, que esta tallada en la pefia viva, y su ta- 
mafio es de poco mas de un codo, sobre fondo de un finisimo azul sembrado de unas como estrellas blancas, y que 
al lado diestro tiene un escudo sobre el mismo color azul con cinco bolas blancas que figuran las cinco preciosisi- 
mas Ilagas del Seftor, tan permanente el color que no ha habido aguas, soles, aires, ni intemperie alguno que haya 
podido disminuirle en nada su hermosura. Su antigiiedad no es disputable, pues como dice el autor esplicando la 
voz Meztlitlan, de aqui tomé el nombre toda esta sierra, y desde tiempos muy antiguos y distantes de la venida de 
los Espafioles se llama de Meztlitlan. Esta, pues, soberana seal, tan admirable por su hechura, situacion, antigiiedad 
y permanencia, prueva la predicacion del evangelio en estos paises desde los primitivos tiempos del Cristianismo 
por algun apostol 6 discipulo de Cristo, y estando constante por las historias de los Indios que Quetzalcohuatl 
fue el primero que les dié 4 conocer la cruz, es verosimil que el fue este apostol 6 discipulo del Sefior que la fijé 
alli, para memoria de su predicacion, 6 alguno de sus discipulos. | 

E] mismo Padre Fr. Gregorio Garcia refieret por relacion de otro religioso de su orden, que cuando entraron los 
Dominicos en la provincia de los Zapotecas en aquellos primeros tiempos immediatos 4 la conquista, hallaron en un 
lugar llamado Quicchapa, en poder de un. Cacique, una biblia de solas figuras que eran los caracteres que les 
servian de letras, cuya significacion sabian, porque de padres 4 hijos se iban enseflando el modo de entender 
aquellas figuras, y este libro le guardaban de tiempo muy antiguo; y asimismo refiere§ que al pasar el Padre 
Alonso de Escalona del orden de nuestro Padre Sefior Francisco por el pueblo de Nexapa en la provincia de 
Huaxacac, el vicario de aquel convento que era de la religion de Santo Domingo, le mostré unos mapas de estos 

* Garcia, lib. 5. cap. 6. + Calancha, lib. 2. cap. 2. t lib. 5. cap.. 7. § lib. 5. cap. 8. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 199 

dichos Indios de pintura antiquisima y contenian algunos puntos de nuestra santa fé. Yo tengo entre los 
papeles gue he recogido, una explicacion entera de uno de estos mapas que contiene los puntos mas principales de 
nuestra fé: comienza por la creacion del hombre, su pecado, destierro del paraiso, el diluvio, la torre de Babel, y 
sigue la encarnacion, nacimiento, pasion y muerte de Cristo, y la venida de un apostol que predicé el evangelio 
en aquellos primeros tiempos, y el autor de esta explicacion dice que el mapa se le dié al Dr. Don Carlos de 
Sigitenza y Gongora, que fue sugeto muy conocido en Mexico, donde hoy dura su fama por su grande erudicion 
y noticias en esta materia y antigiiedades de los Indios, y aunque he recogido algunos de sus manuscritos no he 
podido haber 4 las manos este mapa por diligencias que he hecho, con la curiosidad de ver si es 6 no de los antiguos, 
porque hay muchos modernos, esto es, posteriores 4 la conquista, que estos nada prueban, por lo que no me valgo 
de esta explicacion. 

Antonio de Herrera hablando de las cosas de Honduras*, dé noticia de una piedra triangular que se hallé en la 
tierra de Cerguin con tres rostros disformes en cada punta, la cual tenian desde la mas retirada antigiiedad en mucha 
veneracion aquellos naturales; y aunque la relacion que dieron del modo con que vino alld aquella piedra es fabulosa 
y llena de desatinos, se conoce que aquellas mismas fabulas se inventaron sobre las verdades catolicas de que tubieron 
noticia en los primeros siglos, y con el curso del tiempo se disfiguraron como ha sucedido en todo el mundo, y este 
ha sido siempre el modo con que se ha estendido y multiplicado la idolatria. 

Carituto XVII. 

Las noticias que se hallaron de la doctrina de Quetzalcohuatl, y los ritos y costumbres que enseno, 
prueban con mas eficacia que fue algun Santo Apostol. 

Furra de estos vestigios y sefias materiales permanecieron otros de superior esfera, y prueban con mayor eficacia 
que Quetzalcohuatl fue alguno de los santos apostoles 6 discipulos del Seftor, que predicé el evangelio en estas 
partes. Estos son la doctrina, costumbres y ceremonias que ensefié 4 estos naturales, las que conservaron en sus 
republicas como cosas santas y sagradas, sin perder de su memoria que fue Quetzalcohuatl quien se las ensefio. 
Confirmolos en la adoracion al Dios Criador solamente, pues como dejamos dicho, por estos tiempos aun no habia 
nacido en estos paises la idolatria, y era el Tloquenahuaque 6 Dios Criador, el unico objeto de su adoracion, bien 
que desnudo de toto culto exterior, porque ni habia templos, ni ellos le adoraban con ceremonias exteriores, ni 
sacrificios ni inciensos, ni oraciones, de manera que solo era un conocimiento 6 noticia de que todas las cosas, y 
ellos mismos, eran obras de la mano poderosa de este Ente Supremo que las crié y las conserva, pero sin que por 
estos beneficios le tributasen culto ni gracias en manera alguna. Quetzalcohuatl les enseno 4 orar en parajes 
separados de todo uso domestico, y destinados solamente 4 congregarse en ellos 4 adorar 4 Dios Criador con hu- 
millacion y alabanzas, y 4 comer juntos en ciertos dias en ellos, instruyendoles en la modestia y compostura con 
que debian estar, y poniendo en algunos de ellos la santa cruz para objeto visible de su adoracion, como figura del 
crucificado instrumento de la redempcion y estandarte que publica el triunfo del Redemptor. Les dié la noticia del 
misterio inefable de la augustisima Trinidad, explicandole con aquellos ejemplos y figuras proporcionadas 4 su 
rudeza, como son las piedras triangulares con los rostros iguales y muy grandes como la de Cerquin; y hasta el 
ingreso de los Espafioles en estos paises se conserv6 la memoria de la doctrina de Quetzalcohuatl acerca de este 
misterio, pues como refiere el Obispo de Chiapa Don Fr. Bartolomé de las Casas en el manuscrito que dejo citado, al 
que tambien se refieren Fr. Gregorio Garcia en su obra de la predicacion del evangelio en el nuevo mundof, y Fr. 
Antonio Remesalt en la historia de su provincia de Dominicos de San Vicente de Chiapa, se hallé en Yucatan un 
Indio principal y de razon, que preguntado por su creencia y religion antigua suya y de sus compatriotas, dijo, que 
creian que habia en el cielo un Dios supremo, que aunque era uno solo eran tres personas, que 4 la primera 
Ilamaban Izona, y le atribuian la creacion de todas las cosas, a la segunda Bacab, que decian era hijo de Izona, y 
habia nacido de una virgen llamada Chibirias que esta con Dios en los cielos, y ala tercera Echuah: que 4 Bacab 
le hizo azotar Eupoco, le puso una corona de espinas, y ultimamente tendido y atado 4 un madero le quité la vida, 
que estuvo tres dias muerto, y luego resucité y subié 4 los cielos con su padre: que despues vino 4 la tierra Echuah 

* Dec. 4. lib. 8. cap. 4. + Garcia, lib. 5. cap. 9. tRemesal, lib. 5. cap. 7. 

200 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

y la llené de cuanto habia menester. Dijo tambien que esta doctrina la ensefaban los sefiores 4 sus hijos, y que 
tenian por tradicion que la ensefaron unos hombres que llegaron 4 aquellas tierras en tiempos muy antiguos en 
numero de veinte, de los cuales el principal se Ilamaba Cocolcan, que traian la barba crecida, unas ropas largas, y 
sandalias en los pies, y que estos mismos los ensefiaron 4 confesarse y ayunar. Es muy respetable la autoridad de el 
Obispo de Chiapa que da esta noticia, y aunque se refiere 4 la relacion de un cierto clerigo Mamado Francisco 
Hernandez, 4 quien hizo el particular encargo de que indagase y averiguase bien cuanto le fuese posible en orden 
4 la antigua religion y creencia de estos naturales, debemos suponer que lo hizo con esmero, y 4 lo menos que no 
le fingiria esta fabula. Fuera de que esta noticia se halla contestada en Herrera, Salazar y otros, aunque con alguna 
variacion, pero todos convienen en que creian la existencia de un Dios en tres personas, de las cuales una se hizo 
hombre y nacié de una virgen, y que esta doctrina les ensefié Cocolcan, y sus discipulos, y esto basta para mi 
intento. Salazar hablando de los nombres que daban 4 las tres personas, cree que con el tiempo 6 por la mala 
pronunciacion estaban alterados y corruptos, y que equivocaban los de la primera y segunda persona, porque Bacab 
que era el que daban 4 la segunda, cree que sea corrupcion de Abba, que significa padre, Izona que era el que 
daban 4 la primera, piensa ser corrupcion de Icon, que significa imagen, y conviene mejor al Hijo segun San 
Pablo*, y Echuah que llamaban 4 la tercera, parece ser corrupcion de Haruach, voz Hebrea que significa espiritu, y 
el nombre de Chibirias 6 Chiribias que daban 4 Nuestra Sefiora, corrupcion del nombre de Maria. 

Herrera contesta en la venida de Cocolcan y sus compafieros 4 Yucatan, los que dice vinieron por la parte de 
Poniente en numero de tres, de los cuales era el principal Cocolcan ; pero parece que la pone muchos afios despues, 
porque dice que habiendo reinado todos tres en Izamal y fundado’ despues la ciudad de Mayapanf, se volvié Cocol- 
can 4 Mexico, donde habia ido por el mismo camino, y en esto puede haber equivocacion, 6 en los que dieron el 
informe, 6 en los que le tomaron, pues pudo ser muy bien, y es conforme a las historias de los Indios, que Cocolcan 
(que supongo ser el mismo. que Quetzalcohuatl, por las razones que daré en su lugar,) 6 algun discipulo suyo pre- 
dicase en las poblaciones de los Ulmecas y Xicalancas, que caen al Poniente respecto de Yucatan, cuya situacion era 
como hemos dicho en donde despues fue territorio de Tlaxcallan, 4 la linde de lo que tambien fue despues imperio 
Tezcucano, y reino de Mexico, que no se fundé sino muchos afios despues, El decir que reynd Cocolcan en 
Izamal debe entenderse por el respeto y veneracion con que le miraron, obedeciendo sus preceptos en orden 4 la 
doctrina y ensefanza que les dio, no porque en la realidad fuese rey ni dominase como tal, y esto se conoce con 
evidencia, porque convienen en que era advenedizo y no natural del pais, que vino ensefiando esta doctrina, y despues 
paso 4 fundar 4 Mayapan, y asi que les dejé poblados y instruidos, se fue, y entonces dicen que eligieron para que 
los gobernase 4 uno del linage de los Cocomes, esto es y debe entenderse, no de familia conocida por este nombre, 
sino de los discipulos Cocolcan, porque Cocome es el plural de Cohuatl 6 Cocolcan, como despues diremos; y asi 
quieren decir que eligieron para que les gobernase 4 uno de aquellos discipulos 6 secuaces de Cocolcan, que seguian 
y practicaban su doctrina, hasta que estos 6 sus subcesores 4 quienes dieron el mismo nombre prevaricaron y se 
entregaron 4 la codicia y ambicion, que es cosa muy comun y 4 cada paso se experimenta entre los hombres, que 
con facilidad degeneran de lo bueno y declinan al mal. 

Los usos, costumbres, y ceremonias que se hallaron establecidos en toda la Nueva Espafia, que por tradicion 
antiquisima tenian haberlos introducido Quetzalcohuatl, son tantos y tan universales, que ellos solos bastaban para 
probar que este fue un predicador evangelico que desde aquellos primitivos tiempos les instruyé en la ley de gracia. 
Ks constante y uniforme la noticia que se hallé en todas estas gentes, de que el fue quien les ensefio el ayuno de 
cuarenta dias que debian observar anualmente, la mortificacion y penitencia, disciplinandose las espaldas, brazos, y 
pantorrillas, con abrojos y espinas hasta derramar sangre; les exortdé 4 dar limosna y socorrer las necesidades de los 
proximos, haciendoles entender que no solo debian hacerlo por acto de humanidad, sino de religion por amor de 
Dios, y en su obsequio, sin excepcion de personas, y en esta materia era particular una fiesta que celebraban los 
Mexicanos en el mes Hueytecuilhuitl 4 honor de una de sus deidades Mamada Xilonen, diosa del maiz tierno, y en 
ella tanto los reyes y sefiores, como los demas caballeros ricos daban de comer 4 muchos pobres. No solo les dié 
4 conocer las virtudes sino tambien los vicios, procurando inspirarles odio 4 ellos, y amor 4 aquellas, y asi aunque 
al tiempo que aparecié en estas regiones, ya tenian en sus republicas alguna manera de gobierno, mas 6 menos 
segun se habian pulido unas naciones mas que otras, y en general todas tenian gefes 6 sefiores que les mandaban y 4 

* 2 ad Corin. iv. ver. 4. et ad Colos. i. ver. 15. 
‘+ Mayapan was the principal city in Yucatan, the language of which peninsula was named Maya by the Spaniards. 

-FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 201 

quienes obedecian y se sujetaban, los cuales castigaban algunos delitos, otros muchos se quedaban impunes, porque 
no eran todavia entre ellos conocidos por tales, hasta que Quetzalcohuatl se los dié 4 conocer, inspirandoles un gran 
horror no solo al homicidio, al hurto, y a los demas que siendo prohibidos por la ley natural son conocidos de todas 
las gentes y naciones, sino tambien al adulterio, 4 la mentira, 4 la incontinencia, y 4 la embriaguez, persuadien- 
doles 4 que cada hombre no tuviese mas. que una muger, y cada muger mas que un hombre, y que una vez 
unidos no. pudiesen separarse, y algunos dicen que las ceremonias que usaban en sus matrimonios, de que daré 
razon en su lugar, se les ensefid Quetzalcohuatl. Les ensefié 4 congregarse en un lugar separado de todo bullicio y 
comercio para orar y pedir 4 Dios criador el remedio de todas sus necesidades, y acudir 4 aquel lugar siempre que se 
hallasen afligidos, venerandole como 4 sagrado, de donde tubo origen la ereccion de sus templos, para cuyo cuidado 
y asistencia instituyé sacerdotes, 4 quienes instruyé en la modestia y compostura de la verdad y circunspeccion con 
que debian portarse para ser los maestros, directores y ejemplares de los demas. Tambien asientan que erigié en 
algunas partes colegios de virgines, y que los que se hallaron en Mexico y Tescuco al ingreso de los Espafoles 
se habian erigido y subsistian bajo la regla y instituto que ordend Quetzalcohuatl. 

Carrruto XVIII. 

De otras costumbres y ritos que se hallaron establecidos en estos paises quando entraron en ellos los 

Espanoles. 

Topavia se hallaron entre estas gentes al tiempo del ingreso de los Espafioles, otras costumbres y ritos que por ser 
mas propias y caracteristicas del Cristianismo, prueban mas eficazmente que quien las introdujo fue algun Apostol 6 
Discipulo de Jesus Cristo. El bautismo es el primer sacramento necesario, sin el cual no puede haber salvacion, y por 
tanto le llaman justamente puerta de la Iglesia Catolica, 4 la cual nadie puede entrar sino es por el, y es constante 
que en todo este pais se hallé establecida una especie de bautismo, que aunque variaban en las ceremonias segun los 
lugares, en lo substancial convenian todos en este bafio de agua natural, diciendo sobre el bautizado algunas formas 
como preces y oraciones y poniendole nombre, y esto observaban como rito de religion, conservando la memoria 
de haberselo ensefiado Quetzalcohuatl. El Padre Remesal afirma que los primeros Espafioles que llegaron 4 Yucatan, 
hallaron que aquellos naturales usaban una especie de bautismo, a que daban en su lengua un nombre que en la 
nuestra quiere decir, ‘nacer otra vez’, que no puede darse espresion mas conforme 4 la de Cristo en el Evangelio. 
“ Tenian 4 ello (dice) tanta devocion y reverencia que nadie le dejaba de recibir. Pensaban que recibian en él una 
pura disposicion para ser buenos y no ser dafados de los demonios, y conseguir la gloria que esperaban. Dabaseles 
de edad de tres aftos hasta doce, y sin él ninguno se casaba: elegian dia para ello que no fuese aciago, ayunaban los 
padres tres dias antes y abstenianse de las mugeres, trataban los sacerdotes de la purificacion de la posada, hechando 
fuera al demonio con ciertas ceremonias, y estas acabadas iban los nifios uno 4 uno, y les hechaba el sacerdote un 
poco de maiz y incienso molido en la mano, y ellos en un brasero, y en un vaso enviaban vino fuera del pueblo, 
con orden al Indio que no lo bebiese ni mirase atras*, y con esto pensaban que habian hechado al demonio: salia 
el sacerdote revestido de vestiduras largas y graves y un hisopo en la mano. Ponian 4 los nifios pafios blancos en 
las cabezas, preguntaban 4 los grandecillos si habian hecho algun pecado, y en confesando los apartaban a una parte 
y bendecian con oraciones, amagandoles con el hisopo, y con cierta agua que tenian en un hueso les mojaban la 
frente y las facciones del rostro, y entre los dedos de los pies y de las manos, y luego se levantaba el sacerdote, y 
quitaba los pafios 4 los nifios, y hechos ciertos presentes quedaban bautizados y acababa la fiesta en banquetes, y en 
los nueve dias siguientes no habia de llegar el padre del nifio 4 su muger.” 
En los territorios de Tescuco, Mexico, Tlacopan, Culhuacan, y otros comarcanos, habia ciertas festividades en 
que se hacia solemnemente la ceremonia de bafiar 4 los nifios y ponerles nombres, pero cuando estas no estaban 

* Tt would appear from this passage that the Mexicans felt superstitious scruples about looking back, when the occasion of a person’s departing 
was solemn and important: and itis difficult to imagine (on reading, in the concluding paragraph of the third chapter of the ninth book of Sahagun’s 
History of New Spain, that they not only accounted the act itself unlucky, but believed the person to be a great sinner,) that they were wholly 
ignorant of the tradition of Lot’s wife having been turned into a pillar of salt, as recorded in the twenty-sixth verse of the nineteenth chapter of 
Genesis. 

3 F 

202 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

inmediatas, era costumbre de bahar a los nifios 4 los siete dias de nacidos, poniendoles de pies y hechandoles agua 
desde la sumidad de la cabeza, y al mismo tiempo les ponian el nombre: si era hombre le ponian en la mano diestra 
una flecha y en la siniestra una rodela, y si era muger, en una mano el uso y en otra la lanzadera, 6 una escoba; 
y 4 los dos meses de nacidos (que era 4 los cuarenta dias *) por que cada mes de los suyos era de 4 veinte dias, los 
llevavan las madres 4 presentar al templo, donde los recibia uno de los sacerdotes que era el que estaba encargado 
de llevar la cuenta de su calendario 6 cartilla eclesiastica: este le presentaba 4 uno de sus dioses segun le parecia, 
y le ponia por sobrenombre el nombre de aquella deidad{, 4 la cual hacia ciertas preces, y se reducian 4 pedirle que 
hiciese 4 aquella criatura de bueno y apacible natural, que no fuese rudo para aprehender lo que debia, que fuera 
feliz en la guerra, que no padeciese trabajos ni necesidades ni otras cosas semejantes. En algunos pueblos no era 
el bao hasta el decimo dia de nacidos, y en otros no era por infusion sino por immersion, zambullendo 4 las cria- 
turas en estangues, rios, fuentes, 6 tinajas llenas de. agua, pero en todas partes les ponian el nombre al hacer esta 
ceremonia del bao ; y aunque en algunas partes se habia perdido ya la memoria de el que introdujo entre ellos 
estas ceremonias 6 muchas de ellas, entre la gente mejor instruida se hallé,como he dicho,la noticia de que fue 
Quetzalcohuatl el que les ensefié esta ablucion 6 bafio de agua natural y 4 poner el nombre 4 las criaturas al tiempo 
de practicarlo ; y parece regular que siendo algun Apostolé Discipulo del Sefior lo ejecutare asi, para Ilenar el que el 
Sefior les did 4 todos sus apostoles, cuando les mandé predicar el evangelio por todo el mundo y 4 toda criatura, 
bautizandolos en el nombre del Padre, del Hijo, y del Espiritu Santo, prometiendo por medio de la fé y del bautismo 
la-salud eterna: “qui crediderit et baptizatus fuerit, salvus erit.” 

El] Padre Torquemada aleanzé la noticia de esta ceremonia del bautismo de los nifios, aunque no como la 
refieren los escritores Indios, porque dice que se hacia 4 los cuatro dias de nacido el infante, pero concuerda en las 
circunstancias de que en aquellos cuatro dias ardia fuego continuo en la casa de la parida, con gran cuidado de que 
no se apagase, ni le sacasen fuera de la casa, porque decian que se desgraciaba la criatura, y al cuarto dia la pasaban 
sobre las llamas, dando 4 esta ceremonia el nombre de Tlequiquitztiliztli, la que dice Boturini|| que conservaban 
de sus antepasados los descendientes de Cham, de que se infiere que el tenia 4 los Indios por descendientes de Cham. 
Este dia era uno de los mas solemnes y de los mayores y mas suntuosos convites{] que hacian los Sefiores principales 
y semejantemente los pobres, cada uno segun su posibilidad. Contesta asimismo en que al tiempo de hacer este 
lavatorio 6 especie de bautismo, le ponian nombre 4 la criatura**, y aunque antes de nacer 6 apenas nacida, la 
destinasen nombre sus padres, no le nombraban con el hasta que se practicaba la ceremonia del lavatorio; y aun- 
que dice, .que hacian en esto siguiendo 4 las demas naciones del mundo que asi lo practicaban, y trae los ejemplos 
de los Romanos, Griegos, y Hebreos, como quiera que por las historias de estas gentes de ningun modo pueda cole- 
girse que tubiesen en tiempo alguno comunicacion con aquellas naciones, no hay razon para creer que lo apren- 
dieron de ellas, y parece mas regular que se lo ensefiase el mismo Quetzalcohuatl, que les instrujo en los demas 
puntos de la ley evangelica, como asientan algunos de sus historiadores nacionales. 

No es menos notable la costumbre que hallaron establecida de confesarse con los sacerdotes, declarandoles 
aquellas cosas que tenian por culpas, y aceptando la penitencia que les imponian; y era tan rigurosa la obligacion 

* It is extremely remarkable that this was the precise number of days which were to be reckoned, according to the enactment of the twelfth 
chapter of Leviticus, by Jewish women for their purification after the birth of male children; at the expiration of which period of forty days they 
presented themselves and their sons with gifts at the temple, when an atonement was made for the women by the sacrifice of a lamb and a pigeon, 
—or, if she was poor, of two pigeons; after which offering she became clean. 

+ Echevarria seems to have been led into error here from not recollecting that Tezcatlipoca and the goddess Chalchiuitlicue were adored by 
the Mexicans under many names, It deserves likewise to be noticed that the Mexicans were accustomed to give their children the same name 
as that of the day on which they were baptized; and the signs of the Mexican calendar having been considered by some of the Spanish mission- 
aries objects of religious worship, from the superstitious reverence that the Mexicans entertained towards them, they might be said in this sense 
to have named their children after some particular deity. t lib. 13. cap. 23. . 

§ To pass children through the flames was an ancient Hebrew custom, as we learn from many passages of the Old Testament. 

|| Idea de una Nueva Historia General de la America Septentrional, fol. 19. 

J. We learn from the fifty-eighth verse of the first chapter of Saint Luke, that rejoicings took place on the birth of Jewish children. These 
rejoicings were renewed on the eighth day after its bixth, when the child was circumcised ; whence in all probability originated the value which the 
Jews set on the number eight, which number was equally esteemed by the Mexicans, and consecrated to the purposes of superstition. . 

** Baptism under the. new law was substituted for circumcision under the old; and each rite in its turn became indispensable to salvation. 
Baptism therefore having thus superseded the old rite of circumcision, it is probable that the primitive Christians would have deemed it incumbent 
on them to:name their children at the time_of baptizing them ; inthis manner conforming with the ancient Jewish precedent,—since we learn from the 
fifty-ninth verse of the first chapter of Saint Luke that it was a Hebrew custom to name children at the time of cireumcising them. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. « 203 

que los sacerdotes tenian, de no revelar las culpas que se les confesaban, que si faltaban 4 este sigilo eran severa- 
mente castigados hasta con pena de la vida*. Hablan contestes de esta costumbre todos los historiadores Indios, y 
Herrera dice{ que lo mismo se practicaba en Nicaragua, y 4 buen seguro que esta costumbre en toda su estension 
no la aprendieron de los Griegos y Romanos. Que habia sacerdotes cuyo ministerio era ofrecer 4 los dioses los 
sacrificios y dones del pueblo, rogar por él, bendecirle, cuidar de los templos, reprehender los vicios, vivir en conti- 
nencia y mantenerse de limosna, es tan asentado que sin recurrir 4 los manuscritos de los Indios, lo contestan 
unanimes todos nuestros escritores: y que fuese Quetzalcohuatl el institutor de este orden sacerdotal, y el primero 
que ensefio 4 vivir en continencia tanto 4 los hombres como 4 las mugeres, que hacian vida comun en sus monaste- 
rios{, y estaban enteramente dedicados al culto del verdadero Dios en aquellos principios, y en los tiempos poste- 
riores al de sus falsas deidades, no solo lo dicen los historiadores Indios, sino tambien muchos de los Espafoles ; 
como tambien que les ensefidé 4 ofrecer 4 Dios los frutos de la tierra, flores y inciensos, cuya costumbre hallaron los 
Espafioles tan establecida, aunque variado y obscurecido el verdadero objeto de este culto exterior, que aun el dia de 
hoy restaurada por la luz evangelica le practican tan nimiamente que casi tocan en supersticion. No hay cosa mas 
sabida que las ofrendas que hacian de pan y vino§ (esto es pan de masa de maiz porque carecian de trigo), y aquella 
bebida que usaban por vino, y los Mexicanos celebraban una solemne fiesta 4 honor del Cienteotl, dios del maiz, 
que era su pan, y esta la hacian, formando el cuerpo de este dios en figura humana de la masa del maiz en que 
mezclaban algunas yerbas y lo cocian. El dia de la fiesta le sacaban en procesion con gran solemnidad, y al rededor 
de el ponian gran cantidad de trojos de la misma masa que bendecian los sacerdotes con ciertas formulas y ceremo- 
nias, con lo que creian que toda aquella masa quedaba convertida en la carne de aquel Dios. Acabada la fiesta, los 
sacerdotes repartian todo aquel pan al pueblo en menudos pedazos, y de ella comian todos, grandes y chicos, hom- 
bres y mugeres, ricos y pobres, que los recibian con gran reverencia, humillacion y lagrimas, diciendo que comian 
la carne de su Dios, y de ella Ilevaban tambien 4 los enfermos como por remedio. Ayunaban los cuarenta dias 
antes, y tenian por gran pecado el comer 6 beber alguna cosa despues de este pan hasta que no hubiese pasado 
medio dia, y 4 los nifios les escondian el agua para que no la tomasen. Esta era una de las fiestas mas solemnes 
que hacian, y al fin de ella un anciano de autoridad hacia una especie de sermon esplicando aquellas ceremonias. 
No es menos particular la otra fiesta que hacian al gran Dios del cielo, sacrificando 4 un hombre, a quien ataban 
4 una cruz de madera y alli le mataban 4 flechazos. Al dia siguiente sacrificaban otro poniendole en otra cruz mas 
baja, pero no flechando, sino rompiendole las piernas{[ con un palo. Otros muchos vestigios se hallaron tanto en su 
culto como en sus costumbres, que prueban con evidencia la noticia que tuvieron estas gentes de los misterios prin- 
cipales de la religion catolica, que se iran viendo por el discurso de esta historia. Por ahora basta lo dicho para 
demostrar que Quetzalcohuatl 4 quien atribuyen toda la instruccion de su ceremonial, culto, y religion, no pudo 
ser otro que algun apostol é discipulo de Jesus Cristo, pues el conjunto de tantas cosas, que aunque pervertidas despues 
6 por ignorancia 6 por malicia, demuestran en su origen tanta conformidad con el Cristianismo, induce 4 creer que 

* Confession was areligious rite common both in Peru and Mexico; and it was a custom that prevailed in the earliest ages of the Church, although 
that point is denied by Protestant writers, who contend that it was a fraud of later times, devised for the purposes of promoting spiritual ambition. 

t Decad. 3. lib. 4. cap. 7. y 12. { The same custom prevailed in Peru. 

§ Chicha, the name which the Peruvians gave to their drink-offerings, nearly resembled 12%, the term applied to the Hebrew drink-offerings in 
the Pentateuch. 

@ Crucifixion was a common mode of punishment amongst the ancient Jews, whose penal code annexing the clause “thine eye shall not pity” 
to some of its enactments, and frequently adjudging criminals to be burnt alive, gave a certain tincture of ferocity to the manners of that people, 
which was rather heightened than diminished by their being permitted indiscriminately to witness and take a part in public executions, when the 
sentence to be carried into effect was that of stoning a criminal to death. It is worthy of observation, that the refined feelings of modern times are 
shocked at the bare mention of the Roman ladies going to the theatre to view the combats of gladiators: yet there is something infinitely more re- 
volting in the picture which the imagination forms to itself, of a Hebrew market-place crowded with men, women, and children, all eager to stone an 
adulterer to death, in order to show themselves zealous followers of the Mosaic law. There was mystery however, as well as barbarity, in the 
crucifixions practised by the Mexicans; and the custom of breaking the legs of a crucified person on one of their festivals, and leaving him in this 
manner to die upon the cross, reminds us that the Jews broke the legs of those whom they crucified on the eve of the sabbath day, out of reverence, 
as it would appear, for that festival. We shall here transcribe a passage from the tenth chapter of the first part of the inedited History of Torribio 
de Benavente, which fully confirms the account given above by Echevarria;—the sacrifices described are those of the province of Tlascala: “En 
otra fiesta levantaban un hombre atado 4 una cruz muy alta, y alli le asaeteaban: en otra fiesta ataban otro hombre mas bajo, y con varas de palo 
de encina del largo de una braza con las puntas muy agudas le mataban, agarrocheandole como 4 toro; y casi estas mismas ceremonias y sacrificios 
usaban en Jas provincias de Huexocinco, Tepeaca, Zacatlan, en las principales fiestas, porque todos tenian por el mayor de sus dioses 4 Acamachtli, 
que era la grande estatua que tengo dicha.” 

BOA. SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

no pudo ser otro su institutor: y no es de admirar que con el curso del tiempo y faltas de maestros 6 directores, 
corrompiesen la sana doctrina que aprehendieron, abusando del ceremonial, y declinando en idolatria, pues en la 
Europa, centro del Cristianismo, con tanta inmediacion 4 la cabeza de la Iglesia y al Vicario de Cristo que ha velado 
infatigablemente en conservar la pureza de la religion, se han introducido insensiblemente tantos abusos, que ha sido 
necesario congregar Concilios para reformarlos, y en sus decretos se admiran las extravagancias y errores 4 que los 
hombres se habian dejado llevar y ha sido preciso corregir. 

Dice Herrera* que en las provincias de Coazacoalco y Iluta, tenian la costumbre de circuncidar 4 los nifios, y 
Torquemada dice que el mismo uso habia entre los Totonacas, y de aqui quieren inferir algunos de nuestros escritores 
que estos naturales fueron descendientes de los Judios. Yo no he encontrado en sus historias noticia alguna de esta 
costumbre, solo hallo que en una de sus fiestas que celebraban 4 honra de su famoso dios Tlaloc, los que no tenian 
sucesion y la deseaban, se cortaban una pequefia parte del prepucio que Ilamaban montepolizo, y la ofrecian en. 
sacrificio 4 este Dios paraque les diese sucesion: pero cuando sea cierta la noticia+ que dan estos autores, pudieron 

*® Herr. dec. 4. lib. 9. cap. 7. oy 

+ In addition to the authorities cited in the note subjoined to page 334 of the sixth volume of this work, in proof of the existence of the rite of 
circumcision amongst the Mexicans and other civilized states of America, we shall quote’a passage from the second chapter of the fourth book of the 
third part of Oviedo’s General History of the Indies, which can leave no doubt that the practice of that rite was common in Nicaragua; since, had 
it been confined simply to a few individuals, (as the reply of the Indian would seem to insinuate,) it could searcely have come to the knowledge of 
the Spaniards, much less have been a subject of grave inquiry amongst them. The letters Y. and F. in the following passage signify Indian and 
Franciscan: the entire chapter consists of interrogatories and replies. “ J’. Porque os sajais el miembro generativo ?—Y. Eso no lo hazen todos sino 
algunos bellacos por dar mal plazer 4 las mugeres, pero no es ceremonia nuestra.—I", En algun tiempo ha venido 4 esta tierra de Nicaragua alguna, 
gente como los Christianos, que os aiga dicho que hagais aquellas ceremonias que ellos os mandan, 6 que os heche agua enzima de las cabezas, 6 otros 
que os corteis el capullo del miembro, 6 supistes que los Christianos havian de venir 4 esta tierra? Y. Ninguna cosa desas avia venido 4 nuestra 
notizia,e despues que los Christianos vinieron nos han dicho que es bueno hechiar el agua sobre la cabeza e baptizarnos.” Another Indian nation, 
named the Yopes,—who inhabited a province not so remotely situated from Mexico as that of Nicaragua, and who worshiped Totec and Tezcat- 
lipoca,—a proof that they were of the same religion as the Mexicans,—likewise practised the rite of circumcision, as we learn from the following 
passage of a manuscript preserved in the library of the Escurial: ‘Los Yopes, que es una nacion de Indios de esta tierra, se circuncidaban, y 
preguntados el por qué, decian que no sabian mas de que sus antepasados lo hacian.” ‘Torribio de Benayente, in affirming that some supposed the 
Mexicans to be descended from the Moors, on account of a conformity in certain rites and ceremonies, obliquely perhaps alludes to circumcision, 
since that was a rite which the Moors and other Mahometans borrowed from the Jews. But, independent of the existence of this rite among 
other Indian nations, the Mexican language affords evidence of its long existence amongst the Mexicans; and the Mexican paintings would alone 
render all other kinds of proof superfluous. The words in the Mexican language which, according to Molina, signify ‘circumcision’ and ‘to cir- 
cumcise,’ are the following: “‘ texipineuayotequiliztl, circuncision; texipinquacuayolequiliztli, circuncision ; tlaxipineuayotectli, circuncidado; tlaxi- 
pinquaeuayotectli, cireuncidado ; nite xipinquayotequi, circuncidar 6 retajar; nite xipinquayeuatequi, circuncidar; nino xipineuayotequi, circunci- 
darse ; nino xipinquaeuayotequi, circuncidarse.” ‘ Circumcision’, it deserves to be remarked, has as many different names in the Mexican language, 
as ‘to stone to death’; which renders it probable that that Hebrew ceremony and that Jewish mode of punishment were equally ancient amongst the 
Mexicans. Acosta and other celebrated writers having laid the greatest stress on the absence of the rite of circumcision amongst the Indians,—as 
disproving the assertion of those who maintained that the Mexicans were descended from the Jews,—we shall not hesitate to lengthen this note by 
selecting the following passages from Peter Martyr, in which mention is made of that Hebrew rite as common amongst them. ‘“ Aliud meo 
judicio non magis tacendum intellexi: legum peritus quidam, dictus Corrales, Dariennensium przetor urbanus, inquit, se occurrisse cuidam fugitivo 
ex internis Occidentalibus magnis terris, qui ad regulum repertum a se profugerat. Is Jegentem cernens pretorem, insilivit admirabundus, aitque 
per interpretes qui reguli, hospitis sui, linguam callebant. En quid et vos libros habetis? En et vos characteres quibus absentes vos intelligant 
assequimini? Oravit una ut apertus sibi libellus ostenderetur, putans se litteras patrias visurum: dissimiles reperit esse. Mcenibus septas urbes 
et vestiri cives aiebat suos, legibusque gubernari. Sed quid colant non didici, recwéirt tamen dispreeputiarique ab exemplo et sermone fugitivi 
compererunt. Quid hic dices, Beatissime Pater? Quid sanctissimus preesagit animus tuus sub cujus throno tempus hee omnia subjiciet ?” 
Petri Martyris dec. 3. cap. 10.— Vestita est haee gens, non lana, quia pecudes non habent, sed gosampio mille modis, et variis fucato coloribus. 
Foeminz a cingulo ad talum induuntur, velaminibusque diversis caput et pectora tegunt, et pudice cavent ne crus aut pes illis visatur. Zempla 
frequentant, ad que primarii vias ex propriis domibus sternunt lapidibus. Idolorum culturze indulgent. Sunt, sed non omnes, recutiti. Legibus 
vivunt, et summa fide commerciantur, permutando sine pecuniis. Cruces viderunt: unde id habeant interrogati per interpretes, dicunt aliqui 
transiisse virum quendam formosissimum per eos tractus, qui eis id insigne in sui memoriam reliquerit: alii obiisse lucidiorem sole hominem 
quendam in eo opificio: certi nihil habetur.” dec. 4. cap. 1.—‘‘Turres ibi vetustas, dirutarum etiam vestigia, redolentia etiam antiquitatem 
repererunt: unam pre ceteris graduum octodecim, uti ad illustria templa conscenditur. Nostras admirati sunt naves et nauticam artem. No- 
luissent hospites primo congressu, benigne postmodum eos admiserunt. Turrim conscendunt, duce primario, quem sacerdotem credunt: vexillum 
in cacumine sistunt: regi Castellee imperium adjudicant. Sanctee Crucis nomen insule assignant, quia nonarum Maii quinta solenni sunt 
insulam ingressi. Cozumellam vero inquiunt appellari a regulo Cozumelao, cujus majores primos ipse jactat fuisse hujus insulz habitatores. 
Cameras in turri reperere, statuis tum marmoreis, tum fictilibus ursorum simulachris immixtas, quos unisono elato cantu invocant, suffumigiisque 
ac suavibus adolent odoribus: uti penates eas colunt. Res ibi divina celebrata est. Sunt recutiti.” dec. 4. cap. 4.—‘ En, Pater Sancte, 
libros etiam innumeros, de his una cum ceteris ad novum Cesarem nostrum advectis, late infra dicemus.—idolatras et recutitos esse reperierunt.” 
dec. 4. cap. 6.—Peter Martyr was the first historian who asserted that circumcision was a rite common among the Indians; and the authority 
of Acosta, although a much later writer, is that which is generally opposed on this question to him. Whether, however, the latter author is 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 205 

tenerla estos naturales de esta ceremonia por el mismo Quetzalcohuatl, dandoles 4 entender que esta fue la seal que 
dio Dios 4 su pueblo escogido, para que fuese entre todas las naciones conocido, distinguiendose de este modo la 
descendencia de Abraham 4 quien habia hecho las promesas de la redencion futura, que debian verificarse con la 
venida del Mesias, que habia de nacer de su propia estirpe; y tambien les haria saber que ef mesmo Mesias quiso 
sugetarse & esta ley de la circuncision para verificar el cumplimiento de sus promesas: y asi pudieron ellos haber 
adaptado el uso de esta ceremonia, 6 por vanidad y especie de nobleza para distinguirse de otras naciones, 6 por 
supersticion, 6 por ignorancia despues que de ellos se aparté Quetzalcohuatl, pues habiendo quedado el gobierno de 
la religion en manos de sus sacerdotes, estos harian lo que hicieron en otras partes, que fue inventar nuevos ritos, 
ceremonias, y embustes, con que hacerse respetables y engafiar 4 los pueblos, sumergiendoles en un abismo de 
errores, con que pervertido el verdadero culto, degenero en idolatria. Pero ni de la circuncision ni de otras costumbres 
en que se asemejasen 4 los Hebreos, se infiere que descendieron de ellos, ni que aprehendiesen de ellos las ceremonias 
del culto exterior, como dicen algunos, pretendiendo persuadir que en varios tiempos vinieron estas partes algunos 
Hebreos, pues en su historia no hay memoria alguna de esto, y solo atribuyen 4 Quetzalcohuatl la primera instruccion 
en materia de religion, culto y moral; y es prueba de mi opinion en esta materia, lo que dice el mismo Torquemada 
que con las nifias hacian otra indecente ceremonia en lugar de circuncision*, y esto no lo aprenderian de los 

Hebreos que no la practicaron. 

Capituto XIX. 

Parece haber sido el Apostol Santo Tomas, al que dieron los nombres de Quetzalcohuatl, Cocolcan y 
Hueman, y que predico en estas regiones. 

Mucuo trabajé el caballero Boturini por haber 4 las manos una obra que escribid el celebre Don Carlos de Sigitenza 
con el titulo del Fenix del Occidente, probando que este prodigioso varon Quetzalcohuatl fue el apostol Santo 

entitled to unqualified praise for candour, when he declares that the Indians could not be descended from the Jews, because no trace of the 
rite of circumcision was to be discovered amongst them, will best appear from the following passage of Diego Duran’s History of Mexico, which 
valuable work is preserved in MS. in the Royal Library at Madrid, and appears to have chiefly assisted Acosta in the compilation of that part 
of his Natural and Moral History of the Indies, which treated of the history of New Spain, whose words he may be said sometimes almost 
literally to transcribe. “Era esta fiesta (de Togi) una purificacion de las mugeres paridas y como circumcision, y en lo que parecia ser purificacion 
de estas mugeres, era en que asi por el nifio, como por las madres, ofrecian ofrendas al modo de la vieja ley donde ofrecian corderos, tortolas 6 
palominos, aca ofrecian este dia codornices, gallinas, pan, mantas, &c. Hacian esta ceremonia todas las paridas que de la fiesta pasada del aiio 
pasado aca habian parido, y la ceremonia era de esta manera. Compraban aquellos dias antes gran cantidad de astillas de tea; de estas astillas 
hacian una larga hacha gruesa, tambien se apercibian de la ofrenda que habian de llevar: molian un poco de maiz y frangollado y mal molido 
revolvianlo con semilla de bledos tostada, y amasabanla una harina con la otra echandole miel en lugar de agua, y hacian un pan que se Ilamaba en 
su lengua tamales, y por el propio nombre de este genero de pan se decia tzocoyotl, que es como nosotros decimos por este vocablo diminutivo 
bollitos, el cual genero de pan no solo se hacia para ofrenda, pero tambien para comer este dia, pues era cerimonia de su religion que no se habia de 
comer otro pan. Tambien se ocupaban las madres de los nifios que habian de ser presentados al templo y ellas purificadas, en tejer mantas y 
camisas de mugeres, bragueros y faldellines, para vestir 4 todos y 4 todas las que las acompafiaban de sus parientes y amigos en aquella estacion 
que hacian, y cada uno hacia conforme 4 su posibilidad, los ricos mas, los pobres menos, cada uno conforme 4 su estado, Llegada la vispera de la 
fiesta, en poniendose el sol, los sacerdotes del templo hacian sefial con aquellos caracoles y bocinas y atambores que solian tocar y tafier en las 
solemnidades, la cual hecha, los que habian de salir se aderezaban, y juntamente vestian un Indio que para este afecto tenian alquilado y una India 
juntamente: al Indio daban el hachero de tea encendido, y 4 Ja India ponian el nifio 4 cuestas, la madre tomaba ella mesma su ofrenda en Ja mano 
y acuestas, y yendo el Indio delante alumbrando salia de su casa y andaban las estaciones por todas las hermitas de los barrios de la ciudad 4 la 
misma manera que lo usamos el Jueves Santo, y en cada hermita dejaba alguna ofrenda, y 4 este modo andaban todas las paridas toda la ciudad 
tan llena de hacheros y lumbreras que era cosa de ver, y tan Ilena de gente que no podian por las calles romper unos por otros. Concluido de 
andar las hermitas de los barrios, venian al gran templo donde era la principal ofrenda, presentandose 4 los sacerdotes, los cuales las purificaban 
con ciertas cerimonias y palabras y quedaban limpias de aquel parto. En lo que dijimos que tambien parecia esta cerimonia que en este dia se 
hacia circumcision de nifios, parecelo por lo que diré, y era que legando al gran templo de Vitzilopochtly, alli tomaban al nifio por pequefiito que 
fuese y ofrecianlo al sacerdote, y el sacerdote tomabalo y con una navaja de piedra que la mesma madre traia, le sacrificaban la oreja y la puntica 
del capullito de su miembrecito, dandole asi en la oreja como en el lugar dicho una muy delicadita cuchillada que apenas salia sangre 6 se parecia 
y 4 las mugeres sola la oreja. Acabado el sacerdote de cortar con aquella navaja, luego la echaban delante los pies del idolo y la madre pedia 
nombre para su hijo, y si era sefior dabanle un nombre esquisito: ejemplo, Montezuma quiere decir Sefior enojado, que fue la causa porque le 
nombraron asi; consideré el sacerdote la fisonomia del nifio y pareciole de rostro mohino y triste y airado, 6 nacié en dia triste y melancolico y 
pusole aquel nombre y lo mesmo era de los demas Sefiores.” 

* This proof is not conclusive, since Ludolfus declares that a similar practice prevailed amongst the Abyssinian Christians. See his Historia 
Ethiopica, fol. 273; Alvarez, Historia de las Cosas de Etiopia, p. 27. edit. Antwerp; and Damian a Goes de A:thiopum Moribus. 

3G 

DOO SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Tomas, la cual nunca llegé a darse 4 la prensa; mas no le valieron sus diligencias para conseguirlo ; con todo no 
perdia la esperanza de hallarla, practicando otras de que me instruyé cuando pasé 4 la Nueva Espafia el aflo de 1750, 
y aunque yo las puse en ejecucion con la mayor exactitud, no he podido hallar otra cosa que la noticia que ya me 
tenia de que escribio esta obra, pero nadie que la haya visto, ni menos que me diese luz de poder hallarla; no dudo 
que si la hubiera conseguido, satisfaciera plenamente la curiosidad y buen gusto de mis lectores, porque considero 
segun la vasta erudicion de su autor, especialmente en las antigitedades de los Indios, que seria una obra completa, 
Mas sin embargo de faltarme este apoyo, valido de los monumentos que tengo entre manos, me atrevo 4 afirmar que 
este prodigioso varon fue el apostol Santo Tomas, y las pruebas que ministran estos documentos me parece que lo 
persuaden. La primera prueba que se presenta es en el significado del mismo nombre Quetzalcohuatl, que quiere 
decir traducido literalmente pavo real culebra, porque es compuesto de las dos voces, quetzalli, qne significa el 
pabo real, ycohuatl, la culebra. Es menester saber que todos los nombres de las personas entre estas gentes eran 
alegoricos y significativos, haciendo relacion 4 dote 6 defecto natural, suceso 6 hazaiia particular del sugeto, como 
se ve en los nombres de los Emperadores de Tezcuco, v. g. Netzahualcoyotl, que significa vulpeja* en ayunas, 
haciendo relacion a los sucesos de su juventudt: en los reyes de Mexico, v. g. Montecuhcuma, sefior severo, y asi 
de los demas; y esta es la razon porque los mas de ellos, especialmente los sefiores y gente principal, tenian varios 
nombres: porque recien nacidos les ponian sus padres nombre alusivo al tiempo 6 circunstancias de su-nacimiento, 
pero despues, por los varios sucesos de su vida, por sus hazafias, 6 por otros acaecimientos, tomaban 6 les daba el 
pueblo otros nombres, que 6 le afiadian como sobrenombre al primero, 6 lo mudaban enteramente. Tambien debe 
advertirse que la voz quetzalli, Ja aplicaban alegoricamente para significar cualquiera especie de excelente pluma, por 
ser este uno de los generos mas estimados entre ellos y ser lo tanto la del pabo real, y como la mas rica pluma era 
la que usaban para adorno de la cabeza, de hay es que daban tambien este nombre 4 las personas de talento para 
explicar su juicio y capacidad, y por esto algunos autores traducen el nombre Quetzalcohuatl, culebra de rica pluma, 
entendiendo que querian decir, hombre muy sabio 6 de mucho talento 6 muy estimado. Pero el Bachiller Luis 
Becerra Tanco { en el libro que imprimio con el titulo de Felicidad de Mexico en la Aparicion de Nuestra Sefiora de 
Guadalupe, dice que en la voz Quetzalcohuatl se conservé el sobrenombre que tenia el apostol, siendo una verdadera 
traduccion de él. Este era Didimus, que en Hebreo quiere decir mellizo, y en el idioma natural la voz cohuatl, 
que en sentido natural quiere decir culebra, significa tambien alegoricamente el gemelo 6 mellizo por la alusion de 
que las culebras siempre paren los hijos 4 pares§, y es constante que en este idioma que hoy llaman Mexicano, 
no hay otra voz con que explicar la del gemelo 6 mellizo que la de cohuatl 6 coatl, que es sincopado, y en plural 
dicen cocon 6 cocome. Los mismos Espafioles han adaptado tanto esta voz en nuestros tiempos castellanizandola, 
que 4 los que nacen dos 6 mas de un parto, los llaman coates, y solo por esta voz entiende el comun del vulgo, y de 
ningun modo por las de gemelo 6 mellizo, y absolutamente no tienen uso en estos paises. 

Ksto supuesto como incontestable y notorio, no lo es menos el que sabemos por el evangelio, que el apostol 
Santo Tomas tenia el sobrenombre de Didimus, voz que en Hebreo significa mellizo. Didimus es Griego y significa 
mellizo, lo mismo significa en Hebreo Thomas, de la raix ‘tham’ que significa geminare, y asi los gemelos en He- 
breose dicen ‘thesnim’, vease 4 San Geronimo en las Questiones Hebreas. Esta nota es del Dotor Mier, Mexicano, y 
asi para traducirla los Indios en su idioma, la llamaron cohuatl, afiadiendo como adjetivo el quetzalli, como quien dice 
coate muy sabio 6 muy excelente 6 muy estimado, que todo esto querian significar en la rica pluma, que como he 
dicho servia entre ellos para adorno de la cabeza, y asi simbolizaban en ella la sabiduria, el talento, la dignidad, y 
todo lo mas excelente; y cualquiera que tenga una mediana instruccion en el idioma Mexicano sabe cuan familiares 
son en ellos estas frases y espresiones alegoricas, de que se veran no pocos ejemplares en el discurso de esta historia. 
Para evidenciar que el verdadero nombre que dieron a este varon fue el de Cohuatl, y que el Quetzalli fue solo epiteto 

* The Mexican coyotl was properly neither a wolf, a fox, nor a dog, but a different variety of the species to which those animals belong; it 
was fierce and carnivorous: the Spaniards named it a fox from some similitude in its habits to that animal. 

+ This proper name might be interpreted, the fasting wolf: it commemorated both the personal prowess and the religious habits of the monarch 
who bore it, who was accustomed to fast, tasting very little food for forty days together; his son, for a similar reason, might have received the 
appellation of Nezahualpilli. 

{ Becerra, Fel. de Mex. f. 59. edicion de 1685 en Mexico. 

§ A serpent is an oviparous animal, and Echevarria seems here to be mistaken in assigning te the serpent a quality that belonged to the 
goddess Cihuacohuatl, which proper name, literally signifying the female serpent, might have led him into the error of supposing that the tradition 
of Cihuacohuatl, the Mexican Eve, always giving birth to twins, referred to the serpent. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. . 207 

de veneracion y estimacion, basta ver que constantemente llamaron todos a sus discipulos Cocomes, que es el plural 
de cohuatl, al modo que alos secuaces de Mahoma Ilamaron Mahometanos, 4 los de Lutero, Luteranos, y 4 los de 
Christo Christianos; y no se hallara que alguno les llama Quetzallis 6 Quepzame, que es el plural verdadero de 
Quetzalli, porque este era un epiteto de estimacion y veneracion que dieron 4 este varon; pero su propio nombre 
de que tomaron denominacion sus discipulos era el Cohuatl, y lo mismo digo del otro nombre que le dieron de Hue- 
man, porque tambien era renombre de estimacion y no nombre propio, y asi tampoco dieron 4 sus discipulos deno- 
minacion alusiva a:él. 

Pero es digna de reflexa y una nueva y robusta prueba de haber sido el apostol Santo Tomas 4 quien dieron el 
nombre de Quetzalcohuatl, la noticia que nos dan contextes los autores de la santa cruz de piedra que se hallé en 
Meliapor en el sepulcro del santo apostol, cuya copia y estampa traen el Padre Atanasio Kircher en su China 
Ilustrada, el Padre Lucema en la Vida de Sefior Francisco Xavier, Fr. Gregorio Garcia en su citada obra de la Pre- 
dicacion del Evangelio. En ella pues se ve sobre la santa cruz* un pabo real, como que desciende y la tiene con 
el pico, que es la misma ave quetzalli de cuya bella pluma tomaron los naturales de este reyno la alegoria que 
hemos dicho, en el nombre de Quetzalcohuat! que dieron al santo apostol. No puede negarse que este es un 
simbolo 6 geroglifico que quiere denotar 6 significar alguna cosa, porque 6 fuese el mismo santo quien le. puso, si 
fue él quien plantd alli la cruz, 6 mas verosimilmente sus discipulos despues de su muerte para sefialar su‘ sepulcro : 
no admite duda que el haberle puesto la figura de esta ave tuvo algun fin, algun motivo, y alguna significacion : 
gual pudo ser esta? Mi cortedad no alcanza a otra sino el que fuese este geroglifico una muda inscripcion se- 
pulcral, que declarase el nombre del heroe que alli estaba sepultado por el famoso epiteto que le dicron de sabio, 
prudente, grande, y poderoso, comprehendido todo en la alegoria del pavo real que inventaron los naturales de este 
reyno, llamandole Quetzalcohuatl. 

El nombre Cocolcan tiene la misma etimologia de la voz cohuatl culebra, y quiere denotar 6 significar el gefe 6 
cabeza de los Cocomes. Pudo ser el mismo santo el que pasé con sus compafieros 4 Yucatan, 6 alguno de sus 
discipulos que iba por cabeza y superior de los demas 4 quien por eso dieron este nombre, y quien despues de fun- 
dada la ciudad de Mayapan, se volvio por el mismo camino de poniente por donde habia ido: y considerando los 
sefiores de Yucatan que no quedaba bien el gobierno sino en mano de uno de estos Cocomes, dicen que eligieron 
por su sefior 4 uno de los de este linage, es de los que seguian la doctrina y eran discipulos de Cocolcan, y en ellos 
permanecié el gobierno hasta que degenerando de aquella escuela y doctrina de su maestro, y abandonandose 4 los 
vicios, perdieron la estimacion y veneracion del pueblo. Pocos afios antes dela legada de los Espafioles dice el 
maestro Gil Gonzalez{ que la profetizé un sacerdote de sus idolos, llamado Chilancambal, que entre ellos era muy 
venerado, y es de notar que la voz ‘cambal’ significa tambien gemelo 6 mellizo en la lengua de las Yndias de Filipinas, 
donde se hallan tambien muchos vestigios de la predicacion de Santo Tomas, y pudieron darle alli este nombre por 
traduccion de Didimo, y que le tomase alguno de sus discipulos que en los tiempos posteriores hubiese pasado 4 
estas partes anunciando la misma doctrina, de donde la pudo aprehender este sacerdote gentil gloriandose de aquel 
nombre para hacerse respetable, y profiriendo como propias aquellas predicciones del santo apostol, que como ve- 
remos adelante, fueron tan sabidas en todo este Nuevo Mundo. 

Tambien le dieron el nombre de Hueman, compuesto de las voces huei, que significa grande, y maitl que sig- 
nifica mano, esto es el de las grandes manos; 6 porque en esto daban 4 entender su gran poder por las obras prodi- 
giosas que le vieron practicar, 6 porque efectivamente tenia las manos grandes como se ve el dia de hoy en varias 
partes donde las dejé impresas y estampadas, de que hablan los historiadores asi de este reyno como del Peru y 
Brasil, y son particulares las dos manos que se ven en el parage que Ilaman Santa Maria Meye de la doctrina de 
Xocotitlan, jurisdiccion de Yxtlahuacan, pintadas y perfectamente estampadas como de yeso blanco en unas pefias 
negras, sin que ni el tiempo, ni la diligencia de muchos que lo han intentado, hayan podido barrarlas. No lo es 
menos la mano estampada en un puentecillo cerca de Tlalnepantla en las inmediaciones de Mexico, que por antigua 

* The figure of a bird is sculptured upon the cross which M. Dupaix discovered in the temple of Palenque. The dove, it is scarcely neces- 
sary to observe, was an ancient symbol of the Holy Ghost; and the apostles are commanded in the New Testament to assimilate themselves both 
to doves and serpents. On the supposition that that most beautiful of American birds, the huitzilin, the green feathers of which were named 
quetzalli, and highly prized by the Mexicans, was substituted in the New World for the dove, both the proper name Quecalcoatl and the 
symbol of the green-feathered serpent would seem to contain a double allegory. 

+ Teatro de la Iglesia de Yndias, fo. 203. 

208 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

tradiccion refieren haber la estampado alli Quetzalcohuatl yendo para Choyolan, y en memoria de este caso se fundo 
alli un pueblo que se ama Tlemaco, que quiere decir la piedra de la mano. En otros parages se hallan tambien 
huellas impresas y estampadas, cuyo tamafio debiendo corresponder 4 los de las manos, denotan que estas eran 
grandes. . Advierto de paso que la semejanza 6 por mejor decir la identidad de los nombres Hueman y Huemac 
ha dado motivo 4 que nuestros autores hayan confundido 4 Hueman aquel astrologo 6 adivino que salid de Huet- 
lapalan con los que vinieron 4 fundar 4 Thoyan, (de que trataremos en su lugar,) con Quetzalcohuatl 6 Cocolcan, 
porque realmente el nombre es el mismo, y asi le Ilaman algunos autores Indios 4 este astrologo Hueman y Hue- 
mantzin, que es el reverencial para denotar su gran sabiduria y poder, por lo que me inclino mas 4 la opinion de 
los que dicen que dieron este nombre 4 Santo Tomas por las grandes obras que le vieron ejecutar, porque esto es 
mas conforme al genio de estas naciones y 4 su modo de esplicarse. 

En la noticia que dejo referida al cap? 16 en orden 4 la santa cruz de Quauhtolco, afirma Brulio que no solo 
era venerada de tiempos muy antiguos, sino que sus naturales tenian por tradiccion de sus antepasados que la habia 
puesto y colocado en aquel parage el apostol Santo Tomas, cuya imagen y propio nombre conservaban en los mapas 
historicos y pinturas de que usaban en lugar de letras, y en otras muchas partes se conservé la memoria del verda- 
dero nombre Tome 6 Tomas asi en la Nueva Espafia como en el Peru y reyno de Chile, como se puede ver en 
Calancha*, Ovalde}, y otros muchos. 

Finalmente se prueba por razon haber sido Santo Tomas, porque en la suposicion que dejamos hecha de haberse 
de cumplir el precepto de Jesu Cristo de predicar el evangelio en esta tan considerable parte del mundo y 4 este tan 
crecido numero de criaturas, 4 alguno de los santos apostoles debia tocar la obligacion de su cumplimiento, y no 
habiendo sido alguno de los otros once, porque de todos se sabe el pais en que predicaron, se sigue que fue Santo 
Tomas. Que los apostoles fuesen los que hubiesen de cumplir este precepto lo dejamos sentado al cap? 15, con las 
autoridades que alli cito, y lo persuade la razon, pues si se determinaron once apostoles 4 predicar el evangelio en 
las otras partes del mundo que se incluyen en la mitad del globo, porque no habia de destinarse uno para predicarle 
en la America, que se estiende por casi toda la otra mitad, poblada de tanto numero de criaturas igualmente parti- 
cipantes del fruto de la redencion. Que no fuese otro alguno de los apostoles nos consta por la relacion de sus 
vidas, y porque no hay autor que lo diga. Luego habiendo tantas razones de congruencia en los nombres, en el 
tiempo, en la doctrina que predicé, en las costumbres y ceremonias que enseid Quetzalcohuatl, debemos creer que 
este fue el apostol Santo Tomas, 4 quien pudieron acompafiar algunos otros discipulos que le ayudasen en su mini- 
sterio apostolico, pero estos me persuado 4 que fuesen los naturales del pais que primero se le agregaron y siguieron 
su doctrina, que aunque pocos, fuesen el fruto de su trabajo, el consuelo de sus fatigas, y las primicias que rindiese 
4 Dios del crecido numero de criaturas que habitaban entonces estas dilatadas regiones. 

CapiruLo XX. 

De dos celebres Profecias que hizo Quetzalcohuatl, cuando predico en Chollolan. 

Era por estos tiempos la ciudad de Chollolan la mas famosa y numerosa poblacion de la tierra de Anahuac: estaba 
en su mayor auge y esplendor, y era nombrada y aplaudida por su elevada torre, que como he dicho, la habian 
fabricado sus habitadores para gloria de su nacion y monumento que manifestase 4 los futuros haber sido esta la 
primer poblacion de los Ulmecas, y de donde habian salido los fundadores de las demas poblaciones de esta nacion. 
Su figura era redonda, teniendo en su plan poco mas de mil varas de diametro, y se elevava en forma piramidal ; 
no sabemos hasta que altura, pero sin duda era mucha segun se manifiesta por las ruinas que aun duran en nuestros 
tiempos. Su fabrica merecia mejor el nombre de cerro que de torre, porque era maciza de piedra suelta y grandes 
adoves de tierra, una capa de estos y otra de piedra apretada y apisonada con tierra, y la subida segun se percibe 
del resto inferior de ella, (que es el que subsiste en el lugar y modo en que se fabricd) parece que era dando vueltas 
4 su contorno por una especie de esplanada. En uno de los mapas que recogié Boturini en papel de maguey, se ve 
dibujado este cerro en la dicha figura piramidal, con cuatro divisiones que servian como de descanso y le rodeaban 

* Calancha, Historia del Peru, lib. 2. cap. 2. + Ovalde, Historia de Chile, lib. 8. cap. 1. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 209 

‘todo con bastante espacio para andar por ellos: dicen que por fuera estaba cubierto de una argamasa blanca muy 
‘dura, de la que el dia de hoy no ha quedado vestigio alguno. Ups 

Estaba situada esta torre en medio de la poblacion, que lo esté en un hermoso y fertil plano ; aunque al presente 
la torre 6 cerrillo esté ya casi fuera de ella, asi por lo mucho que ha diminuido su vecindario, como por haberse 
retirado mas hacia el norte los habitadores, pues aun subsisten vestigios de lo mucho que se estendia su poblacion 
por el lado opuesto. No contribuia poco al esplendor de esta ciudad el haber sido la primera en que se dice haber 
fabricado casas para habitar sus moradores, porque situada en un Ilano donde faltaban cuebas y no habia repechos 
en que labrarlas, les obligé la necesidad 4 buscar abrigo y defensa @ las inclemencias del tiempo. Por todas estas 
razones era numerosisima su poblacion, y aunque no se sabe nada en orden 4 su gobierno, no podia menos de haber 
alguno que mantuviese en armonia tanta multitud de gentes. } 

Estas eran las que buscaba el apostol Santo Tomas para instruirlas en las verdades evangelicas, y hallando tan 
copiosa mies en esta ciudad, dicen haberse detenido tres meses en ella predicando y ensefando la nueva ley de Jesu 
Cristo. Mas no habia Ilegado todavia el tiempo de que fructificase la sagrada semilla, y asi viendo el santo la 
rebeldia y dureza de aquellos corazones dificiles de rendirse en poco tiempo, habiendo cumplido su mision determiné 
dejarlos. Pero antes les predijo que llegaria el tiempo en que todos abrazarian la nueva ley que les predicaba, y que 
un afio que seria sefialado con el geroglifico de una cafia, vendrian de la parte de Oriente por sobre las aguas del 
mar unos hombres blancos y barbados que les despojarian del dominio de la tierra, y sehoreandola toda les harian 
abrazar la ley del evangelio, y por sefias de que se cumpliria perfectamente esta su profecia, les hizo otra, diciendoles 
que pocos dias despues de su salida de la ciudad, se les arruinaria su famosa torre, lo que puntualmente sucedio 
como se les predijo, pues ocho dias despues de haber salido el santo de la ciudad, se sintid un fuertisimo terremoto *, 
que derribé la gran torre, quedando hasta nuestros dias existentes las ruinas para perpetua memoria del suceso que 
les anuncié, en varios fragmentos, de los cuales hay dos tan grandes que forman dos cerrillos inmediatos 4 la basa 
principal que quedé inmoble, y esta tiene de alto como doscientas varas. Puede discurrirse cuanto habra destruido 
y desbaratado la continuacion de tantos siglos. 

La destruccion de esta torre fue para estas gentes uno de los mas memorables acaecimientos, asi por lo famoso 
de ella, como por haberse cumplido en su ruina la prediccion de Quetzalcohuatl, que dio por sea de que se cumpliria 
del mismo modo la que les hizo de la venida de aquellas gentes del Oriente que se harian sefiores de la tierra; y 
como esta habia hecho en todas las demas poblaciones por donde habia venido, interesaba 4 todos la verificacion de 
ella, y desde entonces quedaron persuadidos 4 que habia de Iegar el tiempo en que tuviese efecto, y aguardaban 
siempre su cumplimiento. De suerte que cuando Ilegaron 4 estas partes los Espafioles, hallaron constante y uniforme 
esta noticia en todos los pueblos de la Nueva Espafia, como asientan unanimes todos los historiadores; y fue no 
pequefio motivo de la felicidad de sus conquistas, pues firmemente persuadidos los Indios 4 que no podia dejar de 
cumplirse la profecia de Quetzalcohuatl, perdieron el animo para la defensa, y 4 esto debe atribuirse en mucha parte 
la facilidad con que un corto numero de Espafioles vencia a una multitud de ellos, como refieren 4 cada paso los 
historiadores de la conquista. ; 

Pues aunque por estos tiempos de que voy hablando, no habia nacido todavia el gran imperio de Tescuco, ni las 
demas monarquias que despues ocuparon estas tierras, estaban ya muy poblados los paises mas septentrionales y sus 
riberas maritimas : habia ya tambien muchas poblaciones en las costas del Seno Mexicano hasta Yucatan, en el reyno 
del Peru, y es constante por la historia Tulteca que Quetzalcohuatl corrié todas aquellas poblaciones del norte, ense- 
fiando la misma doctrina y haciendoles la misma profecia, cuya noticia trajeron los fundadores de las dichas monar- 
quias, y hallandola aqui corroborada con el suceso de Chollolan, quedaron mas firmemente persuadidos 4 que algun 
dia habia de llegar su cumplimiento, y aunque tambien en esto introdujo el tiempo alguna variacion, queriendo 
interpretar la profecia como se dird en su lugar, la substancia de ella, que se reduce 4 anunciarles la venida de las 
gentes blancas por el Oriente que dominarian la tierra, se mantuvo siempre constante como se ve por las historias. 

A vista de este suceso formaron estas gentes un alto concepto de Quetzalcohuatl, y comenzaron 4 honrar y venerar 
su memoria poniendo en practica muchas de las doctrinas que les habia ensefado, cuya observancia mantuvieron 
siempre sin olvidarse de haber sido Quetzalcohuatl quien se las ensefio, aunque despues en el discurso del tiempo 
introdujeron en ellas algunos abusos. La principal de que hacen mencion por estos tiempos es la adoracion de la 

* Ollin, or the sign of the Earthquake, was dedicated to Quecalcoatl, perhaps on this account. 

aja! 

210 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

santa cruz, para cuyo culto edificaron un magnifico templo sobre la basa que quedo ilesa de sv famosa torre *, el 
que todavia hallaron subsistenic los Espafioles y colocada en el una cruz de madera; y este es el primer templo de 
que hallo memoria en las historias de losIndios. Ni antes de esto, encuentro noticia de que adorasen divinidad 
alguna, ni diesen culto 4 idolo material, ni reconociesen otro dios que el Tloquenahuaque 6 criador de todas las 
cosas. A la santa cruz la dieron diversos nombres: los que hallo muy frecuentes son. estos tres : Quiahuitzteotlt, 
que quiere decir el dios de madera; Chicahualizteotl, que se interpreta el dios fuerte y poderoso ; y Tonacaquahuitl, 
que interpretan dios de las lluvias; pero su genuino significado en el idioma Nahuatl, es el palo de la fertilidad 6 de 
la abundancia, alegoria muy propia de este idioma para significar que por medio de este palo lograban las Iuvias que 
fertilizaban su sementera, y asi fue este el nombre mas comun y general que le dieron; porque habiendoles ensefiado 
Quetzalcohuatl, que esta soberana sefial tenia virtud para atraer las lluvias 4 su sementera, y habiendo ellos experi- 
mentado por su medio este beneficio, la adoraron como deidad poderosa para socorrerles en esta necesidad, que era 
para ellos de la unica importancia; y habiendose propagado despues su culto en los demas reinos y monarquias que 
posteriormente se fundaron, fue siempre adorada y conocida por el dios de las Iuvias, pervirtiendo la ignorancia el 
verdadero objeto del culto, y este fue el motivo de haber encontrado los conquistadores tanto numero de cruces en 
estos paises. 

En los tiempos subcesivos dominando la nacion Tulteca, volvieron 4 levantar su famosa torre los Chololtecas, 
que eran de los mismos Ulmecas mezclados ya con los Tultecas, y dicen que la subieron 4 mayor altura que la vez 
primera ¥, pero tambien volvié 4 arruinarse les una noche cuando menos lo esperaban, sin haber precedido terremoto, 
uracan, ni otra causa alguna 4 que poderlo atribuir, y asi les causé tanto terror que en adelante no se atrevieron 4 
volver & intentar su reedificio. En el mapa 6 pintura de esta torre de que hablé al principio de este capitulo, se halla 
una inscripcion en lengua Mexicana, puesta sin duda por aquellos primeros neophitos que supieron escribir en nues- 
tros caracteres, y aplaudiendo 4 los Cholloltecas dice que la hicieron sus antepasados para preservarse de otro diluvio. 
A la ciudad la dé el nombre de Toyanchollolan, y dice que aquella torre es un monumento precioso de la nacion 
Tulteca ; pero en la realidad fue la Ulmeca la que la erigié, y verosimilmente fueron ellos tambien, aunque mezclados 
ya con los Tultecas, los que la restauraron. Aviade-el autor de la inscripcion que el arcangel San Miguel fue quien 
la derribé esta segunda vez}, y que algunas personas le vieron derribarla. Ya se ve que en aquellos tiempos ni ellos 
conocian 4 San Miguel, ni su nombre siquiera habia Iegado 4 sus oidos, y asi aunque sea veridica la noticia, que no 
he hallado en otro algun escritor de haberse visto en el aire algunas personas que la derribaban, debemos persuadir- 
nos 4 que esta expresion del autor de la inscripcion no es mas que un discurso piadoso, fundado en que el obispado 
de Tlaxcallan, ahora de la Puebla de los Angeles, esta bajo la tutela y patronato de San Miguel, que con singulares 
prodigios ha querido manifestarse su protector desde los primeros tiempos de su cristianidad, 

CaviruLo XXI. 

Rebelanse los Tultecas en su antigua patria, y salen arrojados de ella para poblar la tierra de 
Anahuac. 

La antigua y primitiva ciudad de Huehuetlapalan corte del imperio Chichimeca, no solo era ya famosisima por 

* This is a very curious passage, as it is here expressly declared that the famous temple of Cholula, which the Spaniards found in a complete 
state of preservation on their arrival in the New World, and which, dedicated to Quecalcoatl, was frequented by pilgrims from all parts of New 
Spain, had been built in honour of the cross, and contained a wooden cross when the Spaniards first visited it. 

+ This proper name is compounded of quiahuitl, rain, and teotl, god, and signifies ‘the god of rain’, an interpretation which Echevarria has 
orronequaly given to Tonacaquahuitl; which latter term being compounded of tonacayo, defined by Molina to be “cuerpo humano, 6 nuestra 
carne,” and quauatl or quahuitl, which, according to the same author, signifies ‘‘arbol madero 6 palo,” may be interpreted ‘the tree of life or of 
our bodies.’ Don Ferdinand de Alba Ixtlilxochitl, in the first chapter of his History of the Chichimecan Empire, mentions these amongst the 
names by which the cross was adored in ancient times in New Spain; but as he does not assign its signification to each name separately in the order 
in which he writes them, but explains their meaning collectively, it is not unlikely that this was the cause of Echevarria confounding the signifi- 
cation of Quiahuitzteotl with that of Tonacaquahuitl. 

{ The temple of Cholula, like the temple of Jerusalem, was said to have been twice built ; and it is singular that after its second Beeetenon the 
same superstitious notion should have prevailed about any attempt to rebuild it. 

§ This tradition supposes the destruction of the second temple of Cholula to have been a judgement on the people of Cholula for their sins. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. OI) 

estos tiempos, sino que habiendo ya salido de ella muchas cuadrillas de gente que poblaron todo aquel pais fundando 
ciudades y lugares en su comarca, todos los habitadores de ellos la reconocian por cabeza y cuna de sus mayores, y 
ella habia dado su nombre 4 toda aquella region, y aunque los historiadores no nos dan particular noticia de su modo 
de gobierno, nos dicen que lo habia monarquico y que en la gran ciudad de Huehuetlapalan residia el supremo 
Emperador Chichimeca y en cada una de las poblaciones un sefior 6 regulo 4 quien estaban sujetos sus moradores ; 
pero este reconocia por supremo sefior al Emperador Chichimeca. Entre las grandes poblaciones que habia, era 
muy numerosa y nombrada la ciudad de Tlachicatzin, fundacion de una de aquellas cuadrillas de gentes que salieron 
de Huehuetlapalan 4 quienes dieron el nombre de Tultecatl, por su mayor habilidad industria y destresa, tanto para 
el cultivo de los campos como para el ejercicio de las artes que conocieron y alcanzaron cuya invencion les atribuian. 
Siel nombre Tultecatl le tomaron de la lengua Nahuatl, 6 ella de ellos, no es facil averiguarlo. Lo comun en estas 
gentes, era tomar el nombre de sus gefes, y parece regular que por haberse llamado Tultecatl el caudillo de esta, 
tomase el nombre toda la nacion, y que despues por haber esta sobresalido en ingenio y habilidad, aplicasen el nombre 
Tultecatl a todo diestro artifice, que de esto hay hartos ejemplos en esta historia: vivian en la ciudad de Tlachicatzin 
dos grandes seftores llamados Chalcaltzin y Tlacamihtzion descendientes de la casa y familia principal de Jos Tultecas, 
los cuales confiados en el gran seguito que tenian, concitaron una rebelion contra su natural sefior. No dicen cual 
fue este, si el Emperador Chichimeca 6 el regulo de su nacion Tulteca, pero por el discurso de la historia me inclino 
a creer lo primero, y aunque tampoco dicen el motivo de la rebelion es facil persuadirse 4 que fuese la ambicion y 
quererse eximir de la subordinacion 4 el imperio, lisongeandose del aplauso que tenian tanto en esta ciudad como en 
otras poblaciones de su comarca. ‘Tanta era la gente que les seguian que habiendo tomado las armas los partidarios, 
mantuvieron trece afios la guerra con varios sucesos, hasta que finalmente se vieron precisados 4 ceder al mayor poder 
y dejar su ciudad. Aunque arrojados de ella mantubieron todavia la guerra otros ocho afios, hasta que en el de doce 
cafias se vieron precisados & desamparar la empresa huyendo como pudieron para escapar del castigo que les amena- 
zaba. Siguio su partido un considerable numero de personas asi en esta ocasion como en los afios subsecuentes, 
que aunque no le describen con particularidad, se percibe su multitud por lo que fueron poblando hasta llegar 4 Tullan 
pues no solo seguian los varones sino las mugeres y familias de todos ellos: fuera de los dichos dos principales se- 
flores, mencionan otros cinco que eran tambien de la principal nobleza y parientes suyos, cuyos nombres nos conser- 
varon y son Ehecatl, Cohuatzon, Mazacohuatl, Tlapalhuitz y Huitz. Siguieron todos su viage sin hacer alto hasta 
estar sesenta leguas distantes de Tlachicatzin 4 la banda del Sur, hasta donde los acompafiaron muchos otros parientes 
y deudos, particularmente de otra gran ciudad llamada Tlaxicoluican. Yen un sitio que descubriéd Ehecatl y les 
parecié 4 proposito para sus sementeras, determinaron hacer alto y poblarse, dando 4 la nueva poblacion el nombre de 
Tlapalan, 6 por emular al imperio Chichimeca cuya corte tenia este nombre, 6 por conservar la memoria de aquella 
primer poblacion que fundaron sus progenitores, cuando se establecieron en estos paises, y 4 la que miraron siempre 
con mucho afecto llamandola su antigua patria. A esta otra nueva Tlapalan, la llamaron despues Tlapalanconco que 
quiere decir la pequefia Tlapalan, para distinguirla de la antigua. 

Esta rebelion Tulteca dicen haber acaecido mas de seiscientos afios despues de la correccion de su calendario, en 
uno que fue sefalado con el geroglifico de una cafia, que segun parece de las tablas debié ser el de 4616 del mundo 
que es el_primero que se halla en ella sefialado con este geroglifico, contando los seiscientos afios despues de la 
correccion del calendario, y concurrio con el de 583 de Jesu Cristo, y habiendo durado la guerra civil hasta su salida 
de Tlachicatzin trece afios, colocan esta en el afio de un pedernal, que justamente corresponde al de 596 de la era 
Cristiana, que agregados los otros ocho afios que la mantuvieron hasta su ultima fuga, parece que esta debe colocarse 
en el afio de 604 y en el mismo la fundacion de Tlapalanconco. Los autores Indios aunque todos contestes asientan 
que habia pasado los 600 afios de la correccion del calendario y concuerdan en los geroglificos de los afios en que 
acaecieron estas turbaciones, segun los anotaron los antiguos en sus mapas, varian muchisimo en la confrontacion 
con los afios 4 que corresponden en nuestros computos, porque en mi dictamen ninguno tomé el trabajo de tomar 
tablas,y haciendo la cuenta de memoria, padecieron notables equivocaciones, que se manifiestan por la misma relacion 
que hacen de los sucesos, pues interpretando los mapas en aquel estilo sencillo de sus autores, cuyas cifras denotan 
el numero de edades, siglos 6 afios, que habian pasado de uno 4 otro suceso, sefialan el caracter del afio en que 
acaecié, el que refiere omitiendo regularmente los quebrados que intermedian, entran luego los interpretes 4 querer 

sealar el ailo 4 que corresponde en nuestros computos sin el auxilio de las tablas cronologicas, y por esto incurren 
4 cada paso en estos errores. 

919 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Es curiosa y singular la noticia que nos dan de una especie de voto que hicieron estas gentes al tiempo de salir 
fugitivos de su patria. Este fue de no conocer los hombres 4 sus mugeres por espacio de veinte y tres afios, abste- 
niendose de todo acceso carnal en dicho tiempo, el qual cumplieron perfectamente, que es cosa bien singular entre 
tanta multitud de personas no haber habido uno que lo quebrantase. Me figuro que el motivo que tubieron para 
esto, pudo ser el librarse de la molestia y cuidado de las mugeres prefiadas* y nifios pequefios en el aho que empre- 
hendian 4 poblar nuevas regiones, pareciendoles que en el espacio de veinte y tres alos podrian tener ya estableci- 
mentos y poblaciones fijas. Aunque dicen los historiadores que hicieron voto}, debe suponerse que este fue un 
compromiso entre ellos mismos 6 una determinacion de sus principales gefes, 4 quienes ciegamente obedecian, y 
aun afiaden algunos autores con D. Fernando de Alba, que les impusieron este precepto con rigurosas penas al que le 
quebrantase. Mas siempre es digno de admirar su gobierno y prudencia en esta determinacion, para no hacer menos 
molesta su peregrinacion, y su constancia y continencia en cumplirla, sin que entre tanta multitud hubiese alguno 
que lo quebrantase segun la asercion de sus escritores. Is verdad que si como los mismos historiadores asientan, 
aquellos principales sefiores que los mandaban, impusieron rigurosas penas 4 los transgresores, estas sin duda fueron 
en mucha parte el freno que les contuvo, pero no por eso deja de ser digno de admirarse. ; : 

Hasta aqui todas son noticias por mayor las que nos dan estos historiadores, porque estos mapas historicos que 
interpretan,no son verdaderamente historia antigua de su primer origen, sino unos apuntes 6 comentarios que sirven 
de proemio 4 la historia de los Tultecas, que ellos mismos escribieron ; y asi todo lo que refieren hasta su rebelion 
que es donde toman el principio de la historia de su nacion 6 fundacion de su reyno, son noticias muy escasas las 
que dan de su peregrinacion por el Asia hasta la America, de su multiplicacion, poblaciones y gobierno en los 2379 
afios que pasaron desde la fundacion de su primer ciudad de Huetlapalan hasta la rebelion de los Tultecas, y solo las 
traen como supuestos 6 preliminares para comenzar 4 referir su historia: pero es suficiente para. comprender que 
todos los pobladores de este nuevo mundo que se llama America, provinieron de aquellas siete familias que se unieron 
en la dispersion de Babel: que vinieron por la parte del norte, atravesando rios y brazos de mar y costeando sus 
riberas en balsas de carrizos 6 lefios ligeros, como el dia de hoy lo acostumbran en muchos parages; que lo primero 
que se poblé fue la parte septentrional de la America que se demarca desde el tropico de cancro por el norte, desde 
la altura de 24 grados hasta 75, en que se comprenden las dilatadas provincias de Cinaloa, Taraumaza, Chihuagua, 
Sonora, California, Pimeria y las demas que siguen de gentiles, en donde hasta ahora no ha entrado la religion catolica, 
como lo testifica en el dia de hoy el inumerable gentio de que estan pobladas segun lo afirman contestes los que han 
entrado hasta ellos, y que asi como se fueron multiplicando,fueron saliendo en cuadrillas 4 poblar el resto de todo este 
continente hasta la otra parte del Sur, los unos por tierra como estos Tultecas y algunos otros que veremos, y los otros 
por mar costeando sus playas, como los Ulmecas, Xicallancas y otras naciones que poblaron las costas de Yucatan : 
pero en orden 4 su gobierno y costumbres en aquellos primitivos tiempos, sin embargo de tanta multitud de manu- 
scritos como he reconocido, no he podido investigar ni comprender otra cosa que lo que dejo escrito, ni me parece 
que puede adelantarse mas en la materia en tan retirada antigitedad, puesto que los mas habiles entre ellos que fueron 
estos Tultecas, y los mapas historicos que son las unicas fuentes de donde pudieran sacarse estas noticias, no nos dan 
otras que las que llevo hasta aqui expendidas. No asi en lo subsecuente, pues como se vera, procuraron conservar 
con mucha puntualidad los memorables sucesos de su historia, y por ejemplo de los Tultecas lo ejecutaron tambien 
las demas naciones que repoblaron estas tierras despues de la destruccion del primer reyno Tulteca. 

Antes de cerrar este capitulo, quiero que se haga reflexa en que, como hemos visto en el cap. 1°, fueron siete las 

familias que en la dispersion de la torre de Babel se unieron para entenderse la lengua, para venir 4 poblar estas 

, * “Woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days!” were words uttered by Christ in reference to the flight of 
the Jews from Jerusalem, as we learn from St. Matthew, in the nineteenth verse of the twenty-fourth chapter of his Gospel ; from which expressions 
it might be inferred, that pregnant women and sucking children were reckoned by the Jews amongst the worst evils of a forced flight, which might 
have led them to adopt the expedient alluded to in the text. 

+ A vow was what the Jews considered most binding. The twenty-seventh chapter of Leviticus entirely relates to vows; and its first ordi- 
nance reminds us that the same very singular custom of self-devotion for the religious service of the temple, and to obtain favour in the eyes of 
the Deity by such a mark of zeal, prevailed amongst the Mexicans as well as the Jews. In the eleventh verse of the first chapter of the First Book 
of Samuel we read, that Hannah the mother of Samuel “ vowed a vow,” in order to obtain a son from God.- And the emperor Nezahualcoyotl is 
recorded to have vowed, that he would fast forty days in order to obtain a victory. Mexican and Jewish parents likewise were accustomed to bind 
themselves by a vow, that they would offer their children for the service of their respective temples, when they should attain a fit age; and both 
nations considered the breach of a vow to be asin of the most atrocious kind. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 913 

regiones, que asimismo fueron siete las familias principales Tultecas que salieron de Tlachicatzin en esta rebelion 
para poblar la tierra que hoy se llama de Nueva Espafia, y que como veremos en su lugar fueron tambien siete las 
familias de la nacion Mexitzin, que fundaron la ciudad de Mexico. De esta uniformidad en el numero de familias 
ha tenido origen la multitud de confusiones, equivocaciones y errores en que incurrieron nuestros historiadores que 
escribieron por las relaciones que les daban los Indios, de quienes se informaban de su origen, costumbres, reyes y 
demas sucesos de su antigitedad. Porque si era de los Tezcucanos, referia su origen 4 las siete familias primitivas 
que fundaron 4 Huehuetlapalan, porque estas naciones se tuvieron siempre por Chichimecas y descendientes de ellos ; 
si se informaba de un Tulteca 6 Aculhua, referia su origen 4 estas siete familias Tultecas que vinieron 4 poblar. Y si 
se informaba de un Mexicano 6 Michoacano, referia su origen 4 las siete familias de sus fundadores que salieron de 
las cuebas de Chicomoztoc, y juzgandolos 4 todos una misma nacion, creyeron tambien una misma la historia de 
todas estas naciones, mezclando los sucesos, y llenaron las suyas de confusiones. 

Ya dejo insinuado al cap. 25 * que el caballero Boturini en su citada obra, confunde estas siete familias Tultecas 
que salieron de Tlachicatzin para poblar estas tierras de Nueva Espafia, con las otras siete que se unieron en la dis- 
persion de Babel y peregrinaron tantos afios hasta estas regiones, y dice espresamente, “ que siete Tultecas que asis- 
tian ala fabrica de dicha torre, viendo que no se entendian con los demas, se apartaron con sus mugeres é hijos &c.”; 
cuya esplicacion es capaz de confundir al que no esté versado en esta historia, porque las siete familias de Babe. 
fueron los progenitores de toda la innumerable multitud de gentes que poblé estas regiones, dividiendose despues de 
muchos afios en naciones diversas, de las cuales una sola fue 4 la que dieron el nombre de Tultecatl, y un ramo de 
esta nacion fue el que vino 4 establecerse 4 la Nueva Espafia, guiado y conducido de los siete gefes que dejo nombrados 
que supongo vinieron con sus familias, pero distintas de aquellas primeras siete que por ser de un mismo idioma se 
unieron en la dispersion de Babel. Porque estas peregrinaron por el Asia hasta llegar 4 establecerse en la America, 
y las otras salieron de la ciudad de Tlachicatzin en la parte septentrional de la misma America, por rebelion y fugi- 
tiva, y vinieron 4 establecerse 4 la Nueva Espafia, y el confundir unas con otras es error manifiesto opuesto 4 las 
mismas historias de estos naturales. Algunos autores se persuaden 4 que en el numero sve¢e quisieron denotar estas 
gentes una multitud indefinida, como vemos en las sagradas letras empleado el numero septenario para denotar mul- 
titud, y el mismo Boturini se inclinaba 4 esta opinion, pero yo no hallo razones en que fundarla, porque en toda la 
historia no encuentro que se valgan del numero siete, siendo asi que en tantas poblaciones y fundaciones de ciudades, 
guerras, mortandades y otros semejantes sucesos, era regular que sino en todos, en algunos se valiesen de esta expli- 
cacion para denotar multitud de pobladores, de soldados, de rebeldes, de muertos &c., y asi me persuado que es mera 
congetura, por la uniformidad que se halla de las siete familias en los tres sucesos notados. 

CapiruLo XXII. 

Por consejo del astrologo Huemantzin determinan los Tultecas ir a poblar a la tierra de Anahuac : 
emprenden su viage, que describen con toda puntualidad y las fundaciones que hicieron en el 
camino hasta llegar a Tulantzinco. | 

LvueEco que los Tultecas hicieron alto y fundaron 4 Tlapalanconco, se dedicaron al cultivo de la tierra, sembrando los 
campos de su comarca para proveer al sustento de aquel numeroso pueblo, que cada dia se aumentaba con las nuevas 
cuadrillas de gentes, que les venian asi de la ciudad como de otras poblaciones de su misma nacion. Presidia el 
gobierno en los siete principales sefores, que confiriendo entre si determinaban unanimes lo conveniente 4 la sub- 
sistencia y buen orden de aquel gran gentio que les estaba enteramente subordinado. Asi se mantuvieron tres afios, 
mas viendo al cabo de ellos el considerable aumento de gente que cada dia iba 4 mas, y esto hacia dificil el buen orden 
y gobierno en una sola poblacion, se juntaron los siete sefiores para consultar entre si las providencias que debian 
tomar para dividir aquel numeroso gentio en diferentes poblaciones. Asistié 4lajunta un venerable anciano llamado 
Hueman y en el estilo reverente de la lengua Nahuatl Huemantzin, de quien dice al cap. 15 que algunos autores le 
han confundido con Quetzalcohuatl, porque 4 entrambos dieron el nombre de Hueman, que quiere decir el de las 

* Errata en el cap. y veras otra vez 4 Boturini, § 16. 

Sue 

Q14 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

grandes manos, y alegoricamente el que tiene mucho poder, talento y sabiduria. Era este anciano Hueman muy 
estimado y respetado de todos, no solo por su edad, por su prudencia, madurez y sabiduria especialmente en la astro- 
nomia y arte divinatoria, este pues les dijo que no le parecia conveniente que se quedasen en aquel sitio ni exten- 
diesen en el sus poblaciones, porque estando tan cerca sus enemigos quedaban siempre expuestos 4 vivir sin sosiego 
y con las armas en la mano para defenderse de sus insultos: que habia observado en sus historias que todos los 
grandes trabajos y calamidades que habian padecido sus mayores, habian acaecido en el afio sefialado con el geroglifico 
del pedernal, que era para ellos funesto signo, como lo verificaba el haber sido en afio de este mismo caracter su 
ultima desgracia y salida de su patria: pero que tambien habia observado que 4 las desgracias sucedian luego grandes 
prosperidades y felicidades, especialmente en los aitos sefalados con el segundo geroglifico que es la casa, y era nuncio 
de dichas felicidades ; que se atrevia 4 prometerse las, si seguian su dictamen de dejar aquella tierra y emprehender 
su viage hacia las tierras Orientales en que habian vivido muchos afios los gigantes : porque. conocia por su ciencia 
que debia ser su clima mas benigno, sus tierras mas fertiles y abundantes y grande su extension para poder fundar 
en ella una prospera y feliz monarquia ; que por la distancia estaban libres de los insultos de sus enemigos; que 
aquel pais no estaba sujeto 4 las malignas influencias del astro que les perseguia, y que aunque conocia tambien por 
su ciencia que todavia les amenazaba con otra gran desgracia, estaba muy distante su cumplimiento y podia con el 
tiempo variarse su maligno aspecto, y cuando no, lograr en el intermedio ellos y sus descendientes hasta el decimo 
grado de un feliz imperio; y finalmente que los gigantes que habian sido los habitadores de aquellas tierras, se sabia 
que habian sido enteramente destruidos y asi no habia que temer contradiccion alguna. 

El razonamiento del anciano movié de suerte los animos de los sefiores, que al punto condescendieron en seguir 
su dictamen, y quedé resuelto emprender nuevo viage, haciendo mansion en los parages que les pareciesen mas a pro- 
posito para sembrar y proveerse de lo necesario 4 su sustento, dejando en todos ellos poblaciones que les guardasen 
las espaldas en caso de una pronta retirada. Por esto no condescendieron en abandonar enteramente 4 Tlapalan- 
conco, sino que determinaron que quedasen en ella pobladas algunas familias de gente plebeya. Declararon los 
seiiores al pueblo su determinacion y hallando en el una pronta y ciega obediencia, resolvieron emprender luego su 
marcha y efectivamente la comenzaron en el afio de doce cafias, que en las tablas corresponde al de 607, 4 los once 
afios de la salida de su patria. Doce dias continuos caminaron saliendo al amanecer sin hacer mansion alguna hasta 
que la obscuridad de la noche les obligaba 4 parar y tomar algun reposo y sustento. Andaban cada dia como seis 
leguas, que no era poco hacer en tanta muchedumbre mezclada de mugeres y nifios y los que levaban 4 cuestas los 
bastimentos. A los doce dias llegaron 4 la tierra de Hueixalan, que pareciendoles buena y fertil determinaron hacer 
alli mansion. Hacen descubridor de ella 4 Cohuatzon, uno de los cinco caballeros que se unieron 4 los dos princi- 
pales, y el por ventura le daria el nombre de Hueixalan, que significa arenal grande. Detuvieronse aqui cerca de 
cuatro afios haciendo sus sementeras, y volviendo 4 emprender su viage dejando poblacion en Hueixalan, caminaron 
veinte dias seguidos hacia el poniente, y al cabo de ellos otro de los cinco capitanes llamado Mazacohuatl descubrié 
la tierra de Xalixco en las riberas del mar. Parecioles buena y fertil y determinaron demorarse en ella como lo 
hicieron, y fundaron la ciudad de Xalixco que subsiste en nuestros dias, y segun parece debe referirse su fundacion 
al afio 610, 6 611, respecto 4 que asientan haberse detenido en Hucixalan como cuatro afios, ocho se demoraron en 
Xalixco, y habiendo dejado competente poblacion en ella y su comarca, centinuaron su marcha por las riberas y playas 
del mar, y habiendo andado veinte dias continuos hicieron alto en la costa que llamaron de Chimalhuacan Atenco, 
donde se detuvieron cerca de cinco afos. Estando aqui se cumplio el tiempo de los veinte y tres afios de su voto 6 
compromiso: comenzaron los hombres 4 tener acceso 4 sus mugeres y 4 multiplicarse, y habiendo dejado suficiente 
poblacion, continuaron su marcha en el afio de un conejo, en que contaban veinte y siete de la salida de su patria, que 
segun las tablas corresponde al de 622. Caminaron diez y ocho dias buscando siempre el Oriente hasta llegar 4 
Toxpan, de que hacen descubridor 4 uno llamado Metzotzin. Detuvieronse en ella otros cinco afios, y el ultimo de 
ellos volvieron 4 emprender su derrota, y habiendo caminado yeinte dias llegaron 4 las costas y playas que llamaron 
Quiyahuitztlan Anahuac, donde se vieron precisados 4 formar balsas para pasar algunos rios caudalosos 6 brazos de 
mar. Hacen descubridor de ella 4 Tlacamitzin uno de los dos sefiores principales, 4 quien dan tambien el nombre de 
Acapichtzin, acaso por haber descubierto estas playas y brazos de mar, porque hasta esta ocasion no le dan este 
nombre, que suena 6 puede interpretarse el descubridor de los carrizales, por haber acaso encontrado algunos en estas 
playas en las que padecieron no pocas incomodidades : pero sin embargo se mantubieron en ellas seis afos cultivando 
las tierras inmediatas, cuya fertilidad les hizo tolerables las incomodidades. A’los seis afios determinaron continuar 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 215 

su marcha, movidos de las persuasiones del sabio Huemac, y caminaron diez y ocho dias hasta llegar @ la tierra de 
Zacatlan, de la que hacen descubridor 4 Chalcatzin, el otro de los principales sefiores que los mandaban. Determi- 
naron hacer alto alli, y 4 poco tiempo le nacié un hijo 4 Chalcatzin 4 quien puso por nombre Zacapantzin, que inter- 
pretaron sobre el yervasal, y en memoria de esto determin6 fundar alli una poblacion dandole el nombre de Zacatlan, 
que significa yervasal 6 prado cubierto de yerva, otros lo dicen al contrario, esto es, que por haber dado 4 la poblacion 
el nombre de Zacatlan, le puso 4 el hijo Zacapantzin. El afio en que esto acaecié le sefialaron con el geroglifico de 
una cafia, y dicen que en el contaron un Xiuhtlalpili 6 siglo del principio de su guerra, que en afio de semejante 
caracter comenzaron, y confrontandolo con las tablas, parece que debe fijarse la fundacion en el afio de 4668 del 
mundo y 635 de la era cristiana. Siete afios se detuvieron en esta poblacion y en el octavo que fue sefialado con el 
geroglifico de ocho conejos, emprendieron de nuevo su marcha, y habiendo caminado diez y ocho dias llegaron 4 la 
tierra de Tutzapan, que interpretan tusal, voz hoy en dia muy usada y castellanizada, que quiere significar tierra donde 
anidan topos, animal bien conocido que en la lengua Nahuatl se llama tuzan 6 totzan, y por este nombre es conocido 
en este pais donde no tiene uso el de topo. Hacen descubridor de Tutzapan 4 Exocatl, el mismo que descubrié la 
de Tlapalanconco, uno de los cinco capitanes que se les agregaron, y dicen que el fundé la poblacion de Tutzapan, y 
que habiendole nacido un hijo en el ultimo afio de los siete que en ella se detuvieron le puso por nombre Totzapantzin. 
El afio en que nacio este nifio le sefialan con el geroglifico de un pedernal, que corresponde segun las tablas al de 
4681 del mundo y 648 de la era cristiana, y hacen memoria de que en el dicho afio se cumplid un siglo de la salida 
de su patria en afio de igual caracter, como dejamos asentado. En el mismo afio volvieron 4 emprender su marcha 
y caminaron 28 dias continuos sin rumbo cierto, hasta llegar 4 la tierra de Tepetla, de la que hacen descubridor 4 
Cohuatzon, uno de los cinco capitanes y el mismo que habia descubierto la tierra de Hueyxalan. Siete afios se 
detuvieron en Tepetla y al cabo de ellos volvieron 4 tomar su marcha, y habiendo caminado diez y ocho dias llegaron 
& Mazatepec, de que fue descubridor Mazacohuatl, otro de los cinco capitanes, que de su nombre la llamé Mazatepec. 
Estuvieron alli ocho afios, y al cabo de ellos prosiguieron su camino por diez y ocho dias continuos hasta llegar 4 un 
parage 4 que dieron el nombre de Ziuhcohuatl, por haber sido su descubridor Ziuhcohuatl, otro de los cinco capitanes 
4 quien daban tambien los nombres de Tlapalhuitz y Tlapalmetzin: detuvieronse aqui otros ocho afios, y cumplidos 
prosiguieron su camino por veinte dias continuos hasta llegar 4 Yztachuexuca, tierra muy fertil que descubrio Met- 
zotzin yen la que mas se detuvieron, porque asientan haberse demorado en ella veinte y seis afios. Hace memoria de 
que en el afio decimo sexto que fue sefialado con el geroglifico de una cafia, se cumplié una edad, que son 104 aios 
que habian comenzado sus guerras en su patria, y segun las tablas sale puntual su cuenta, porque el ano decimo sexto 
de su mansion en Yztachuexuca, segun las epocas anteriores, fue el afio de 687 de Cristo, que fue sefalado con el 
geroglifico de una cafia. 

Cansados ya de caminar y agradados de la bondad del pais, tenian poca gana de continuar la marcha, si el astro- 
logo Hueman no repitiera sus instancias, asegurandoles que durarian ya poco sus penalidades, porque no estaba 
muy distante el pais dichoso y afortunado que les tenia predicho, donde lograrian un imperio prospero y vVivirian 
satisfechos y gustosos con cuantas comodidades podian apetecer. Con estas persuasiones consiguio que 4 los 26 
afios se moviesen de alli y prosiguiesen su marcha por otros diez y ocho dias continuos, en los que llegaron 4 Tul- 
lantzinco, y aunque el astrologo les persuadia 4 caminar un poco mas, no pudo conseguirlo, porque habiendo des- 
cubierto Acapichtzin la tierra de Tullantzinco, les agradé tanto, que determinaron hacer en ella su asiento y morada 
perpetua, fundando alli la principal poblacion y ciudad, capital de su reyno, y desde luego pusieron mano 4 fabri- 
car una casa de madera tan grande, que concluida cupo en ella toda la gente. No por esto dejé el astrologo de 
procurar disuadir les del intento, declarandoles que no era aquel todavia el lugar en que segun su ciencia tenia pre- 
visto que habia de florecer la corte de su imperio, y desde donde habian de hacerse duefios de toda la tierra y ex- 
tender sus poblaciones por toda ella, mas con todo no logré por entonces que se moviesen, y se mantuvieron en Tul- 
lantzinco, diez y seis afios; pero 4 poco tiempo comenzaron 4 salir de alli varias familias que fueron formando di- 
versas poblaciones, extendiendose por todos los contornos de Tullantzinco, donde hallaron terreno proporcionado para 
sus sementeras, continuando siempre 4 estar sugetas y subordinadas estas nuevas colonias al gobierno de sus gefes 
gue con el grueso de la nacion se mantenian en Tullantzinco, cuya fundacion que anotan en un ajfio sefialado con 

el geroglifico de once cafias, parece debe fijarse segun las tablas, en el aio de 697 de Cristo. 

216 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Cariruto XXIII. 

Dejan a Tullanizinco, se pasan a Tullan y fundan esta ciudad que despues fue la corte de su Reyno. 

Dixz y seis afios se mantuvo en Tullantzinco el grueso de la nacion con sus gefes y capitanes que desde alli gober- 
naban todas las nuevas poblaciones que cada dia se iban formando, dilatandose por toda la tierra hasta que persua- 
didos del sabio Hueman, determinaron trasladarse 4 otro terreno poco distante de las riberas de un rio, y con efecto 
en un afio que sefialan con el geroglifico de una casa, que segun la espresion de su sabio Hueman era para ellos 
signo prospero que les anunciaba felicidades, se trasladaron 4 el y comenzaron con todo empefio la fabrica de su 
ciudad con casas y calles, en que dividiendose las familias viviesen mas comodos, y haciendo desde luego 4 esta 
poblacion la capital de su imperio y el centro de su nacion Tultecatl, la dieron el nombre de Tullan, y en ella dicen 
algunos que comenzaron 4 labrar sus primeras casas de lodo y piedra, cuya arte de fabricarlas les era ya conocido, y 
D. Fernando de Alba dice que esta invencion de fabrica era ya muy antigua entre ellos, aun antes de salir de su 
patria. La fundacion de esta ciudad de Tullan que subsiste en nuestros dias en su misma antigua situacion doce 
leguas al Norueste de la ciudad de Mexico, y conocida por el nombre de Tulla, dicen haber sido en un afio sefia- 
lado con el caracter de una casa, por lo que debe fijarse segun las tablas en el aio de 713 de Cristo, que fue senalado 
con este geroglifico como en ella se manifiesta. Fue esta despues famosa ciudad y corte de los reyes Tultecas 
como se vera adelante, y hasta el tiempo presente es considerable poblacion y mantienen los naturales de estos reynos 
en la memoria la noticia de su antigua opulencia. 

No es facil averiguar el camino que siguieron estas gentes, ni las leguas que andubieron desde su ciudad de 
Tlachicatzin hasta Tullantzinco, porque no llevando destino cierto y rambo conocido, vaguearian ya por unas, ya por 
otras partes, y por lo menos asentando como asientan sus interpretes que caminaban seis leguas cada dia, y compu- 
tando los dias que caminaron desde Xalixco 4 Tullantzinco, asciende la suma 4 ciento noventa y seis dias, que 4 razon 
de seis leguas por dia, componen mil ciento setenta y seis leguas, y es constante que desde Tullantzinco 4 Xalixco y 
aun 4 Culhuacan, que esta mas al norte, no habra muchas mas de trescientas leguas, y es constante que desde Tul- 
lantzinco 4 Xalixco, y aun 4 Culhuacan, que esta mas de trescientas leguas, pero no es de admirar siguiendo estas 
gentes unos rumbos inciertos, en que debemos creer que el camino que hacian un dia otro lo deshacian; y aunque 
gastaban dias y multiplicaban leguas, no avanzaban terreno hacia el lugar en que habian de venir 4 parar. Por todo 
el camino, y especialmente en los parajes donde hicieron mansion, fueron dejando poblaciones, de suerte que cuando 
llegaron 4 Tullantzinco, se debe suponer poblado ya todo el terreno por donde habian venido, no solo con las pobla- 
ciones que ellos habian hecho en los parages en que hicieron mansion, sino en otros muchos, que de estas mismas 
iban saliendo extendiendose por todo el continente, desde las costas del Mar del Sur alas del Seno Mexicano, por las 
provincias que ahora'son conocidas por los nombres de Chichuagua, el Parral, la Nueva Vizcaya y Parras, porque 
Chicohuatl y Hueixalan que ahora llaman Huexutla, estan inmediatas 4 Panuco y Tampico, poblaciones maritimas en 
la costa del mar del norte, y aun puede ser que hubiesen entrado ya algunas cuadrillas 4 la provincia de Texas y 4 la 
Florida, pues 4 mas de la multiplicacion que debemos suponer tubieron en los cien aos que duré el viage, nos dan 
la noticia de que salieron en su seguimiento de las mismas partes del Norte y region de Huchuetlapalan muchas cua~ 
drillas de gentes en diversos tiempos, de las cuales unas se establecieron y poblaron las costas del Sur sin legar 4 
Tullan, otras llegaron, y otras muchas pasaron hasta ocupar todo el recinto de este Nuevo Mundo hasta el Estrecho 
de Magallanes, y puede que mas alld, si esta poblada la tierra que descubrio Francisco Draque, y ellos hallaron modo 
de pasar el estrecho hasta dichas tierras, como pasaron el mar de California y los demas estrechos, brazos de mar y 
rios caudalosos que atravesaron, asi por haber de llegar los primeros pobladores desde el campo de Senaar hasta la 
region de Huehuetlapalan, como esta nacion Tultecatl hasta llegar de Tullan. 

Es cosa de notar la dilatada vida de estas gentes, pues por lo menos los dos sefiores principales Chalcatzin y Tla- 
camitzin, los cinco capitanes agregados, y el astrologo Hueman, que asientan haber llegado 4 Tullan y vivian el aho 
de 713 ; habia 130 afios que se rebelaron contra su gobierno, que fue la causa de su salida, y aunque fuesen entonces 
jovenes de veinte afios, ya debian llegar 4 pasar de ciento y cincuenta: que uno U otro llegase 4 edad tan avanzada 
no es irregular, pero que todos vivieron tanto, es cosa que hace fuerza; y del astrologo dice expresamente D. Fer- 
nando de Alba, que pasaba ya de ciento y ochenta afios cuando Ilegaron 4 Tullan. Pero es constante que no solo en 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. ONT 

estos tiempos, sino tambien en otros mucho posteriores 4 ellos, nos dan noticias de personas de vidas dilatadisimas 
porque de Ycoatzin, que 4 la sazon reinaba en el imperio Chichimeca, dicen que goberné ciento y ochenta afios. Su 
sucesor Motzeloquiatzin ciento cincuenta y seis; Tlamacatzin que le sucedio ciento treinta y tres; Xolotzin el 
primer emperador que reiné en estas partes despues de los Tultecas, goberné ciento y doce afios, y otros muchos que 
se veran en el discurso de esta historia, y los mismos reyes Tultecas que todos reinaron cinquenta y dos afios, y 
algunos sobrevivieron muchos mas por la razon que se dird adelante, y no se me hace dificil creer que aquella sobe- 
rana Providencia que los guiaba, y destinaba 4 poblar estas tan vastas regiones, los conservase tanto tiempo la vida, 
como quiso dilatarsela 4 los patriarcas y primeros pobladores del universo, y debemos suponer que asi como estos 
sefiores principales, habria otros muchisimos en tan numeroso concurso de gentes que lograrian igualmente una dila- 
tada vida. Y verdaderamente no debe hacer esto gran fuerza 4 los que han andado algo por estos reynos, pues es 
muy comun en estos tiempos hallarse muchos Indios de crecida edad; yo he conocido y conozco muchos, entre ellos 
una muger que pasa de cien afios, y esta tan fuerte y robusta como cualquiera otra de veinte, y es constante la expe- 
riencia de que por lo general son de larga vida los Indios, y si con sus desordenes y mal trato que dan 4 su salud, no 

se la quebrantaran, llegarian muchos 4 una grande ancianidad*. 

* The eleven chapters which follow of the first part of Echevarria’s History of the Origin of the Indians of New Spain, and the entire of the 
second part, which chiefly relates to the ancient History of the Mexicans, are here omitted, because the original Histories of Tezozomoc and Ixtlilxo- 
chitl which treat of the same subject will be found in the ninth volume of the present work. T’o the merits of the former of these Histories Echevarria 
bears honourable testimony, in the following passage of the twelfth chapter of the second part of his History of the Origin of the Indians, which we 
transcribe at greater length because it makes mention of some other native Indian historians whose works have escaped the ravages of time, and, we 
might also add, the flames of the Inquisition. ‘* Los dos mas famosos historiadores de ]a nacion Mexicana, que han interpretado sus mapas con 
mas claridad y orden, son Don Fernando de Alvarado Tetzotzomoc, descendiente de los reyes de Azcaputzalco, que escrivié por los afios de 1598, 
un abultado volumen con el titulo de Cronica Mexicana; y Don Domingo de San Anton Mufion Chimalpain Quauhthuamitzin, que escrivié en su 
lengua Nahuatl con el titulo de Cronica Mexicana, y en Ja nuestra Ja misma obra con el titulo de Historia Mexicana, por los afios de 1626. Los 
dos mas famosos en la historia Teochichimeca son Don Domingo Mufion Camargo, mestizo Tlascalteca, que escrivié con el titulo de Cronica Tlax- 
cayan por los afios de 1585, y Don Juan Ventura Zapata y Mendoza, cacique de Tlaxcallan de la cahbecera de Quiyahuiztlan, que escrivio en su 
idioma Nahuatl con el titulo de Cronica de la muy noble y leal Ciudad de Tlaxcayan por los afios de 1589.” We may here remark, as a fact very 
deserving of attention, that for nearly half a century after the conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards, the ecclesiastical authorities discouraged all 
researches into the history and religion of the ancient Mexicans; and when at the expiration of that long period greater latitude was given to 

inquiry, the recollection of many important events had been already swallowed up in the gulf of oblivion. 

3K 

% 

Lee ORE 

cy Rey 

CPO RECT NES | 

Pie (Se ary AE 

ch eoyaeODe wthon rs sgt 

paid 
1 f aa a = Hf 1 ay, gies 
Sphere eatee HRT Eee ae 

oe pe etary ec Hi 
a as ’ 5 ”, 
Rae raids 
ee 
eat 

“eh 

aarti 

ee hy 

i toes hte 
Bey RE 

TERCERA NOTICIA DE LA SEGUNDA PARTE 
DE LAS 
NOTICIAS HISTORIALES 
DE LAS 
CONQUISTAS DE TIERRA FIRME 
EN EL NUEVO REYNO DE GRANADA, 

POR 

FR. PEDRO SIMON, 

OFRECIDA A NUESTRO INVICTISIMO CESAR FILIPO IV. EN EL REAL CONSEJO DE INDIAS, ANO 1624. 

[ 991 | 

TERCERA NOTICIA 

HISTORIAL 

DE LAS CONQUISTAS DE TIERRA FIRME* 

Cariruto I. 

1. Las Perdidas y desgraciados Fines, que han sucedido en las Jornadas que se han hecho en 
demanda del Dorado. 

2. Dase Noticia de donde tuvo Principio este Nombre del Dorado, y como fue el Nuevo Reyno. 

3. Comienzase a dar la Razon y Fundamento que se tuvo, sobre que se fundo la primera Noticia. 

1. LA ocasion 4 que hemos llegado con nuestra historia, nos la da, para que sin pasar de aqui demos noticia de 
los principios que tuvo este nombre de la provincia del Dorado, aunque dejamos ya tocado algo de esto de paso en 
la Primera Parte, por haberlos tenido de este Reyno Nuevo de Granada, y la verdad que hay en ello ser hija legi- 
tima de esta historia, aunque el nombre se le puso en la ciudad de San Francisco del Quito en los reynos del Peru, 
desde donde ha volado por tantas partes, que pienso hay pocas, aunque sean remotas, no solo en este Nuevo Mundo, - 
sino aun en todas las otras tres partes de él], por donde no esté estendido este nombre, y noticia de las provincias 
del Dorado, que ha sido ocasion de dejar 4 tantos no solo desdorados, sino perdidas sus haciendas, casas, y vidas ; 
no habiendose perdonado nada de esto en los descubrimientos que se han intentado de las tierras que publica esta 
fama, fingiendolas cada uno donde quiere, y poniendo la proa de sus diligencias para donde la gobiernan sus pensa- 
mientos sin mas luz que unas ciegas relaciones, que algunos dan sin bastante fundamento. Si bien es verdad, que 
todos las enderezan hacia el corazon y entrafias de esta tierra firme, de quien solo estan habitadas de Espafioles todas 
sus riberas en redondo del Mar de que est4 cercada: porque lo esta por una parte de el del Norte, por otra del mar 
de Etiopia, por otra del estrecho 6 canal de Magallanes, y por la otra del mar del Sur; de hacia donde corre y vacia 
en el mar del Norte por las Bocas del Drago el famoso rio Orinoco, por cuyas feroces aguas sucle meterse el animo 
y brio Espafiol, como hemos dicho en nuestra Primera Parte lo hizo Don Diego de Ordas, y Don Pedro de Silva, y 
otros muchos; porque desde las margenes de este rio, que subiendo por el demoran 4 la mano derecha hasta las del 
rio Papamene, que bajando por las provincias del Caguan, que esta a las espaldas de este Nuevo Reyno, entra en el 
mismo Orinoco; cerca de sus bocas fingen las de los que dan estas noticias, estar las del Dorado : en cuya demanda 
se han puesto en ejecucion grandes y costosas jornadas, trasegando mares y rios, trastornando tierras y provin- 
cias de dificultosisimos caminos, estalages, y habitaciones; sin haber surtido otro efecto, que perdidas de familias, 
que 4 la fama de este nombre campanudo del Dorado, no han reparado en dejar sus ticrras en los reynos de 
Espafia, y venir 4 buscar su perdicion y total ruina. De que son buenos testigos los lastimosos fines que han tenido 
quantos han intentado estos caminos y entradas ; sin que haya habido uno de los muchos que se han puesto 4 ello, que 

* These two Historical Notices of Pére Simon will be very valuable to the future historian of America. | They have never been published, 
and were copied from the MS. of the author. 

3 L 

999 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

le haya sucedido otra cosa que calamidades sin un dia de descanso ; que no deja de ser ocasion de espanto, ver que 
todos los que intentan esto, corren igual fortuna de desgracias. Cuya verdad nos desempenan los sucesos referidos 
en la Primera Parte de las jornadas de Don Diego de Ordas por el Orinoco, las dos de Don Pedro de Silva; la del 
capitan Juan de Cerpa; las del capitan Antonio de Berrio desde este reyno, y la del capitan Domingo de Vera: 
cuyos fines han sido lastimosas tragedias, celebradas con tristes y mal enjugadas lagrimas que duran hoy. 

2. El fundamento pues que hubo, de donde se han levantado estas polvaredas del Dorado, fue de esta suerte. 
Recien poblada la ciudad de San Francisco del Quito por el capitan Sebastian de Belalcazar el afio de 1534, siendo 
adelantado del Peru Don Francisco Pizarro, y su teniente general el Belalcazar, este capitan andando con cuidado, 
inquiriendo por todos los caminos que podia sin perder ocasion, de todas las tierras’ y provincias de que pudiese 
tener noticias, entre los demas Indios de quien se andaba informando, la tuvo de que habia alli en la ciudad un 
forastero, y preguntandole por su tierra, dijo, que se llamaba Muizqueta, y su cacique Bogota, que es como hemos 
dicho este Nuevo Reyno de Granada, que los Espafoles le llamaron Bogota. Y preguntandole si en su tierra habia 
de aquel metal que le mostraba, ‘que era oro, respondié ser mucha la cantidad que habia y de esmeraldas, que el 
nombraba en su lengua piedras verdes. Y afiadia, que habia una laguna en la tierra de su cacique, donde el entraba 
algunas veces al afio en unas balsas bien hechas al medio de ella, yendo en cueros, pero todo el cuero Ileno desde 
la cabeza 4 los pies'y manos, de una trementina muy pegajosa, y sobre ella echado mucho oro en polvo fino; de 
suerte que quajando de oro toda aquella trementina, se hacia todo una capa, 6 segundo pellejo de oro, que dandole 
el sol por la mafiana, que era quando se hacia este sacrificio, y en dia claro, daba grandes resplandores, y entrando 
asi hasta el medio de la laguna, alli hacia sacrificio y ofrenda, arrojando al agua algunas piezas de oro, y esmeraldas 
con ciertas palabras, que decia.. Y haciendose luego lavar con ciertas yerbas, como jaboneras todo el cuerpo, cahia 
todo el oro que trahia 4 cuestas en el agua: con que se acababa el sacrificio, y se salia de la laguna, y vestia sus 
mantas. Fue esta nueva tan aproposito de lo que deseaba el Belalcazar y sus soldados, que estaban cebados para 
mayores descubrimientos con los que iban haciendo en el Peru, que se determinaron luego 4 hacer este de que daba 
noticia el Indio. Y confiriendo entre ellos que nombre le darian para entenderse, y diferenciar aquella provincia de 
las demas de sus conquistas, determinaron llamarle la Provincia del Dorado, que fue como decir: Ilamese aquella 
la provincia donde va 4 ofrecer sus sacrificios aquel hombre 6 cacique con el cuerpo dorado. Esta es la raiz y 
tronco de donde han salido por el mundo las estendidas ramas de la fama del Dorado; y fuera de esto todo lo 
demas es pura ficcion y nombre sin cosa sobre que caiga, si no es que lo fingen donde lo pone el deseo que tienen 
de hallar tanto oro, que puedan dorarse como el otro cacique, y asi poder llamar 4 la tierra que tan abundante- 
mente se descubriese, otro Dorado ; y de esta suerte irlos multiplicando hasta los que quisieren, de que ya dejamos 
tratado en nuestra Primera Parte. ate 

3. Pero para que sepa el lector de fundamento, el que el Indio tuvo para decir lo que dijo de esta su tierra de 
Bogota, habré de hacer aqui una forzosa digresion, en que se dira 4 donde y como se hacia aquel ofrecimiento del 
Dorado, segun mas cierta opinion; con que se hallara aqui consecutivo, uno tras otro, sin atormentar el deseo, mi- 
entras no lo halla escrito, y yo quedaré ya desocupado, para quando llegue 4 la parte donde me era forzoso decirlo, 
no pudiendome escusar por ser cosa de consideracion en esta historia. Pues para que mejor se entienda la que 
aqui hay, digo, que entre las demas supersticiones que tenian los Indios de este Nuevo Reyno (de que despues ha- 
blaré mui largo,) en ofrecer sacrificios 4 sus fingidos y falsos dioses, entre los quales ponian en primer lugar al Sol, 
era ofrecerles sacrificios en las aguas, no porque tuviesen 4 las aguas por dioses, sino porque el demonio, cuyas eran 
las trazas por donde estos miserables se governaban, se las tenia dadas, de manera que lo honrasen 4 él en las 
aguas, queriendo con su depravada voluntad igualarse en esto con Dios, que tanto se da por honrado y servido en las 
aguas, como lo dié 4 entender luego 4 los primeros pasos de la creacion del mundo, quando el espiritu del Senor 
anduyo sobre las aguas*: tambien quiere, que le bendigan todas las aguas del mar, fuentes, y rios, y al fin quiso 
ser honrado con las aguas del baptismo, ordenando que ellas fuesen instrumento con que saliesen las almas del poder 
del demonio, y se escribiesen y alistasen debajo sus banderas de Cristo, por la gracia que alli reciben. 

* Gen. cap. ii. 

iS) 
© 
GS 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 

Carrruto II. 

1. Describese la Laguna de Guatabita. 

2. Ahogase la Cacica en la Laguna; y cuentase la hechizeria para sacarla con unas Ninas 
que tambien se ahogaron. 

3. Ofrendas, que se hacian en la Laguna; y Adultervo de la Cacica, y su castigo. 

A, Segunda hechizeria para sacar la Nina: la sacan muerta, y la vuelven al agua. 

1. Lo qual asi determinado por el demonio y obedecido por ellos, hacian estas ofrendas, no en qualquiera aguas, 
sino en aquellas que parecia habia alguna particular razon, por ser extraordinario su sitio, asiento, 6 disposicion, 
como en partes extraordinarias de rios, como lo hacian en una parte pefascosa del de Boza, quando pasa por cerca 
de un cerro que Iaman del Tabaco, dos leguas y media de esta ciudad de Santafé; en lagunas de sitios y puestos 
peregrinos, como se hacia en una que estd cerca de este pozo del rio, en la mitad de tierra que hay desde él al pueblo 
de Suacha. Llaman 4 este puesto Bochachio (6 Bazazio). Pero entre todas estas partes, el mas frequentado y 
famoso adoratorio fue la laguna que laman de Guatabita, que esta una legua poco mas del pueblo asi llamado, de 
quien ya dejamos dicho algo. Esta laguna tiene mil razones de las que los Indios buscaban, y el demonio pedia 
para hacer en ella sus ofrecimientos. Porque estd en la cumbre de unos muy altos cerros 4 la parte del Norte re- 
specto del pueblo. Causase de unas fuentezuelas, 6 manantialejos, que salen de lo alto del cerro, que la sobrepuja, 
que manaran por todos como un brazo de agua, que es la que de ordinario sale de la laguna, 6 poca mas; aunque 
puede ser tenga otros manantiales dentro de agua, que aun no se ha podido saber por ser tan profunda: la qual no 
tiene de ancho en redondo aunque un poco ovalada, mas de un tiro largo de piedra. A la redonda subira desde el 
agua otro tanto por lo mas alto, porque no estan parejas las cumbres, que la cercan. Algunos arboles bajos, como 
los consiente la frialdad del paramo donde estd, cercan sus riveras de sus aguas claras, aunque no gustosas, por 
picar un poco en sabor de agua de bomba. 

2. Aqui pues, como en lugar acomodado de los que el demonio pedia, se solian hacer algunos ofrecimientos con 
el modo que el les tenia ordenado ; el qual se solia aparecer en las mismas aguas en figura de un dragoncillo, 6 cule- 
bra grande. Y en apareciendo, le habian de ofrecer algun oro, 6 esmeraldas, para lo qual estaban con vigilancia los 
Xeques aguardando en unas chozuelas 4 la vera del agua. Duraron estos ofrecimientos, que no eran muy en grueso, 
hasta que se aumentaron despues con lo que sucedio 4 la muger del cacique Guatabita. El qual en tiempos muy 
atrasados, quando todos los caciques gozaban libremente de su sefiorio, antes que el Bogota tiranicamente los suge- 
tase, era el mas poderoso Sefior, que habia en todo este Reyno de los Moscas, reconociendole superioridad muchos 
caciques sus convecinos, no por modo de tirania y servidumbre, como despues sucedio con el Bogota, sino por un 
respeto y reverencia, que le tenian como 4 mayor Sefior, y de mayor linage, sangre, y prendas. Sucedio pues en 
aquella edad, que entre las mugeres que tenia, estaba una de tan buenas partes en sangre y hermosura, que asi como 
en esta excedia 4 las demas, tambien les excedia en la estimacion que hacia de ella el Guatabita. Lo qual no advirti- 
endo la Cacica como debiera, hizole traycion con un caballero de los de la corte, y no tan en secreto, que no llegara 
4 los oidos del marido; el qual puso tan buenas diligencias en haber 4 las manos el adultero, que presto le cayé 
en ellas, y desde aquellas en aquel cruel tormento de muerte, que usaban en tales casos, como era empalarlos, habién- 
dole primero hecho cortar las partes de la puridad, con las quales quiso castigar 4 la muger, sin darle otro castigo, 
que darselas 4 comer guisadas en los comistrages que ellos usaban, en una fiesta que se hizo, por ventura, solo para 
al proposito en publico, por serlo ya tanto el delito. De que fueron tan grandes los sentimientos de la muger, que 
no hubieran sido mayores, si hubiera pasado por la pena del agresor ; 4 que se afladieron otros no menores, can- 
tando el delito los Indios en sus borracheras y corros, no solo en el cercado y casa del cacique, 4 la vista y oidos 
de la muger, sino en los de todos sus vasallos, ordenandolo asi el Guatabita, para escarmiento de las demas mugeres 
y castigo de la adtltera. 

3. En la qual fueron creciendo tanto los sentimientos de estas fiestas amargas para ella, que por huir de ellas, 
traté de huir de esta vida con desesperacion, para entrar en mayores tormentos en la otra. Y asi un dia en que hallé 
la ocasion que deseaba, se salié del cercado y casas de su marido, 4 deshora con el mayor secreto que pudo, sin 

QD4 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

llevar consigo mas que una muchacha, que llevaba cargada una hija que habia parido poco habia, de su marido el 
cacique; y caminando 4 la laguna, apenas huvo llegado, quando por no ser sentida de los Xeques, que estaban 4 la 
redonda en sus chozuelas, arrojé 4 las nifias al agua, y ella tras ellas, donde se ahogaron, y fueron 4 pique sin poderlas 
remediar los Mohanes que salieron de sus cabafias al golpe, que oyeron en el agua; aunque conocieron luego, por 
ser de dia, quien era la que se habia ahogado. . Y asi viendo no tenia ya aquello remedio, partio uno de ellos & mayor 
correr, 4 dar aviso al cacique del desgraciado suceso; el qual partiendo al mismo paso para la laguna con ansias 
mortales, por no haverse persuadido que los sentimientos hubiesen trahido 4 tal estado 4 su muger que hiciese aquello, 
y por la desgracia de su hija, luego que llegé, y no las vido, por haberse ya sumido los cuerpos que pretendia sacar 
si estuviesen sobreaguados, mandé 4 uno el mayor echicero de los Xeques, que hiciese como sacar 4 su muger é 
hija de aquel lago. El Xeque traté luego con sus vanas ceremonias y supersticiones de poner por obra lo que se le 
ordenaba. Para lo qual mandé luego encender lumbre a la lengua del agua, y poner en las’ brasas unos guiarros 
pelados, hasta que quedasen como las demas brasas. Y estandolo ya, y el desnudo, echolos en el agua, y el tras ellos, 
zabullendose sin salir de ella por un buen espacio de tiempo, como lo hace un buen nadador, 6 buzo, como el era, 
hasta que salié solo, como entré, diciendo, que habia hallado 4 la cacica viva, embuste que el demonio le puso en la 
imaginacion, y que estaba en unas casas y cercado mejor que el que dejaba en Guatabita, y tenia el dragoncillo en 
las faldas, estando alli con tanto gusto, que aunque le habia dicho de parte de su marido el que tendria en que saliese, 
y que ya no trataria mas del caso pasado, no estaba de ese parecer; pues ya habia hallado descanso de sus trabajos, 
4 que no queria volver, pues el habia sido causa de que le dejasen ella y su hija, 4 la qual criaria alli donde estaba, 
para que la tuviese compafia. 

4. No se aquieté el cacique con el recado del Xeque; y asi diciendole, que le sacara siquiera 4 su hija, sela hizo 
buscar otra vez. . Con los mismos guijarros hechos ascuas repitio la ceremonia zabullendose ; y volviendo 4 salir, trajo 
el cuerpo de la nifia muerta, y sacados los ojos, diciendo, se los habia sacado el dragoncillo estando todavia en las 
faldas de la madre, para que no siendo la nifia con ojos, ni alma de provecho entre los hombres de esta vida, la volvi- 
esen @ enviar 4 la otra con su madre, que la quedaba aguardando. A que acudio el cacique, por entender asi lo 
ordenaba el dragoncillo, 4 quien. el reverenciaba tanto; y asi le mando volver 4 echar el cuerpezuclo en la laguna, 
donde luego se hundio, quedando el Guatabita sin poder consolarse en nada, por lo mucho que queria 4 la hija y 
madre, no obstante lo que habia usado con él. 

Cariruto III. 

1. Aparecese el Demonio en figura de la Cacica, para confirmarlos en sus Supersticiones, y el 
modo que teman de hacerlas. 

2. Echose mucho oro en la Laguna, quando se supo de la llegada de los Espanoles. 

3. El desague, que le zo Antomo de Sepulveda, para sacar el Oro, y en lo que paro. 

1. No fue perezosa la fama en divulgar por toda la tierra este supuesto, asi en lo que tuvo de verdad, como en lo 
fabuloso y mentira, como lo era el decirse estaba la cacica viva, despues de haber muerto en las aguas de la laguna ; 
lo qual se crey6 con la facilidad que la verdad del caso. Porque el enemigo de ella disponia los animos 4 que se per- 
suadiesen 4 ello: con que tambien lo quedaron de ser verdad lo que ya les tenia introducido, de que despues de 
muertos, habia otra vida, donde comian y bebian, y eran servidos de sus criados, como en esta. Por donde se venian 
4 perder mas temprano tantas almas, como eran las de aquellos criados y criadas que enterraban consigo vivos, los 
caciques y sefiores, demas de sus comidas y bebidas, armas, vestidos y telas, con que se hacen otros en rompiendose 
aquellos con que los enterraban. Luego comenzaron 4 tomar fuerza los sacrificios que se hacian en la laguna, 
yendo con ellos alli en todas las necesidades, pareciendoles 4 los vasallos de Guatabita, que pues estaba alli viva su 
cacica se las remediaria; y lo mismo hacian los que no lo eran, 4 quien habia llegado esta fama, que fue por largas 
tierras, viniendo de todas con sus oblaciones 4 la laguna. Y asi habia muchas carreras 6 caminos anchos, que estos 
Indios usaban para ir 4 sus santuarios, que llegaban a la laguna, y cada pueblo tenia y conocia el suyo, que guiaba 
desde aquella parte por donde venian, como el de Tunja, 6 Choconta, Ubate, Bogota, &c. por donde entraban 4 echar 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 995 

sus sacrificios, que venian hechos desde media legua antes de llegar 4 la laguna, como los hallaron los Espanoles, y 
aun hoy se conocen, y yo los hé visto. Los sacrificios se hacian por medio de los Xeques. El] demonio viendo lo 
bien que le habia salido la traza, para asegurarlos mas en aquellas vanas supersticiones, se aparecia de quando en 
quando sobre las aguas de la laguna, en figura, gesto, y talle de la cacica, desnuda de medio para arriba, y de alli 
para abajo ceftida de una manta de algodon colorada; y diciendo algunas cosas que habian de suceder de las que 
penden de las disposiciones y causas naturales, que el tambien conoce, como que habia de haber secas, hambres, 
enfermedades, muertes de tal 6 tal cacique que estaba enfermo; desapareciase, quedando los miserables persuadidos 
en que la cacica era la poderosa para enviar, 6 quitar por su mano aquello que habia dicho, y veian, que sucedia. 
Con que no perdonaban al buen oro, joyas, esmeraldas, comidas, y otras cosas, que no ofreciesen en sus necesidades, 
usando de esta ceremonia en el ofrecimiento. Tomaban dos cuerdas, que pudiesen atravesar la laguna por el medio, 
y cruzandolas de una’parte 4 otra, en la cruz que hacian, se venia 4 conocer el medio 6 centro de la laguna, a donde 
iban dos Xeques, y la persona que hacia el ofrecimiento, en unas balsas, que son de hazes de eneas 6 espadafias 
secas, juntos, atados unos con otros, 6 de palos, con que se hace un modo de barca, donde pueden ir tres, quatro:é 
mas personas, segun son de anchas y largas, con que tambien se pasan los rios, donde no hay puentes. Con estas 
pues Ilegaban al medio de las aguas de la laguna; y alli con ciertas palabras y ceremonias echaban en ellas las ofren- 
das, menores 6 mayores, segun para la necesidad que se hacia, y el posible del que la hacia; viniendo a ser algunas 
de tanto valor, como hemos dicho en el capitulo antes del pasado numero 2, hacia el cacique Guatabita, dorandose 
el cuerpo; por donde vino 4 decir el Indio en la ciudad de Quito, lo que dijo, y los Espafioles 4 ponerle 4 esta pro- 
vincia el nombre del Dorado. 

2. Y porque concluyamos con lo que hay que decir de esta laguna, digo, que como este era su principal san- 
tuario y comun de toda la tierra; y aun hay quien diga haver sido entierro de algunos caciques, mandando quando 
morian echar en aquellas aguas sus cuerpos con sus riquezas, quando se fue divulgando que entraban unos hombres 
barbudos, y buscaban con cuidado el oro entre los Indios, sacaron muchos el que tenian guardado, llevandolo, y ofre- 
ciendolo en la laguna, 6 rogando con aquel sacrificio que les librase la cacica de aquellos hombres que entraban por 
sus tierras, como de las plagas que les solian venir; 6 queriendo mas tenerlo ofrecido en su santuario que en sus 
casas, 4 peligro que lo hubiesen 4 las manos los Espafioles. Hicieron esto algunos en tanta cantidad de oro, que solo 
el cacique del pueblo de Simijaca eché en la laguna quarenta cargas, que llevaron quarenta Indios desde el pueblo 4 la 
laguna, como se verifico de ellos mismos y del cacique, sobrino y succesor en el cacicazgo, al qual lo envio, que fue 
el que iba con los Indios que lo Ilevaban, y lanzo en la laguna, que quando menos serian quarenta quintales de oro 
fino. Tomose motivo para averiguar esta verdad, de que el encomendero del pueblo, que es el capitan Gonzalo de 
Leon Venero, persuadiendo al cacique, que se llamaba Don Alonso, que le mostrara algunos santuarios, pues era 
mejor servirse del oro, que tenerle en ellos sin provecho ofrecido al demonio, le respondio el Indio de amistad y con 
secreto, que si desaguaba la laguna de Guatabita, sacaria infinitas riquezas, porque su tio solo habia enviado con él 
las cargas de oro referidas. De que se hizo averiguacion ser asi, y haber hecho otros muchos lo mismo, unos con 
mas, otros con menos. 

3. De cuya fama.movidos muchos de los soldados que descubrieron la tierra, intentaron desaguar la laguna, como 
lo puso en egecucion el capitan Lazaro Fonte, despues que salio de las borrascas en que se vido; aunque como no 
fue mucho el caudal con que lo intent6, no pudieron ser las diligencias que eran menester para conseguir el efecto 
con provecho. Y asi con menos de esto que de gasto, did de mano a la labor; aunque no falté quien la pasase 
adelante mas de proposito, por hallarse con mas caudal y suficiente 4 su parecer para hacer el desagiie, pareciendole 
no poderlo emplear en cosa de mayor ganancia que en la que esperaba sacar de la laguna. Y asi determinose 4 esto 
un Antonio de Sepulveda, mercader de. esta ciudad de Santafé. Pasd desde aqui en Espafia por los aftos de 1580, 
donde sacé del consejo una cedula con ciertas condiciones, para poder él, y no otro, desaguar la laguna, y que sele 
diese de la real audiencia todo el favor que fuese necesario, y los Indios que pidiese para la labor del desagiie. El 
qual se pasé a hacer luego que fue de vuelta de Espafia mui de proposito, haciendo casas junto a la laguna, y un barco 
para ella, desde donde sondaba la altura, que se halld ser por medio de 25 brazas. Juntéd luego muchos Indios gas- 
tadores, que tomando las zanjas desde la altura, que parecio a los ingenieros: bastaba, las iban siguiendo con mil 
dificultades, que se ponian delante de grandes peas. Con que se comenzé a descubrir luego, ser la dificultad mayor 
que lo que se entendia; aunque rompiendo por todo con grandes gastos. de herramientas y vino, por ser la tierra 
de frios paramos, y no poder los Indios de otra suerte sufrir el trabajo, se fue llegando el desmonte de los dos cerros, 

3M 

296 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

que tiene & los lados el desaguadero de la laguna, 4 donde yendo cortando la una y otra parte del cerro, y ‘apunta- 
lando, 6 ademando con maderos mui gruesos, se comenzé 4 abrir boca al desaguadero; de manera que ya iba vaciando 
mas de lo ordinario, y dejando descubiertas sus orillas, donde iban hallando algunas joyas de oro de mil hechuras,— 
chagualas, 6 patenas, sierpezuelas, aguilas, esmeraldas, que sacaban de entre la lama y cieno, que se iba descubriendo. 
Y la razon porque las hallaban, era, porque no todos entraban 4 ofrecer al medio de la laguna, quando eran de poco 
precio los ofrecimientos, sino desde fuera del agua las ofrecian por las orillas. Al fin aquello poco, que alli hallaban, 
daba al Sepulveda animo de pasar adelante con la esperanza de sacar lo que gastaba, y mucho mas, como fuera sin 
duda, si su caudal hubiera sustentado la labor que fue menester: porque 4 cada desagite que iban dando, se hallaban 
mayores y mas ricas piezas de oro, y esmeraldas, y tal vez sacaron una como un huevo, una mitra y baculo de 
obispo hecha de planchas de oro, y el baculo aforrado de las mismas canoillas de oro y otras joyas; que fue todo 
hasta en cantidad de cinco 6 seis mil ducados, que iban metiendo en la caja real, por haber: sido una de las condi- 
ciones con que se le habia dado la licencia, para que se partiese despues de junto todo lo que se sacase por mitad al 
mercader y la caja, habiendole pagado la costa, de la qual no habia de poner el rey alguna. Al fin siendo mas la 
que hacia, que lo que podia su bolsa, sucedio que no teniendo bien puntalados los cortes del desagiie, y sobreviniendo 
muchas aguas del invierno, dieron abajo la una y otra banda de las barrancas, volviendo 4 cegar la salida del agua en 
tiempo que ya no alcanzé el caudal del mercader 4 volver 4 limpiar la tierra. Y asi le fue forzoso dejar la rancheria 
y labor, y irse a morir 4 un hospital, sin haberle quedado caudal para otra cosa, ni haber habido despues quien se 

atreva 4 tomar entre manos la empresa de proposito. 

Capvrruto IV. 

1. Sale el Capitan Belalcazar de la Ciudad de Quito en demanda de Bogota, con titulo de buscar 
el Dorado, que es el Nuevo Reyno de Granada. 

2. Vuelve otra vez Belalcazar a Quito, y desde alh sale otra vez a buscar el Dorado. 

3. Viene Belaleazar por muchas dificultades y trabajos é dar al Valle de Neyba. De la Gente; 
y Conquistadores del Reyno. 

1. No se le cocia, como dicen, al Belalcazar el pan en el horno de los deseos, que se le habian encendido en el 
pecho de hacer jornada para esta tierra del Dorado 6 Bogota, de que el Indio le habia dado las noticias, y el nombre. 
Y asi luego que se desembarazé de las guerras que se levantaron con los naturales de la tierra y distrito de Quito, 
procurando poner en efecto estos sus deseos, despaché con buen avio la gente con que se hallaba de presente con el 
capitan Juan:de Ampudia, para que fuesen delante de el, que se quedaba 4 allegar mas soldados 4 la villa del Pasto, 
que estaba recien poblada ; y desde alli pasase 4 la provincia del Popayan, de quien se tenian noticias y de sus mu- 
chas riquezas ; desde donde pasase 4 la tierra del Dorado para donde le iba guiando el Indio que habia dado las no- 
ticias. Salio con estos propositos de Quito el capitan Ampudia, yllegando 4 Pasto, pasé hasta dar vista 4 la tierra 
de Popayan, y desde alli 4 la de Cali, donde advirtiendo le enfermaba la gente, determiné de torcer el camino 4 la 
mano izquierda 6 vanda del Norte, contra las voces que daba el Indio de Bogota, diciendo que su tierra y Dorado 
estaba 4 la mano derecha. Pero no queriendo seguir por entonces lo que el Indio decia, el qual murio de alli 4 
pocos dias, por ventura de pena en ver no guiaban los soldados acia su tierra, llegaron 4 la provincia donde despues 
se poblé la ciudad de Cartago, desde donde por los muchos naturales que habia, no atreviendose por entonces con 
ellos por ser pocos los soldados, se retiraron 4 la tierra de Cali, donde poblé la villa de Ampudia, y donde no les 
faltaron refriegas con los Indios y Indias, que peleaban mejor que los hombres. Estando alli celebrando la semana 
santa, aunque una semana antes que lo fuese por la impericia de los curas, que sabian poco de computo, el afio de 
1536, llegé Belalcazar con la gente que pudo recoger: el qual mandé luego despoblar el pueblo, aunque veia la 
grosedad de la tierra, porque tenia concebido en su entendimiento era mucho mayor la del Dorado de Bogota, que 
iba buscando ; y para volver 4 aquella tierra no faltaria ocasion, sin perder por entonces la que se le ofrecia de sus 
noticias, y la que tambien pensaba hallar para hacer viage 4 Espafia, donde intentaba ir 4 negociar para si el govierno 
de aquellas tierras, que habia descubierto. 

2. De manera que dos intentos sacaron del Quito al general Belalcazar para intentar esta jornada: el uno des- 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS, 997 
cubierto y claro, 4 titulo del qual hizo la gente que trahia, que fue venir 4 Bogota en demanda del Dorado, con 
que doré sus acciones y encubrio en su pecho el otro, que era el ir a Espafia 4 lo dicho: Y pienso era este el que 
mas cuidado le daba, como se vio en la diligencia que luego hizo. Salieron desde este sitio de la villa despoblada 
de Ampudia, y Ilegaron al rio que llamaron de la Vieja, bien celebrado en esta tierra por una que hallaron alli, que 
lo era segun su aspecto de mas de cien afios ; pero tan Ilena toda de oro fino, que parece queria suphr con la hermo- 
sura de aquel metal la que sus afios le habian quitado. Del qual estaba tan cargada con orejeras, collares, manillas, 
y una muy ancha cinta de oro batido con que cefiia por la cintura sus arrugadas y curtidas carnes, que las trahia sin 
mas defensa que la del pellejo, que pesaba todo mas de seiscientos ducados. De que la desocupé un soldado llamado 
Miguel Mufioz, no haciendo la buena vieja resistencia, antes parecia holgarse de que la descargasen ya de aquel 
pesado metal, dejandole por paga puesto al rio el nombre de su edad. De alli pasaron hasta el sitio donde despues 
se poblo la villa de Ancerma; y de alli revolvieron 4 la provincia de los Indios Garrones, desde donde envio el 
general Belalcazar al capitan Juan Ladrillero con algunos soldados a descubrir si hallaban camino para la Mar del 
Sur, por donde pensaba si se hallara, dar con tonada 4 Don Francisco Pizarro, por no podersele escapar de otra suerte, 
para ir en Espafia 4 sus intentos ; aunque por entonces quedaron defraudados, por haberlo quedado tambien los que 
tenia el Ladrillero, de hallar camino para el Sur, por las espesuras y malezas de las montafias, que lo defendian; y asi 
le fue forzoso sin ningun buen efecto volverse 4 su general. El qual trato por entonces de revolver hacia la ciudad 
de Quito, 4 donde Ilegé, dejando de camino pobladas la ciudad de Popayan y la villa de Cali el afio de 1536. Dio 
cuenta de lo hecho a Don Francisco Pizarro, el qual confirmandole en su oficio de su teniente general, le dio 
nuevos poderes para poderse alargar 4 todos los descubrimientos que se le ofreciesen, no habiendo el Don Francisco 
alcanzado 4 hacerlos de los intentos del Belalcazar, porque se los supo bien ocultar. Y asi con ellos y sus nuevas 
licencias, y este ruido de ir 4 buscar el Dorado, allegé buena compaiiia, con que saliendo de Quito, donde quedaba 
Don Francisco Pizarro, llegé 4 Popayan el mes de mayo de 1538; y reparando alli poco por el pio que trahia de 
llegar & esta provincia del Reyno en demanda de su Dorado, luego que el tiempo les abrid, escogiendo trescientos 
hombres, los ciento de a caballo, con gran carruage y Yanacones y otros Indios y Indias sirvientes, con prevencion 
para quatro afios de sedas, lienzos, pafios, y otras cosas de Castilla, y caballos en que se cargase, comenzé su jornada 
a la parte del oriente, por donde les decia el Indio Bogota estaba su tierra. 

3. Era la que comenzaron luego 4 encontrar, tan aspera y doblada de riscos, cerros, montafas cerradas, rlos, que- 
bradas, ramblas, pantanos, tremedales y balzares, con malas influencias del cielo, que si el no les ayudara perecie- 
ran todos, segun comenzaron luego 4 enfermar. Pero con tal ayuda vinieron a dar en el valle de Neyba*, tierra como 
dejamos dicho mal sana por entonces, aunque llana y desahogada de montafias, pues no las tiene sino 4 la margen del 
Rio grande de la Magdalena que lo bafia, y de los que entran en el por ambas partes. Por la que llegaron, que es la 
tierra de los Coyaymas, hallaron muchos lugares poblados, y muchos despoblados por unas sangrientas guerras civiles, 
que se habian levantado entre ellos ; por donde se vinieron 4 dividir y apartar despues 4 los llanos los Coyaymas de 
los Pixaos, que se retiraron 4 las sierras, de que trataremos quando en nuestra Tercera Parte llegue la historia a esta 
tierra: en la qual estuyo algunos dias el general Belalcazar reformando su gente por haber comidas abundantes, no 
con falta de guazabaras, que les daban los Indios, en especial los Geporoges con sus caciques Acatulo y Yapaolos : 
en una de las quales mataron un criado del general, llamado Saldafia, cerca de un gran rio que baja de las sierras, 
con que le quedé hasta hoy al rio el mismo nombre; aunque otros dicen, que al pasar el rio se le ahogo el criado. Y 
fue bueno estar los Indios en sus guerras para no tenerlas mayores con los nuestros, 4 quien les bastaban las que 
trahian de enfermedades y disgustos de hallar la tierra sin oro. Por lo qual pareciendole 4 Belalcazar seria acer- 
tado no dejar sin poblar la de Timana, que sabian lo tenia, envid 4 los capitanes Juan de Ampudia, y Pedro de 
Afiasco con alguna gente con setenta hombres, que volviesen 4 Popayan, y desde alli el uno 4 poblar 4 Timana, que- 
dandose él con los demas, y los capitanes Juan de Cabrera, Juan Tafur, Juan de Avendafio, Martinez, y Luis Sana- 
bria: de los quales el Tafur, Avendafio, y Sanabria, se habian tambien hallado en la conquista de Cubagua. Ya 
quando iban caminando el valle abajo, Ilegaron al parage de las fortalecillas, donde habian Megado por esta otra 
banda del Rio grande los soldados, que dias habia, habian ido 4 buscar con el general Quesada la casa del Sol. Tu- 
vieron nuevas de los Indios, que ya habia otros hombres como ellos en la tierra; de que recibieron harta pena, por 
haberles en esto sucedido lo que el Belalcazar se sospechaba, por saber andaban muchos conquistando por muchas 

* Antes de llegar 4 Neyba se estuvieron en Timana, por la riqueza que en ella hallaron del contrato del hayo, de que fue y es mui abundante, 
y hallaron cosa de 5000 Indios en aquella provincia. 

998 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

partes. Y esas eran las causas que le hacian andar siempre con priesas para hacer este descubrimiento, por los 
temores que tenia no se le hubiese otro, anticipado en cosa que el se prometia una gran grosedad por las nuevas del 
Indio. Tampoco falto otro que las diese al general Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada, de como esos estaban en el valle 
de Neyba; de cuya verdad quedé bien enterado, por irse refrescando 4 cada hora de Indios amigos ; los quales para 
mayores sefias de ser asi, decian que no venian vestidos como ellos estaban de mantas de su tierra, sino de otras 
cosas mejores, y trahian mucha gente que les servian. 

Capiruto Y. 

1. Sale Fernan Perez de Quesada a saber que Gente es la que viene por el Valle de Neyba, y 
vese con Belalcazar. | 

2. Convida Fernan Perez a Belalcazar, si quiere venir a Santafe, y no se resuelve por entonces. 

3. Tiene noticia Lazaro Fonte de la venida del General Nicolas de Fedreman por la orilla de 
los Uanos, y dala al General Ximenez de Quesada. 

1. No dejé de causar novedad al Gonzalo Ximenez y sus soldados por las que se podian seguir de juntarse diferentes 
conquistadores. Pero para certificarse mas de la verdad, y disponerse para lo que pudiese suceder, se determind 
saliese una esquadra de buenos soldados, y por cabo su hermano Fernan Perez de Quesada, 4 quien quisieron acom- 
pafiar los capitanes Juan de Cespedes y Pedro de Colmenares. Fueron caminando con cuidado, y con solas las 
noticias que sacaron de Santafé hasta llegar 4 Guataqui cerca ya del valle de Neyba, donde las hallaron mui mas 
claras por unas xaras emplumadas, que los Indios les mostraban, que habian trahido de Jas que los Peruleros tiraban ; 
& cuyo sitio, y alojamiento los fueron guiando los mismos que mostraban las xaras, hasta Ilevarlos al rio, que 
Ilaman Sabandija, (cuyas aguas me han apagado algunas veces la sed,) que era ya cerca del alojamiento de los Peru- 
leros; donde se escondieron el capitan Pedro de Colmenares, Juan Rodriguez, Gil y Juan de Frias, con algunos 
otros soldados en emboscada, para si acaso se ofreciese ocasion de descuido en los del Peru, cogerlos, y saber que 
gente era. Estando asi encubiertos entre las yerbas de la margen del rio Sabandija, Namado asi por una culebrilla 
que vieron en el los primeros que le descubrieron, llegé a el un mancebo 4 caballo, y 4 vista de los escondidos co- 
menzo desde el caballo 4 pescar con una cafia y anzuelo; y determinando salir para pescarlo a él, apenas se hubie- 
ron meneado quando lo sintio el caballo, y apuntando con vista y orejas hacia ellos, al punto volvio los ojos el 
mozo 4 donde el caballo, y viendolos apretdle las piernas, con que llego como un viento 4 donde los compafieros, 
dando arma con mil desentonadas voces, que entendieron venia el mundo sobre ellos. EKnvio luego Belalcazar al 
capitan Juan Cabrera, con los capitanes Pedro de Puelles, Juan Diaz Hidalgo, y Juan de Arevalo, con algunos otros 
de 4 caballo, que llegaron hasta veinte, 4 reconocer la gente de Quesada: la qual iba ya al descubierto 4 verse con 
los del Peru. Con que en breve se encontraron los unos con los otros, entre los quales hubo grandes cortesias de 
ambas partes ; y dandose cuenta unos 4 otros en suma de sus descubrimientos y trabajos, se fueron mano 4 mano 4 
descansar de los suyos, los de Quesada 4 las tiendas de Belalcazar, donde los recibio con gusto sagaz, pues nunca se 
aseguré tan del todo, por lo que pudiera suceder, que se descuidase de andar sobre aviso ; el que tampoco falté en 
los de Quesada prevenidos para todo suceso. 

2. Pero aseguraronse luego de ambas partes quedando sin ningunas sospechas unos de otros: con que abridé del 
todo su pecho el Fernan Perez, y dando 4 Belalcazar un mui cumplido y cortesano recado de parte de su hermano, 
le cont6 mas 4 la larga el descubrimiento que habian hecho, la disposicion de la tierra, y el aparejo que desde ella 
se habia hallado para otras mayores, por las vistas que se habian dado 4 los Ilanos, de que no se pensaba dejar de 
tomar noticia en habiendo oportunidad de pertrechos y caballos. Admitié Belalcazar el recado y cortesias de Fer- 
nan Perez, y con las mismas hizo el retorno, ofreciendo soldados, caballos, y quanto el trahia para que consiguiesen 
los intentos que tenian de mayores descubrimientos ; por que los suyos ya no eran por entonces sino de cumplir 
los que dias habia le solicitaban, de irse 4 Espafa por el camino que veia abierto de los del Reyno, supuesto que la 
tierra de su hombre dorado ya tenia duefio: Deseando con esta diligencia serlo él tambien en propriedad y no como 
teniente de la que habia descubierto y poblado desde Quito para abajo. Estimé en mucho el Fernan Perez estos 
ofrecimientos, y haciendolos mui cumplidos de todo lo que se quisiese servir Belalcazar de la rancheria de Santafé, 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 299 

donde quedaba su hermano, le suplicé se sirviese ir alla 4 verse con él, con quien se podia tratar de los intentos de 
la ida 4 Espatfia, pues el estaba con los mismos, y con una gran voluntad que desde luego de su parte le ofrecia para 
servirle 4 él, y 4 todos sus soldados. Los quales, como no siempre el vulgo es de una opinion, se dividieron en 
tenerlas diferentes, y aun que no del todo al descubierto, hubo algunos que dieron 4 entender, fuera bueno librar 
en las armas el derecho de la tierra descubierta. Fuele esta platica al capitan Juan de Cespedes, y no sabiendo de 
burlas en cosas que pedian veras, dijo en alta voz: Sefiores, 4 las tierras que nosotros hemos ganado, otros no han 
de entrar 4 poseerlas, sino por las puntas de las lanzas: y pues 4 nadie quitamos sus trabajos, estas dificultades 
hallara, el que intentare quitarnos los nuestros. Oyé estas razones el capitan Juan Cabrera, hombre de mui gran 
suerte y valor en toda ocasion ; y viendo que aquella lo era de encenderse algunos pesados disgustos, procuré pisar 
aquellas centellas, diciendo : Sefior Capitan, bien pienso que quando el negocio viniera 4 eso, no nos las dieron en las 
espaldas, porque no sabemos volverlas 4 mayores peligros. Pero ahora no deseamos sino paz y amistad, y que cada 
uno goze lo que su buena suerte y trabajos le hubieren dado; porque sabemos lo que cuesta conquistar un palmo 
de tierra, como nos lo ha dicho la experiencia 4 los curtidos en esto. Y asi mas deseo saber el nombre de vuestra 
merced, para servirle, que no pasara delante inquietudes. Llamome Juan de Cespedes, respondio, mas conocido que 
la ruda, y mi nombre bien sabido de todos por mares y tierras de estas Indias. Aunque hé andado muchas partes de 
ellas, respondio el Cabrera, nunca ha llegado 4 mi olor de ruda criada entre tales cespedes : porque yo soy un pobre 
capitan lamado Juan de Cabrera, hijo del olvido y de mis obras. Y aunque estos cavalleros le quieren, porque ellos 
son, dar otros titulos, el que yo tomaré de aqui adelante, sera de mui criado de vuestra merced, de que blasonaré mas 
que de mis hazafias. No quedd sin conveniente respuesta este honrado termino, por saberlo tener con todos el capitan 
Cespedes: con que quedaron estos dos valerosos capitanes mui en amistad y conformes, y 4 su imitacion todos los 
demas, aunque sin acabarse de resolver el general Belalcazar, si llegaria 4 Santafé.. Por lo qual despidiendose de él 
y de todos el Fernan Perez de Quesada, 4 quien todos acompafiaron por buen trecho, se volvio 4 Bogota y conto 4 
su hermano la gente que era, y lo sucedido con ellos. 

3. Mientras pasaban estas cosas, pasaban otras mas de afliccion y fatiga sobre el pobre desterrado y preso Lazaro 
Fonte, en su pueblo de Pasca : porque si bien le acudian los Indios en sus necesidades, con que se relevaban algo los 
trabajos, no era tan del todo, que no fuesen mui grandes en considerarse entre barbaros de una condicion tan mudable, 
que lo suele ser tras cada hora por levisimas ocasiones. Y asi no se aseguraba un dia sin sobresaltos de quando 
seria aquel, en que mudasen de parecer, y 4 él de esta vida. Y asi solo ponia la suya en el Autor de ella, no dejando 
de encomendarsela de dia, ni de noche. En los quales egercicios estaba, quando por caminos mui otros de los nues- 
tros, le dispuso y envio su remedio, con unas nuevas que tuvo de ciertos Indios que venian por la parte del Oriente, 
que es la de los lanos de Venezuela, de unos hombres como él; y que estaban ya menos de seis leguas de alli, con 
caballos y perros como los que ellos trahian. Certificose de la nueva por medio de su sirvienta, y sabida la verdad 
traté luego de avisar de ella 4 su general. Y asi tomando un pedazo de cuero de venado bien brufiido, que halld © 
entre los Indios, escribio con bija 6 almagre una carta con estas razones : Mui Sefior, nueva cierta he tenido que 
viene gente Espajfiola por los llanos, y que esta tan cerca que Iegara aqui mafiana; vea vuestra merced lo que se debe 
hacer, y avise con brevedad. Llegé con mucha priesa el Indio que la llevaba, y did le en mano propia al general, 
despues de seis 6 siete dias de como habia llegado su hermano Fernan Perez del valle de Neyba de ver 4 Belalcazar. 

Carituyo VI. 

1. Sueltan de la prision a Lazaro Fonte, y entra Nicolas de Fedreman en el pueblo de Pasca. 

2. Viene Fedreman & Santafé, y recibele Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada con toda la demostra- 
cion de amistad que pudo. : 

3. Conciertanse ambos Generales de hacer Compania por escritura publica, de estar aunados para 

todo buen 6 mal suceso, y particion de ganancias. 

1. Con la brevedad que pedia el caso y carta, y dando muestras de agradecimiento 4 quien la envid, mando el general 

se aparejase una esquadra, en que fuesen con los demas los capitanes Juan de Junco, Gonzalo Suarez Rondon, Pedro 

Fernandez Valenzuela, Paredes, Calderon, y otros de quien tenia mejor confianza, con orden de que llegasen 4 Pasea 
3 N 

230 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

d paso largo, y que con el mismo le avisasen de lo que habia, dando ante todas cosas libertad al capitan Lazaro Fonte, 
apesarado ya de lo-que habia hecho con él de mala informacion, lo qual procur6 despues reparar en todas ocasiones ; 
pues no se ofrecia ninguna en que con demostraciones no le hiciese favor. No incit6 poco 4 los soldados para abre- 
viar la Ilegada a Pasca, el desear tambien el dar 4 Lazaro Fonte soltura de su prision; en que le hallaron ya con mas 
alientos por haverlos cobrado con las esperanzas de su libertad, con las nuevas que le habian venido de gente nueva 
Espafiola. La qual llegd luego que llegaron 4 Pasca los Quesadas; porque apenas se habian apeado, quando entré 
en el pueblo el capitan Pedro de Limpias, conquistador antiguo de la provincia de Venezuela, que con otros compa- 
fieros venia sobresaliente descubriendo la tierra por el capitan Nicolas de Fedreman, Tudesco de nacion, y teniente 
general del gobernador de la provincia de Venezuela Jorge de Espira, de quien largamente queda tratado en nuestra 
Primera Parte. Llegé otro dia Fedreman con el resto de la gente que habia quedado sola una jornada atras ; 4 quien 
recibieron con todas las cortesias y agasajos, que pudieron los de Santa Marta, dandoles tambien cuenta de los descu- 
brimientos que se habian hecho en esta tierra del Reyno, y el estado en que todo estaba. De que tuvieron mucho 
gusto los de Venezuela ; porque aunque no dejaron de sentir el verse defraudados de ser ellos los primeros conquis- 
tadores de aquella provincia a donde la suerte los habia trahido, pero tuvieronla por buena, pues Dios lo habia orde- 
nado asi, de haber llegado donde hallasen socorro para tantas necesidades como trahian, y descanso de trabajos tan 
intolerables como habian pasado en cinco afios, que habia, habian salido de Coro, en los quales se habian consumido 
300 soldados ; pues de 400 que salieron, solo llegaron alli ciento el aio de 1539; y estos tan gastados y desarropados, 
que los mas venian vestidos de cueros de venados, y abarcas de las mismas pieles. Con que parece pudieron los de 
Santa Marta perder el empacho que pudieran haber cobrado, en verse vestidos de mantas de algodon delante de los 
Peruleros, que lo estaban de sedas y perpifianes : en que se verifica el dicho comun, que nadie es tan pobre, que no 
pueda ser otro mas; y lo que le sucedio-al otro, que hallandose con solos dos maravedies en la bolsa, y con ganas de 
comer, le parecio ser el mas pobre del mundo, pues su caudal no Iegaba 4 mas; y al fin arbitrando en que emple- 
aria, que fuese suficiente 4 matar su hambre, determiné comprar una libra de habas verdes ; y saliendose del pueblo 
para ir 4 otro, ibaselas comiendo solos los granos, y arrojando las cascaras, y volviendo la cabeza vido 4 otro que 
las venia cogiendo y comiendo, por ser mas pobre que él, y no haver tenido con que comprarlas: con que conocio 
no ser él el mas pobre del mundo. 

2. Movieron 4 compasion 4 los del Reyno, viendo soldados tan valientes y que 4 muchos de ellos conocieron, por 
ser de los que prendio Fedreman 6 su gente, en las costas del Cabo de la Vela, con su capitan Juan de Rivera, como 
dejamos dicho en nuestra Primera Parte, y que viniesen tan gastados de vestidos, y necesitados de todo. Despachose 
luego 4 dar aviso al general Quesada de como era Nicolas de Fedreman y su gente, la que habia llegado, yendo 4 
Nevarlo Paredes, Calderon, y otro soldado de los. recien llegados, llamado Fernando Montero, que despues fue vecino 
de la ciudad de Tocayma, 4 quien recibio el general Ximenez benignamente, dando le algunas finas telas de algodon 
con que se vistiera, y una chaguala de fino oro, que pesaba 200 ducados. Y tratando Iuego del recibimiento que se 
le debia de hacer 4 Fedreman, hizo apercibir los peones y caballos, y avisar 4 los caciques mas cercanos para que se 
hallasen con sus gentes: con que vinieron en bien crecido numero con sus gallardos pefiachos de rica plumeria, 
dardos, lanzas, y macanas, con todos sus caracoles, fotutos, trompetas, y los demas pertrechos de guerra, como si 
fuera para algun rompimiento de batalla. Quando supo el general que ya llegaba Fedreman, hizo dividir los Indios 
en dos mangas, yendo él con su pendon delante acompafiado de algunos de 4 caballo y los demas con la infanteria. 
¥ dispuestos en buen orden caminaron desde Santafé hacia las grandes Ianulas del pueblo de Boza, hasta que vieron 
asomar por el alto de la loma que se remata cerca del pueblo, 4 Fedreman con treinta de 4 caballo, de los quales eran 
los mas de los que habia enviado 4 su recibimiento el general Ximenez: el qual al tiempo que Ilegaban cerca los 
unos de los otros en aquellos espaciosos y agradables prados, mandé que se tocasen todas las trompetas, cajas, cara- 
coles, fotutos, y los demas instrumentos que se hallaban: con que parecio se representaba una sangrienta y refida 
batalla. | Sobresaltose Fedreman de ver la gente tanta y tan en orden militar, y sonar los instrumentos en modo de 
rompimiento, temiendo no lo quisiesen hacer con él y su gente. _Y volviendo 4 la de Santa Marta que le acompa- 
haba, dijo: Sefores, ya sabeis que me hé fiado de vosotros, por haber conocido sois gente noble y de sencillos tratos. 
No querria hallarlos ahora dobles, en tiempo que yo y los mios no nos podemos disponer para la defensa de algun 
dafio 6 agravio, si se nos prefende hacer. Ninguno se hard4 4 la persona y gente de vuestra merced, respondio Gon- 
zalo Suarez. Y asi puede estar yuestra merced bien seguro, pues ninguno pretende sino servir 4 toda su compafiia 
con personas y haciendas ‘con mucho gusto, por ser este el nuestro y de nuestro general, como se'experimentara desde 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 231 

luego. Yban prosiguiendo con esto su camino los unos y los otros, hasta juntarse en distancia de veinte pasos, 4 
donde Fedreman con terminos humildes y cortesanos se aped de su caballo; y haciendo lo mismo Gonzalo Ximenez, 
legaron 4 abrazarse ambos con mui grandes cumplimientos y cortesias, y con terminos y palabras se prometieron 
amistad el uno al otro, con tan firmes palabras como se conocio despues por las obras. En lo qual habiendo gastado 
un moderado espacio de tiempo, volvieron todos 4 subir en sus caballos, y los peones y Indios en su orden se vini- 
eron mano a mano 4 la nueva ciudad de Santafé. 

3. Donde fueron los recien venidos agasajados con todo lo que fue posible amigablemente, festejando la venida 
con fiestas de 4 caballo por algunos dias. En los quales habiendo conocido el general Ximenez la afabilidad y no- 
bleza de Fedreman, que la tenia con mui grande agrado pareciole confederarse con el por ventura por lo que podia 
suceder con los Peruleros, que tenia 4 la puerta, no quisiesen como gente arriscada, y que ya se habia traslucido algo, 
como hemos dicho, hacer pendencia la posession de la tierra, si se determinasen llegar 4 ella. Y asi con esta buena 
prudencia, por escritura publica se concertaron ambos generales en que fuesen partibles por mitades todas las ganan- 
cias que desde aquel dia que entraron, se hiciesen, en todo bueno 6 mal suceso participantes todos, como quienes 
eran ya de una misma masa y hermandad. Del qual concierto vino 4 tener fundamento y fuerza el repartirles 
encomiendas a los soldados de Fedreman, que se quedaron en este Reyno, sin haber sido conquistadores ni descubri- 
dores primeros de él. Si bien lo merecian por ser gente toda de tanto valor, como se conocié en jornadas de cinco 
aflos, y en otras ocasiones que se ofrecieron de harta consideracion en el Reyno, donde por no estar aun todo pacifi- 
cado, fueron menester sus buenos brios y valor, como se vieron en reducir los Indios de los alzamientos del termino 
de la ciudad de Velez, y de las retiradas y alzamientos de los pefioles de Simijaca, Suta, Ocabita, y el pantano de 
Duytama, como diremos, queriendo el Seftor, quando Ilegue por aquellas tierras la historia. 

Cariruxto VII. 

1. Llega a Santafe el capitan Sebastian de Belalcazar, y lo que alh paso, se cuenta. 
2. Platica que hizo Belalcazar sobre la utilidad de las Fundaciones, que se deben hacer, en lo que 
se va conquistando. 

3. Determinase el general Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada a poblar dos Ciudades, y reformar la 
edificacion de la de Santafé. 

1. Bren pocos dias pasaron despues de la Ilegada de Fedreman 4 Santafé, quando vino nueva que venia acercandose 4 la 
misma ciudad Belalcazar. Y esta fue tan cierta, que apenas la habian recibido, quando lo vieron asomar por la misma 
loma, que vino Fedreman, a él, y 4 toda su gente ; que acercandose al pueblo hacian por aquellos campos mil visos y 
tornasoles con los’ varios colores de que venian vestidos, de sedas, granas, perpifianes, con encrespadas plumas, bien 
opuestos en estas galas 4 las que trahian en Santafé los de Santa Marta y Venezuela, pues 4 los que mas se alargaban, 
era & ser telas de algodon con monteras, y alpargates de lo mismo, por haber sido sus caminos tan prolixos y dificul- 
tosos, que lo tuvieron 4 buena suerte haber quedado vestidos de sus pellejos, y estos tan curtidos que casi no sentian el 
picarles los mosquitos. Si bien la falta de vestidos la suplia la fortaleza de los animos, que suele apocarse entre ves- 
tidos blandos. Llegé 4 Santafé Belalcazar con toda esta demostracion de bizarria, donde fue bien recibido y agasajado 
como merecia su persona, y las de sus compafieros, que todos eran de prueba para qualquier acontecimiento : Aunque 
por el que podia suceder, todos comenzaron sus hospedages sin descuidos, hasta que ya se aseguraron unos dé otros 
y trabaron estrechas amistades, siendo el enlaze de todas la prudencia del general Ximenez de Quesada, que la tenia 
singular para negocios arduos, como lo era este de juntarse y conservarse en paz tres valientes y briosos conquista- 
dores sobre una provincia de tanta consideracion, como es esta del Reyno. Porque si es verdadero el refran, que dos 
gorriones en una espiga hacen mala liga, si se juntan tres, que seran? Y asi siempre me ha parecido ser providencia 
del cielo el haberse ofrecido los estropiezos que dijimos, para que dejara el general Quesada el viage que habia 
comenzado para Espaiia, por haber de ser de la importancia que ahora fue, su talento y persona, para que no se tur- 
bara la paz entre estos tres conquistadores y el que dejaba Quesada por su teniente : Porque no obstante, como era 
hombre mui de hecho, como yeremos que lo fue en la venida de Geronimo Lebron, pues no lo fue para defender su 
govierno, con todo eso ‘ Neque Hercules contra duos’. Y asi no fueron estas las que atajaron y lo compusieron todo, 

932 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

sino las buenas razones en quien de ordinario suele residir mayor fortaleza que en las armas; y mas si entre lo uno 
y lo otro tercian ayudas de costa, en que no pienso anduvo corto el Quesada, si creemos 4 la fama parlera, que si fue 
asi, fue echar el sello 4 la prudencia, comprando mucho con poco sin amancillar la conciencia. 

2. Fue la entrada de estos dos capitanes en Santafé por todo el mes de febrero del aftlo de 1539, donde se detu- 
vieron todos tres generales hasta fin de mayo del mismo afo, descansando de tan crecidos trabajos como todos 
habian pasado, y disponiendo lo necesario al viage que todos tres pretendian hacer 4 Espafia, en que luego se decla- 
raron y concertaron. Era en este tiempo su ordinario entretenimiento la caza de venados de que hervia entonces 
la tierra, como se echara de ver por los muchos que aun hay ahora, despues de haver los seguido ochenta y dos 
afios que hd hoy que paso esto. Pero entre estas ocupaciones considerando el general Belalcazar como mas experi- 
mentado en conquistas, la bondad de esta tierra del Reyno; su buena disposicion para labranzas y crianzas ; la 
infinidad de Indios que la habitaban, y ser de animos tan dociles, pues tan sin resistencia habian dado la amistad ; 
por la que habia cobrado con el general Quesada, le dijo un dia delante del general Fedreman, y de los demas 
lucidos capitanes y soldados: Sin duda, Sefior Capitan, que si esta grosedad de Indios y tierras huviera legado 4 mis 
manos, esta fuera la hora que las tuviera empleadas en la poblacion de tres 6 quatro pueblos, y repartidos los Indios 
Alos moradores de ellos: porque sino se le ponen 4 lo conquistado estos fundamentos, quedarse ha sin ningunos, 
y el trabajo perdido en valde, como sabe el Sefior Capitan Nicolas de Fedreman ha sucedido en sus conquistas de la 
provincia de Venezuela. Y asi tendré por grande acierto, que vuestra merced lo ponga luego por obra, pues de 
hacerlo no se seguiré ningun dafio, y podran seguirse infinitos provechos ; y uno de los principales vendra a ser en 

orden 4 las jornadas que para mayores descubrimientos se hicieren, pues para el malo 6 buen suceso que tuvieren, 
es bien tener de asiento ciudades y casas proprias que no falten, ya que lo demas corra con varios sucesos. No 
habra por donde mejor se llene esta tierra de buena gente en pocos dias, que con la voz que se diere, de que ya hay 
ciudades pobladas, y Indios que dan demoras y labranza en las tierras, que pagan bien con sus frutos los trabajos 
de quien las cultiva. Todo esto hard facil las dificultades, que he sabido que hay en los viages hasta las costas del 
mar; y mas si 4 esto se afladen descubrimientos de minas, de quien han dado tan claras muestras el oro y esme- 
raldas que se han hallado en el Reyno. Este es mi parecer, no porque yo tengo intentos de permanecer en esta 
tierra, pues solo son por ahora de ir en Espafia 4 pedir el premio de mis sudores, que no han sido pocos en con- 
quistar y poblar las provincias y ciudades del Quito, Pasto, Popayan, Cali, y Timana. Y aun pues vuestras mercedes 
no se quedan atras en merecimientos, sera bien tampoco se queden en pedir la gratificacion de ellos, pues para todos 
tiene pecho nuestro invictisimo Cesar, y la mano sabrosa de hacer otras mayores mercedes que las que le pediremos. 
Y asi si en esto nos resolvemos, es menester lo hagamos tambien en determinar por donde ha de ser el viage; y si 
se hiciere por el rio grande, que le tengo por mas acertado, se disponga luego la fabrica de los bergantines en que 
podamos bajar sin impedimento, pues no lo tendremos en la embarcacion desde los puertos, en especial del Sefior 
general Ximenez, por ser ya muerto el gobernador el adelantado Don Pedro Fernandez de Lugo, como lo tengo 
por una carta que dias ha, recibi. Trahia por su maestre de campo Belalcazar al capitan Melchor Valdes, hombre 
valeroso, como lo habia mostrado en las conquistas del Peru, y gran confidente del Marques Don Francisco Pizarro, 
por haber sido uno de los mejores capitanes que tuvo; y por tal se le habia dado para este efecto de maestre de 
campo al Belalcazar. Y sabiendo su determinacion de pasar 4 Espafia 4 pedir por govierno lo que habia con- 
quistado, le dijo con mucha libertad, no cumplia con lo que debia 4 la confianza que de él hacia el Marques, que lo 
habia enviado 4 hacer aquellas conquistas en su nombre; con que se repunté mucho con el Valdes el Belalcazar : 
pasara 4 mas, si Quesada no terciara de buena, rogando al Valdes se quedara en el Reyno con su hermano Perez de 
Quesada, como lo hizo, y permanecié toda la vida que le resté, que fue de muchos afos, que gasté en conquistas en 
este Reyno, haciendo su principal vecindad en la ciudad de Ybague. 

3. Bien hubo menester la tibieza que hasta alli habia tenido el Licenciado Ximenez en poblar, que se avivara con 
el calor del general Belalcazar, que como mas experimentado, sabia lo que convenia las poblaciones para la conser- 
vacion de lo ganado en servicio de Dios y del Rey, y ampliacion de otras conquistas. Y asi tomando el consejo 
como de amigo, y viendose ya con el aumento que se habia hecho de soldados con los de Fedreman, y algunos que 
ya habian dado muestras de quedarse de los de Belalcazar, y que ya se le habia levantado mas el animo y esperanzas 
con haber sabido la muerte de Don Pedro Fernandez de Lugo, su gobernador, que se le haria merced del gobierno 
en propriedad de todo lo que habia descubierto, luego traté con sus capitanes, como quien sabia bien la disposicion 
de la tierra, en que partes de ella se podrian fundar dos 6 tres ciudades. Y resolviendose, que lo mas 4 proposite 

Q 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 233 

era el sitio donde estaba Tunja, y aquella parte por donde se habia entrado por la provincia de Chipata, quedandose 
esta de Santafé en el sitio que se habia comenzado 4 poblar, pues era acomodado. _Parecio.al Ximenez poner luego 
manos 4 la obra en esta ciudad de Santafé; porque aun no tenia, como hemos dicho mas que los doze buhios, y la 
iglesia, y todo en forma de rancheria. Y asi comenzandose la 4 dar de ciudad, se fueron luego sefialando calles, 
plaza, y solares, dandole el mejor en la mejor parte de ella 4 la iglesia, que es el que ahora tiene; y los demas 4 
todos los vecinos, segun sus calidades, cerca, 6 desviados, de la plaza; y en ella casas de cabildo, donde lo hiciesen 
los que para él sefialaron, 4 los primeros de Abril del mismo afio de 1539, que fueron por alcaldes Geronimo de la 
Inza, y Juan de Arebalo: regidores el capitan Juan de San Martin, el capitan Juan de Cespedes, el capitan An- 
tonio Diaz Cardoso, el capitan Lazaro Fonte, el Alferez Hernan Venegas, Pedro de Colmenares, y Hernando de 
Roxas: alguacil mayor Baltazar Maldonado; porque alguacil mayor del reyno era Perez de Quesada, hermano del 
licenciado Gonzalo Ximenez, teniente general: escribano Juan Rodriguez de Benavides. El titulo de la iglesia 
fué ‘de la Concepcion de Nuestra Sefiora, como hoy lo tiene. El primer cura, que luego alli se sefial6 en nombre del 
rey, fue el bachiller Juan de Berdejo, y su teniente el Padre Fray Vicente Requesada de la Orden de San Augustin, 
que ambos entraron con Nicolas de Fedreman. 

Cariruxto VIII. 

1. Fundase mas de proposito la Ciudad de Santafe, con la iglesia de tapias. 

2. Envia Sebastian de Belalcazar a poblar la villa de Neyba al capitan Juan de Cabrera. 

3. No pudo el general Quesada repartir la tierra antes de su partida, y dejo para ello comi- 
sion a su hermano. 

1. Funpapa ya de proposito la Ciudad de Santafé, y sefialados los que se habian de avecindar en ella, comenzaron 
luego todos en los solares que se les habian repartido, 4 ensancharla, cimentando casas un poco mas de proposito 
que lo estaban, aunque no de mas fundamento que el que daba lugar los pocos albahiles, y muchos embarazos que 
habia de otras cosas mas importantes por entonces ; aunque quando estas lo dieron, se fueron mudando las flacas 
paredes de barro y cafias, en tapias y adobes; 4 que dio principio el capitan Alonso de Olalla de los que vinieron 
con Fedreman, porque él fue el primero que la tubo de tapias, aunque la cubierta de paja como las demas. Despues 
hizo la suya de teja Pedro de Colmenares, padre de Luis de Colmenares, que la tubo el primero de esta cubierta : 
hizose tambien de tapia la iglesia, y duré asi hasta la venida del obispo Don Fray Juan de los Barrios, de nuestra 
sagrada religion, que con su buena industria y ayuda del pueblo, se hizo de piedra y teja, como diremos mas largo 
en otra parte. En la que estaba en ella al lado del evangelio fundé la primera capilla, y la doté con titulo de Santiago 
apostol, patron de Espafia, el capitan Gonzalo Garcia Zorro. 

2. La priesa que tubieron los tres tenientes generales de su ida en Espafia, no daba lugar, dilaciones en nada; y 
asi luego entrando el mes de Abril el mismo afio, enviaron oficiales que labrasen un mui buen barco para el viage 4 
la ribera del rio grande de la Magdalena, en aquella parte cerca de donde fue despues poblada la ciudad de Tocayma, 
por donde determinaron embarcarse y seguir su camino. Para el qual se dispuso buen matalotage de lo que entonces 
daba la tierra, que lo mejor fue cecinas de venado con cantidad de maiz, sin poderse ayudar de otras carnes. Porque 
aunque el general Belalcazar trahia puercos con sus hembras, y Nicolas de Fedreman gallinas, no fueron mas que 
los que eran menester para casta; de que luego comenzé 4 crecer en tanto numero lo uno y lo otro, que en breves 
dias se llendé toda la tierra, por haberla hallado tan 4 su proposito en abundancia de comidas y buen temple. Envid 
el general Belalcazar al capitan Juan Cabrera con la mayor parte de sus soldados 4 poblar el valle de Neyba, porque 
aunque lo habia primero que él descubierto el general Gonzalo Ximenez, quando fue rastreando la casa del sol, 
como digimos, no llegé tan arriba, como despues, quando venia Belalcazar, que lo fue descubriendo. Por lo qual 
lo tuvo por tierra que entraba en su conquista, 4 lo menos aquella parte donde se poblé el pueblo: aunque quando 
Don Alonso de Lugo vino al reyno por gobernador juzgando ser aquello tambien de su gobierno, escribio una carta 
al gobernador Belalcazar, que era de vuelta de Espafia con el gobierno y adelantamiento que pretendio, en que le 
decia no pasase aquella poblacion de Neyba adelante, pues cahia en las tierras de su gobierno del reyno: 4 lo qual 
respondio Belalcazar con un grande enfado, que le tenia no tanto por lo que le escribio quanto por haber sabido 

30 

234, SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

de su aspero proceder y malos tratamientos que hacia 4 los del reyno, con quien el habia cobrado tanta amistad, y 
aun estuvo casi determinado. de venir 4 ampararlos ; que si lo hiciera, se viera en harto peligro el Don Alonso, 
segun tenia de avispados 4 todos los de su gobierno. Al fin con no venir cesé todo ; pero no la poblacion; la qual 
hecha por el capitan Juan. de Cabrera, se volvio al reyno, ya que se habian ido los generales: con los que se fueron 4 
esta poblacion, y con otros que se fueron tras de los generales con el Belalcazar en Espafia, fueron pocos los que 
de ellos quedaron en el reyno, todos hombres de mucha suerte fuera de unos dos, Antonio de Luxan, y Francisco 
Arias, hombres inquietissimos, y que fueron causa de que lo estuviese el reyno, quando vino Don Alonzo, por haberse 
ido 4 el en cosas con los pareceres. 

3. No pudo el general Ximenez hacer apuntamientos ni repartimientos de Yndios 4 sus soldados, ni sefialarles 
estancias 6 heredades antes que se fuera, por no estar aun del todo pacifica la tierra, ni saber con que igualdad se 
podian repartir. Y asi todo lo remitio 4 su hermano Fernan Perez de Quesada, 4 quien dejé por su lugarteniente 
con dos poderes para mayor abundamiento; el uno en quanto teniente general que era de Don Pedro Fernandez, el 
gobernador de Santa Marta; y el otro como conquistador y descubridor del Nuevo Reyno; aunque este segundo 
mas parece le dio, como lo da a entender en él, por haber dudado si podia dar el primero, por ser el tambien teniente. 
Ambos despaché 4 8 del mes de Mayo del mismo afio de 1539; y por quitar del todo estas sospechas si podia 6 
no quedar el Fernan Perez por teniente, aun con ambos titulos, presentandolos 4 doze del mismo mes, que fue el 
mismo dia que se partio de la ciudad para Castilla el licenciado Ximenez, en el cabildo de la ciudad, para que lo 
recibieran ; dilataron en el recibir le aquel dia; y luego 4 trece tuvo por mejor el cabildo, no quitando ninguna fuerza 
4 los poderes, eligirle ellos de nuevo en nombre del rey, para que gobernase lo descubierto y por descubrir del 
Nuevo Reyno, hasta que el rey, 6 el gobernador que de nuevo viniese 4 Santa Marta, supuesto que ya sabian era 
muerto el Don Pedro Fernandez de Lugo, ordenase otra cosa. Tambien al capitan Gonzalo Suarez Rondon, demas 
de la comision que le dio para poblar una ciudad en Tunja, le hizo su justicia mayor para lo que tocaba al termino 
de dicha ciudad; el qual sefialé en la misma provision, para que entendiera hasta donde se extendia su jurisdiccion : 
y lo mismo hizo con el capitan Martin Galeano con la comision que le dio para poblar la ciudad de Velez. Con 
que ambos en sus distritos tuvieron facultad para hacer las encomiendas de Yndios que se fueran allanando y repar- 
tiendo. Y despues la tuvo el capitan Suarez para hacer las del distrito de esta ciudad de Santafé, quando fue 
gobernador y justicia mayor de todo el reyno. Los dos generales Fedreman y Belalcazar vendieron 4 los soldados 
que se quedaron, sus esclavos y pertrechos de guerra 4 buenos precios, como. eran perros, caballos, pafios, sedas, 
arcabuces, polvora y ballestas. Porque un caballo razonable daban por mil pesos; y no tal, ochocientos; y mui 
bueno, dos mil pesos ; y 4 este modo el Belalcazar y los que de sus compaiiros le siguieron, la vara de pafio, sedas, 
telas, perpifanes granas, y otras cosas; con que se juntaron gran suma de oro y esmeraldas. En las quales dili- 
gencias y otras para el viage, se iban ya legando los doze de Mayo del mismo afio de 1539, que fue el dia en que 
juntos se partieron de Santafé; dejando 4 todos encargada la paz y hermandad, si querian conservarse en las tierras 
en que quedaban, para donde pensaba el general Quesada dar promto la vuelta ; aunque le sucedio mui de otra suerte, 
como lo dira la historia @ su tiempo ; porque el de ahora solo es de proseguirla en las cosas del Reyno. 

Carituto IX. 

I 

. Embarcanse los tres generales en el Rio Grande, y Uegan a Cartagena. 

2. Son los prameros que dan en Cartagena las nuevas del descubrumento, y porque se habia 
aenorado. 

3. Llegan las nuevas del descubrimiento a Santa Marta, y disponese Geronimo Lebron « subir 
al Nuevo Reyno. ; 

4. Requerelo Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada desde Cartagena, que no suba por no ser de su 

gobierno. 

1. La mayor y mejor parte de los capitanes y soldados fueron desde Santafé, acompafiando 4 los tres generales. y 4 
los soldados que con ellos se iban 4 Espafia, hasta llegar al Rio Grande, donde ya estaba hecho el barco bien capaz: 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. . 935 

para todos: en que se embarcaron con hartos sentimientos 4 la despedida de los que se quedaban y se iban; y vol- 
vieron los otros 4 Santafé sin sucederles encuentros con los Panches, por estar algo atemorizados con los. sucesos 
pasados. . Los del rio fueron navegando, sin tenerlos malos, hasta que llegaron al salto del rio que ahora Ilaman 
de Honda, por los Indios que habia alli poblados, llamados asi, donde estan pobladas las bodegas y casas de los 
sefores de las canoas que bogan con negros y Indios Guataquies el rio: el qual encontrandose alli con algunas 
piedras grandes se alteran sus aguas de manera que impide el pasar las canoas, 4 lo menos cargadas de alli para arriba, 
aunque yendo hacia abajo suelen pasar no sin riesgo: de suerte que por asegurar la carga las descargan 4 la parte de 
arriba de este que Ilaman el salto, aunque mas propriamente se puede llamar raudal; y pasando por las orillas los 
vasos vacios, que sera su distancia hasta cien pasos, vuelven 4 tomar la carga que se lleva a cuestas por la playa todo 
lo que es el raudal hasta lo manso de el rio, donde aguarda la canoa. Esto les sucedio a los tres generales quando 
llegaron 4 este raudal, que descargando el barco lo pasaron vacio quatro soldados que iban dentro, buenos nadadores ; 
y volvyiendo 4 tomar la carga, mientras descargaban y pasaban el barco y ropa, tuvo traza el general Quesada de 
entender como tenian oro aquellos Indios Hondas, y que lo trahian de la tierra de hacia Poniente, que es donde ahora 
esta poblada la ciudad de Mariquita. Esto escribio el general Quesada desde Cartagena 4 su hermano, y con estas 
noticias que se le dieron, el afio de 1551 conquisté aquella tierra y poblé la ciudad el capitan Pedroso, como 4 su 
tiempo diremos. Prosiguieron su viage no sin encuentros con los Indios del rio, de que salieron bien por ir soldados 
de tanto valor, y tan bien prevenidos de armas y polvora, que llevaban los de Belalcazar; 4 que les ayudé mucho el 
ir rio abajo, y bogando quando lo pedia la necesidad de verse cercados de canoas que salian en algunas partes 4 salu- 
darlos, y darles el buen viage con nubadas de flechas envenenadas, de donde con buena ayuda de Dios, y su buena 
diligencia escaparon todos libres hasta llegar 4 la tierra del cacique Malambo, que tenia dada una no mui fundada 
paz 4 los Espafioles; desde donde fueron cortando por caminos mal abiertos hasta la ciudad de Cartagena, a donde 
hizo tan gran ruido su llegada, por las nuevas que luego se extendieron de las grandezas que se habian descubierto 
en el Reyno, y de ver 4 los soldados vestidos 4 lo nuevo y nunca visto en aquella tierra, de telas de algodon, que se 
alboroté toda ella, y llenaron de brio los pechos de todos para intentar hallarse en las infinitas riquezas que la fama 
iba aumentando que se hallaban en esta tierra del Reyno; sin aprovechar 4 que no se extendiese esto en el vulgo 4 
mas de lo que era, el hablar con moderacion del descubrimiento los tres generales, en especial el Gonzalo Ximenez, 
como quien mas de raiz sabia la substancia de la cosa. 

2. En este tiempo ya habia alguno que gobernaba en Santa Marta por comisiones de la audiencia de Santo 
Domingo por la muerte del adelantado Don Pedro Fernandez de Lugo, Geronimo Lebron, sin atender 4 mas de las 
cosas del gobierno y defender la ciudad de los Indios alterados ; porque de la jornada que habia hecho los afios de 
antes el licenciado Quesada al descubrimiento de los nacimientos del Rio Grande no se trataba, ni aun habia casi quien 
se acordase de ella con la muerte del adelantado, y por tener ya por muertos a todos los que la emprehendieron, ya 
por las malas nuevas que trajeron del viage el licenciado Gallegos y Diego de Rincon, quando llegaron desbaratados 
y heridos con los bergantines de vuelta, y ya porque se habian pasado mas de dos afios, y no habian sabido rastro 
ni nueva de ninguno. Y fue la causa, que como el camino fue tan dificultoso como hemos visto, y despues de pasado 
se hallé el general Ximenez entre tanta infinidad de Indios y con tan pocos Espafioles, por haber consumido 4 tantos 
los trabajos, le parecio ser menos inconyeniente que se dilatase el dar aviso 4 su gobernador de lo que se habia descu- 
bierto, que desmembrar algunos de sus pocos soldados para que fuesen a dar la nueva en ocasion y tierra donde uno 
le hiciera falta; y mas habiendo de ser necesariamente razonable compafiia la que se habia de despachar, si se hiciera 
4 dar la nueva, para que se pudieran vencer las dificultades del camino, asi las de la tierra y aguas, como las de los 
enemigos, que estaban peores y mas avispados y alertos, que 4 la subida; demas que siempre intentdé el general 
Ximenez desembarazarse lo antes que pudiera para ser el mensagero, como se eché de ver en haber intentado su viage 
otra vez antes que lo efectuase ahora, como dejamos dicho. 

3. La fama pregonera metié en pocos dias estas nuevas harto mas acrecentadas de lo que en si era la cosa, desde 
la ciudad de Cartagena en la de Santa Marta, y la llegada de Gonzalo Ximenez 4 Cartagena: con que se alboroté 
el gobernador Geronimo Lebron de manera que dando a sus provisiones el sentido que su deseo quiso, y que hasta 
alli no les habia dado, le parecio estirarlas un poco, y que le daban jurisdiccion hasta todo lo que se decia que habian 
descubierto en el Reyno, por haber tenido el descubrimiento origen de los soldados de aquella ciudad; 4 que no de- 
jaban de ayudar los capitanes y soldados que habian quedado en ella, quando se partieron los descubridores del Reyno, 
por el deseo que luego se les infundié de subir 4 ver lo que la fama decia, deseando reparar con esto su desgraciada 

236 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

suerte en no haber subido con el licenciado Ximenez 4 gozar de lo que él y sus compafieros habian hallado. Deter- 
mindse con esto Geronimo Lebron a subir al Reyno para reconocerlo, como cosa que pertenecia 4 su gobierno, y que 
lo reconociesen a él como 4su gobernador. Para lo qual traté luego se dispusiese lo necesario al viage con el mismo 
modo que supo habian tenido en él los que habian subido al descubrimiento ; porque pretendia seguir sus pasos asi 
con los bergantines por. el rio, como con los caballos y soldados por la margen de él; hallando favor para todo esto 
en los capitanes y soldados, que andaban deseosos de que se emprehendiese el viage. 

4, Al qual como la misma fama lo levase 4 Cartagena y 4 los oydos del general Ximenez de Quesada, y viese, 
que era tan contra los intentos que le llevaban 4 Espaiia, que eran de pedir para si el gobierno de lo descubierto por 
él y sus soldados, le envio 4 requerir no intentase la jornada, pues sus provisiones solo se extendian al gobierno de 
Santa Marta, de quien era cosa distinta lo que se habia descubierto en el Reyno, y que hasta que el rey determinase 
otra cosa, a cuya presencia el iba al caso, no se atreviese 4 entrar en el Reyno, como en cosa que pretendia pertenecer 
a su gobierno. . Pudo mas con el gobernador el deseo que tenia de hacer la jornada que las notificaciones ; y asi no 
dejé de hacer se dispusiese lo necesario 4 ella hasta que la puso en ejecucion, como despues diremos, como el 
Gonzalo Ximenez la suya con sus compafieros Fedreman y Belalcazar, llegando 4 la corte con prospero viage todos ; 
donde los dejaremos negociando en sus pretensiones, hasta que la historia desocupada de otras cosas que se ofrecen 

ahora, buelva a tropezar con ellos. 

CarituLo X. 

Catalogo de los camtanes y soldados que quedaron en el Nuevo Reyno de Granada, asi de los de Gon- 
fo) p) 
zalo Ximenez de Quesada, como de los de Nicolas de Fedreman y Sebastian de Belalcazar, 
quando los tres se fueron en Espana, con convenientes advertencias para la historia. 

PARECIOME no ser de poca importancia poner aqui con distincion los nombres de los capitanes y soldados que que- 
daron en este Nuevo Reyno, quando se partieron de él los tres generales 4 Espafia, para que se sepa quales entraron 
con el uno y quales con el otro, por lo mucho que importa para esta tierra que se sepa quales fueron los primeros 
descubridores y conquistadores de ella, y quales los que entraron despues que estaba la tierra descubierta y la mayor 
parte conquistada: porque aunque es asi, que los unos y los otros trabajaron mucho cada qual por su parte para 
llegar 4 esta ciudad de Santafé, y despues fueron mui lucidos los trabajos de todos, y bien conocido su valor en todas 
las ocasiones que se ofrecieron en pacificar las rebeliones de los Indios que se alzaron en muchas partes del reyno, 
como lo ira diciendo la historia; con todo eso, quando entraron en el reyno el general Nicolas de Fedreman con 
sus soldados, y Sebastian de Belalcazar con los suyos, hallaron, como dicen, la mesa puesta y amigos que los reci- 
biesen con buen agasajo, y la tierra pacifica por los trabajos y industria del general Ximenez de Quesada y sus 

soldados, que fueron los descubridores y primeros conquistadores. Y asi estas ventajas no se les pueden negar 4 estos - 

por haber excedido en ellas 4 los demas, y ser iguales 4 ellos en los trabajos que despues de todos juntos se siguieron. 
Conforme es esta distincion a la que los reyes hacen para premiar trabajos de unos y otros, pues ponen en primer 
lugar 4 los descubridores, conquistadores y pobladores, como lo fue Gonzalo Ximenez y sus soldados, que 4 los 
pobladores solamente, como lo fueron los demas ; aunque como hemos dicho, tuvieron algo de conquistadores, pero 
ninguna cosa de descubridores. No podré poner aqui los nombres de todos, porque la tardanza de mas de ochenta 
afios se ha comido los nombres de algunos; debiendo estimar en mucho que hayan quedado los que ponemos aqui. 
Y asi, si algunos mas se hallaren haber quedado (que bien sé, que son mas) no es nuestra la falta, sino de las memorias 
y de la mucha antiguedad de tiempo, el qual, como dijo el filosofo, de suyo mas hace que se pierda la ciencia y las 
memorias, que no que se adquieran: Tempus magis est deperditivum scientie, quam adquisitivum. 

Copia de los capitanes y soldados que quedaron en este Nuevo Reyno de Granada quando el teniente 
_ general Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada y Nicolas de Fedreman y Sebastian Belaleazar fueron 
en Espana. 

Ew primer lugar ponemos al licenciado Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada, teniente general de Don Pedro Fernandez de 

Lugo; porque aunque se fue 4 Espafia y estuvo por allé doze afios, despues de ellos volvio al reyno y hizo asiento 

i] 

. FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 237 

en el hasta que murio. El padre Juan de Lescanes, clerigo, capellan del egercito porque el padre Alonzo de las 
Casas de la orden de nuestro padre Santo Domingo se fue 4 Espaiia con el licenciado Ximenez de Quesada, de donde 
no volvié mas como queda dicho. Hernan Perez de Quesada hermano del general Ximenez de Quesada, que venia 
por alguacil mayor del egercito. El capitan Gonzalo Suarez Rondon. El capitan Juan de Cespedes. EI capitan 
Martin Galeano. El capitan Juan del Junco. El alferez Fernan Venegas. El capitan Gonzalo Garcia Zorro. El 
capitan Baltazar Maldonado. El capitan Antonio Diaz Cardoso. El capitan Juan de San Martin. El capitan Juan 
Tafur. El alferez Antonio de Olalla. El capitan Lazaro Fonte. Juan de Montalbo. Hernando de Prado, hermano 
del capitan Juan de Cespedes. Pedro de Colmenares. Antonio Bermudez. Gomez de Cifuentes. Pedro Rodri- 
guez de Carrion y de los Rios. Juan de Quincozes de Llana. Miguel Lopez de Partearroyo.' Pedro Fernandez 
Melo. Juan Lopez Sachica. Pedro del Acebo Sotelo, secretario del general Ximenez de Quesada. Martin de las 
Yslas. Alonzo Dominguez Beltran. Domingo de Aguirre. Pedro Ruiz Herrezuelo. Francisco Gutierrez de Murcia. 
Pedro Yafiez. Martin Ropero. Miguel Seco Moyano. Bartolomé Camacho. Juan de Olmos. Francisco de 
Figueredo. Pedro de Salazar. Francisco Gomez de la Cruz. Pedro Nuftez de Cabrera. Juan Martin y Diego 
Martin de Yniesta, hermanos. Baltasar de Moratin. Antonio Perez. Cristoval Arias de Monroy. Cristoval Bernal. 
KE] capitan Geronimo de la Ynza. Cristoval Ruiz Clavijo. El capitan Francisco Salguero. Diego Romero. Andres 
Vazquez de Molina. Juan Sanchez de Toledo. Diego Parades Calderon. Pedro Gomez de Orosco. Juan de 
Torres. Bravo. Segura. Pedro Vasquez de Leyba. Pedro Brisefio. Juan Ortiz de Zarate. Juan Gomez. Luis 
Gallegos. Aguirre. Trugillo. Mateo Sanchez Cogolludo. Gonzalo Macias. Juan de Chincilla. Juan Alonso. 
Alonso Machado. Martin Pujol. Simon Diaz. Hernan Gomez Castillejo. Diego Suarez Montafiez. Bartolomé 
Sanchez Suarez. Francisco Rodriguez. Cristoval de Roa. Juan Valenciano. Miguel de Otafiez. Gil Lopez. 
Valenzuela. Villalobos. Novillo. Juan de Ortega. Francisco Hernandez. Alonso Martin Cobo. Juan Ramirez. 
Hernando Navarro. Ruano Benito de Carco. Calbeche. Pedro Corredor. Juan de Frias. Juan de Pinilla. 
Francisco Diaz. Paniagua. Nicolas de Troya. Francisco de Tordehumos. El capitan Juan de Madrid. Pedro 
Bravo de Rivera. Juan Rodriguez Gil. Pedro Sanchez Sobaelbarro. 

Capitanes y soldados del general Nicolas de Fedreman, Tudesco. EI bachiller Juan Berdejo y el padre Fray 
Vicente Requesada, capellanes del egercito. Elcapitan Juan de Abellaneda. El capitan Cristoval de San Miguel, que 
despues fue muchos afios contador de la real hacienda en este reyno. El capitan Alonso de Poveda. Francisco Mal- 
donado del Hierro. Domingo de Guevara. Pedrode Almarcha. Bartolomé Hernandez Berrero. Hernando Gallego. 
Pedro de Miranda. El capitan Luis Lanchero. El capitan Domingo Lozano. EI capitan Garcia Calbete de Hazo. 
Francisco de Monsalve. El] capitan Alonso de Olalla. Diego Rodriguez Valderas. El capitan Rivera. Gonzalo de _ 
Vega. Melchor Ramirez de Figueredo. Mateo Sanchez Rey. Hernando de Santa Ana. Juan de Contreras. Sebastian 
de Porras. Miguel Holguin. Juan de Trugillo. Alonso Martin. Francisco de Murcia. Diego de Espinosa. Fran- 
cisco Ruiz. Diego Sanchez Castilblanco.. Diego Franco. Juan Fuerte. Cristoval de Toro. Hernando de Alcocer. 
Cristoval Gomez. Miranda. Cristoval de Oro. Juan Gascon. Miguel de la Puerta. Pedro de Valenzuela. 
Alonso Moreno. Villapasas. Francisco de Aranda. Diego Ortiz. Juan Cabezon. Diego de Huete. Juan Mateo s 
Pedro Gutierrez. Juan Pedro, negro. Luis Hernandez. Juan Martin Hincapie. 

Capitanes y soldados de Sebastian de Belaleazar. Melchor de Valdez, que vino por maestre de campo de Belal- 
cazar. El] capitan Juan de Avendafio, que vino por su alferez. Ximenez de Quesada, hermano del general Gonzalo 
Ximenez de Quesada y de Hernan Perez de Quesada, que fue de los que se hallaron en la conquista de Chile, y vino 
4 este Nuevo Reyno de Granada luego que se fueron los tres generales 4 Espafia. El capitan Maldonado que vino por 
la misma orden. Pedro de Arebalo Orozco, 4 diferencia de otro Orozco llamado el mozo. Hernando de Roxas. 
Juan de Arebalo. Cristoval Rodriguez. Juan Burguefio. Antonio de Lujan. Francisco Arias. Alonso Fernandez de 
Esniesta. Pedro de Puelles. Juan Diaz Hidalgo. Juan de Cuellar. 

AVERTENCIAS. 

AnTEs que pase de aqui la Historia, para su mayor luz, y que 4 nadie se le quite lo que es suyo, seré de importancia 
advertir dos 6 tres cosas. La primera que todos los capitanes y soldados que hemos puesto en estas tres copias, se 
han nombrado con sus oficios y estado en que los dejaron sus tres tenientes generales quando se fueron 4 Espafia, 
y asi muchos de ellos no quedaron con oficio de capitanes entonces; y si despues los tuvieron, fue por haberlos 

3 P 

938 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS. 

adquirido por sus manos en conquistas y ocasiones que se ofrecieron en este Reyno y fuera de él, en que pudieron 
mostrar su valor y hacerse dignos de tal nombre y de otros mui mayores. Y aunque en algunas partes de esta 
historia nombramos capitanes 4 los que entonces no lo eran, ha sido por haber Ilegado a tiempo 4 descubrirse que 
no solo lo habian sido ya casi todos, pero aun que yason todos muertos con mas honrados oficios. Si bien tiene ya 
en estas partes de las Yndias tanta facilidad el dar 4 uno titulo de capitan, que solo por ir 4 buscar dos esclavos 
cimarrones se le suele dar; al modo que la hay en Ilamarse licenciado a qualquiera que ven con manteo, sotana y 
bonete, habiendolos graduado de este nombre solo la ropa, sin que hayan sido doctores de universidad ni letras. 

La segunda es bien se advierta, que quando nuestros conquistadores descubrieron este Reyno, no habia Espafiol 
puesto’ el pie en él, ni tenido noticias con muchas leguas de la redonda de sus terminos: lo qual me obliga 4 
advertir, por lo que dice el padre Fray Antonio Daza en la cuarta parte de la Cronica de Nuestra Sagrada Religion, 
lib. 2, cap. 58, el qual, habiendole engafado en los memoriales que le dieron acerca de esto, de quien fueron no se 
debia de fiar, por no haber estado en estas tierras, dice que un virrey de Nueva Espafia, llamado Don Antonio de 
Mendoza, por noticias que le dio el padre Fray Marcos de Nisa de nuestra sagrada religion, por haber estado en él, 
envio 4 descubrir y conquistar este Nuevo Reyno de Granada, y que le puso este nombre, habiendolo hallado y con- 
quistado, porque era natural de Granada en Espafia: que es lo que nosotros tenemos dicho, sucedio con Gonzalo 
Ximenez de Quesada, quando lo descubriéd y puso nombre. Y tambien le engafiaron en la memoria que le dieron, 
diciendo, que el dicho padre Fray Marcos de Nisa caminé desde Nueva Espaiia 4 pie mas de mil leguas hacia el 
Poniente, llevando por guia el sol, por ser esto imposible, siendo como es, todo mar hacia estas partes de Nueva 
Espaa en la Mar del Sur, que es hacia donde se va 4 poner el sol. Y quando queramos deshacer este engafio y 
decir que pudo ir caminando 4 pie al norueste, por ser por alli toda tierra firme hasta el reyno de Quivira y Anian, 
no llevaba mas camino para poder descubrir por alli este Nuevo Reyno de Granada, que si uno quisiese en Espafia 
caminando desde Toledo 4 Lisboa descubrir 4 Barcelona 6 4 Valencia, pues esta este Reyno Nuevo de Granada 
respecto de la Nueva Espafia hacia los reynos que hemos dicho que pudo caminar este bendito padre, 4 sus espaldas, 
y que parece iba huyendo de él, que es buena traza para haberlo de hallar. De manera que todo esto es engafio, 
como otras cosas que dice en el mismo capitulo, como son, que el rey Bogota era sefor de la gran mina de esmeraldas; 
pues de dos minas que hay de ellas en este reyno, la una en Somondoco, que fue la que hallé Gonzalo Ximenez de Que- 
sada, y la otra mas famosa en la ciudad dela Trinidad de los Muzos, sobre ninguna tenia jurisdiccion el Bogota; pues 
la primera estaba en la del Tunja, y la segunda en los Muzos, enemigos mortales ambas 4 dos jurisdicciones del 
Bogota, 4 quien tambien dice este padre quemaron los Espafioles y lo herraron como 4 bestia: pero todo es ficcion 
y malas informaciones tomadas del Obispo de Chiapa, que con leves pensamientos y apasionados testigos dijo en su 
libro muchas cosas contra razon y su nacion, que fueran bien excusadas. De manera que concluyamos haber sido 
nuestros conquistadores los primeros que descubrieron y dieron vista 4 estas tierras del reyno, y le pusieron el nombre 
en la manera que queda dicho, sin que otro ninguno les hubiese precedido. 

La tercera se ha de advertir para los que no lo hicieren ni coligieren de lo que hemos dicho en la historia, que 
toda la costa que se hizo en el descubrimiento de este reyno, 4 lo menos hasta que le dieron vista en la provincia de 
Chipata, se le debe 4 Don Pedro Fernandez de Lugo, adelantado de Canaria, y adelantado y gobernador de Santa 
Marta, pues él desde alli 4 su costa, y sin que nadie le ayudara para ello, envid 4 este descubrimiento al licenciado 
Ximenez de Quesada, y armé dos veces los bergantines, y 4 los soldados de armas, y caballos, y todo lo demas que 
fue necessario al viage, como se ha visto en la historia. De manera que 4 nuestros conquistadores y descubridores 
solo se les debe los valientes animos que tuvieron, y gran tolerancia y perseverancia en el sufrir tan immensos 
trabajos y atropellar tan grandes dificultades, como se les ofrecieron en el camino, en que tuvo excelencia el ade- 
lantado, que despues fue, Gonzalo Kimenez de Quesada, al fin como caballero, y 4 cuyo cargo estaba el dirigir las 
cosas de la jornada, para que tuvieran el dichoso fin que tuvieron. A cuyos trabajos atendieron nuestros reyes para 
premiarles en la forma que lo quedaron muchos de los conquistadores, como fue el dicho general Quesada, 4 
quien despues de doze afios de haberse obscurecido su justicia y servicios, le volvieron 4 enviar con titulo de mariscal, 
y despues de adelantado de este reyno, con 6000 pesos de renta, y otros honores debidos 4 su valor, prudencia, y 
calidad. En cuyos servicios, aun mas que en los premios, le han sucedido sus sobrinos descendientes de dos hermanas 
‘suyas, que viven en este reyno, Don Fernando de Berrio, que hoy es gobernador de la Guayana, y Don Francisco de 
Berrio su hermano, que lo es de Caracas, y el capitan Francisco de Berrio, que lo es de Antioquia, todos imita- 
dores de su buen tio, y en este especial de su gran talento en manejar negocios. 

CUARTA NOTICIA 

HISTORIAL 

DE LAS CONQUISTAS DE TIERRA FIRME. 

Cariruxo I. 

. El modo con que se han vendo a saber las antigiiedades de estos Indios. 
. Lo que sentian los de la Nueva Espana y Peru de su origen. 

Lo que sienten otras provincias de su origen y descendencia. 

. Ha sido dificulioso de arrancar las idolatrias de entre ellos. 

m CO DN 

1. WA eneste tiempo por la experiencia y cuidado que tuvieron de informarse de los Indios, fueron los Espafioles 
teniendo algunas noticias acerca de sus costumbres en su religion y gobierno, que juntas con las que despues se han 
procurado saber, se han venido 4 sacar las que iremos diciendo: porque solos estos dos caminos se han podido 
hallar para descubrir esto, pues el de las escrituras 6 modos de escribir, 6 poner en memorias y entenderse en sus 
anales nos ha faltado totalmente en esta tierra del Nuevo Reyno, y aun en todo lo que trata nuestra historia ; que 
no fuera poca ayuda de costa haber hallado algo de esto, como lo fue 4 los que han escrito las cosas de los Indios de 
la Nueva Espafia, que las tenian en memoriales escritas con ciertos caracteres y figuras; y los que escribieron de las 
del Peru, que las hallaron como vivas en aquellos quippos que tenian hechos de hilos de diversos colores con 
diversos nudos. De donde se sacaron en ambas partes mucha parte de las memorias de los afios y cosas pasadas en 
ellos de aquellas tierras. Aunque la verdad no me ha puesto en cuidado esto, pues no hallo otra diferencia de aquel 
modo de conservar sus memorias al de estas tierras, sino estar las cegueras ¢ ignorancias de aquellos por escrito, y las 
de estos del Reyno y las demas partes que tocan 4 nuestra historia, tenerlas de memoria: porque ya que los que 
han tenido este modo de escrituras por figuras y hilos puedan haber conservado con ellas mas enteros y de mas atras 
los sucesos de su antigiiedad, que los que solo los han fiado de la memoria, trasegandolos de gente en gente, en que 
nunca deja de perderse algo por descuido 6 flaqueza de la memoria ; en el conocimiento de su origen, de un Dios, y 
del modo de sus idolatrias y ceremonias, 4 todos los hallamos en unas mismas tinieblas y ciegas obscuridades. Y 
los figuro yo, que han sido como los que juegan 4 la gallina ciega, que como lo estan quando oyen dar la palmada, 
por ir adonde la oyen, ya se abrazan del cofre, ya del bufete, ya de la silla, pensando que aquello es lo que buscan y 
los llama; y asi se entretienen en aquello sin topar con el que les hizo la sea y les movio 4 que lo buscasen. 
Naturalmente la luz de la razon con que esté amasada la naturaleza humana, nos dice que tuvimos algun principio, 
y que nosotros no pudimos serlo de nosotros mismos, por ser lo contrario de esto totalmente imposible ; pues ya 
eso fuera tener ser antes de tener ser. De donde se sigue necesariamente que antes que tuvieran ser todas las cosas, 
habia de haber una que no dependiera de otra cosa, para que fuera principio de las demas. ‘Codo este conocimiento 
que naturalmente pueden tener todos los hombres con la luz de la razon, es como darnos una palmada y avisarnos 
con verdad, y como hacernos seflas para donde hemos de ir 4 buscar este primer principio. Pero el que esta ciego, 

Q4O SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

esto es, ofuscado el entendimiento, y mal afecta la voluntad, aunque conozca esta verdad, como es imposible deje 
de conocerla, no atina con quien sera verdaderamente este principio y origen suyo, y de los demas. Y asi sin 
averiguar mas, ni ocupar en esto la razon, dejase llevar por los sentidos y asese de las criaturas, algunas veces de las 
mas hermosas, pareciendole hay en ellas mayor razon de deidad que en las otras, como son el sol, la luna, y estrellas, 
adorandolas por entender que es aquel su primer principio, 4 quien conocen se les debe naturalmente adoracion, sumi- 
sion, y obediencia. Otros con mayores tinieblas y obscuridades adoran cosas muy inferiores, engafados por el mismo 
modo ; pues ha habido naciones tan ciegas, que han adorado serpientes, monas, ratones, gatos; y aun quien ha 
tenido por dioses las legumbres de las huertas: en que no quiero detenerme por estar tan llenas de esto las escri- 
turas divinas y humanas, y mis intentos por ahora no ser mas que tratar la ceguera y tinieblas en que los Indios 
de este Nuevo Reyno han estado acerca de esto: pues han corrido por persuasion del demonio, enemigo del hombre, 
y padre de la mentira, igual y ciega fortuna, como dicen, que los demas de estas Indias. ‘Porque si tienen per- 
suadida alguna verdad, estdé tan envuelta en fabulosas mentiras y vanidades, que con ellas se confunde y quita su 
fuerza. Y para que se vea ser esto asi, diré de paso las tradiciones de los Indios de otras provincias acerca de 
sus principios, de donde se vera haber todas estas tierras 4 un mismo paso quebradose los ojos en unos mismos 
estropiezos. 

2. En las librerias que se hallaron entre los Indios de Mexico y sus comarcanos esté en pintura y por historia, 
segun dice el padre Acosta*, que el postrer paso que dan en el origen de sus antepasados es hasta llegar a siete 
cuevas, 6 4 una que significa siete, con este vocablo Chicomoztotl, como quiere Torquemada-} ; de donde salieron 
siete linages 6 parcialidades, de la parte del norte respecto de esta ciudad, para poblarla y 4 sus tierras comarcanas, 
aunque algunos dicen fueron las familias doze 6 trece._ Pero todos convienen en esta obscuridad y ignorancia, que 
se originan de la obscuridad de las cuevas, sin darles otro principio. Del que tuvieron sus mayores no tienen menores 
neblinas los naturales del Peru, como escribe Levinio Apolonio x, y otros graves autores, pues mirando aquellos sus 
mazos de hilos y nudos, y preguntandoles lo que saben desu primer origen y descendencia, dicen que de la parte 
del norte respecto del Cuzco, que era la principal de aquel reyno, vino una cierta cosa, (y Ilamanle asi, porque dicen 
no tenia nervios, huesos, ni miembros humanos,) y que esta crio todos los hombres de aquella tierra; levanté y 
empin6 los montes, siendo antes Ilana; aunque dejo entre ellos caminos, por donde andar. A esta le llamaban 
Conn, 6 hijo del sol y la luna. No le tuvieron los Indios el respeto que se le debia 4 quien los habia criado, 
en especial los que vivian en las tierras maritimas que llaman de los Ilanos, que son las que hay entre Ja mar y 
sierras : con que indignado traté luego de castigar estos atrevimientos, llenandoles la tierra de arena como ahora lo 
esta, y mandando 4 las nubes no llovieran sobre ella; con que perdio la fertilidad que tenia antes, y quedé total- 
mente esteril fuera de las margenes de los rios, con que alcanzan 4 regar alguna parte de ella, dejandoselos para esto 
y para que bebiesen, para que no pereciesen del todo. | 

3. Con esta fabula les tenia introducida el demonio la razon porque no Ilueve jamas en todos aquellos llanos y 
costas de entre el mar y las sierras, siendo cosa natural como todos la tienen disputada, y aqui la tratariamos si no 
fuera salir de nuestro intento. Alargan esta su fabula y ridicula relacion, y dicen que despues de algunos tiempos 
que paso esto, vino de la parte del Sur otro Hamado Pagacamac, hijo tambien del sol y la luna, y muy mas poderoso 
que el primero; pues luego que este aparecio, desaparecio de miedo el otro; con cuya ausencia, como las personas 
que él habia criado quedaron sin amparo ni quien las defendiese, y el segundo sin contrario y con plena autoridad 
determiné hacer hombres nuevos y de su mano; y para que cupieran estos desocupar la tierra de los que habia 
hecho el otro. Y asi los convirtis y transformé en los animales que hay ahora en ella, haciendo luego otros hombres 
de nuevo, que son los que ahora estan; 4 quien ensefio 4 labrar y cultivar los campos, porque le tuviesen por 
supremo dios. Y le edificaron un sumtuoso templo con mil pasos de cimenterio 4 la redonda, donde se enterraban 
los principales de la tierra. Y no eran estas ignorancias tan generales en toda ella, que en muchas de sus provincias 
no hablasen con diferente lenguage acerca de su origen: pues los del valle de-Xauxa dicen que oyeron 4 sus 
antiguos que descendian de un hombre y una muger que salieron dela fuente de Guarubalia: los del valle de Anda-. 
bayla dicen, que salieron del lago Sogdocota: los del Cuzco en otra parte de la. que hemos dicho, que se originan 
dela laguna Titiaca. Los Indios que llaman Pijaos en este Reyno, de quien trataremos largo en nuestra Tercera Parte, 
dicen que nacieron sus primeros padres en el centro de la tierra, y que salieron 4 este mundo por las montafias que 

* Acosta; lib. 2. cap. 2. Histor. Ind. + Tub. 2. cap. 11. Histor. Apolonio, lib. 2. Histor. Peruvian. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. Q41 

estan entre el rio Cacarayma y el valle de Anayma. Los Indios de Sogamozo, de quien luego hablaremos, dicen 
que tuvieron su primer origen de un antiguo Cacique de aquel valle, y de un sobrino suyo Cacique del pueblo de 
Ramiriqui y Tunja. 

4, Estas y otras semejantes fabulas, de que no podremos excusar de tratar adelante, introducia el demonio en esta 
gente ciega, con que se entretuviesen y no tratasen de buscar la verdad clara de estas cosas, con que se hiciesen & 
ellas y dificultasen de creer la verdad que se les ensefiase, si en algun tiempo, como ha sucedido en estos, tuviesen 
ministro de ella. Y no le salieron en vano sus intentos ; pues la mayor dificultad que ahora se halla, para intro- 
ducirles la verdad evangelica, y en que mas tiempo se gasta, es en arrancar estas diabolicas persuasiones del demonio, 
para plantarles despues las verdades evangelicas. Con que se vé cumplido lo que dijo Dios que habia de hacer el 
profeta Jeremias * en la predicacion de los gentiles, dandole 4 entender con quatro terminos el mayor trabajo que le 
habia de costar el destruir las malas costumbres y supersticiones de los oyentes, que el que habia de tener en plantar 
su doctrina, pues esto con solos dos lo significa. 

Cariruto II. 

jon 

. Lo que sentieron estos Indios del Reyno acerca de la Creacion del Mundo. 

2. La opimon que tuneron del origen y principio de los hombres y mugeres. 

3. El primer hombre y la primera muger que segun la opinion de los naturales, hubo en este 
Nuevo Reyno. 

4. Caso que le sucedio al Padre Molina sacando un santuarco. 

1. VINIENDO pues ya a tratar de lo que sienten nuestros Indios del Reyno de sus principios y origen, hemos hallado, 
que conservando sus memorias de gente en gente, tienen noticia de la creacion del mundo, y la declaran diciendo, que 
quando era de noche, esto es, segun ellos interpretan, antes que hubiera nada de este mundo, estaba la luz metida alla 
en una casa grande, que para significarla le llamaban Chiminigagua, de donde despues salid ; y que aquella cosa 6 
Chiminigagua en que estaba metida esta luz (que esto quieren decir, que es lo mismo que nosotros Ilamamos Dios) 
comenzé a amanecer y mostrar la luz que en si tenia. Y dando luego principio 4 criar cosas aquella primera luz, 
las primeras que crié fueron unas aves negras grandes, 4 las quales mandé al punto que tuviesen ser, fuesen por 
todo el mundo echando aliento 6 ayre por los picos; el qual ayre todo era lucido y resplandeciente. Con que 
habiendo hecho lo que les mandaron, quedé todo el mundo claro é iluminado, como esta ahora; sin adyertir, como 
no tienen fundamento en lo que dicen, que es el sol él que dé estaluz. A este dios reconocen por omnipotente, 
Sefior universal de todas las cosas, y siempre bueno, y que crié tambien todo lo demas que hay en este mundo, con 
que quedé tan lleno y hermoso. Pero como entre las demas criaturas veian la mas hermosa al sol, decian, que 4 él 
se debia adorar, y 4 la luna como 4 su muger y compafiera. De donde les vino, que aun en los idolos que adoran, 
jamas es uno solo, sino macho y hembra; y no se persuaden 4 que entre las demas cosas crié Dios hombres y 
mugeres, sino que estando el mundo lleno de las demas, faltaban estas dos; y asi se remedié esta falta de esta 
manera. 

2. En el distrito de la ciudad de Tunja, 4 quatro leguas 4 la parte del norte-este, y una de un pueblo de Indios que 
Ilaman Iguaque, se hace una coronacion de empinadas sierras, tierra muy fria, y tan cubierta de paramos y ordinarias 
nieblinas que casi en todo el afio no se descubren sus cumbres, sino es 4 medio dia por el mes de Enero. Entre 
estas sierras y cumbres se hace una mui honda laguna, de donde dicen los Indios, que 4 poco de como amanecid 6 
aparecié la luz, y criadas las demas cosas, salid una muger que Ilaman Bachue, y por otro nombre acomodado 4 las 
buenas obras que les hizo, Turachogue, que quiere decir muger buena, porque ¢wra llaman a la muger, y chogue es 
cosa buena. Sacé consigo de la mano un nino de entre las mismas aguas de edad hasta tres alos ;_ y bajando ambos 
juntos de las sierras 4 lo llano, donde ahora esta el pueblo de Iguaque, hicieron una casa donde vivieron hasta que 

* Jeremias, I. 

3 Q 

Q42 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

el muchacho tuvo edad para casarse con ella, porque luego que la tuvo se casé. Y el casamiento fue tan importante, 
y la muger tan prolifica y fecunda, que de cada parto paria quatro é seis hijos; con que se vino 4 llenar toda’ la 
tierra de gente; porque andaban ambos por muchas partes, dejando hijos en todas; hasta que despues de muchos 
afios estando la tierra Ilena de hombres y mugeres, y los dos ya mui viejos, se Volvieron al mismo pueblo; y de él 
un dia llamando mucha gente que los acompafiara 4 la laguna de donde salieron, junto 4 la qual les hizo la Bachue 
una platica exhortando 4 todos la paz y conservacion entre si; la guarda de los preceptos y leyes que les habia dado, 
que no eran pocos, en especial en orden al culto de los dioses, y concluida se despidio de ellos con singulares clamores 
y llantos de ambas partes. Y convirtiendose ella y su marido en dos mui grandes culebras, se metieron por las aguas 
de la'laguna y nunca mas parecieron por entonces : si bien la Bachue despues se aparecia muchas veces en otras 
partes, por haber determinado desde alli los Indios contarla entre sus dioses en gratificacion de los beneficios que les 
habia hecho. ; 

Siguieron de este engafio otros muchos, y no fué el menor persuadirles el demonio, fundandolos‘en esto, 4 que le 
hicieran sacrificios en las aguas, como ya tocamos, tratando de la laguna de Guatabita; en que tuvieron todos estos 
naturales ordinaria frecuencia; pues no habia arroyo, laguna, ni rio en que no tuviesen particulares ofrecimientos, 
como en especial los hacian en una parte del rio que llaman de Boza, que es el que recoge estas aguas del valle de 
Bogota, donde son mas ordinarias sus pesquerias ; y mas en cierta parte peflascosa por donde pasa cerca de un cerro 
que Ilaman del Tabaco, 4 donde por ser mayor la pesca que hacen, ofrecian entre las pefas del rio pedazos de oro, 
cuentas y otras cosas, para tener mejor suerte en las pesquerias: y en otra lagunilla cerca de este puesto al oriente, 
donde tenian una costilla de un animal tan grande como de vaca 6 camello, 4 quien hacian la veneracion y ofreci- 
miento por estar dentro de las aguas ; que causé no poca admiracion 4 los Espanoles que la hallaron alli, por no 
haberse hallado en estas tierras animal tan grande de donde la pudieran haber sacado: si bien es opinion de algunos 
que pudo ser la costilla de un camello, de quien luego hablaremos. Al fin en todas partes que huviese aguas con 
algun extraordinario asiento 6 disposicion, no quedaban sin ofrecimiento de unos 6 de otros. 

3. Siguiose tambien el levantar idolos al muchacho que sacé la Bachue 6 Baque de la laguna, de la estatura y 
edad que tuvieron, quando salieron. Y fue esto de tanta veneracion, que en alguna parte le hicieron estatua maciza 
de oro fino, como la tenian en el mismo pueblo de Iguaque, viendose por ventura mas obligados 4 esto que otros, 
por haber sido el pueblo y sitio donde se crid'el muchaco, se cas, y comenzaron 4 tener hijos. 

4. Verificose ‘esto en lo que le sucedié el afio de 1572, al padre Fray Francisco de Molina de nuestra religion, 
siendo cura y doctrinero de este pueblo ; donde teniendo muy en secreto, casi en la mitad de él dos casas de adoracion, 
que se comunicaban la una con la otra, vino 4 rastrearlas el padre por medio de una India madre de un muchacho 
que le servia. Pero aunque se certificé del todo por otras pesquisas que hizo, no se atrevid por la ferocidad de los 
Indios 4 destruirles 4 solas su adoratorio. Y asi dando parte 4 un Espaifiol llamado Bartolome Perez Garzon, y 4un 
mestizo Santa Ana, trazé que para cierta noche viniesen en secreto al pueblo y posada, para desde alli con el silen- 
cio posible saquear y destruir el santuario.. Fueron los dos puntuales en el concierto; y'asi una noche con recato 
y la obscuridad que hacia 4 la mitad de ella, en compafiia de estos dos, y tres Indios forasteros, salié el padre de ‘su 
casa para las del santuario, que estaban cercadas de madera y fagina, comun cerca que hacen estos Indios 4 sus 
casas por la parte de afuera: aunque estas por la de adentro tenian otra de’ maderos mui gruesos juntos unos con 
otros; pero las puertas del cercado y buhios tan flacas, que no eran mas que unas delgadas cafias asidas con cordeles 
de cabulla. Pudieron llegar 4 la cerca sin ser seritidos de los Indios, porque no estaba de la casa del padre mas que 
hasta 250 pasos; el qual corté con un cuchillo los cordeles de las puertas; y quedandose los dos Espafoles fuera 
del buhio dentro del cercado, y el un Indio 4 la puerta para guardarla, entro el padre Molina dentro de la primera 
casa con los otros dos Indios. Sacé lumbre y encendié una hacha, y comenzando 4 mirar la primera casa, donde 
vido ofrecidas al santuario y puestas por orden en barbacoas, mas de tres mil mantas de algodon finas y bien hechas 
que cada una valia mas de dos pesos de buen oro. Y no hallando alli otra cosa, paso en la segunda, donde vido una 
immensa riqueza de oro fino en pedazos de barras, tejos, y santillos, de los que ellos hacen sus ofrecimientos, con 
figuras de hombres, aves, sierpes y otras sabandijas : algo de esto puesto en petacas sobre barbacoas, y en adorotes 
entre paja. Pero lo que mas le admiro, fue una figura de un muchacho, de hasta tres aios, puesto en pie, de oro 
macizo, y una piedra de moler maiz de las comunes que usan los Indios, que suelen pasar de tres. y quatro arrobas, 
con su mano, que llaman toda, del mismo oro macizo, como se echa de ver, pues no pudo el padre levantar al 
muchacho ni piedra, probando levantar de tierra, con ser él hombre de las mayores fuerzas que se ha conocido en 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. JA3 

esta : pues se atrevid con ellas en cierta ocasion, como dejamos dicho, de embestir con un valiente cayman en el rio 
grande de la Magdalena, para quitarle un caballo como lo hizo, en que habia hecho presa y se lo Ilevaba al rio. No 
paso mucho tiempo despues que el padre andaba ocupado en esto, quando sintiendo los Indios el robo de su santuario 
en un instante acudieron mas de 300 4 la defensa, y cargando sobre los dos Espafioles que estaban 4 la puerta dentro 
del cercado, fue tanta la brabeza con que les embistieron, que despues de haberse defendido un rato, tuvieron por 
buena suerte escapar huyendo por donde pudieron, y desamparar al padre: el qual siendo un poco sordo, desde lo 
que le sucedidé con el cayman, y con la ocupacion que trahia dentro, no oyé el ruido que pasaba fuera. Y sin duda 
los Indios le cogieran dentro, si el que tenia la hacha encendida, oyendo el tropel no la apagara y cogiera la puerta: 
tras quien viendose a obscuras salié el padre, rifiendole porque la habia apagado. Y de manos 4 boca se hallé dentro 
mas de cien Indios, que ya iban entrando en el buhio, y estaban entre él y la puerta del cercado, donde si la capa de 
la noche que era bien negra y obscura, y una que el llevaba por ir disfrazado, con un sombrero del mismo color, no 
deslumbraran 4 los Indios, lo pasara peor de lo que lo pasd: porque si conocieran que era el padre, entendieran ser 
él el que les queria despojar de su santuario, y le embistieran con mas furia ; aunque no entendiendolo, fue 4 purgar 
4 la otra vida, como dicen, el atrevimiento: pues un Indio a vueltas de la tropa, y otros muchos macanazos que le 
dieron en él cuerpo, le acerté con uno en la cabeza, de que quedé con una mui mala herida, y perdiendo el sentido 
cay6 medio muerto. Bien pensaron los Indios lo estaba del todo y no medio, pues lo sacaron fuera del cercado arra- 
strando, como cosa que no tenian mas en que ocuparse; donde lo hallaron los Indios del servicio del encomendero, 
que salieron al ruido en este tiempo con hachos de paja encendidos, y conociendolo y pensando tambien que estaba 
muerto, lo cargaron y Ilevaron 4 su casa y cama; y mirandole la herida, y viendo que lo tenia puesto en peligro de 
muerte, una India vieja curandera le aplicé unas yerbas que conocia, con las quales y la ayuda de Dios escapé de las 
manos de la muerte. No volvié en si hasta el otro dia 4 las ocho, 6 nueve de la mafiana, que ya no se conocia vien- 
dose tan acardenalado y molido de los golpes que le habian dado en el cuerpo: de manera que ya la herida de la 
cabeza la estimaba en menos que los demas golpes, de que despues de muchos dias qued6é sano con el favor divino, 
y escarmentado de la burla, que contaba muchas veces. Cargaron los Indios con todo lo que habia en el santuario 
aquella noche, y guiando 4 la parte de la laguna lo escondieron, de suerte que hasta hoy no se ha podido rastrear 4 
donde, por grandes diligencias que se han hecho por algunos Espafioles, como tambien en desaguar la laguna por la 
fama que hubo se habia echado en ella el muchacho, piedra y el demas oro, con otro mucho en otras ocasiones de 
ofrecimientos de mucha grosedad: pero por ser de tantas las sierras que cifien esta laguna, les ha hecho dar de mano 
4 sus intentos, despues de haber gastado en ellos algun cuidado, sudor, trabajos y dineros. 

Capitruto III. 

1. Rastros que se han hallado de haber tenido luz estos Indios del Reyno, de la ley evangelica. 
2. Yde habersela venido a predicar algun Cristiano. 

3. El modo que tubo de predicar y ensenarles algunas otras cosas de vida politica. 

A, Apareciose luego el demomo en figura de una muger, predicandoles contra lo que el pri- 

mero les habia ensenado. 

1. DEsPuEs que entré en estas tierras, me ha solicitado el deseo de saber si en algun tiempo entro en ellas por algun 
camino la luz del evangelio, y se ha adelantado este en estas ocasiones que he visto cosas que me parecen centellas 
de eso, como son : que estos Indios esperan el juicio universal por tradicion de sus mayores, diciendo que los muertos 
han de resucitar, y vivir despues para siempre en este mismo mundo, de la suerte que ahora viven, porque entienden 
que ha de permanecer siempre este mundo de la manera que ahora lo vemos; que las almas son immortales, y que 
quando salen de los cuerpos que solos mueren, ellas bajan al centro de la tierra por unos caminos y barrancas de 
tierra amarilla y negra, pasando primero un gran rio en unas barcas 6 balsas de telas de arafia ; y por eso dicen no 
Osan matarlas, porque no falte quien los pase. ‘Alla dicen, que tiene cada qual provincia sus terminos y lugares sefia- 
lados, como acd, donde hallaran hechas labranzas, porque en esto no hacen diferencia, de que ya trataremos algo 
tratando de la laguna de Guatabita. Tambien hallamos, como dejé escrito el adelantado Don Gonzalo Ximenez de 

O44 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Quesada en un quaderno de su propria mano, que ponian cruces sobre los sepulcros de los que habian muerto picados 
de viboras 6 otras culebras y serpientes; aunque no saben decir el principio que tuvo el poner esta sefial 4 estos difuntos 
mas que 4 los de otras muertes, para diferenciar los unos de los otros, hallandose tambien esta misma figura de la 
santa cruz bien hecha, y formada con un almagre tan fuerte que la antigiiedad ni Jas aguas lo han podido borrar, en 
algunas pefias altas, que las hallaron hechas quando entraron los Espafoles, de que yo he visto algunas cerca de los 
pueblos de Boza y Suacha. Los Indios Pijaos, y algunos del distrito de Tunja, han tenido figuras en sus santuarios 
con tres cabezas humanas, 6 con tres rostros en solo un cuerpo, que dicen ser tres personas con solo un corazon; 
de todo lo qual, aunque embuelto y deslustrado con mil fabulas y obscuridades, parece salen las centellas dichas. 

2. A que ayuda mucho una tradicion certissima que tienen todos los de este reyno, de haber vivido en el veinte 
edades (y cuentan en cada edad setenta afios) un hombre no conocido de nadie, ya mayor en afios y cargado de lanas, 
el cabello y barba larga hasta la cintura, cogida la cabellera con una cinta, de quien ellos tomaron el traher con otra 
cogidos los cabellos como los trahen, y el dejarles crecer: andaba los pies por el suelo sin ningun calzado: .una 
almahalafa 6 manta, puesta con un nudo hecho de las dos puntas, sobre el hombro derecho ; y por vestido una tunica 
sin cuello hasta las pantorrillas; 4 cuya imitacion andaban ellos tambien descalzos, y con este modo de vestido ; 
aunque 4 la tunica han llamado los Espaftioles camiseta, y 4 la capa almahalafa 6 manta; si bien ya no se usa en 
todas partes el traher nudo dado al hombro con las puntas ; y aun traher la camiseta no es habito de los Moscas, sino 
de los del Peru, de quien estos Moscas lo tomaron, desde los primeros que entraron aqui con los primeros Espafioles 
que bajaron del Peru; pues el propio habito de los de este reyno es ceflirse una manta, y cubrirse con otra, como 
se ve en los Indios viejos que andan siempre asi, y Jamas con camiseta. Dicen que vino por la parte del Este, que 
son los llanos que llaman continuados de Venezuela, y entré 4 este reyno por el pueblo de Pasca al Sur de esta ciudad 
de Santafé, por donde ya dijimos habia tambien entrado con su gente Nicolas de Fedreman. Desde alli vino al 
pueblo de Boza, donde se le murié un camello que trahia; cuyos huesos procuraron conservar los naturales, pues 
aun hallaron algunos los Espafioles en aquel pueblo quando entraron; entre los quales dicen, que fue la costilla que 
adoraban en la lagunilla llamada Bozacio los Indios de Boza y Suacha. A este pusieron dos 6 tres nombres, segun 
la variedad de las lenguas que habia por donde pasaba: porque en este reyno, pocos eran los pueblos como ya hemos 
dicho, que no tuviesen diferentes lenguas, como hoy las tienen. Y asi en este valle de Bogota comunmente le Iama- 
ban Chimizapagua, que quiere decir mensagero de el Chiminigagua, que es aquel Supremo Dios 4 quien conocian 
por principio de la luz que tiene. Y asi 4 los Espafioles entendiendo que eran sus hijos 4 los principios que en- 
traron, no supieron darles otro mas acomodado nombre, que el del mismo sol, llamandoles Gagua, hasta que los 
desengaflaron con sus crueldades y malos tratamientos; y asi les mudaron el nombre, llamandoles Suegagua, que 
quiere decir diablo 6 demonio con luz porque con este nombre Suetiva nombran al diablo, y este les dan hoy 4 los 
Espafoles. 

3. Otros le llamaban 4 este hombre Nempterequeteva: otros le decian Xue. Este les ensefio 4 hilar algodon y 
tejer mantas, porque antes de este solo se cubrian los Indios con unas planchas que hacian de algodon en rama, 
atadas con unas cuerdezuelas de fique unas con otras, todo mal alifiado. Y aun como 4 gente ruda, quando salia de un 
pueblo les dejaba los telares pintados en alguna piedra lisa y brufiida, como hoy se ven en algunas partes, por si se 
olvidaban de lo que les ensefiaba, como se olvidaron de otras cosas buenas que dicen les predicaba en su misma 
lengua 4 cada pueblo, con que quedaban admirados. Ensefioles 4 hacer cruces, y usar de ellas en las pinturas de las 
mantas con que se cubrian, y por ventura declarandoles sus misterios, y los de la encarnacion y muerte de Cristo, 
les traheria alguna vez las palabras que el mismo dijo 4 Nicodemus, tratando de la correspondencia que tuvo la 
cruz con la serpiente de metal que levantd Moyses en el desierto, con cuya vista sanaban los mordidos de las serpi- 
entes. De donde pudo ser la costumbre que hemos dicho tenian, de poner las cruces sobre los sepulcros de los que 
morian picados de serpientes. ‘Tambien les enseié la resurreccion de la carne, el dar limosna, y otras mui buenas 
cosas, como lo era tambien su vida. Que si esto es asi, no solo estas de que se acuerdan ellos, sino otros muchos 
misterios de nuestra fé les enseflaria. La qual tradicion, ni apruebo nirepruebo: solo la refiero, como la he hallado 
por cosa comun entre los hombres graves y doctos de este reyno. Desde Boza fue al pueblo de Hontibon, al de 
Bogota, Serrezuela, y Cippacon ; desde donde dio la vuelta 4 la parte del norte por las faldas de la sierra, yendose 
abriendo los caminos alli, yen todo lo demas que anduvo por montafas y arcabucos: fue 4 parar al pueblo de 
Cota, donde gasté algunos dias predicando con gran concurso de gente de todos los pueblos comarcanos, desde un 
sitio un poco alto, 4 quien hicieron un foso 4 la redonda de mas de dos mil pasos, para que el concurso de la gente no 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. : Q45 

le atropellara, y predicara mas libremente ; 4 donde despues en reverencia suya hicieron santuarios y entierros los 
mas principales Indios. Recogiase de noche 4 una cueva 4 las faldas de la sierra, todo el tiempo que estuvo en 
Cota, desde donde fue prosiguiendo su viage 4 la parte del nordeste, hastar llegar 4 la provincia de Guane, donde 
hay mucha noticia de él; y aun dicen hubo Indios alli tan curiosos que lo retrataron, aunque muy 4 lo tosco, en 
unas piedras que hoy se ven, y unas figuras de unos calices dentro de las cuevas donde se recogia, 4 las margenes 
del gran rio Sogamozo. Desde Guane revolvid hacia el leste, y entré en la provincia de Tunja y valle de Soga- 
mozo, de donde se desaparecié, quedando hasta hoy rastros de nuestra fé en toda aquella provincia, como presto 
diremos. 

4. Despues que pasé este predicador, se conforman en decir vino una muger 4 estas tierras hermosisima y de 
grandes resplandores, 6 por mejor decir el demonio en aquella figura, que predicaba y persuadia contra la doctrina 
del primero; 4 la qual llamaron tambien con varios nombres: unos le decian Chie; otros Huytaca; y otros 
Xubchasgagua. Pero los que mas bien dicen 4 su parecer afirman, que fue aquella Bachue, que dicen los engendré 
4 todos, y se metid hecha culebraen la laguna. Seguian 4 esta en sus predicaciones mucho mas que al otro ; porque 
les predicaba vida ancha, placeres, juegos, y entretenimientos de borracheras: por lo qual el Chiminizagagua la 
convirtié en lechura, y hizo que no anduviera sino de noche, como ella anda. Comenzé con esto 4 caher la 
doctrina que les habia ensefiado el otro; porque en quanto 4 la limosna, les persuadia no la hicieran, aunque fuera 
4 sus padres y en caso de necesidad, y asilo guardan hoy: pues siendo viejos y sin fuerzas para el trabajo, los echan 
y no quieren recoger en sus casas. De que se siguen grandes inconvenientes para su conversion ; pues viendose 
necesitados y sin poder trabajar, se andan de casa en casa por los pueblos, viejos y viejas convidando si quieren que 
hagan hechizerias y adivinaciones, mascando tabaco y embriagandose con el humo, para adivinar con esto mil 
vanidades, los fines y sucesos de las cosas que intentan, que no es pequefio estropiezo para disuadirles de su genti- 
lidad y engafios del demonio, por tener 4 estos viejos por sus oraculos. Tambien se les confundié la doctrina de la 
Cruz; pues 4 las que mandaba poner el primer predicador 4 las mantas, les iban quitando sus formas perfectas, 
echandoles unas rayas desde los extremos, como hoy las trahen, que mas parecen signos de escribanos que otra 
cosa. La resurreccion de la carne y la immortalidad del alma, la fueron envolviendo como vimos en mil fabulas y 
cosas ridiculas, de que tenian tantas é infinitas transmutaciones, que si hubieramos de tratarlas, se pudieran hacer 
mayores libros que hizo Ovidio de sus Metamorfoseos, que todos fueran sartas de disparates, como lo son decir que 
hubo siempre entre ellos tan grandes hechizeros, que quando querian se convertian en leones, osos y tigres, y 
despedazaban los hombres como estos animales verdaderos. Pero todo debia de ser ilusiones que les ponia el de- 
monio, como sobre quien tenia tanto sefiorio. 

Cariruto IV. 

1. La diferencia que tenian de Dioses en nombres y figuras. 
2. Los Gazofilacios para las ofrendas que les hacvan. 

3. La razon porque adoraban el Arco del Cielo. 

4. Otras naciones le adoraron tambien. 

1. Despues de la adoracion del Sol, que estimaban por la mas famosa, veneraban otros dioses de diversos nombres, 
4 quien adoraban para necesidades diferentes. Los mas principales de estos eran Chibchatchum y Bochica. El 
primero era proprio de toda esta provincia de Bogota, y asi le pusieron el nombre conforme 4 ella, que comunmente 
le llaman Chibcha, y la lengua de esta zavana que es la mas universal de esta tierra, se Hamaba la lengua Chibcha, 
y tchum quiere decir baculo en esta lengua, donde juntando los dos vocablos y diciendo Chibchatchum, significa 
Baculo de esta provincia Chibcha; porque este nombre le daban 4 este dios por lo mucho que les favorecia, no 
ausentandose jamas de la provincia, para acudirles con mas facilidad. El] Bochica era dios mas universai, y aun casi 
sefior de este otro; pero ambos les daban leyes y modos de vivir. Respondian en los oraculos que les consultaban, 
aunque nunca los veian los xeques ni otros, porque eran unas cosas incorporeas 6 como de ayre. A estos dos 
siempre que les ofrecian, habia de ser oro, con el modo que despues diremos; porque aunque eran dioses universales 
de todos, mas en particular era el Bochica de los caciqts y capitanes, y el Chibchatchum de los mercaderes (de que 
se preciaron mucho siempre estos Indios), plateros y labradores; y como de gente rica, no querian les ofreciesen 

3R 

QA6 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

sino oro. Otro dios tenian que Ilamaban Chuchaviva, que decian era el ayre resplandeciente, 6 como mejor inter- 
pretan otros, era el Arco del Cielo, de que luego hablaremos ; y aunque era dios universal, mas en particular le 
tenian por abogado de las mugeres de parto, y enfermos de calenturas ; y ofrecianle alguna vez oro bajo; pero lo 
ordinario era ofrecerle esmeraldas y cuentas de Santa Marta. A otro dios llamaban Nemcatacoa. Este era dios de 
las borracheras, pintores y tejedores de mantas: ayudaba 4 traher arrastrando los maderos gruesos para los 
edificios. Apareciase en figura de oso, cubierto con una manta, la cola de fuera: baylaba y cantaba con ellos en 
las borracheras. No le hacian ofrecimientos, porque decian le bastaba hartarse de chicha con ellos, ni el pedia 
otra cosa. Y esa era la razon porque se hallaba al arrastrar de los palos, porque en aquella ocasion se bebia mucho: 
llamabanle otros el To, que quiere decir zorra, porque en figura de este animal se aparecia algunas veces, para que 
correspondiese la zorra con la borrachera. A otro dios llamaban Chukem. Este tenia 4 su cargo los terminos y 
los puestos que sefialaban, quando en algunas fiestas ordenaba el cacique corriesen los mas valientes Indios la tierra, 
con premios que para esto se ponian. Dedicabansele tambien los adornos de las borracheras y fiestas con toda la 
plumeria que usaban en ellas y en las guerras. ‘Tambien la diosa Bachue era comun 4 todos; pero en especial era 
el amparo de todas las legumbres ; ofreciendole sahumerios de moque y resinas. Las figuras de estos dioses, hechas 
al modo de cada uno que los adoraba 6 mandaba hacer, y otras que imaginaban, tenian en templos comunes y par- 
ticulares ; pero todos sin ornato ni grandeza; al fin como para quien eran: pues solo era una casa 6 buhio mui 
ordinario, leno de barbacoas 6 poyos 4 la redonda, donde estaban puestas varias figuras de diversos metales y 
materias, ningunas pintadas, porque las mas eran de oro. Y estas usaron mas despues que entraron los Espaioles, 
por haberles visto estimarlo en tanto; otras de madera; otras de hilo de algodon; otras de barro blanco; de cera 
hacian otras; pero de todas habia macho y hembra, revueltos en mantas: unas sin cabellos; otras los tenian mui 
largos ; unas con largas colas de dos y tres varas; otras las tenian mui pequefias ; pero todas en rostros y talles de 
figuras tan abominables, que representaban bien 4 quien estaban dedicadas. 

2. Tenian en los templos comunes dos maneras de cepos 6 gazofilacios, en que metian las ofrendas que se les 
hacian. La una era una figura de hombre hecha de barro, sin pies, toda hueca, abierto todo el casco de la cabeza, 
por donde echaban las ofrendas, que eran hechas de oro con figuras de animales varios, como culebras, ranas, 
lagartijas, mosquitos, hormigas, gusanos, leones, tigres, monos, raposas, y de toda suerte de aves: estas solo las 
ofrecia el xeque. Tapaban lo abierto de la cabeza de la figura con un bonete redondo 6 con quatro picos, como los 
de nuestros clerigos; unas veces hecho de palmas ; otras del mismo barro de que era la figura, con un palillo en 
medio de un dedo de grueso, para quitarlo y ponerlo. El otro cepo era una vasija 4 modo de mucura enterrada en 
el suelo del templo, sin dejar descubierto mas que la boca 4 raiz de la tierra, donde tambien iban echando las ofrendas, 
hasta que ambas estaban llenas ; porque luego el xeque ponia otras en su lugar, llevando aquellas 4 enterrar a otro 
fuera del templo, asi Ilenas como estaban: de que han tenido buena suerte algunos Espafoles, en que les hayan 
yenido algunas de estas 4 las manos por su buena diligencia, con que han mudado el pelo de sus capas. 

3. El fundamento que hubo para adorar estos Indios con ofrecimientos el Arco del Cielo, Cuchaviva, aunque 
envuelto en fabulas fue de esta manera: todas las aguas que entran por una parte y otra de sus serranias, que no 
son pocas en este valle de Bogota, no tienen mas que una salida por lo ultimo de la parte del sudeste, donde se junta 
de todas un copioso rio, que llaman Funzhua. Este corre por una estrechura ya al desembocar del valle, que llaman 
de Tekendama, por entre dos piedras tajadas y otra que esté en medio de ellas, con que hace dos canales tan estrechos 
que muchas veces no bastando 4 dar salida 4 las muchas aguas que por alli van 4 embocar, en especial en tiempo de 
invierno, rebalsan atras, con que se anegan grandes pedazos de la zabana, en especial cerca de los pueblos de Boza, 
Hontibon, y Bogota; con que quedan por todo lo mas del afio grandes anegadizos. De los rios que dan mas agua 
4 este grande, son principalmente uno que llaman de Sopo, que toma el nombre de un pueblo de Indios que se llama 
asi, por donde pasa, y el otro Tibito, 6 rio de Choconta, porque comienza 4 hacerse en los paramos de un pueblo 
de Indios que se llama asi, 4 la parte del nordeste respecto de Santafé, y terminos de su jurisdiccion como hemos 
yatocado. Fundan sobre esto su razon diciendo que por ciertas cosas, que habia usado con ellos, al parecer en su 
agravio, el dios Chibchatchum, le murmuraban los Indios y ofendian en secreto y en publico: con que indignado 
Chibchatchum, traté de castigarlos anegandoles sus tierras; para lo qual criéd 6 trajo de otras partes los dos rios 
dichos de Sopo y Tibito, con que crecieron tanto las aguas del valle, que no dandose manos, como dicen, la tierra del 
valle 4 consumirlas, se vino 4 anegar gran parte de ella; lo que no sucedia antes que entraran en el valle los dos 
rios ; porque el agua de log demas se consumia en las labranzas y sementeras, sin tener necesidad de desagiie. Fue 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. Q47 

tan en lleno y universal este castigo, é iba creciendo cada dia tantas varas la inundacion, que ya no tenian esperanza 
del remedio, ni de darlo 4 las necesidades que tenian de comidas, por no tener donde sembrarlas, y ser mucha la 
gente. Por lo qual toda se determiné por mejor consejo de ir con la queja y pedir el remedio al dios Bochica, ofre- 
ciendole en su templo clamores, sacrificios, y ayunos. Despues de lo qual una tarde reverberando el sol en el ayre 
humedo contra esta sierra de Bogota se hizo un arco, como suelen naturalmente, en cuya clave y capital se aparecié 
resplandeciente el demonio en figura de hombre representando al Bochica, con una vara de oro en lamano; y llamando 
& voces desde alli 4 los caciques y mas principales, 4 que acudieron con brevedad con todos sus vasallos, les dijo 
desde lo alto: Oydo he vuestros ruegos, y condolido de ellos y de la razon que teneis en las quejas que dais de 
Chibchatchum, me ha parecido venir 4 daros favor, satisfecho de lo bien que me servis, y 4 pagaroslo y a remediar 
la necesidad en que estais, pues tanto toca 4 mi providencia: y asi aunque no os quitaré los dos rios, porque algun 
tiempo de seca los habreis menester, abriré una sierra por donde salgan las aguas y queden libres vuestras tierras. 
Y diciendo y haciendo arrojé la vara de oro hacia Tekendama, y abrié aquellas pefias por donde ahora pasa el rio: 
pero como la vara era delgada, no hizo tanta abertura como era menester, por las muchas aguas que se juntan en 
los inviernos, y asi todavia rebalsa. Pero al fin quedé la tierra libre para poder sembrar y tener el sustento, y ellos 
obligados 4 adorar y hacer sacrificios, como los hacen, en apareciendo el arco, aunque llenos de temores, por los que 
despues les puso el Chibchatchum de que habian de morir muchos en apareciendose el arco, por el castigo que 4 él le 
habia dado el Bochica por el hecho, que fue cargar en sus hombros toda la tierra, y que la sustentara; la qual antes de 
esto, dicen se sustentaba sobre unos grandes guayacanes ; y esa es la razon porque ahora tiembla la tierra, lo que antes 
de esto no hacia, porque como le pesa mucho el mudarla de un hombro 4 otro, le hace se mueva y tiemble toda ella. 

4. No fueron solos estos Indios del Reyno los que cayeron en este error de adorar al Arco ; pues de los del Peru 
afirma lo mismo el padre Acosta *, y que el arco era las armas 6 insignias imperiales del Inga, con dos culebras 
asidas las colas 4 las puntas del arco y se tocaban en medio de él con las cabezas. De este embuste con que el 
demonio abobaba a estos Indios del Nuevo Reyno y de otros infinitos, de que estaban Ilenas y lo estan las historias 
de estas Indias, se conoce quanta verdad tenga el dicho comun de los santos, que el demonios es un simia 6 mona 
de Dios, y que lo que sabe hizo 6 mandé Dios hacer, quiere él poner por obra, permitiendoselo asi en gente poco 
alumbrada. Sabia el demonio que Dios para sefial de que se habian ya apaciguado sus iras con el castigo de las 
aguas, habia dado por sefial el arco del cielo, en el qual libré la certidumbre de que no vendria otra vez el diluvio 4 
anegar la tierra, diciendo 4 Noe que en viendo el arco en las nubes se acordaria de este concierto, como Jo llemos en 
el Genesis -{-, que tenia hecho con él y sus hijos y todos los animales de la tierra. Y asi en aseguracion y remedio de 
la necesidad que tenian los Indios de que se les desanegase su tierra, le parecié al demonio seria bueno tomar por in- 
strumento el arco del cielo, y aparecerse encima de él, y hacer desde alli aquellas monerias ‘de arrojar la vara de oro, 
y que con aquello quedaba desaguada la tierra, para que asi quedase introducido otro nuevo genero de idolatria al arco, 
y los pobres Indios cargados de mayores errores y pecados, que es lo que siempre ha pretendido, pues 4 vuelta de 
estas mentiras de desaguar este rio, y otras, se sorbe él los rios enteros de almas, como lo dijo el santo Job f. 

Carituto Y. 

1. Como se llama el Sacerdote de los Indios, y como se ensenaba y graduaba. 
2. Modos de ofrecer los sacrificios por las necesidades comunes y particulares. 
3. Modo de ofrecer en los campos ofrendas particulares. 

4, Quan pegado se tengan hoy en las entranas la idolatria, ponese un exemplo. 

1. A Los sacerdotes que tenian de los idolos para las ofrendas y sacrificios, 4 quien respetaban mucho, llamaban 
Chque, y los Espattoles Xeque, por la dificultosa pronunciacion que le hallaron, y porque tiene alguna correspon- 
dencia el uno con el otro; y este sabian los Espafoles, porque es proprio del capitan 6 sefor de algun aduar, que 
son como pueblezuelos 6 parcialidades que hay en el reyno de Mazagan en Africa, cerca de la ciudad de Oran, que 
comunmente llaman Moros sin rey 6 Alarabes, y ellos @ su principal y sefior, Xeque. Y los Sophes de Persia se 
laman Xeques, como dice Pineda en su Monarquia Ecclesiastica, lib, 2. cap. 1; con el qual vocablo se han quedado 

*% Acosta, lib, 5. cap. 4. + Gen. cap, 9. + Job, cap. 4, 

948 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

y se entienden los Espafioles en este reyno, quando se trata de estos sacerdotes; 4 los quales heredaba siempre el 
sobrino, hijo de hermana, como 4 los caciques. A este que habia de succeder, quando era de mediana edad, lo 
sacaban de casa de sus padres y metian en otra apartada del pueblo, llamada Cuca, que era como academia 6 uni- 
versidad, donde estaban algunos pretendientes, con otro Indio viejo, que les hacia ayunar con tal abstinencia que no 
comian al dia mas que una bien tasada porcion de mazamorra 6 puches de harina de maiz, sin sal, ni agi, y alguna 
vez algun pajarillo que se llamaba Chsinia, 6 algunas sardinetas que cojen en los arroyos, no mas larga cada una 
que la primera coyuntura del dedo mayor de la mano, que llaman guapucha ; pero de todo mui poco. Tambien les 
ensefiaba las ceremonias y observancias de los sacrificios, en que gastaban doze afios; despues de los quales les 
horadaban las orejas y narices, en que se ponian zarcillos y caracuries de oro: ibanle acompafiando muchos Indios 
hasta una quebrada limpia, donde se lavaba todo el cuerpo y vestia mantas nuevas finas: desde donde iba con el 
mismo, 6 con mas acompafiamiento 4 la casa del cacique, el qual le daba la investidura del sacerdocio, concedien- 
dole y dandole de su mano, para que trajera el Poporo y mochila del hayo, y algunas buenas mantas finas y pintadas, 
y licencia para ejercer el oficio de Xeque en toda su tierra, porque en cada una los habia particulares. Y con esto 
quedaba del todo graduado en su oficio ; por cuya solennidad hacian grandes fiestas de mucha bebida y bayles, ofre- 
ciendo sacrificios para que ejercitara el oficio. Mietiase despues de celebrar las fiestas en una casa que le tenian 
hecha cerca del templo, 6 en el campo para el proposito, de donde no salia mas que para hacer los ofrecimientos, 
porque su sementera y labranza se la hacian de comunidad ; y para su vestir le daban mantas los que venian 4 hacer 
las ofrendas, para que mas desocupado de estos estorbos, se diese mas del todo al servicio de los dioses; por cuya 
razon tampoco consentian se casase por toda su vida. Y asi era austerisima la que pasaba, sin compafiia de nadie, 
siempre en asperos ayunos y martirios diabolicos ; pues mui de ordinario se sajaba y sacaba abundancia de sangre 
de muchas partes de su cuerpo. 

2. Ningun sacrificio ni ofrenda se podia hacer sino por su mano, particular ni comun, porque todavia en las 
ofrendas comunes y por causas graves sacrificaban al Sol, que como hemos dicho era el principal 4 quien adoraban 
no en templos, porque decian era imposible meter tanta majestad entre paredes ; sino en altas cumbres 4 la parte 
que miraban al Oriente, 4 donde llevaban los Xeques, juntandose muchos para esto, un nifio de los que habian cogido 
en guerra de sus enemigos, que para esto tenian reservados muchos, y guardados en ciertas casas y regalados con 
delicadas comidas. Lilegadosal puesto del sacrificio, con algunas ceremonias tendian al muchacho sobre una manta 
rica en el suelo, y alli le degollaban con unos cuchillos de cafia: cogian la sangre en- una totuma, y con ella untaban 
algunas pefias en que daban los primeros rayos del Sol, porque esto hacian en dias claros y 4 esta hora. El cuerpo 
de el difunto unas veces lo metian en una cueba 6 sepultura, y otras lo dejaban sin sepultura en la cumbre, paraque 
lo comiera el Sol y se desenojara ; entendiendo que por estarlo con ellos, les venian aquellos trabajos. Y asi quando 
despues de algunos dias de como lo habian dejado, volvian 4 verlo y lo hallaban consumido, decian habersele co- 
mido el Sol, con que estaria ya aplacado y en su favor para sus necesidades. De esta costumbre vino el arrojarles 
sus nifios desde el cerro los Indios de Guacheta a los Espanoles, quando iban entrando en estas tierras, por entender 
eran hijos del Sol, como ya digimos. Compafiros tuvieron los Indios de este reyno en estos sacrificios, pues tambien 
los del Peru sacrificaban nifios, como dice Gregorio Garcia *. 

En las ofrendas y sacrificios particulares de los caciques era otro el modo; porque 4 las entradas y esquinas de 
sus casas tenian unos gruesos y levantados maderos, en que hacian trabazon las cercas de las casas, y en lo mas 
alto de ellos hechas unas gabias como de navios, que servian de hermosear los palos y esquinas, y de poner quando 
se habia de hacer el sacrificio un nifio de los que tenian para esto, a donde lo mataban con flechas y dardos que le 
tiraban de abajo, donde estaban los Xeques cogiendo la sangre con unas totumas que cahia el madero abajo, que 
porque no se afease con ella, lo tenian todo enalmagrado 6 enbiyado: bajaban el cuerpo de estos muertos, y con 
él y la sangre, 4 quien le tenian gran reverencia, iban con muchas danzas por una carrera que tenian muy limpia y 
ancha, como para dos carretas, que salia desde el cercado del cacique hasta un cerro alto, que solia ser de mas de 
media legua de distancia; donde apartandose los Xeques del vulgo, untaban las piedras de la frente del Sol con la 
sangre y el cuerpo lo enterraban. Usaban tambien estas carreras en dias de sus fiestas, que tenian ya para esto de- 
dicados ; en los quales habian de concurrir todos los vasallos del cacique, y de cada parcialidad, traher una danza con 
invenciones nuevas, y mucha plumeria y flautas, fotutos y tamboriles. Y haciendo por el caminomil entremeses y 

® Lib. 3. del Orig. de los Ind. cap. 3. § 4. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 249 

juegos, llegaban al alto, donde las carreras, que siempre iban 4 parar 4 estos puestos. Y hecha alguna ofrenda 4 sus 
dioses, se volvian por la misma carrera con los mismos juegos, regocijos y libreas, que muchos tambien llevaban 
de pieles de animales, con diademas de oro fino en la cabeza, que eran 4 modo de medias lunas, las puntas para ar- 
riba. Lilegados ya de vuelta 4 la casa del cacique, loaba las invenciones de las danzas, juegos, regocijos y libreas: 
daba algunas mantas en premio 4 los que las habian sacado mejores, y esfuerzo de chicha para el camino: con que 
se volvian 4 sus casas y acababan en ellas con borracheras lo restante de la fiesta. Quando ‘el’ afto era seco, de 
manera que picaba la hambre por la falta de aguas, ayunaban asperisimamente unos dias los Xeques, y al fin de ellos 
subian 4 un monte que tenian dedicado para esto, donde quemaban moque y mechones de trementina, y tomando 
las cenizas las esparcian por el ayre, diciendo que de aquellas se habian de congelar las nubes y llover, y suceder 
despues bien el afo. 

3. No todos tenian sus adoraciones en los templos, pues las de muchos las tenian dedicadas en lagunas, arroyos, 
pefias, cerros y otras partes de particular y singular disposicion y compostura ; no porque tubiesen estas cosas por 
dioses, sino que por la singularidad que tenian, les parecian ser dignas de mayor veneracion, 6 porque pasando por 
ellas les habia sucedido alguna singular cosa, como zumbarles los oydos, temblarles las manos, haber venido mucho 
viento, algun gran trueno 6 rayo, diciendo que con aquello les hacia sefia el demonio para que lo venerasen en 
aquellos lugares: en que no faltaban un punto, porque aunque conocian que era malo, le obedecian porque no les 
hiciese mal. Teniendo cada uno pues alguna de estas partes sefialadas para su devocion y ofrecimientos, quando 
tenia aleuna necesidad hombre 6 muger, la comunicaban con el Xeque, que para solo esto tenia licencia de mirar 
y hablar 4 las mugeres: comunicada, mascaba el Xeque tabaco en su casa, y ora se lo revelase el demonio, 6 él lo 
imaginase, ordenaba 4 los que querian hacer la ofrenda, los dias que querian ayunar, porque ninguna se hacia 4 que 
no precediese ayuno, tan preciso de parte de los necesitados y el Xeque, que aunque murieran, no lo habian de 
quebrantar, con ser estrechisimo y no de pocos dias. Quando se iban acabando, mandaba el Xeque se hiciesen de 
oro, cobre, hilo é barro, las figuras que habian de ofrecer, que solian ser de una aguila, serpiente, mona, papagayo 6 
otras asi. Adquella noche que se le daban, iba 4 la mitad de ella al lugar de la devocion de los que ofrecian, que ya 
lo sabia, el Xeque; y veinte pasos antes que llegara, se desnudaba y quedaba todo en carnes, mirando primero si 
sonaba algun ruido, y sin hacer él ninguno, iba con gran reverencia aquellos veinte pasos, y llegando al lugar del 
santuario, levantaba en ambas palmas la figurilla que Mevaba envuelta en algodon; decia algunas palabras en que 
significaba la necesidad del que ofrecia, y pedia el remedio para ella; y puesto de rodillas la arrojaba en las aguas 
de manera que se fuese 4 pique, 6 metia en una cueva, 6 la envolvia en la tierra, segun era el santuario. Y volvi- 
endo, dando pasos atras sin volver de ninguna manera las espaldas, llegaba asi hasta donde habia dejado el vestido, y 
poniendoselo volvia 4 su casa en lo intempestivo de la noche. Y viniendo luego 4 la mafana el que ofrecia, y sabi- 
endo del Xeque que ya aquello estaba hecho, dabale por su trabajo dos mantas y algun oro; y volvia 4 su casa, y 
mudandose otro vestido del que se habia puesto para el ayuno, y Javandose, convidaba 4 sus parientes, y hacia con 
ellos gran borrachera, que era en lo que venian 4 parar todas sus fiestas. Al modo con que hacian reverenciar 4 sus 
santuarios en esta ocasion, lo hacian en todas las que entraban 4 ofrecer en los templos; pues iban desde la puerta 
de ellos con pasos cortos y ojos bajos, haciendo muchas y grandes humillaciones, lo que tambien guardaban al salir 
hasta fuera de la puerta. 

4, En esta zabana y valle de Bogota tenian estos mil modos de idolatrias, en que no puedo detenerme, pues 
basta lo dicho para que se entienda quan connaturalizado tenian el corazon en ellas. Y como es vicio tan pegajoso, 
no han sido bastantes los immensos trabajos que padecen los ministros del evangelio en toda ocasion para desarray- 
garlo de ellos ; pues como ven que los persiguen en esto, hacen sus ofrecimientos y santuarios entre penascos y des- 
yumbaderos, y aun debajo de los saltos que hacen las aguas en los arroyos y quebradas, por tenerlos mas seguros 
de que no los hallen los padres. De manera que no lo hay del Indio que parece mas Cristiano y ladino, de que no 
tenga idolos 4 quien adore, como nos lo dice cada dia la experiencia. Suelen hoy ofrecer 4 los idolos quanto topan 
de los Espafioles, como se vido en un santuario que sacé un padre de nuestra religion en el pueblo de Cipaquira, 
en donde hallé una bota para vino, un rosario, una capilla de frayle francisco, un bonete de clerigo, y una suma de 
casos de conciencia de Durando. Yo hé visto sacar de algunos Ilaves y imagenes de nuestros rosarios. Tambien le 
sucedié 4 un padre doctrinero de nuestra religion en el pueblo de Cogua, ocho 6 diez leguas de esta ciudad de San- 
tafé, que habiendo vivido un Indio de los principales con muestras de muy Cristiano, le did la enfermedad de la muerte, 
y yendole 4 visitar el padre entre otras veces, ya que estaba cerca de ella, para ayudarle 4 bien morir, hallé que lo 

38 

950 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

estaba ya haciendo un sobrino del enfermo, teniendole puesta en las manos una cruz hecha de las palmas de do- 
mingo de ramos; y tomandola el padre y comenzandole 4 exhortar lo que Dios le inspiraba, parece le inspiré tam- 
bien, que desenvolviese las palmas de la cruz, porque le parecio pesaba mas que lo que las palmas podian pesar. Y 
desenvolviendolas hallé en ellas un idolo de oro, que representaba al dios Bochica, en cuya adoracion se disponia 
para morir, como lo hizo luego, admitiendo poco las exhortaciones del padre, el qual hizo castigar al sobrino, 
porque no habia sido poca parte en que muriese su tio en aquel estado. 

Capituto VI. 

1. Modo de heredar los cacicazgos, y cosas que precedian antes de tomar la.posesion de ellos. 
2. Lo que se hacia despues de tomada la posesion del cacicazgo. 

3. Modo de elegir Cacique, quando faltaba heredero. 

4, Respeto grande, que se les tema a los Caciques. 

1. No heredaban 4 sus padres los hijos de los caciques, sino era las haciendas que se hallaban tener quando morian, 
que se repartian entre todos y las mugeres que dejaban: porque el estado lo habia de heredar el sobrino, hijo de 
hermana, y no de hermano, para asegurar con aquello su sangre, por la poca satisfaccion que tenian de la fidelidad 
de las mugeres. Faltaba esta regla en la succesion del cacique 6 rey de Bogota, pues le succedio el cacique del 
pueblo de Chia, como ya dejamos dicho y la razon y principio que esto tuvo. Y no era el heredar los cacicazgos tan 
4 secas y sin ceremonias y prevenciones, que no le diesen dos ayos al que habia de succeder, luego que llegase 4 
los afios de discrecion, que le fueran ensefiando é industriando en buenas costumbres y vida honesta hasta que llegaba 
4 edad de 15 6 16 afios: porque entonces lo metian a que ayunara uno en la casa, que para esto tenian diputada y 
apartada del comun trato de la gente, pues solo veian de quando en quando 4 sus maestros. En este afio de ayuno 
les oradaban en las narices y orejas ; y cumplido, les decian los Xeques de su pueblo y parcialidad lo que habian de 
ofrecer aquella primera vez 4 los dioses, 6 figuras de leon, aguila, tigres ti osos, que hacian los plateros de oro fino, 
6 como se lo daba el pretendiente; de cuyas manos iba 4 las de los Xeques, y de ellas 4 las de los dioses, con las 
ceremonias y respetos dichos. Lo qual acabado, acababan tambien con gran cantidad de su vino en una gran fiesta 
que hacian de todos los caciques convecinos, 4 quienes les volvia los retornos doblados de los presentes que 4 él le 
hacian, de mantas, oro, armas y otras cosas. Y en especial se hacia esta fiesta mas crecida quando le daban la 
envestidura del cacicazgo y lo metian en posesion, quando faltaba el antecesor por muerte; porque esta duraba 
diez y seis dias con grandes bayles y embriaguezes, despues de haberle concedido el Bogota que entrase en posesion 
de su estado; porque aunque les vinieran de derecho, no los gozaban sin que él los confirmase y aprobase primero: 
y asi luego que tomaban la posesion del estado, venian al Bogota para la confirmacion, acompaiiados de los mas 
principales, y cargados de dones de valor y estima; con que la hacia mui grande el Bogota de sus personas, y los 
confirmaba en el estado, y volvia 4 enviar 4 sus pueblos; 4 cuya entrada estaban sus vasallos aguardandolo con pre- 
sentes ricos, pata con ellos hacer el reconocimiento que debian 4 su sefior natural, y dar el parabien de las mercedes 
que le habia hecho el gran Cippa, que asi se llamaba en esta lengua el supremo sefior de todos los demas. 

2. Desde entonces le obedecian con tanta puntualidad, sin faltar en nada, que pienso han sido en esto estas 
naciones las superiores de quantas hemos conocido ; aunque ya ha cahido esto casi del todo, por el recurso que 
tienen los Indios 4 las justicias Espafioles de los agravios 6 injusticias que les hacen los caciques; y asi son mal 
obedecidos en pagarles los tributos y en lo demas que les ordenan. Comenzabase entonces, como digimos, la fiesta 
mas de asiento, que llamaban de la coronacion, por espacio de quince dias: y al ultimo trahian todos los principales 
las joyas y coronas de oro adornadas de caracuries de Santa Marta, que habian hecho para el efecto, orejeras y nari- 
gueras de oro para las narizes y orejas, chagualas para el pecho, y medias lunas para la frente ; y dandoselas en presente 
los mas principales al cacique, y vistiendole los caballeros de ricas telas de algodon, y poniendole un bordon de guay- 
acan bien labrado en la mano, y una corona de oro, cuentas verdes y blancas, y otras joyas ricas en la cabeza, con las que 
no eran de tanto valor, daban remate 4 la fiesta, partiendo de carrera todos hasta llegar 4 la primera cerca, que estaba 
mas inmediata de donde se celebraba, y arrojandolas al agua, se quedaban alli en alabanza de sus dioses : al modo de 
estas eran las fiestas que se hacian en la posesion que tomaba el Bogota, aunque con mayores gastos y grandeza. 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. Q51 

3. Quando sucedia que le faltaba heredero al cacique, no tenia licencia el pueblo de elegirlo, porque el Bogota 
To ponia de su mano, escogiendo para esto los hombres de mas nobleza, y mejor sangre, costumbres y valentia; entre 
los quales eran preferidos aquellos valentones, que digimos se llamaban Guechas, y estaban en las fronteras de sus 
enemigos los Panches: pero 4 estos que escogia el Bogota para poseer estos cacicazgos, en ninguna cosa ponia 
mas cuidado para examinar sus costumbres, que en saber por experiencia si eran honestos, conociendo de la mucha 
importancia que sea esta virtud para el gobierno: lo qual experimentaba publicamente con bien poca honestidad ; 
pues en medio de todos los que habia en una plaza juntos para este examen, hacia traher una doncella de buen parecer 
con solo el vestido que le dio la naturaleza, y con el mismo salian dos de los pretensores y se ponian junto 4 ella, 
y si alguno tenia natural movimiento sensual, era excluido de la pretension del cacicazgo, y elegido el otro; y si 
ambos cahian en lo mismo ambos eran excluidos, hasta que viniendo otros, era elegido el que se mostraba enfrenado 
en aquella ocasion, juzgando el Bogota ser capaz de aquel sefiorio quien era enfrenado en tales ocasiones. Del 
Bogota nunca se supo haber faltado heredero, porque para esto tenian cuidado los caciques de Chia de tener muchas 
mugeres, con que nunca habia falta de quien los heredase. No eran iguales en linage todos los caciques; pues 
unos eran menores y de menos estimada sangre; otros eran de mayor estima, 4 quien llamaban Ubzaques, y estos 
eran en especial los que tenian sus pueblos en fronteras de enemigos, como el Pasca, Subachogue, Cagueza, 'Teuzaca, 
Fosca, Guasca, Pacho, Simijaca. El Tibacuy era como condestable; Guatabita y Ubaque eran como duques; el 
Suba como virrey, y el rey el Bogota, aunque por tirania, porque en las primeras poblaciones de estas tierras, cada 
cacique fue sefior de lo que por entonces le cupo de tierra y vasallos, sin sugecion 4 otros ; hasta que con violencia 
sugeté despues el Bogota 4 sus caciques, aunque muchos de sus convecinos nunca acabaron de darle perfecta obe- 
diencia, sin andar royendo el cabestro como luego veremos. Y lo mismo sucedio con el cacique de Tunja 6 
Ramiriqui, que con la misma violencia sugeté 4 muchos de la tierra. Tampoco heredaban los hijos legitimos 4 los 
capitanes y gente principal despues de los caciques, sino los sobrinos, salvo si los hijos eran habidos en esclavas, 
porque estos entraban heredando 4 sus padres. 

4, El respeto que tenian sus vasallos al cacique era tan grande, que juzgaban perdersele si le miraban 4 la cara: 
y asi el hablarle era siempre 4 espaldas vueltas; lo que guardaban con tanta puntualidad, que solian dar por pena 
de infamia el hacerle 4 uno por fuerza que le viera la cara, como sucedia con el que era acusado de ladron, pues 
trayendole la primera vez delante del cacique 4 espaldas vueltas y reprehendiéndole el hecho, y la segunda reprehen- 
diendole y castigandole con azotes, 4 la tercera como incorregible le daban mayor pena, que fuera para ellos la 
muerte natural, porque delante del cacique, que estaba sentado en una silla de autoridad, lo reprehendia un caballero 
de los de su casa, desde las espaldas de la silla del cacique, diciendole: ya os hemos castigado dos veces de vuestra 
mala vida, y no habeis tenido vergiienza de volver 4 ella, vos os debeis de considerar algun gran sefior, y pues lo 
sois, bien podeis mirar al cacique. Y arremetiendole 4 él, le volvia con violencia la cabeza, y hacia que mirase al 
cacique, dejandole ir con sola esta pena 4 su casa. Pero era tan grande la infamia que con eso llevaba, que se aca- 
baba su linage, pues ninguno del pueblo ni su comarca le daba sus hijos ni hijas, para que se casara con los suyos, 
ni le ayudaban en labranzas, ni en necesidad alguna, y todos se tenian por afrentados de hablar con él, solo porque 
habia mirado al cacique. Y asi quando le Ilevaban algun presente para negociar y hablar con él, porque nadie lo 
iba 4 ver, ni visitar, que no presentase algo primero, entraban con la cabeza y cuerpo bajo, y puesto en suelo delante 
de los pies del cacique lo que levaban, le volvian las espaldas, y sentandose en el suelo le trataban de su negocio. 

Cariruo VII. 

1. Modos que tenian los Caciques en cobrar sus tributos y otras deudas. 
2. Fiestas que se hacian, quando se acababan las casas nuevas. if 
3. Leyes universales del Bogota para.todo su reyno. 
4. Modos y leyes de los casamientos. 
1. Quanpo algun Indio retardaba la paga del tributo que le debia al cacique, le enviaba con un criado suyo un gato, 

leon, 6 oso, que criaban en sus casas para este efecto. Amarrabanlo 4 la puerta de la casa del deudor, estando el que 
lo Ievaba con él, 4 quien estaba el deudor obligado 4 mantener con mucho regalo, y darle cada dia que se detuviese 

959 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

alli una manta de algodon, y darle 4 comer al animal tortolas, curies, 6 pajarillos ; con que ponian al pobre Indio en 
tales apreturas, que por salir de ellos, diligenciaba con cuidado la paga, quedando escarmentado para lo de adelante. 
Lo mismo usaban, en especial el Bogota, quando enviaban a llamar algunos de sus vasallos, porque el gato era como 
sefia de que ellos eran los que los Ilamaban. Si alguno no criaba de estos gatos, que eran monteses y bien diferentes 
de los nuestros, para apremiar 4 que se le pagara el tributo, usaban de otro modo, y era que en enviando 4 cobrarlo, 
sino pagaban en los dias que daban de espera, entraba el cobrador @ sus casas y apagabales con agua la lumbre, y no 
se habia de volver 4 encender hasta que pagasen, con que procuraban los deudores fuese con brevedad, por la falta 
que les hacia el fuego. 

2. Quando se hacia de nuevo la casa y cercado del cacique, en los hoyos que hacian para poner aquellos palos 
gruesos que usan en medio de buhio y 4 las puertas del cercado, hacian entrar, ya cavado el hoyo, una nifia bien 
compuesta en cada uno, hijas de los mas principales del pueblo, que estimaban en mucho se quisiese servir de ellas 
para aquello el cacique. Y estando las nifias dentro de los hoyos, soltaban los palos sobre ellas, y los iban afijando 
con tierra, por que decian consistia la fortaleza y buen suceso de la casa y sus moradores en estar fundada sobre 
carne y sangre humana. Despues de acabada, convidaba el cacique 4 todo el pueblo para una gran borrachera que 
duraba muchos dias, en que habia muchos juegos, hayles y entretenimientos, en especial de truanes y chocarreros, 
de que habia muchos entre ellos, que ganaban 4 eso su vida, andandose de fiesta en fiesta, por las pagas que les 
daban de mantas y otras cosas, segun la calidad del que las hacia. El tiempo que duraban estas del cacique, estaban 
4 la puerta del cercado, desde la mafiana hasta la noche sin comer ni beber, dos Indios ya en edad mayores, desnudos 
todo el cuerpo, en pie, cubiertos con una red grande de coger pajaros, tafendo con unas flautas y haciendo una 
musica melancolica y triste, para significar con aquello mas al vivo lo que representaban, estando alli con aquella 
postura, que era la muerte,. porque decian, que la red era instrumento suyo, pues mataban con ella las aves: el 
estar desnudos representaba como deja 4 los hombres quando los acomete, pues quedan desnudos de todas las cosas 
de esta vida; y4lo mismo aludia el no comer ni beber en todo el dia, pues tambien los priva de eso; de lo que era 
bien se acordasen en todos los juegos, fiestas y entretenimientos: y por eso estaban a la puerta de la fiesta, para 
que antes de ella, se lo representasen 4 todos los que se hallaban en ella que habian de-morir. Y aun entre los 
regocijos de dentro habia Indios con instrumentos que hacian musicas tan tristes, que incitaban a llorar @ todos de 
rato en rato, en medio de los regocijos y bayles. Usaban todos los Indios estas fiestas siempre que estrenaban casas 
nuevas ; pero cada qual con gastos segun su posible: si bien en ninguna habian de faltar truanes, de que se han 
preciado tanto comunmente todos los Indios de estas tierras, que los de Mexico tenian sus dioses particulares y tem- 
plos para ellos. Para mas solennizar estas fiestas de la dedicacion de sus casas, los caciques ordenaban, que algunos 
mozos de buena disposicion corriesen cierta distancia, que les tenian sefalada en redondo, algunas veces de mas de 
quatro leguas, 4 que salian corriendo todos juntos los que se determinaban 4 eso; pero yendose aventajando 4 los 
demas los mas valientes, volvian mas presto 4 la casa de donde habian salido: donde les iba premiando el cacique 
su valentia, como iban llegando, porque al primero le daba seis mantas, y le concedia que cubriendose con la una, 
pudiera llegar la una punta de ella al suelo por detras, que le daba en los talones, cosa que nadie lo podia hacer sin 
privilegio del cacique, y les duraba por toda su vida: al segundo que llegaba, daba cinco mantas ; al tercero, quatro 
y asi 4los demas hasta seis, iban disminuyendo el premio, sin el qual se quedaban los demas. Y aun algunos por 
pasar con honra la carrera, rebentaban con el trabajo en ella. 

3. Aunque cada uno de los reyes Bogotaes ponia particulares leyes, segun le parecia convenia 4 su republica y 
buen gobierno, tenian otras comunes y de immemorable antigiiedad puestas por los reyes pasados, a cuya observancia 
ninguno faltaba, que eran asi. Mandaban, que quien mataba muriese, aunque lo perdonasen los parientes del muerto, 
porque la vida, decian, que solo la daba Dios, y que los hombres no la podian perdonar. Si algun hombre soltero 
forzaba alguna muger, habia de morir por ello; y si casado, habian de dormir dos solteros con la suya. Si alguno 
se hallase, que tubiese cuenta con su madre, hija, hermana, 6 sobrina, que entre ellos eran grados prohibidos, lo 
metiesen en un hoyo angosto de agua con muchas»sabandijas venenosas dentro, y cubriendolo con una gran losa, lo 
dejaban pereciendo alli; y la misma pena se daba 4 ellas. Los que incurriesen en el pecado nefando, muriesen con 
tormentos, y los que de ordinario les daban, era empalarlos con una estaca de una palma espinosa, hasta que les 
saliese por el cerebro ; porque decian era bien fuese castigado por donde habia pecado. Y dejaba la ley puerta 
abierta, para que los reyes succesores pudieran agravar las penas: con que fue la gente de este reyno siempre limpi- 
sima en este pecado, y bien diferente de la de los lanos sus vecinos, y de los de Santa Marta, como diremos en la 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 253 

Tercera Parte. Si alguna muger casada moria de parto, mandaba la ley que perdiese el marido la mitad de la hacienda, 
y la llevase el suegro 6 suegra, hermanos 6 parientes mas cercanos en defecto de padres. Mas quedando la criatura 
viva, solo estaba obligado 4 criarla 4 su costa. Y aun afiidian en algunas partes, que sino tenia hacienda, habia de 
buscar algunas mantas el viudo con que pagar 4 los herederos la muerte; y si no, le perseguian hasta quitarle la 
vida. oo 

Ninguno por prohibicion de la ley podia subir en andas para ser llevado en hombros de sus criados 4 alguna parte, 
sino solo el Bogota, y quien por privilegio y merced ganada con sefialados servicios se le concediese. Estaban limi- 
tadas las pinturas, galas y joyas en sus vestidos y adornos 4 la gente comun, y concedidas de privilegio 4 los Ubzaques 
y 4 los demas caciques y otros principales, y la licencia para poder traher las narices y orejas horadadas, y ponerse 
en ellas y en el cuello las joyas de oro que quisiesen, como tambien estaba concedido 4 los Xeques. Era ley, que 
los bienes de quien muriese sin herederos, quedasen aplicados 4 su fisco y cofres reales. Que quien huyese de la 
batalla antes que el capitan que le governaba, le diesen una muerte vil al albedrio de su cacique. Que quien mostrase 
cobardia en la guerra, le vistiesen por afrenta ropas de muger, y usase los mismos ministerios y oficios que ellas usan 
en sus casas por el tiempo que quisiese el cacique. | Estaban ordenadas tambien otras penas ligeras para mas ligeras 
y livianas culpas, como eran azotes, romperles la manta con que se cubrian, tresquilarles los cabellos, que por mucha 
gala trahen largos ; y asi tienen por pena afrentosa hoy que se los hagan quitar los Espafioles en pena de algunos 
delitos que cometen, aunque ya van perdiendo el miedo poco 4 poco 4 este castigo, viendo que alli se les quedan las 
raices con que luego se va remediando aquella falta. Este castigo era comun 4 mugeres y hombres, y asi ahora lo 
es tambien comun el sentimiento de él. 

4, Estas eran las comunes leyes que tenian puestas los Bogotaes 4 todo su reyno; sobre las quales habia otras 
costumbres comunes y aun particulares de cada pueblo, en especial acerca del casarse. Porque el que queria tratar 
de eso, ya que tenia determinado con quien, hablaba sin poner casamenteros, ni otras ceremonias, por su persona con 
alguna de las que tenian 4 su cargo y debajo de su amparo 4 la que pretendia, ora fuesen padres 6 parientes, con 
quien trataba del precio que habia de dar por ella. Y si lo que ofrecia no les parecia bastante, afiidia por dos veces 
la mitad mas de lo que prometia primero, y si 4 la tercera no bastaba, buscaba muger mas barata. Pero si en esto 
quedaba satisfecha y contenta la parte de la novia, entregabansela sin mas ritos ni dilaciones, quedandose ellos con la 
paga que el novio habia dado, sin que ella Ilevase mas de dote que algunas quinze 6 veinte mucuras de Chicha, y 
algunas alhajuelas usuales de casa. De manera que iban por diferente camino que nuestra nacion, para echar esta 
mercaduria de casa: pues ellos la vendian, y se la pagaban con ser de menos valor; y entre nosotros se usa pagar 
porque las quieran llevar. Y aun pienso viene de hay el tratar estos Indios tan mal y como esclavas 4 sus mugeres, 
porque las tienen como compradas por el precio que dieron ; y las nuestras ser tan respetadas y mandonas, porque 
parece compran el respeto con la dote que llevan. 

Carituto VIII. 

1. Leyes particulares de casamientos, y numero de mugeres que pocia tener cada Inco. 

2. Caso notable que sucedio a un Bogota de los antiguos con una muger. 

3. Castigos que se daban a los adulteros. 

4. Ceremonias que se usaban con las doncellas, quando les vena la primera vez su mes, y con los 
ninos recien nacidos. 

5. En cierta provincia de los anos, quando pare la muger, se echa el marido en la cama con cierta 
supersticion. 

1. No eran las que hemos dicho leyes comunes 4 todos en los casamientos, pues en algunos pueblos se usaba, que 
el pretendiente enviaba sin hablar con nadie, 4 los parientes 6 padres de la que pretendia, una manta, y si no se la 
volvian 4 enviar, luego volvia 4 enviar otra, y una carga de hayo, y medio venado, si era gente 4 quien les estaba con- 
cedido por los caciques comerlo, porque esta carne no se podia comer sin este privilegio, aunque era comun 4 
todos comer de otras carnes, de conejos, curies y aves. Aquella noche siguiente de como habia enviado esto, se iba 

3 T 

Q54 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

al romper del alba, y sentaba a la puerta de sus suegros, sin hacer mas ruido que el que bastase para que 
entendiesen estaba alli; los quales en sintiendolo, decian desde adentro: Quien esta alla fuera? Es por ventura 
algun ladron que viene 4 hurtar, 6 buscarme 4 mi? Pues yo no debo nada a nadie, ni convido huespedes. A que no 
respondia el pretendiente, sino con silencio estaba aguardando que saliese la desposada, que no tardaba mucho 
con una totuma grande de chicha, y llegando junto 4 él, la probaba ella primero, y dandosela 4 él, bebia quanto 
podia, con que quedaba hecho el casamiento, y le entregaban la desposada, aunque ya sabian los padres y parientes 
era trabajador y podia bien sustentarla, en que se reparaba mucho, porque la tasa en el numero dé las mugeres 
que podian tener, era la hacienda y diligencia con que las podian sustentar. Y asi los mas ricos tenian muchas 
mas, pues las de los caciques Ilegaban muchas veces 4 ser ciento, y aun las del Bogota afirman haber sido 300; 
setecientas menos de las que tuvo Salomon, pues estas llegaron 4 mil, como dejamos dicho. Ni hay que espantar- 
nos hayan sido las de estos Indios tantas, por ser ellos tan dados 4 la sensualidad, y ellas tan de poca costa en su 
sustento ; pues no habiendo menester tiendas de Milaneses para sus vestidos y afeytes, con solas dos mantas de 
algodon se concluia con los gastos del vestido, y su comida era un poco de maiz molido, y algunas yerbas y 
raices. 

2. Quando el cacique sabia de algunas doncellas de buen parecer, las pedia 4 sus padres, que sin contradiccion 
se las traian 4 su casa, donde andaban desnudas hasta que dormia con ellas, porque despues se vestian al trage de 
las demas que tenia, de las quales siempre era una la mas principal y estimada del cacique. A uno de los antiguos 
de Bogota llamado Misquechua, sucedié que trayendole una vieja 4 una China doncella, que él habia enviado 4 pedir, 
se aficioné tanto 4 ella por ser hermosa, que empleando en ella toda su aficion, parece no Je quedé ninguna con que 
acariciar 4 la principal de las demas que tenia, porque todo su entretenimiento de noche y de dia era con la recien 
venida; de que la otra rabiaba de zelos sin poderlo remediar, hasta que consultando el caso con un Xeque, y 
ayunando y haciendo ofrendas al santuario, le respondio el Xeque, que Ilegase una noche 4 la cama del cacique, 
quando estubiese en ella con la China; lo qual como hiciese la muger, hallé al cacique su marido durmiendo, y con 
él una gran culebra, en que estaba conyertida la China. Salié con silencio del aposento y casa, y yendose 4 la del 
Xeque, le dijo lo que pasaba: el qual le respondid, que 4 otro dia convidase 4 la India con otras de las mugeres 4 
irse 4 bafiar 4 este rio que llaman Bogota, 6 por su propio nombre Funzua, quando pasa por bajo del salto de 
Tequendama (porque esto sucedié en la casa de recreacion que tenia alli cerca, 4 quien los Espafoles llamaron casa 
del monte, quando entraron en esta tierra de quien yahablamos). No se descuidé la muger en el convite y diligencia 
para el bafio, en el qual estandose ya baftando todas las que fueron, 4 vista de las demas se convirtié la China en 
culebra grande, y se desparecié por entre las aguas, sin que mas la viesen: con que quedo deshecho el engafo del 
demonio, y la cacica fuera de zelos. Algunos casos han sucedido con estos Indios al modo de este, siendoles el de- 
monio incubo y succubo. . 

3. No reparaban mucho algunos Indios, quando se casaban, en hallar 4 sus esposas doncellas, no obstante la ley 
que habia acerca de esto; antes algunos quando conocian no habia Ilegado hombre 4 ellas, las tenian por desgraciadas 
y sin ventura, pues no la habian tenido en que hombres se les aficionasen; y con este pensamiento las abhorrecian 
como 4 mugeres desdichadas. Si bien es verdad, que sentian mucho despues el adulterio. Y asi 4 la que sentian 
sospechosa de esto, le hacian comer apriesa mucho agi, con que se abrasaba las entraflas, y con la misma le decian 
que confesdra su delito ; lo que hacian muchas veces con la fuerza del tormento, y aun lo que no habian hecho. 
Dabanles en confesando agua, con que mitigaban el ardor del pimiento, y sentenciabanlas 4 muerte, como lo 
disponia la ley, y 4 el adultero. Otras no confesaban, y quedaban purgadas con el tormento del indicio, y les 
hacian grandes fiestas. Si era el.adultero rico, y ella de baja calidad, se rescataba la muerte con oro y mantas, de 
que levaba su parte el cacique ; lo que no se podia hacer, si se hacia el desastre con alguna de sus concubinas 6 
mugeres; por que sin remission habian de pasar ambos por muertes crucles, dejando los cuerpos sin enterrar en el 
campo, para escarmiento y ejemplo de los demas. ; 

4, Las prefiadas ofrecian al Cuchaviva sus santillos y figuras de oro bajo para tener buen parto; y si parian 
dos de un parto, mataban el segundo que nacia, teniendo por grande afrenta parir dos juntos, porque decian 
ser aquello demasiada luxuria; creyendo ser imposible engendrarse dos juntamente, sino que habia de ser por 
fuerza’ uno despues de otro con distintos ayuntamientos. Y asi por librarse de esto, era ley inviolable no llegar 
el marido 4 la muger hasta muchos dias despues de haber parido. No se han hallado parteras en esta tierra, porque 
no son menester; antes quando quieren parir, huyen si pueden de la gente, y se van a esconder cerca de un rio, 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 255 

para en pariendo entrarse en él y lavarse con su parto, como lo hacen en particular las Indias Guayupes en San Juan 
de los Llanos al sur de esta ciudad de Santafé. Quando 4 la doncella le venia su mes. la primera vez, la hacian estar 
sentada seis dias en un rincon, tapada con una manta cabeza y rostro: despues de los quales se juntaban algunos 
Indios, que llamaban para esto, y puestos en dos hileras como en procession, Ilevandola en medio, iban hasta un: 
rio donde se lavaba, y despues le ponian el nombre de Ipaque, que es lo mismo que nosotros llamamos Doja. 
Y volviendola con esto 4 casa, hacian las fiestas que solian de chicha. Usaban de esta supersticion para conocer 4 
los nifos, si habian de ser venturosos 6 desgraciados, que quando los destetaban, hacian un rodillo pequefio de 
esparto con un poco de algodon en medio, mojado con la leche de la madre; y yendo con él seis mozos buenos 
nadadores, lo echaban en un rio, y tras él los mozos nadando. Y si el rodillo se volcaba entre el olage del agua 
antes que lo alcanzasen 4 tomar, decian habia de ser desgraciado el nifio por quien se hacia aquello. Pero si lo 
recobraban sin trastornarse, juzgaban habia de tener mucha ventura, y asi contentos se volvian 4 casa de sus 
padres, y diciendo lo que les habia pasado, se hacian fiestas segun el suceso. Llegaban luego cada uno de los mozos, 
y otros que tenian convidados, y quitaban con unos cuchillos de cafia 6 piedra al nifio, que estaba sentado en una 
manta, los cabellos, hasta que lo dejaban sin ninguno. Estos los echaban despues en el rio donde lavaban al nifo, 
que era cierto modo de bautizmo. Ofrecian al nifo algunos dones, despues de estar bien remojados de chicha, con 
que se concluia la fiesta. 

5. A las espaldas de estas sierras de Bogota, que es 4 la parte del leste, que llaman los Llanos, entre las demas 
naciones hay una que anda vagabunda en quadrillas pequefias, desnudos del todo, sin casas ni sementeras: duermen, 
donde les coge la noche, por ser tierra caliente: comen frutas y rayzes silvestres: usan arcos.y flechas: nunca se 
detienen en parte ninguna, sino es quando ha de parir la muger ; porque entonces hace el marido un hoyo tan hondo 
como ella, algo espacioso, donde pare 4 solas. Y si es yaron el del parto, hace el marido una barbacoa 6 tablado de 
caflas encima del hoyo, levantado en alto como una lanza, sobre quatro palos, sobre que se sube ; y aqui estd por 
tres dias sin moverse de un lado 4 otro; y si no puede sufrir los tres dias y noches el estar siempre de aquel lado y 
sin comer, sino que la hambre y cansancio le hacen pedir de comer y volverse al otro lado, se baja triste de la bar- 
bacoa, y diciendo que el nifio ha de ser desgraciado por aquello, no se les da mucho de criarlo; pero si puede 
perseverar en estos dos tormentos, y los que se afiaden 4 veces de sol y agua en aquel tiempo, le juzgan de suerte 

dichosa, y en alegria hacen fiestas. 

Cariruto IX. 

1. Los Indios del Nuevo Reyno no saben dar razon, de donde vinieron a estas sus tierras, en que 
vivian de labranzas. . d 

2. Dividian el tiempo por dias, meses y anos, y usaban de medida y moneda de oro. 

3. TLenian lugares senalados de mercados, donde contrataban. 

4, De estos el mas principal era Sorocota, donde hallaron una riquisima piredra de metal de 

plata. 

1. De las cegueras con que hablan estos Indios, como hemos visto, acerca de sus principios, podemos entender las 
mismas acerca de su venida 4 estas tierras. Y asi solo se sospecha vinieron de la parte del Leste por algunas con- 
geturas que de ellos tenemos, de que por no sacar cosa de fundamento, no trataré mas. Solo digo que la necesidad 
del frio, y no ser de suyo la tierra por la misma razon de arboles frutales silvestres, ni de otra cosa de comida que 
naturalmente produzca, como lo son algunas tierras calientes (de quien ya hemos hablado en nuestra Primera Parte) 
donde se sustentan los Indios sin cansarse en hacer sementeras; los de estas del reyno se dieron mucho 4 ellas. Y 
asi han sido siempre grandes labradores de maiz, yucas, batatas, arracachas, xiquimas, turmas, cubias y otras rayzes ; 
y en especial lo eran de algodon en las tierras que alcanzaban calientes, que eran todas las circunvecinas 4 las 
espaldas de las serranias que cercan estos valles del reyno. Porque aunque por todas partes estaban cercados de 
enemigos, 4 punta de lanza defendian las labranzas que tenian en tierras calientes, de frutas, rayzes, y algodon, que 
mo se dan en las frias. De este hacian mucha, mui fina y buena ropa de mantas, desde que aquel su predicador, que 

256 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

digimos, se las enseiio 4 tejer, con las quales se vestian, revolviendose una al cuerpo y cubriendose con otra, sin 
diferencia hombres y mugeres. Y con las que sobraban, y la sal que se hace en los tres pueblos de Cippaquira, 
Nemocon y Tausa, en que ha tenido excelencia este Nuevo Reyno sobre todas sus tierras convecinas, se iban 4 ellas 
4 los mercados que tenian puestos en ciertos parages de terminos comunes, y de tantas lunas y dias. 

2. Para mayores noticias de esto, importard darlas de otras costumbres que tenian en orden 4 sus contratos y 
inteligencias de vivir en modo politico: dividian el tiempo, como nosotros, en dias, meses y amos, aunque con 
diverso modo: porque los dias contaban por soles, viendo que él era la causa de ellos ; de manera que tantos soles 
eran tantos dias: estos distinguian en solas tres partes, maflana, medio y tarde: los meses contaban por lunas 
con sus menguantes y crescientes, dividiendo cada una de estas dos en otras dos: con que venian 4 hacer quatro 
partes del mes 6 la luna, al modo que nosotros lo dividimos en quatro semanas. Tenian tambien afio de doce 
meses 6 lunas, que comenzaba en enero y se acababa en diciembre; pero no por la inteligencia que nosotros 
tenemos para comenzarlo en aquel mes, ni como la que tubieron los Romanos de comenzarlo en el de marzo: pues 
solo le daban principio desde enero, porque desde alli comenzaron 4 labrar y disponer las tierras por ser tiempo seco 
y de verano, paraque ya estubiesen sembradas la menguante de la luna de marzo, que es quando comienzan las aguas 
del primer invierno en esta tierra. Y como desde la luna de enero, que comenzaban estas sementeras, hasta la de 
diciembre, que las acababan de coger, hay doce lunas, 4 este tiempo llamaban con este vocablo, chocam, que es lo 
mismo que nosotros llamamos Afio; y para significar el pasado, decian chocamana, y al aiio presente chocamata, y 
ala luna llamaban Chié. Nunca supieron contar mas que hasta veinte, y este numero iban multiplicando las veces 
que habian menester. Usaban de medida para el maiz, que llamaban haba; aunque nunca usaron de peso para el 
oro, ni otra cosa. Pues solo para entenderse en el oro fundido (que eran unos tejuelos redondos, hechos en los 
moldes que tenian para ello, y era su moneda aunque sin ninguna sefial, y por eso comun 4 todas las provincias, 
pues no miraban mas que el valor intrinseco) usaban por medida de las coyunturas de los dedos de la mano por la 
parte de adentro ; de manera que la circunferencia del tejuelo habia de llegar 4 ambas 4 dos rayas de las coyunturas, 
y para los que eran mayores, en tratos de mayor quantia, tenian unas ebras de algodon, con que daban vueltad la 
circunferencia del tejuelo y 4 todo su ancho. No conocieron moneda de otro metal que oro; si bien les sucedia de 
ordinario, quando les faltaba este, trocar unas cosas por otras. 

3. Esto, como hemos dicho, se hacia en los mercados 6 ferias donde se juntaban de muchas partes, llevando 

todos 4 cuestas sus mercadurias: porque, como ya digimos en nuestra Primera Parte, no se halld en esta tierra, ni 

en todo el descubrimiento de estas Indias, animal que les pudiera ayudar 4 llevar cargas. Lugares de mercados 

fueron casi todos los que habia de Indios en estas dos provincias del Bogota y Tunja; pero los mas principales se 
hicieron de ordinario en dos: el uno en los pueblos que estaban 4 las margenes del rio grande de la Magdalena, 
tierra mui caliente, poblada por ambas partes de los Indios Poyras, 6 como Ilamaron los Espafioles, Yapotoges, por 
un cacique de ellos llamado Yapotocos. Estos eran tantos, que cogian sus poblaciones ambas margenes de este 

gran rio, desde el de Cuello hasta el de Lache, que entra en el grande en frente de Neyba. Eran estos grandes 

mineros, por ser muchas las vetas de oro que hay en la tierra nombrada; y esto les ocasionaba 4 saberlo fundir y 
labrar, haciendo de ello muchas y grandes joyas, de las que muchas veces hemos dicho, aunque mal obradas, para 
sus galas y santuarios. A las tierras pues de estos acudian 4 hacer mercado los Moscas, en especial los del pueblo 
de Pasca y sus convecinos, llevandoles mucha cantidad de finas mantas, sal, y esmeraldas, con que rescataban el 
mucho oro fundido, y en joyas, que les daban en trueque los Yapotoges ; que fue el camino mas principal por 
donde entré la mayor parte del oro que hubo en este Nuevo Reyno, y hallaron los Espaiioles, aunque no dejé de 
acrecentarlo el que sacaban de los pillages en las victorias que tenian de sus enemigos los Panchez, en cuyas tierras 
se han hallado ricas vetas de ello: porque en todo lo que toca en las dos provincias frias del Bogota y Tunja, hasta 
hoy no se ha podido hallar rastro, como dejamos dicho, sino es lo que en estos tiempos se ha hallado cerca de 
Sogamozo. Eran tan sutiles en sus tratos, que no habia Indios que los igualaran, con ser en las demas cosas de 
tan ofuscados ingenios.. Eran grandes logreros, pues si para el tiempo que fiaban sus mercancias no se les acudia 
con la paga, era ley, que quantas lunas pasasen del tiempo sefialado, fuese creciendo la deuda por mitades; con que 
muchas veces venia 4 ser el numero de la deuda crecidisimo sobre lo que valia lo que la habia contraido. Las 
esmeraldas fueron siempre buen genero entre ellos, porque las estimaban para sus galas y santuarios, de que andaba 
gran numero en la tierra por haber sido abundantes de ellas en sus principios las minas de Somondoco, de donde 

solo las sacaban 4 la sazon que entraron los Espafioles, y se comunicaban entre los Indios de tierra fria ; porque de 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 957 

las de Muzo participaban poco, por las sangrientas enemistades que habia entre ellos y los Moscas; si bien por 
los contratos y rescates que habia entre los unos y los otros, no obstante sus enemistades, les venian muchas de 
ellas, despues que los Muzos se apoderaron de aquella-tierra de guerra, habiendo subido de las margenes del rio 
grande, como despues diremos mas largo: de donde sacamos, que habiendo sido los Moscas sefiores de aquellas 
tierras de los Muzos, antes que estos se las quitaran, pudieron tener, y tubieron muchas y mui finas esmeraldas del 
cerro de Ytoco, de donde ahora se sacan. 

4. El otro puesto famoso, donde se hacian los mas gruesos mercados, era en la tierra del cacique Sorocota, que 
ahora se comprehende en los terminos de la ciudad de Velez. Aqui por ser comunes 4 los Bogotaes, Tunjas, Sogamo- 
zos, Guanes, Chipataes, Agataes, Saboyaes, y otras muchas provincias comprehendidas dentro de estas, se juntaban 
de ocho en ocho soles gran suma de gentes con los frutos de sus tierras, en que tambien bullia buena suma de oro, en 
especial de los que acudian del poniente, como eran Agataes y sus vecinos, que viven 4 las vertientes del rio grande 
de la Magdalena, donde siempre se ha hallado mucho de este metal, aunque nunca él de plata. Y asi se tuvo por. 
cosa rara lo que sucedié en este mercado de Sorocota, ya algunos afios despues de fundados los Espajioles, los 
quales dejaron pasase adelante, como lo tenian de costumbre ; aunque por haber sucedido, que unos negros esclavos 
cimarrones acudian alli el dia del mercado, haciendo 4 los Indios mil agravios, (que despues pagaron en la horca 
por industria de los justicias,) por evitar estos y otros inconvenientes, mandé la de Velez se mudara el mercado 4 
una loma alta cerca del otro puesto, donde aunque comenzaron 4 acudir, era de tan mala gana, que los mas se 
volvian 4 su primer sitio, haciendo sus contratos de mayor quantia sobre una piedra de hasta quatro quintales, que 
habia en un cerrillo del puesto, 4 cuya redonda estaba toda la gente. Advirtiendo en esto la ciudad de Velez, y 
habiendo los alcaldes de ella buscado Ia causa, hallaron que aquella piedra era la que no los podia arrancar de su 
primer sitio, por las supersticiones que en ella tenian para sus contratos: con que determinaron con mas veras 
quitarlos de alli; y para que del todo tubiera efecto, hacer pedazos la piedra, la qual hallaron quebrandola tan rica 
de plata, que se sacaron de ella mas de ochenta marcos, de que se hicieron muchas piezas, que algunas permanecen 
hoy. Lilendse con esto la tierra de esperanzas, entendiendo ser aquella piedra de algunas minas ricas de algun 
metal que hubiese cerca, haciendo en esto apretadas diligencias por mas de quatro afios, en que se trastornaron 
todas las quebradas, cerros y amagamientos de la redonda con extraordinarios cuidados, que todos fueron en vano 
por no haberse podido rastrear hasta hoy cosa de este metal de minas en toda la tierra que lo buscaron. Donde 
salié opinion entre muchos que aquella piedra se la habia trahido alli el demonio de alguna mina rica de plata de las 
de la ciudad de Mariquita, Potosi, ti otra parte, para las supersticiones que sobre ella hacian. 

CapriruLo X. 

1. Modo de inquirir los hurtos, y de hacer bayles. 
2. No conocieron estos Indios otro metal que oro. 
3. Tratase de algunas de sus costumbres y de sus entierros. 

1. No solo los Xeques, pero aun otros Indios viejos ganaban su vida haciendo mil supersticiones en necesidades que 
se les pedian. Para sacar los hurtos tomaban estos viejos 6 xeques la paga que les daban lo primero; y haciendo 
diez caminos 6 fingiendoles, desde el lugar donde se habia hecho el hurto, atribuian 4 cada camino cada dedo de las 
dos manos ; y tomando tabaco, con que se medio embriagaba, advertia si le temblaba alguno de los dedos 6 lo 
imaginaba, y asi decia, que por el camino que correspondia 4 aquel dedo, habian llevado el hurto. Y si haciendo 
diligencia para buscarle por aquella parte lo hallaban, bien, y si no, asi se quedaba. Sobre las fiestas que hemos 
dicho tenian en la dedicacion de sus casas y coronaciones de caciques, tenian otras en los meses de Enero y Febrero, 
y parte de Marzo, en tas cavas de sus labranzas, donde se convidaban alternativamente unos caciques 4 otros, 
haciendose grandes gastos y presentes de oro y mantas, y de su vino; porque todas sus fiestas las hacia este, 
supliendo las faltas de la comida, pues esta no les daba cuidado como él anduviese en abundancia. Asianse de 
las manos hombres y mugeres, haciendo corro, y cantando ya canciones alegres, ya tristes, en que referian las 
grandezas de sus mayores, pausando todos 4 una, y llevando el compas con los pies, ya 4 compas mayor, ya a 

3U 

age 

258 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

compasete, segun sentian lo que cantaban, al son de unas flautas y fotutos tan melancolicos y tristes, que mas parecia 
musica de infierno, que cosa de este mundo. Tenian en medio las mucuras de la,chicha, de donde iban esforzando 
4 los que cantaban otras Indias que estaban dentro del corro, que no se descuidaban en darles de beber: duraba 
esto hasta que cahian embriagados, y tan incitados 4 luxuria con la calor del vino, que la muger y hombre se juntaba 
con el primero 6. primera que se encontraba, porque para esto habia general licencia en estas fiestas, aun con las 
mugeres de los caciques y nobles. 

Todo este vino se hacia del maiz; de suerte que de él usaban para su comida y bebida, de que eran en extremo 
viciosos. Nunca usaron de yerro, ni lo conocieron, con haber infinito en su tierra, en especial en la del Guatavita. 
Tampoco conocieron el cobre, de que hay harta abundancia en los terminos de Velez y Colimas. Plomo y estafio 
no llegé 4 su noticia, con haber infinito en muchas partes. Labraban la tierra con palas de madera.. Usaban de 
cuchillos de piedra. Tenia sus bosques y pesquerias cada lugar proprias.. En las borracheras, fiestas, y en otras 
juntas, tenian sus distinciones de asientos mas 6 menos honrados, segun la antigiiedad y nobleza de sangre y linages ; 
si bien todos se sentaban en el suelo, de suerte que si alguno usurpaba el lugar de otro, el duefio de él quando 
venia, lo cogia de la oreja, y con palabras afrentosas lo quitaba de él. 

No desamparaban sus enfermos, como lo hacian otras naciones, quando estaban en el articulo de la muerte: pues 
antes se juntaban muchos 4 verlos morir, hasta que habia espirado. Tenian por dichoso al que moria de algun rayo 
6 por otro accidente de muerte repentina, porque habia pasado sin dolores de esta vida. ‘Tenian por ley irrefragable 
que quando moria la principal muger de las que tenian, que era la que mandaba y governaba la casa, podia dejar 
mandado 4 su marido no se juntase con otra ninguna muger aunque fuese de las otras que le quedaban, por el tiempo 
que ella le ordenase, como no pasase de cinco afios, porque a esto lo limitaba la ley ; aunque el marido en estos ulti- 
mos pasos de la vida, poniendole delante el regalo y buenos tratamientos que le habia hecho en el discurso del tiempo 
maridable, acrecentando 4 esto grandes ruegos, alcanzaba de ella le acortase el tiempo y plazo de la continencia lo 
mas que pudiese. 

Eran varios los modos con que enterraban sus difuntos. Porque 4 los reyes y caciques de ordinario les sacaban las 
tripas y intestinos en muriendo, y con una resina, que llaman mocoba, que se hacia de unos higuillos de leche pega- 
josa y otras cosas con que la mezclaban, embalsamaban los cuerpos ; y despues de Ilorados en sus casas seis dias, los 
enterraban en unas bobedas 6 cuevas que tenian ya hechas para esto; envolviendolos en mantas finas, poniendoles 
4 la redonda muchos bollos de maiz y mucuras de su chicha, sus armas, que eran las que muchas veces hemos dicho, 
y en la mano un pedazo de tiradera hecho de oro, a devocion de la que arrojé el dios Bochica desde el arco del cielo, 
quando hizo con ella paso 4 las aguas de este valle, como digimos. 

En los ojos, orejas, narices, boca y ombligo les ponian algunas esmeraldas y tejos de oro, segun el caudal de cada 
uno, y al cuello chagualas de lo mismo. __Encerrabanse en Ja misma bobeda con él las mugeres y esclavos que mas 
le querian, porque esta era la mayor demostracion y fineza de amor que habia entre ellos; pero dabanles primero 
4 los vivos un zumo de cierta yerba, con que privados de sentidos no conocian la gravedad del hecho 4 que se ponian; 
si bien despues de vueltos en si moririan desesperados, como lo declaré una India de estas, que sacaron los Espafioles 
otro dia de como la habian enterrado 4 escusa de ellos, en el pueblo de Checa en el valle de Ubaque, que por haber 
tenido aviso del entierro, abrieron el sepulcro, y la sacaron ya medio muerta y descalabrada de los golpes que se 
daba en la bobeda con la desesperacion. Daban 4 entender con este modo de entierros, creer, que habia otra vida, 
aunque necesitada de comer y beber y servicio de criados, como dejamos dicho. 

A los reyes Bogotaes, demas de lo dicho, metian el cuerpo en un tronco de palma concavo, segun la estatura de 
cada uno, forrado de dentro y fuera de gruesas planchas de oro fino, cubiertos con otras de lo mismo. De donde 
tomé fuerzas la fama para decir, que los Bogotaes se enterraban en atandes de oro, como lo dice Gomara, tratando 
de las cosas de este reyno, aunque no con la certeza que ellas tienen. Otros secaban los cuerpos de sus difuntos 4 
fuego mansoien barbacoas, y en otras los ponian dentro de buhios que tenian dedicados como para entierros. A otros 
enterraban embueltos en una manta en los campos, sobre cuya sepultura plantaban un arbol, para deslumbrar el 
sitio, porque no sucediese: desenterrarlos, como se solia: hacer, para sacarles el oro y esmeraldas con que siempre 
los enterraban: de manera que sus hijos y mugeres, si los dejaban, solos succedian en los bienes rayces, porque los 
muebles y tesores entraban con ellos en los sepulcros. De una de estas sepulturas que se hallaron en los cerrillos 
que Ilaman de Caqueza, en el valle de Ubaque, que era de un cacique, se sacaron.mas de 24,000 pesos de buen 
oro por diligencia del obispo Don Fray Juan de los Barrios. La gente mas honrada lloraba sus difuntos otros seis 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 259 

dias despues de enterrados, y aun les hacian por algunos tiempos sus aniversarios, convidando para esto sus deudos 
y parientes, que juntos lloraban al difunto al son de unos tristes instrumentos y voces, en que cantaban endechas y 
los grandes hechos del difunto. Alegrabanse 4 1o ultimo con su vino y mascadas de hayo, que son unas hojas de 
una mata semejantes 4 las del lentisco, que dicen les da fuerza, mascandolas, de que entre los demas abusos ha 
introducido el demonio se apliquen los Espafioles 4 las costumbres de los Indios, ha sido uno el mascar hayo, en 
especial entre mugeres flacas, cosa abominable y escandalosa, y que no deja de estorbar para la conversion de los 
Indios. La gente ordinaria convidaba para estos, y con bollos de maiz que daban al fin de ellos 4 los convidados, 
quedaban acabadas las exequias. 

Cariruto XI. 

1. Origen de los Indios de Sog'amozo. 

2. Fabula que cuentan los Indios de Tunja acerca de su primer Cacique. 

3. Hallanse rastros de que un Predicador entro en Sogamozo, y recibimiento que le hicieron los 
Caciques. 

4, Otros rastros, demas de lo dicho, que se hallan de haberseles predicado verdades a los Indios 
de Tunja. 

1. AunaveE son tan unas estas dos grandes provincias de los Moscas, Bogota y Tunja, en temples, disposiciones de 
tierras, trages y vestidos, siempre han sido disconformes en todo lo demas, por haberlo estado siempre en las volun- 
tades. Y asi-nos obliga la historia 4 decir de esta provincia de Tunja, y del gran valle de Sogamozo, que se com- 
prehende en ella, algo de lo que varian de esta de Bogota, en lo que han dicho los capitulos pasados. Ya pienso 
tocamos en otra parte, que la ciudad y provincia de Tunja se llama asi por los Espafioles, corrompiendo el vocablo 
Idunxaque, que es su proprio nombre, tomado del primer cacique que dicen hubo en ella, llamado Dhunzahua, de 
quien solo se habia el perdido hua. El gran valle de Sogamozo corrié la misma fortuna en este nombre; pues 
Ilamandose el cacique que hallaron en él los Espafoles, Suamox, por no acertarlo 4 pronunciar, le llamaron al valle 
Sogamozo, con que se ha quedado. 

2. Entre las mismas neblinas que los demas de estas tierras, andaban los Tunjas acerca de sus:primeros princi- 
pios. Pues los ponen en decir, que quando amanecid, ya habia cielos y tierra y todo lo demas de ellos y de ella, 
fuera del Sol y la Luna, y que asi todo estaba en obscuridades; en las quales no habia mas personas que el cacique 
de Sogamozo y el de Ramiriqui 6 Tunja, porque en estos dos pueblos nunca hubo mas de un cacique 6 sefior, y fue 
el que lo era de toda la provincia. Estos dos caciques, dicen, que hicieron todas las personas de los hombres de tierra 
amarilla, y 4 las mugeres de una yerba alta, que tiene el tronco hueco. Estaban todavia las tierras en tinieblas, y 
para darles luz mandé el cacique de Sogamozo al de Ramiriqui, que era su sobrino, se subiese al cielo y alumbrase 
al mundo hecho el sol, como lo hizo. Pero viendo no era bastante para alumbrar Ja noche, subidse el mismo Soga- 
mozo al cielo y hizose luna: con que quedo la noche clara, y los Indios obligados 4 adorar 4 entrambos, como lo 
hacian, con otros muchos idolos, que segun su imaginacion y persuasion del demonio levantaban cada dia. Esto 
segun su cuenta sucedié por el mes de Diciembre; y asi en recuerdo y memoria de este suceso hacian los Indios de 
esta provincia, en especial los Sogamozos, en este mes una fiesta, que llamaban Huan: en la qual despues de juntos 
salian doze vestidos todos de colorado, con guirnaldas y chiasines que cada una de ellas se remataba en una cruz, y 
hacia la frente llevaba un pajaro pequefio: en medio de estos doze de librea estaba otro que la tenia azul; y todos 
estos juntos cantaban en su lengua, como todos ellos eran mortales, y se habian de convertir los cuerpos en ceniza 
sin saber el fin que habian de tener sus almas: decian esto con palabras tan sentidas, que hacian mover 4 lagrimas 
y llantos 4 los oyentes con la memoria de la muerte. Y asi era ley, que para consolarlos en esta afliccion, habia de 
convidar 4 todos el cacique, y alegrarlos con mucho vino ; con que salian de la casa de la tristeza, y entraban del todo 
en la de la alegria y olvido de la muerte. 

Despues de subidos los dos caciques al cielo, y convertidos en lo que hemos dicho, el primero que dicen hubo 
en Tunja y Ramiriqui, se llamaba Hunxahua, que permanecié siempre en el primer puesto de la provincia, y él de 

260 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Ramiriqui de menos estimacion. Este Hunxa se enamor6 de una hermana que tenia de buen parecer, y no pudiendo 
conseguir sus sensuales intentos, por la vigilancia con que la guardaba la madre, dio traza de hacer viage 4 la pro- 
vincia de los Chipataes 4 comprar algodon de aquella provincia, de que ha sido siempre abundantisima, con intentos 
de que le acompafiara su hermana, para cumplir con ella los que traia de su aficion, como sucedié. Pues dandole 
licencia la madre para que fuera con él, a pocos dias de como volvieron eché de ver la madre el mal recado, viendo 
que le crecia el vientre y pechos. Con que encendida en colera quando lo advirtio, tomé la sana (que es el palo con 
que menean la chicha quando se cuece, porque la estaba haciendo en esta sazon), y arremetiendo con la moza para 
darle con él, para ampararse del golpe se puso detras de la gacha donde se hacia, que no le fue de poco provecho ; 
pues descargé sobre ella la ira de la madre, quedando la moza libre y la chicha derramada y la gacha quebrada: en 
memoria de lo qual se abrié la tierra y recibiendo la chicha, quedé hecho un pozo de ella, aunque convertida en agua, 
que ahora llaman el Pozo de Donato por lo que dejamos dicho. Corridse el Hunxahua tanto de que hubiese su 
madre acometido delante de él 4 su hermana con tantos brios, que con enfado dejé su casa, y subiendose 4 la loma 
que estaba sobre el pueblo, y ahora sobre la ciudad 4 la parte del Oriente, eché mil maldiciones 4 todo el valle; con 
que quedé esteril y de tan mal pais como ahora lo es; pues es uno de los malos que hay en las Indias, desabrido 
por los muchos vientos suestes que lo combaten, esterilisima la tierra, y desacomodada en todo para la vida humana. 
Llamé desde alli 4 su hermana con una Zaéa, que es trompeta de palo, la qual tubo por mejor dejar 4 su madre y 
casa por huir de su colera, que estar sujeta a mil desgracias que le podian suceder con ella. Y asi viniendose con 
su hermano, determinaron ambos dejar del todo aquella tierra, y no sabiendo por donde mejor guiarse, arrojé el 
cacique una tiradera al ayre, y ella rechinando y sonando como un cascabel, los fue guiando hasta Susa de Lanchero, 
donde le dieron 4 la sefiora los dolores del parto; y pariendo un nifio, y no atreviendose 4 llevarlo, lo dejaron conver- 
tido en piedra en una cueva, donde hoy dicen esta. Y libres ya de esto, pasaron adelante con la misma guia de la 
flecha, y Ilegando por estas tierras de Bogota, cerca del pueblo de Cienega por bajo del salto de Tekendama, al pasar 
el rio les parecid ser mucho su cansancio y camino que trahian, y que hallandose en tierra agena habian de ser 
mayores, determinaron convertirse en dos piedras, que hoy estan en la mitad del rio. De este cacique y el hecho 
que cuentan con su hermana, dicen, tomaron atrevimiento para andar ellos con las suyas, y casarse con ellas como lo 
hacian. 

3. No es menor la noticia que tienen los de esta provincia, en especial los Sogamozos, de aquel predicador que 
digimos habia pasado por estas tierras, que la que tuvieron estos Bogotaes. Y asi dicen, que en tiempo de un 
cacique de aquel valle, Ilamado Nompanem, habra quatro edades, que las nombran por este vocablo Bxogmoa, vino 
un hombre del mismo talle y vestido que le pintamos, tratando de él en estas tierras de Bogota, que les predicé y 
ensefé muchas cosas buenas, de que aunque han quedado algunos rastros, son tan clegos que casi nO se conocen. 
Traia en la cabeza y brazos hecha la sefial de la Cruz, y en la misma remataba una macana que traia por bordon en 
la mano. Llamabanle con tres nombres: el uno Sadiguia-Sonoda, que quiere decir, Nuestro Pariente y Padre: Sugun- 
domoxe, Santo que se hace invisible: y Sugunzua, que quiere decir, Hombre que se desparece. Al primer pueblo que 
Iegé en este valle, fue al de Gamza, en un sitio que llaman Toyci, donde estubo tres dias en una cueva; en los 
quales le fueron 4 visitar el cacique de Gamza, que ahora se dice Gameza; el de Buzbanza, Socha, Tazco, Topaga, 
Mongui, Tutaza, Mongua, Lesca, Yacon, Bombaza, Tota, Guaquira, Satoba; todos por el orden dicho; y como 
fueron llegando, fueron ganando la antigiiedad y grandeza, que hoy tienen y conservan entre ellos. Por ser la del 
Sogamozo superior 4 las dichas, no salié de su casa 4 verlo, hasta que él entrd mas adentro del valle, y llegé 4 un 
puesto que llaman Otga, adonde salié el cacique Nompanem con toda su gente. Y hablandole con grande acata- 
miento, el predicador comenzé 4 hacer su oficio, y darles 4 entender que habia un dios en el cielo que premiaba 4 
los buenos, y tenia en el infierno castigo para los malos, lo que conocen hoy bien los Indios por tradiciones desde 
estos tiempos; si bien respetan y obedecen ofreciendo sacrificios al demonio, aunque conocen ser su enemigo y 
aconsejarles cosas contra razon; 4 quien dicen los Chontales les ayudan los ladinos, exhortandoles que no dejen las 
costumbres de sus antepasados, aunque hagan tambien lo que les aconsejan los Espafioles, donde se ve quan perni- 
cioso sea andar estos ladinos entre ellos. 

4. Didles tambien 4 entender que las almas eran immortales, y que iban a recibir premio 6 pena segun habian 
vivido en esta vida, quando salian de los cuerpos, los quales habian de resucitar y tener otra vida; aunque entendian 
habian de tener necesidad en ella de comidas, como en esta; y 4 esto atinaba el ponerselas en los sepulcros. Estas 
y otras muchas cosas en orden 4 los articulos de la Fé y preceptos, hallamos en rastros fue declarando este predicador 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 261 

por todos los pueblos que pasaba; de los quales unos se fueron acordando y conservando unas cosas, y otros otras, 
que no ha sido poco, despues de tantos afios y comunicacion tan larga y ordinaria que con ellos tenia el demonio, 
no se les acabasen de desarraigar estas luces, sino que se hayan conservado algunas, para que por ellas se haya faci- 
litado mas el crecimiento que han tenido con la predicacion del Evangelio, que amanecio entre ellos con la venida 
de los Espafioles: los quales entre otras centellas y rastro que hallaron de esto en esta provincia, fue, cabezas 
humanas tres en un cuerpo, en una estatua de un idolo en el pueblo de Boyaca, que declaraban los Indios tenerle 
figurado asi, porque representaba una cosa que eran tres personas con un corazon y una voluntad, como se lo habia 
dicho 4 sus mayores el Sugunzua que pasé por estas tierras. 

CarituLto XII. 

1. Desparecese el Predicador del pueblo de Yza, despues de dejar ensenados en buenas costumbres 
a los Indios del Valle y de Tunja. 

2. Hace el Cacique de Sogamozo con graves penas se guarden las buenas costumbres que les 
enseno el Predicador. 

3. Modos con que el Sogamozo se hizo temer y famoso en sus tierras y las convecinas. 

4. Modo que se tiene en la succesion del Cacique de Sogamozo, y caso que sucede acerca de eso. 

1. ProponteNDO con veras el Cacique de Sogamozo, Nompanem, guardar y hacer que sus vasallos guardasen las 
cosas que el Predicador amonestaha, le pidid consejo para las penas con que obligaria 4 su gente para la guarda de 
estos mandamientos; 4 quien respondio el Predicador, se habian de guardar voluntariamente y con buen corazon, 
y no con rigores de este mundo, pues en el otro estaban aparejados premios y penas para los que los guardasen 6 
quebrantasen. LEnsefiéles tambien a hilar algodon y tejer mantas, y otras cosas de vida politica, como 4 los de 
Bogota, en el tiempo que estuvo con ellos, que no fue poco: despues del qual llego al pueblo de Yza; y habiendo- 
les predicado y ensefiado lo mismo, desde alli se desaparecid que nunca mas lo vieron, dejando alli en una piedra 
estampado un pie de los suyos, en que tienen hoy tanta devocion los Indios y Indias prefiadas, que van 4 raspar de 
aquella piedra y la beben en agua para tener buen parto. 

2. Luego que se desaparecié el Predicador, paso el Nompanem mui adelante con sus intentos en observancia 
de lo que les habia ensefiado, tomandolo con tantas veras, que conociendo que su gente no lo habia de guardar sin 
penas, las puso 4 quien quebrantase lo que les habia amonestado, estableciendo por ley que 4 quien cogiesen en 
mentira, hurto, matase, 6 quitase la muger agena, al que matase, muriese ; y en lo demas, por la primera vez fuese 
bien castigado con azotes; por la segunda, con infamia ; por la tercera, él y toda su parentela: lo qual se guar- 
daba tan inviolablemente, que dicen ahora aquellos Indios haber aprehendido de los Espafioles 4 mentir y hurtar, 
porque hasta entonces no sabian que cosa era esto, en que han salido bien ensefados. Heredé el estado por muerte 
de este Cacique una hermana suya llamada Bununguay, que le heredé tambien el zelo en la observancia de estas 
leyes, pues las hizo guardar, hasta que enamorandose de un Indio de Tirabitova, con quien se casé y dej6 en su 
lugar quando murié, se fue cayendo este rigor y observancia, por haber establecido este Cacique que las penas que 
tenia puestas acerca de ella el Nompanem, se commutasen en oro y mantas; con que junté mucho de esto 4 costa 
de las buenas costumbres que hasta alli se habian guardado. 

3. La aficion con que quedaron 4 este predicador los naturales de estas tierras del Bogota, les hizo acudir 4 él 
quando estaba en las del Sogamozo, 4 pedirle remedio en una gran necesidad que les sobrevino de agua; la qual se 
remedid & tiempo que pudieron decir los Bogotaes, habia venido el remedio por la mano del predicador; con que 
cobré entre ellos reputacion, y el Cacique de Sogamozo mayor brio en lo que intenté luego que se desaparecié de su 
pueblo y valle: pues dio en publicar le habia dejado, quando se partid, por heredero de toda su santidad, y asi que 
tenia la misma facultad para hacer llover quando quisiese. Esto fue poco 4 poco cobrando tanta opinion, que la 
vino 4 tener no solo en ambas estas provincias de los Moscas, sino en muchas de sus convecinas, de donde frequen- 
taban aquel pueblo y su templo, que era tan grandioso como tenemos dicho ; teniendo todos ellos hasta hoy por mui 

averiguado, ser aquel territorio tierra santa: y asi vencraban con mayor religion los idolos que se hacian dentro de 
3X 

2962 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

aquel Valle, y serlo tambien el Cacique, pues de su mano y poder creian que venian los buenos 6 malos temporales, 
la salud y enfermedades. Traialos con esto abobados, y de todas partes grandes y ricas ofrendas, segun lo eran las 
necesidades de salud y buenos tiempos, porque le venian 4 rogar, con que él se hacia rico y estimado, y su tierra y 
templo frequentado y famoso en muchas naciones. Para conservar esta opinion usaba 4 veces de mil embustes y 
embelecos; pues fingiendo que se enojaba con la gente de las provincias, les hacia grandes fieros y amenazas de 
muertes, pestilencias y otras plagas ; y subiendose 4 un monte que para esto tenia sefalado con algunos nobles que 
le seguian, quando queria dar 4 entender que habia de venir enfermedad de camaras de sangre, se vestia de mantas 
coloradas, y tomando bixa 6 almagre molido lo esparcia por el ayre. Otras veces, quando amenazaba de viruelas, se 
subia al mismo sitio vestido de mantas viejas, y rascandose el cuerpo, lo que sacaba entre Jas ufias esparcia por los 
vientos, como que daba potestad con aquello 4 que la enfermedad cayese sobre todos. En el mismo lugar se vestia 
otras veces de blanco, y esparciendo ceniza por el ayre, daba 4 entender habia de ser aquello causa de secas y yelos, 
con que se habian de destruir los mayzes y las demas comidas. Daba mas fuerza 4 estos embaimientos, mostrandose 
melancolico y desabrido muchas veces 4 los que le venian 4 hablar. Pero quien mayor la daba era el Demonio, 
pues permitiendo Dios por los pecados y idolatrias de los Indios, algunas veces sucedia lo que amenazaba el Cacique, 
alterando por ventura 6 inficionando el Demonio el ayre, que hasta en esto bien tiene poder con permision divina, 
con que venian enfermedades y las plagas, y sobre los Indios reverencia y temores a estos castigos. Aunque no 
falta quien diga, haber esto tenido principio en un Cacique de buen entendimiento y discurso, que habiendo con él 
gastado muchos dias en las observaciones del sol, luna, estrellas y nubes, aves y animales, vino por experiencia y 
congeturas 4 sacar estos sucesos antes que vinieran, como lo hace la buena y acertada astrologia; 6 por ventura por 
ser el cacique Ydacanzas, en quien dicen comenzé esto, grande hechicero, y por pactos que tenia con el demonio, 
con quien de ordinario hablaba, vino 4 alcanzar estas revoluciones y mudanzas de tiempos, como de un maestro que 
alcanza esto y mucho mas en filosofia. 

4. Esta estimacion, que por esta razon hacia toda la tierra del Sogamozo, fue causa que la hiciesen mui grande 
en la sucesion de este cacicazgo. Y asi aunque antes que se introdugese esta fama, lo heredaban los sobrinos, 
como en los demas pueblos, despues se vino 4 introducir fuese la sucesion por elecciones, hechas una vez del pueblo 
de Tobasia, y otra de él de Tirabitova, alternativamente; y de ninguna manera pudiese ser de otros pueblos, ni de 
uno de estos dos caciques consecutivos; ni lo consentian los quatro electores, que eran los caciques de Buzbanza, 
Gamza, Toca y Pesca, y en casos de discordia entraba el voto del Tundama 6 Duytama. Por conservar esta costumbre 
hubo una revuelta en todo el Valle pocos afios antes que entrasen en él los Espafioles, habiendo querido con el favor 
de seis valientes hermanos suyos, un noble de Tirabitova introducirse en este cacicazgo, no siendo la vez de la elec- 
cion de aquel pueblo, por haberlo sido el antecesor, sino de él de Tobasia. Era este un valeroso mozo, bermejo y de 
barba larga, dos cosas bien peregrinas para estas tierras; viendo los Tobasias que lo era tambien el hecho, y de 
atrevimiento nunca oido, fueron con la queja 4 los electores, que determinaron luego con fuerza de guerra despojar 
al bermejo del estado, no solo porque habia quebrantado las leyes de la sucesion, sino tambien porque habia hecho 
justicia publicamente del Gamza, por haberle negado el voto y voluntad que le pedia para ser electo como los demas. 
Juntaron los electores sus gentes y armas, 4 que acudié tambien el Tundama con la suya; y juntos embestieron con 
el bermejo y Jos que le seguian en Sogamozo, donde se defendio tan valerosamente, que se echo de ver ser aventa- 
jados sus brios sobre todos los de sus enemigos, 4 quienes sin duda venciera y saliera con sus intentos, si los electores 
no mandaran pregonar con penas de la vida, que ninguno de los de Sogamozo peleara en defensa del bermejo, por 
quanto era tirano intruso en el oficio, pues por las leyes de sus mayores no le venia 4 él, sino al que eligiesen de 
Tobasia. Fueron tan eficaces estas palabras de los electores, que al punto se pasaron 4 su banda los Sogamozos, 
dejarido desamparado al bermejo con solos sus hermanos y algunos pocos que le siguicron ; los quales hicieron 
rostro 4 tode el egercito de los demas, con tantos brios que se echaba de ver los muchos que tenia su capitan ber- 
mejo, el qual los perdié y la vida, haciendo demostracion con sus valentias de su hidalga sangre, como tambien la 
hicieron sus hermanos, recobrando su cuerpo de entre sus enemigos, que lo tenian para ponerlo hecho quartos en 
quatro palos, en castigo de su atrevimiento, como él lo habia hecho con el Gamza, y para exemplo de los demas, y 
reparo de lo que en el mismo caso pudiera suceder en adelante. 

Co 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 26 

Capiruio XIII. 

1. Caso notable, que sucede con unos Espanoles que van a sacar un santuario. 
2. Embuste del Demonio, con que se dio principio al gobierno que tuvo sobre los Indios de Tunja. 

1. SosEGARONSE con esta muerte los alborotos, y volviendose 4 reducir las elecciones 4 su camino antiguo, la hicieron 
de uno de Tobasia, de donde habia de ser por las suertes alternativas, llamado Nompanem, que quiere decir, bexija 
de leon, en aquella lengua: por cuya muerte sucedié el Suhammox, que es lo mismo que el encubierto, aunque no 
lo fue mucho 4 los Espafioles, pues facilmente dieron con él, luego que entraron en esta provincia de Tunja, como 
dejamos dicho; y que este era 4 quien hallaron los Espafioles, y despues bautizaron llamandole Don Alonzo: cuyo 
trato fue siempre tal, que dio con él 4 entender la nobleza de su sangre, en especial por la generosa mano con que 4 
las necesidades de todos acudia, del mucho oro y riqueza que le habian quedado quando entraron en su pueblo los 
Espafioles, de quien lo pudo esconder y poner en seguro, por haber tenido noticia de ellos mucho antes que llegaran. 

No sera fuera de proposito, aunque algo antepuesto, decir aqui lo que sucedié 4 un Espanol apellidado Badillo, 
por oficio empedrador, vecino de la ciudad de Tunja; el qual viendose en necesidad de oro, la comunicé con una India 
vieja que le servia en casa, rogandole se la remediara, dandole, si sabia, noticia de algun santuario para que é1 lo 
sacase. La vieja condoliendose del amo, le aseguré que le mostraria en uno grandes riquezas; con que el amo 
codicioso dispusé el viage para irlo 4 sacar, comunicandolo con dos 6 tres amigos, y entre ellos un clerigo de misa, 
para que le ayudaran. Dispuesto ya todo, llevando la India por guia, salieron de la ciudad de Tunja, y llegaron 4 los 
altos de las espaldas del pueblo de Yza, en este valle, y trastornando quebradas, sierras y montes, desde el alto de 
uno mostré la India el parage donde habian de hallar lo que buscaban, no siendoles posible hacerla pasar de alli, por 
el miedo que decia tenia de morirse, si Ilegaba mas cerca del santuario. Dejandola con esto volverse al pueblo, y 
pasando ellos adelante, en el parage que les sefialé, entre la obscuridad y maleza de unos arboles y brefas, hallaron un 
buhio, donde entraron con el secreto posible, y hallaron un viejo seco, al parecer de mas de cien afios, con quatro 6 
cinco muchachos de hasta diez, que les iba ensefiando el oficio y ceremonias de xeques. _Parecidé turbarse el xeque 
con la gente nueva; pero volviendo luego en si, les pregunté que buscaban; y respondiendo que el santuario 
y el oro que tenia, sosegose el anciano, y dijoles: si no son otros vuestros intentos y deseos, yo os los cumpliré, no 
aqui, sino en otra parte, donde lo tengo, para donde podemos ir quando quisieredes. No fue poco el gusto que 
recibieron con esto, considerandose ya sefiores de tanto oro, que eran pocos los que iban para cargarlo. Comen- 
zaron su viage por donde el viejo los guiaba, que eran unos caminos tan dificultosos que lo eran mucho aun para 
mozos sueltos y de buenos alientos. Y asi la guia mostrando pocos, y no poder andar por las malezas que los 
guiaba, decia que lo cargasen 4 cuestas, si querian tener oro; los quales no reparando en lo primero por conseguir 
lo segundo, lo Ievaban a veces cargado por mil dificultades con immensos trabajos y sudores; de manera que ya 
rendidos del trabajo y carga del viejo, despues de haber tomado el alto de una dificultosa cuesta, se sentaron 4 des- 
cansar. Habiase prevenido el clerigo de llevar agua bendita en un jarrillo para lo que sucediera, por ser como son 
de ordinario los santuarios casas de demonio. Ya que hubieron alentadose algo para bajar otra valiente cuesta, toméd 
el clerigo unas yerbas de las que estaban junto 4 si, y diciendo: quiero echarle agua bendita 4 este viejo, para que 
tenga buen corazon en darnos mucho oro: mojo las yerbas en el agua bendita, y rociandolo (cosa maravillosa) al 
punto cay6 el cuerpo del viejo en el suelo, y comenz6 4 rodar la cuesta abajo, como si fuera un madero seco. De 
que quedaron admirados los Espafioles; y bajandolo 4 mirar, echaron de ver habia muchos afios que era muerto, 
segun estaba seco, y que lo habia tomado el demonio por instrumento en quien hablaba, y hacia las demas acciones 
de hombre, que vieron; y tambien consideraron la burla que les habia hecho el demonio, y asi cansados y corridos 
de ella, se volvieron 4 la ciudad donde no se atrevian 4 contarlo. 

2. Luego que el Predicador se ausenté de esta provincia del Tunja y Sogamozo, comenzé el demonio a dar 
contrarias doctrinas. Y entre ellas quiso deshacer lo que el otro habia predicado de la Encarnacion, diciendoles que 
aun no estaba hecha; pero que la habia de hacer el Sol, tomando carne humana en una doncella de las del pueblo 
de Guacheta, y que habia de parir lo que concibiese de los rayos del Sol, quedando virgen. Sond por todas las pro- 
vincias esta nueva, y teniendo dos hijas doncellas el Cacique del pueblo dicho, deseosas ambas de que sucediese en 
ellas el milagro, todos los dias 4 la alborada se salian del cercado y casas de su padre, y subiendose 4 un cerro de los 

204 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

muchos que tiene el pueblo 4 la parte del salir del Sol, se acostaban de manera que les pudiera herir con los primeros 
rayos. Y continuando esto por algunos dias, fue disponiendo el Demonio por permision divina (cuyos juicios son 
incomprehensibles) las cosas para salir con sus intentos: de manera que en pocos dias que las doncellas hicieron 
esto, la una fue apareciendo como prefiada, que ella decia ser del Sol. Y al cabo de nueve meses parié una hacuata, 
que en su lengua es, una piedra de esmeralda grande y rica. Toméla la muger, y envolviendola en unos algodones, 
pusosela entre los pechos donde la trajo algunos dias, y al fin de ellos la hallé convertida en criatura: todo por orden 
del demonio. A este llamaron Goranchacha, y lo criaron en la misma casa del Cacique con titulo de Hijo del Sol, 
hasta que ya fue de mas de 24 alos. Quando ya por toda la provincia se sabia de su nacimiento y crianza, y le 
tenian por Hijo del Sol, parecidle al mozo que se estimaba por hijo de tal padre, no estar ya en una aldea, como era 
Guacheta, sino irse a la corte del Ramiriqui, quien le salié 4 recibir, hospedé y regal6 en su casa por algunos dias 
como 4 Hijo del Sol. Diole despues gana de verse con el Sogamozo, por la fama que se divulgaba de él, que era como 
aca decimos ir 4 ver 4 Roma y al Sumo Pontifice; 4 quien recibid el Sogamozo con grande aplauso, como 4 hijo 
de tal padre, y hizo grandes fiestas y presentes, 4 que no falt6 retorno de parte de Goranchacha de los que le habia 
hecho el Ramiriqui. Estuvo alli algunos dias entreteniendose en regocijos y fiestas de Baco, y tratando de vol- 
verse 4 la corte, encontré en el camino cerca de las pefas de Paypa un Indio de los que él habia traido y dejado en 
Ramiriqui, que le conté como el cacique habia ahorcado 4 un muchacho que servia de page al Goranchacha, y lo 
habia dejado en la corte quando fué 4Sogamozo. Encendidle en colera la nueva, de manera que entrando en Rami- 
riqui con ella, maté al cacique y se hizo obedecer por sefior de toda la provincia; sin que en esto hallara mucha 
dificultad, por lo mucho que estimaban todos su persona, y ser hijo de su padre, 4 quien ellos adoraban por Dios. 
Vinose luego 4 Tunja desde Ramiriqui, donde senté su casa y corte, seflalando luego los criados que le parecieron 
mas 4 proposito, y entre ellos al pregonero, que era un Indio con una gran cola, que ninguno supo de donde vino; 
pero era el mas estimado de todos los criados que tenia, no solo por ser ambos de una patria y cavernas infernales, 
sino porque este oficio de pregonero ha sido siempre tan estimado entre los Moscas, que los que lo ejercitaban eran 
la segunda persona del pueblo en sangre, nobleza y estimacion de todos. 

CariruLto XIV. 

1. En algunas partes ha habido Demonios por Caciques. 
2. Cruel Gobierno del Goranchacha. 

3. Quere hacerle Casa al Sol, y desparecese, y el Pregonero se convierte en humo. 
A, Ehgen en su lugar al que hallaron los Espanoles. 
5. Modo de enterrar sus muertos, y uso de la Cruz. 

1. No ha sido cosa nueva en algunas de estas tierras haber tenido demonios por sus gobernadores y caciques, pues 
como diremos en nuestra Tercera Parte, fue opinion recibidissima y sin duda entre los Indios del Zenu, que en aquel- 
las tres provincias que estan desde el rio Darien hasta el de Cauca, que se Ilaman Fincenio, Zenufena y Panzenu, 
tuvieron por gobernadores tres demonios, como entienden los naturales de esta provincia de Tunja, lo eran estos dos, 
Cacique y pregonero de quien vamos tratando; sin que podamos dar 4 esto mas salida que encoger los hombros, y 
arquear las cejas en los juicios impenetrables de Dios, que permite esto por lo que él se sabe. 

2. Comenzé 4 gobernar este Goranchacha con tanto sefiorio y crueldad para con sus vasallos, que no sole no se 
dejaba hablar de estos, ni mirar 4 la cara, (porque esa era comun costumbre de todos los caciques,) pero aun habian 
de estar delante de él postrados, y el rostro pegado al suelo, y asi le hablaban los pocos 4 quien él daba licencia. 
E] rigor que tenia en los castigos, aun por cosas leves, era tal que no se atrevian 4 quebrantar sus mandatos, aunque 
fuesen con riesgo de la vida. Los azotes que mandaba dar eran tan crueles, que haciendolos cargar primero sobre 
las carnes de pencas de Tunas, sobre ellas los azotaban fuertemente, 6 apaleaban. Puso veras en que se guardaran 
algunos de los mandamientos de la ley de Dios, como no hurtar, no mentir, ni quitar la muger agena, para con estas 
verdades introducir sus mentiras, como fue mandar hiciesen veneracion 4 muchos dioses, que pudiesen tener logros, 
y que le acudiesen con insufribles tributos: de manera que aun hasta los animales grandes y pequefios, dicen los 

Indios por encarecimiento, les hacia que se los pagasen; intentando con esto hacerse poderoso en riquezas, para 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 265 

hacerse temer mas con ellas. Y 4 quien faltaba en algo de esto, tenia mui cierto el morir empalado 6 ahorcado en 
el cerro que hemos dicho esta sobre el pueblo, 4 quien los Espafioles Ilamaron de la horca, por los muchos que 
hallaron alli puestos en estos patibulos. 

3. Cerca de las postreras casas del pueblo 4 la parte del norte, donde ahora Ilaman las quadras de Porras, hizo 
edificar un templo 4 su padre el Sol, donde lo hacia venerar con frequentes sacrificios; y él hacia sus estaciones en 
ciertos dias del afio con tanta prosopopeya y magestad, que juntandose todos los Indios, y puestos en procesion, como 
para acompafiarle, y tendiendole por el suelo en todo el camino mantas finas y pintadas, comenzaba 4 caminar desde 
sus palacios, que eran donde ahora esta fundado el convento de San Agustin, con tanto despacio y flema, que no 
habiendo de una parte 4 otra mas que tres tiros de escopeta, gastaba tres dias enteros en el viage: otros tres estaba 
4 solas en el oratorio 6 capilla del templo: y en otros tantos volvia 4 sus reales casas. Quiso sublimar la fabrica 
de este templo en honra de su padre, y poniendolo en efecto, mandé que le tragesen de diversas partes gruesos y 
valientes marmoles. Llegaron al sitio con tres de ellos, como hoy se ven, aunque dicen nunca vieron la cara 4 los 
que los traian, por llegar con ellos de noche; de donde coligen eran tambien demonios los oficiales. Otros dos se 
ven en el camino de Ramiriqui, y otros dos en Monquira, que no llegaron al sitio; como ni la fabrica 4 ponerse en 
ejecucion, porque quando ya estaba en estado de eso, era en tiempo que ya los Espafioles estaban poblados en Santa 
Marta. Y asi congeturando el Goranchacha, que tambien Ilegarian 4 descubrir y conquistar aquella tierra, hizo 
un dia juntar toda su gente, y por su pregonero (4 quien ponian muchas mantas en rollo, dejando hueco en medio 
donde entrase la cola que tenia, que era como de leon, y se sentase) les hizo una larga platica, en que les adiviné 
habia de venir una gente fuerte y feroz, que los habia de maltratar y afligir con sujeciones y trabajos; y despidien- 
dose de ellos, diciendo que se iba por no verlos padecer, y que despues de muchos afios volveria 4 verlos, se entré 
en su cercado, y nunca mas le vieron. El pregonero por desengafiar mas del todo, y dar mas claras muestras de 
quien era, delante de todos dio un estallido, y se convirtiéd en un humo hediondo, que fue la ultima despedida.. 

4,.En lugar del Goranchacha eligieron despues por cacique, por haberse perdido en él la sucesion, 4 uno que 
lamaban Quemuinchatocha, 4 quien hallaron los Espafioles, y de quien ya hemos tratado. tras dos fiestas afladian 
estos naturales 4 la que dijimos hacian en el mes de setiembre, que las celebraban por el mes de marzo y junio; y 
esta era la mas solenne, porque 4 los primeros del mes quemaban toda la basura de casa, y aquella ceniza y la demas 
que habia sacaban al campo. Hacian que los muchachos se lavasen antes de amanecer, enviandolos 4 esto azotados 
con una mochila de red, y 4 pocos dias habia de traer el muchacho algo de presente 4 quien lo azotd. Gastaban en 
esto los que habia hasta cerca de los postreros del mes, y entonces salian los mancebos engalanados con levantados 
penachos de plumeria, y corrian todos los cerros, dandole el cacique al mas ligero una 6 dos mantas. Concluiase la 
fiesta con los bevrages que solian: lo qual hacian porque no hubiese hambres. 

5. Por las enfermedades de que moria cada uno, juzgaban el lugar de trabajo 6 descanso que habia de tener en 
la otra vida; porque los que morian de calenturas, dolor de costado, camaras de sangre, é en la guerra, y las mugeres 
que morian de parto, los dejaban con esperanzas de que habian ido 4 descansar al cielo; pero sin ellas y que iban 
al infierno los que morian de otra manera; y asi se entristecian con la muerte de estos, y no se ponian mantas nuevas, 
ni cruces junto a ellos en las sepulturas, como lo hacian con aquellos, embarnizandoles la cara con bija, perfuman- 
doles las sepulturas con trementina, y poniendoles una cruz al lado derecho, y haciendoles un pequefio buhio sobre 
el sepulcro ya que estaba cerrado, y en lo alto de 1 otra cruz, aunque perdida casi del todo la forma por unos hilos 
de todos colores, que la entretegian por todas las quatro partes; y ponianla en tantas porque la tenian por simbolo 
de alegria, como se lo habia dicho su predicador. 

Cariruto XV. 

1. El Cacique Guatabita y Ubaque mas enemigos que amgos del Bogota. 

2. Trazas del Bogota para matar al Guatabita. 

3. Mata el Bogota al Guatabita, y apoderase de su pueblo y trerras. 

4. Hace guerra el Bogota al Ubaque y sugetalo, y a otros tres Caciques rebeldes. 

1. Ya dejamos tocado en otras partes las cortas noticias que tienen estos Indios Moscas de sus antigiiedades, y las 

muchas que dan de las enemistades antiguas que hubo entre los dos principales cabezas de estas dos provincias, 
3ny 

266 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Bogota y Tunja: porque como eran tiranos en sus tierras, y sea condicion de los tales no contentarse con poco, no 
se quietaban las ansias de ambos hasta ver sugeto 4 si el uno al otro con toda su tierra. Pero conocianse mas estos 
brios en el Bogota, en especial en el penultimo que hubo, antes que entraran los Espafoles, llamado Nemequene, 
que quiere decir hueso de leon, porque solo desde este saben dar noticia. El qual tocado de la ambicion que hemos 
dicho, y deseos de dilatar su tierra por las del Tunja, le andaba siempre maquinando guerras, aunque muchas de sus 
trazas no le salian 4 proposito, por tener cerca de su pueblo dos grandes principes sus opuestos, y mui confidentes y 
amigos del Tunja, 4 quienes nunca el Bogota pudo por muchos aiios sugetar del todo: el uno se Ilamaba Guatabita, 
que quiere decir alto sobre sierra 6 remate de sierra; y el otro Ubaque, aunque su proprio nombre es Ebaque, que 
quiere decir sangre de madero. Estos dos solos, por ser tan grandes senores, no solo no se le sugetaban, pero le 
hacian resistencia, y tener 4 raya muchas veces en la ejecucion de sus intentos para contra ellos y el Tunja; pues 
sucedia que si le acometia al Tunja, 4 espaldas vueltas entraban talando y destruyendo sus tierras y vasallos, con 
que se le ponia freno en los agravios que intentaba contra el Tunja. 

2. Traia esto desvelado al Bogota, y trabajando su entendimiento buscando trazas como quitar de en medio estos 
estorvos, y no le fue en vano este desvelo, pues entre los demas caminos que intentd, le quadré uno que le salié 
como deseaba, y fue asi. La mayor parte de los Guatabitas tenian excelencia entre los demas Indios de la provincia 
en fundir y labrar oro, y asi andaban derramados por toda ella, pues los habia en casi todos los pueblos ganando su 
vida 4 eso: sobre lo qual fundé su traza el Bogota, mandando 4 los caciques sus vasallos no consintiesen en sus 
tierras ningun Indio platero Guatabita, antes les mandasen se recogiesen @ su pueblo, y que si alguno de ellos 6 
de los de sus pueblos tuviesen necesidad de alguno de ellos, enviase por él, dejando en su lugar otros dos de sus 
vasallos, para que en tanto que duraba la obra, 6 faltaba el platero de su pueblo, hiciesen asistencia sirviendo al Gua- 
tabita. 

Era mucho el trato de joyas de oro que habia en estos tiempos, por ser los Indios aficionados 4 engalanarse y 
adornar 4 sus difuntos con ellas; y por esto fue facil cumplir el orden del Bogota, en especial quando se descubrié 
el intento, aunque en secreto; y asi en poco tiempo tuvo el Guatabita en trueque de mil plateros sus vasallos y 
amigos, mas de dos mil gandules extrafios dentro de su pueblo, y mas sus enemigos que amigos. Crecianle con esto 
sus rentas y arrogancia, no entendiendo el engafio que se le iba armando, y con vanidad decia gloriandose, que le 
reconocian vasallage todos los caciques de la tierra, pues le enviaban sus vasallos que le sirviesen y pagasen tributos : 
de que presto quedé desengafiado, pues siendo los Indios que le enviaban los mas valientes y guerreros que hallaban 
los caciques, y con orden y aviso que quando lo tuviesen del Bogota, le acometiesen y matasen con todos sus hijos, 
sobrinos y parientes mas cercanos, estaban siempre 4 la mira, haciendoseles ciento cada hora que se dilataba el aviso 
del Bogota. 

3. El qual acrecentando cautelas 4 cautelas, advirtié serle estropiezo y inconveniente 4 estos intentos otro capi- 
tan 6 cacique, vasallo del Guatabita, llamado Guasca, de quien hacia grande confianza para guardar el paso por donde 
le podia el Bogota acometer, por tener su pueblo y casa con innumerable copia de Indios poco mas de una legua del 
pueblo de Guatabita, 4 la parte del Bogota. El qual antes que pusiera en efecto lo que intentaba con los dos mil 
gandules, procuré allanar este estorvo y estropiezo del Guasca, que no le fue dificultoso, pues por tercera persona en 
secreto se dejé cohechar y prometer paso franco al Bogota para contra el Guatabita, pudiendo mas el interés que la 
fidelidad que le debia; afiadiendo 4 esta maldad la de hallarse tambien con los Bogotaes, quando le embistieron y 
mataron, que fue una noche estando durmiendo el Guatabita, y sin sospecha del suceso, por la confianza que tenia 
en él y en sus vasallos: pero como no vive mas el leal de lo que quiere el traydor, al amparo de este, facilmente 
consiguié lo que quiso el Bogota, sacando de esta vida al Guatabita y 4 toda su parentela, quedando ya con un ene- 
migo menos, y sefior de sus vasallos y tierras, donde puso luego guarnicion de soldados por lo que podia suceder, y 
por gobernador 4 un hermano suyo. 

4. Viendo que le corria en popa la fortuna, antes que se cansdra, como dicen, acord6 con el mismo egercito 
venir la vuelta de Ubaque, y representandole batalla, le cercé su pueblo principal y casas por dos partes: 4 quien 
el Ubaque, como hombre poderoso y nada descuidado, resisti6 con mucho valor por espacio de seis 6 siete meses, en 
que hubo grandes muertes de ambas partes. Pero al cabo de ellos, viendo que la del Bogota se reforzaba cada dia, 
y minoraba la suya, se le rindié el Ubaque, y prometié vasallage debajo de ciertas condiciones; de las quales fue 
una, que tomase por mugeres el Bogota dos hijas que tenia doncellas, porque le parecio que teniendole por yerno, 
se habian de olvidar acedias pasadas, y tener quietud él y sus vasallos, y algo mas tolerable la sugecion al Bogota, 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 267 

que vino bien en el concierto, tomando por muger 4 la mayor, y dando para lo mismo la otra 4 su hermano. Puesto 
el presidio que le parecio bastaba, para asegurar al Ubaque, y did con esto la vuelta 4 su tierra, cargado de victorias 
y despojos, donde le recibieron con bayles y regocijos y canciones en que cantaban sus hazafias y victorias. 

Para acabar de tenerlas cumplidas, le restaban por sugetar otros tres valerosos caciques rebeldes 4 su obediencia, 
no lejos de su principal pueblo. El uno era 4 quien Ilaman los Espafioles Ubate, aunque él Ebate se dice, y significa 
sangre derramada, por la mucha que en otros tiempos derramaron las guerras en aquel mismo sitio, que hoy es el 
mayor y mejor pueblo que hay en esta provincia de los Moscas. El otro se llamaba Susa, que quiere decir paja 
blanca, delante de Ubate dos 6 tres leguas al norte. Llamabase el postrero Simijaca, que significa nariz, 6 pico de 
lechuza, dos leguas mas adelante al mismo parage. Contra estos fué con poderoso egercito, antes que se le enfridra 
la mano de los buenos sucesos pasados; y aunque en varios encuentros de guerra le resistieron estos pueblos muchos 
dias, con victorias alternativas de una parte y otra, al fin los vino 4 vencer y hacer sus tributarios, dejando caudillos y 
guarniciones en todos de satisfacion sugetos 4 su hermano, el que gobernaba en Guatabita, como su general y lugar- 
teniente en toda aquella tierra. 

Carituto XVI. 

1. Intenta el hermano del Bogota haber a las manos los tesoros del Ubaque, sobre que se traba 
gran guerra. 

2. De ella le sucede la muerte por mano del Ubaque. 

3. Temese este de la indignacion del Bogota, y envia a disculparse. 

4, Va el Ubaque en persona a verse con el Bogota, y vuelve libre a su tierra. 

1. La codicia que ardia en este gobernador, hermano del Bogota, le caldeaba el deseo que tenia de saber donde 
tenian sus tesoros, los que antes de estas guerras publicaba la fama los tenian abundantes. Y no faltando entre los 
muchos que tenia en su egercito quien supiese de todo, no falté tampoco quien le descubriese donde tenia los suyos 
el Ubaque, certificandole los habia retirado y puesto en cobro en un fuerte pefiol que tenia en su tierra, rodeado de 
una profanda laguna, sin tener mas que una estrecha senda por donde entrarle. Kstimulado de esta codicia, dio luego 
en imaginar como los podria haber 4 las manos, y con mal fundadas trazas se determiné una noche 4 tomar la vuelta 
de Ubaque, y caminar @ pasos largos hasta que Ilegé al pueblo de Chiguachi, por donde forzoso habia de pasar para 
el de Ubaque y pefiol donde le guiaban sus intentos: pero viendo que los del Chiguachi eran de no dejarle pasar, 
por tener puestas en él todas sus confianzas y resguardos de sus tierras el Ubaque, le engaié fingiendo tenia orden 
de su hermano el Bogota para visitar de noche los presidios que por alli estaban puestos, y saber si habia descuido 
en lo que les tenia ordenado. 

Entendiendo el Chiguachi ser asi lo que le decia, dejé pasar libre al gobernador y sus soldados: el qual con ellos 
entré al pefiol del Ubaque, y cogiendo de sobresalto 4 los guardas, maté 4 muchas personas; y escapandose otras, 
fueron 4 gran prisa y dieron noticia del insulto al Ubaque, que turbado con la nueva, por tocarle tan de nuevo en el 
corazon, salté6 como un leon de la cama y hizo tocar al arma, y junto alguna gente ; aunque pareciendole no ser bas- 
tante la que le acudidé, se determiné pedir favor al caudillo del presidio que tenia alli puesto el Bogota. El qual 
sospechando que no se habria atrevido el gobernador 4 un caso tan grave sin orden de su hermano el Bogota, no se 
atrevid 4 dar socorro al Ubaque, ni enviar favor al gobernador por si era otra cosa; y asi se estuvo neutral y con 
tibieza; la qual como conocié el Ubaque, fue 4 la defensa con la mas gente que pudo hallar 4 mano; y con brios 
de leones todos cercaron el pefiol y le acometieron, intentando ganarle por la angosta entrada, pues era imposible 
poderse hacer por otra parte: la qual defendian los de adentro con tanto valor que le resistieron el paso por cinco 
dias, en que hubo porfiadisimos encuentros, como lo pedia la grandeza del tesoro, y grandes muertes de ambas partes, 
con que estaba ya la laguna tefiida en sangre de los heridos y muertos que se arrojaban 4 ella. 

2. Viendo el gobernador que le iba ya faltando la comida y gente, y aumentandose la del Ubaque, determiné 
salir del pefiol con la suya, y venir 4 las manos con la de su enemigo en campo mas abierto. Pero antes de esto se 
resolyié 4 echar 4 pique, como lo hizo, en la laguna el tesoro que ya tenia en su poder, para que ya que él no lo 
podia gozar, por saber de cierto se le habian de quitar en saliendo, viendo ser imposible defenderlo, por ser tanto 

968 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

como era, tampoco lo gozase su duefio. Lo qual hecho asi, y desocupado de aquella carga, salid con valerosos brios, 
y embistid con la gente del Ubaque, que se los quitaron presto por ser mucha, despachandolo de esta vida ya 
muchos de los suyos, huyendo los demas: con que quedé el Ubaque victorioso, aunque sin su gran tesoro, ni espe- 
ranzas de haberlo 4 las manos, por ser tan profundo el lago donde lo echaron, y donde hoy se esta. 

3. Sobresaltaronle luego tras esto otros temores al Ubaque, de los sentimientos que habia de tener el Nemequene 
por la muerte de su hermano, 4 quien por su valor estimaba en mucho. Y asi, como hombre sagaz, traté sin dilacion 
de enviar su disculpa, contandole la verdad del caso, y como habia sucedido la muerte de su hermano mui contra su 
gusto, y en lanze forzoso de permitida defensa 4 la violencia que le hacia, en quererle quitar no solo su tesoro, sino 
la vida. Despaché con este recado bien industriados mensageros, y proveydos de joyas de gran precio con buena 
cantidad de finas mantas, por ser costumbre entre ellos, como hemos dicho, nunca aparecer delante del cacique sin 
dones, para con obras y palabras aplacar los sentimientos que tendria del caso. Llegaron 4 Bogota los mensageros, 
y habida licencia para hablar al rey, 4 espaldas vueltas, sentados en el suelo en su presencia, donde tambien habian 
puesto el presente, hicieron su embajada; a que estuvo el Bogota atento con severidad, dando al fin de ella por res- 
puesta que viniese el Ubaque en persona 4 dar su descargo. 

4. En que no puso dilacion, sabiendo la voluntad del rey. Y asi disponiendo para Ilevarle otro rico presente de 
veinte hermosas doncellas, bien aderezadas, con ricas joyas de oro y sartas de cuentas, cien cargas de Indios de ricas 
telas de algodon, con muchas y finas esmeraldas, algunos animales de oro fino bien labrados, con otras cosas que ellos 
tenian de estima, presente al fin de un gran rey: con que llegé 4 su presencia, sin que quisiese tomar de todo mas 
que dos telas de algodon por ceremonia y usanza suya, diciendo no ser licito tomar del acusado cosa que turbase la 
claridad de la justicia y la hiciese torcer: tratése luego del caso, enviando el Bogota criados 4 satisfaccion para que 
se la trageran del suceso, de que resulté la culpa contra su hermano; y asi despues de seis meses que se gastaron en 

averiguaciones, volvié a su pueblo el Ubaque, libre, honrado y cargado de favores del Bogota. 

CariruLo XVII. 

1. Determinase el Bogota a hacer guerra al Tuna. 

2. Juntanse de la tierra del Bogota con sus Caciques cincuenta mil combatientes con sus armas. 
3. Marcha con su gente el Bogota hasta darse vista los dos campos en la tierra del Tunja. 

4. Embajadas que se envian acerca del darse la batalla el Bogota y el Tunja. 

1. Crecran por horas en el Bogota los brios con los crecimientos que habia tenido en las victorias y dilataciones 
de suimperio. Y como un buen suceso sea piedra iman de otros, deseaba fundado en la buena suerte de los sucedi- 
dos y en su gran poder, haber 4 las manos el del Tunja; y asi determinado 4 hacerle una guerra tal que de una aca- 
basen las discordias, consiguiendo él sus intentos, para comunicarlos hizo llamar 4 todos los caciques y gente noble 
sus vasallos; que no siendo perezosos en venir 4 su presencia, estando en ella todos, y él sentado en un levantado 
y rico trono, les hablé de esta manera: Ya, mis amigos, sabeis los acrecentamientos que cada dia me van poniendo 
los dioses en las manos, en ensanchar mi poder, riquezas y terminos de mi imperio: con que es bien procure de 
mi parte no solo conservar lo ganado, pero acrecentarlo con hechos tales que conoscan nuestros vecinos, quien soy 
yo, y quien mis vasallos. Y asi querria, pues sois de ellos los que mas estimo, me ayudaseis con los brios que soleis, 
4 quitarle los suyos al Queminchatocha, con que quedaremos pacificos en nuestra tierra, gozando nuestras hacien- 
das y sefiores de la suya, teniendo en nuestra obediencia sus gentes. Y asi conociendo mi gusto, dispondreis luego 
los vuestros para el efecto, con todas las armas, comidas y pertrechos de guerra, que fueren necesarios: en que no 
gastareis mas tiempo de una luna, dentro del que os aguardo aqui bien despachados ; en que conoceré la aficion que 
me teneis, y gusto con que me servis. Despachaos por la mafiana, porque no perdais tiempo, pues con su serenidad 
y haberse alzado las aguas, nos convida 4 ayudar nuestros deseos. Mostraron los caciques ser los mismos los suyos 
en el cuidado que 4 la mafiana pusieron en su partida, y en el disponer las cosas de la guerra luego que llegaron 
4 sus tierras; pues manifestando 4 sus vasallos la voluntad de su rey, se dispusieron todos a hacerla, aparejando 
bastimentos y armas, que como hemos dicho otras veces, eran macanas, dardos, picas, hondas, flechas sin veneno, 
aunque lo que mas usaban, eran unas tiraderas 6 dardillos de un cierto carrizo, con unas puntas de durisima madera 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 269 

de palma, que tiraban con amientos 6 estolicas, todas de golpe flaco, aunque fuesen crecidas las fuerzas del que los 
tiraba. 

2. No faltaron los caciques en ser puntuales y venir con toda su gente, y muchas mugeres para que los regalasen, 
haciendoles las comidas en Ja jornada, en el tiempo que se les sefialé ; y asi se vieron juntos todos en un dia ran- 
cheados en los anchos y estendidos prados 4 la redonda de los aposentos y pueblo del Bogota, cada cacique y parcia- 
lidad con distintas sefias en sus tiendas, que las armaban de mantas, con que se distinguian unos de otros. Alegrose 
el Nemequene de ver el cuidado y puntualidad con que habian acudido los caciques, y acompafiado de ellos y de otros 
nobles de su corte, salid a ver la gente de guerra y pasar muestra y hacer nomina de los que habia, que fueron cin- 
cuenta mil, con bastantes armas y mantenimientos para lo que durase la guerra. Habia ya enviado mensageros al 
Tunja 4 darle noticia de ella, y de sus intentos, y el Tunja habia hecho lo mismo en retorno, manifestandole tambien 
- los suyos, que eran de no huirle la cara, porque era costumbre en ocasiones de guerra, quando se habia de hacer, 
enviar mensageros de una parte 4 otra, los quales se estaban en los pueblos de los contrarios, donde los regalaban y 
estimaban en mucho todo el tiempo que duraba. 

3. Prepararonse luego sacrificios de nifios, y los Xeques para sacrificarlos, y pedir por aquellos medios al Sol y 
los demas idolos los buenos sucesos de lo que intentaban. No se descuido el Tunja en prevenir lo necesario 4 la 
resistencia de su enemigo, y en avisar 4 sus vasallos le acudieran con su gente y pertrechos de guerra. Envio tam- 
bien 4 rogar al Sogamozo le enviase socorro, porque el ruido que habian hecho las prevenciones del Bogota le obli- 
gaban a todo. Estabalo el Sogamozo de las buenas correspondencias que siempre habia tenido con el Tunja, y asi 
con la brevedad posible le envié doce mil hombres de guerra, y juntos con los demas que tenia prevenidos el Tunja, 
hicieron mas grueso egercito que el del Bogota; el qual, acabados los sacrificios, y tenida respuesta por el Xeque de 
buen suceso y fortuna en la guerra, comenzé luego la gente 4 marchar, cada qual en su esquadra y parcialidad, aunque 
tumultuariamente y sin concierto, haciendo grandes estragos por las tierras del Tunja luego que entraron en ellas ; 
de que llevé la mayor parte Turmeque, como el primero por aquel lado, de que quedd mas irritado el Tunja, que ya 
le estaba aguardando con su gente, quando se dieron vista ambos egercitos en el sitio que ahora llaman el Arroyo 
de las Vueltas, el qual solamente hacia division de los dos campos, que cubrian los Ilanos y laderas con la muched- 
umbre que en ambos habia. 

4. Antes de representar la batalla, envid el Bogota con un noble de su casa al Tunja una embajada, en que le 
decia: Espantado estoy Quemuinchatocha, que siendo tu prudencia tal que sabes con ella dar 4 otros consejos, no 
los tomes para ti, y confiando vanamente de tus brios, los tengas para con los mios que tan superiores 4 los tuyos 
han sido siempre. Y asi tendré por cordura, que dando de mano 4 guerras, (de quien pienso, si las quisieredes, salir 
victorioso) te rindas con paz 4 mi imperio y sefiorio, de donde se seguira quietud 4 tu persona y vasallos, y el 
buen tratamiento que yo sé hacer 4 los mios; y pues no perderas nada de tu opinion en ser vasallo de una sangre 
y linage tan valeroso como lo es el de los reyes Bogotaes, no te estd mal el consejo, antes que vengamos 4 rompi- 
miento y perdida de vidas de tanta gente como aqui tenemos, y de lo que determinaredes ser4 bien me avises 
luego. Alteré la sangre al Tunja la embajada de manera, que si no lo reportara la consideracion de su grandeza, em- 
bistiera sin enviarle respuesta; pero sosegandose, respondié al mensagero, que despues de tomado consejo en la 
respuesta, la daria al Bogota otro dia, como lo hizo en amaneciendo, enviandole un criado de su casa y con él a 
decir: Gran Nemequene, maravillado estoy de que presumas tanto de tus brios, y que los mios se han de acortar de 
manera que yo haga un borron tan grande, como seria para mi sangre y nobleza mostrar flaqueza en esta ocasion, 
donde no tienes tan en la mano la victoria y fortuna, que no pienso yo la tengo mas asida y cierta, pues tengo por 
mayores mis brios, y por mi parte la razon en la defensa de mis tierras, 4 donde tu me vienes 4 buscar. Y pues en 
sangre sabes no te debo nada, hagase muestra de quien cada uno es, librando los sucesos de la guerra en solos los 
dos, para que no muera tanta gente como tu dices, y el que quedare vencido, sirva y sugetese con toda su tierra y 

gente al otro. 

3Z 

270 SUPPLEMENTARY EXTRACTS 

Caritruto XVIII. 

1. Llegan a rompimento ambos campos. 

2. Cada qual de los dos reyes, trahidos en andas de una parte a otra, esfuerzan su gente, y queda 
herido de muerte el Bogota. 

3. Huye con los suyos de la batalla, hasta Uegar a su pueblo de Muixqueta. 

4, Donde muere al qunto dia de como Wego, y lo enterraron los Xeques a su modo. 

5. Sucedele un deudo suyo, aunque no le vema de derecho. 

1. Quepé corrido Nemequene de la respuesta del Tunja, por parecerle sobrado atrevimiento desafiarle de ‘persona 4 
persona, considerando la desigualdad que habia entre los dos ; pero con todo eso se determiné 4 admitir el desafio, 
y saliera a él, sino lo impidieran los Ubzaques, poniendole por medio mil razones tan eficaces, que la menor de ellas 
bastaba para desistir de los intentos. Y no era la menor el representarle la poca igualdad entre él, que era un gran 
principe, sefior de tantos caciques y provincias, y un cacique como lo era él de Tunja, 4 quien ya podian tener por su 
vasallo, segun la confianza con que estaban de ganar la victoria, y seria temeridad dejar por lo dudoso lo cierto, 
porque aunque eran conocidas las ventajas que él le hacia al cacique en brios, animo y destreza, no era bien colgar 
de un hilo, ni aventurar cosa de tanta importancia en lo que la fortuna pudiera suceder rodeara contra el seguro que 
tenian de ser los vencedores, peleando de poder 4 poder. Disuadiose con esto del intento, y mand6 que se ordenasen 
los esquadrones, lo que tambien hizo el Tunja, viendo lo que pasaba en el real'de su enemigo. Y 4 la sefia del 
rompimiento que se did con las trompas 6 tatas, se embistieron los salvages con tanta furia, aunque sin orden, que 4 
poco rato ya el andar de la batalla era sobre cuerpos muertos, porque ya abiertas las cabezas con las macanas, que- 
bradas piernas y brazos, y aturdidos con las piedras de las hondas, ya pasados con las lanzas, fue mucho el estrago 
que al primer impetu hicieron unos en otros. Andaban los encrespados penachos y plumerias rodando por aquel 
suelo empapados en sangre, despedidos de sus amos, que los dejaban ya luchando con la muerte.» Atronaba la tierra 
y ayres el estruendo de trompetas, bocinas y caracoles, y grita que no cesaba de ambas partes. 

2. Como tambien lo hacian el Tunja y Nemequene, andando ambos en andas ricas como viento, esforzando cada 
qual 4 los suyos, y con deseos ambos de encontrarse, aunque lo impidié la confusion y priesa de la guerra, bien des- 
graciada para Nemequene, pues entre los cuidados con que andaba, hallo el mayor de todos, que es el de la muerte, 
con un dardo que le vino sin saber de donde silvando por los ayres, que se le entré con herida penetrante por la 
tetilla derecha, que lo fue tanto, que aunque se le sacéd con ambas manos, sin esperar que agenas lo hicieran, fue 
tanto el dolor que luego le sobrevino, que aunque quiso disimularlo, porque no desmayaran sus gentes, no pudo 
excusar el decir 4 los de su guardia: Yo, amigos, me'siento tan mal herido, que no tengo confianza de mi vida: 
haced como buenos en venganza de la muerte que me han dado en defensa de las vuestras, y de venir 4 manos de 
vuestros enemigos, pues por las muestras que ellos van dando, sin duda serd vuestra la victoria. 

3. Pasara adelante, segun se advirtié, con la arenga, si el grave dolor le dejara la lengua libre y sin la turbacion 
que todos conocieron en él, de que no la tuvieron pequefia los presentes; aunque no fue tanta, que no advirtiesen 
en sacarlo luego del conflicto de la batalla, y comenzar 4 caminar de priesa la vuelta de Bogota, que fue bien me- 
nester, por la mucha que comenzé luego 4 dar el Tunja; los Bogotaes habiendo entendido la ausencia y estado 
en que le habia puesto la herida 4 su rey, de que daba tambien claras muestras la mano floxa con que los Bogotaes 
peleaban. Y asi con poco que apreté la suya el Tunja, le volvieron las espaldas; 4 quien fue siguiendo en alcanze 
de la victoria con dichosos sucesos y muertes de muchos, hasta el pueblo de Choconta, dejando aquellos paramos 
llenos de los cuerpos muertos; desde donde tomé la vuelta el Tunja para su tierra, entrando en ella victorioso y 
rico de despojos. Venian los Bogotaes tan temerosos del suceso, que aun no tenian seguro que no viniesen los 
Tunjas y les quitasen su rey, y asi sin detenerse un punto, remudandose unos tras otros en las andas, los hacia 
ligeros el miedo, y caminar noche y dia hasta que llegaron 4 Bogota. 

4. Donde luego acudieron los Xeques, que tambien se preciaban de medicos, y de que anduviesen juntos los dos 
oficios : porque conocian unas yervas buenas para las heridas, de que hay hartas en esta tierra, y para otras enfer- 
medades, 4 que tambien acudian, usando de mil ridiculas ceremonias entre las aplicaciones que hacian de ellas. Lo 

FROM SPANISH AUTHORS. 971 

que no aprovecho en esta herida de Nemequene, pues al quarto 6 quinto dia salié de esta vida, dejando en ella 4 
sus vasallos con prolijos llantos y cantares tristes en modos de endechas, como tenian de costumbre, donde repre- 
sentaban las hazafias y otras cosas que le sucedieron en el discurso de su reyno. Pusieronse tambien los de su pueblo 
y principales vasallos de los otros mantas coloradas, y envijaron el rostro y cabellos, que era el luto con que se 
celebraban los sentimientos que tenian de la muerte de sus reyes. Esto duré por quinze 6 veinte dias, en que se 
gasto buena cantidad de su vino, porque en todas sus acciones y juntas de tristeza 6 alegria, él es el que los entre- 
tiene. Trataron luego los Xeques del entierro, 4 que ellos solos acudian, sin que otra persona lo supiera; y si acaso 
alguno lo venia 4 saber y lo decia, era ley que lo amarrasen 4 un palo y muriese alli flechado, dando premios al que 
le acertase mas presto al corazon 6 4 alguno de los dos ojos. Y asi para guardar mas este secreto, el mismo afio que 
toma la posesion el que hereda, comienzan los Xeques de noche, con las mayores obscuridades de ellas, 4 hacerle 
poco 4 poco el sepulcro, en partes remotisimas, espesas, brefiosas y escondidas. Y aun suelen, para mas seguro, sacar 
de madre un rio, y en la corriente de él hacer el sepulcro, y se esta hecho para quando es menester, que aun muchas 
veces el que se ha de enterrar en él no lo sabe, y despues de enterrado vuelvenlo 4 echar que pase por encima; aun- 
que todas estas diligencias han solido vencer las que ha hecho la codicia de nuestros Espafioles, hallando donde nunca 
se imaginara, grandes y crecidos tesoros en estas sepulturas *. 

5. Tomé luego por muerte del Nemequene la posesion del reyno un deudo suyo, por modos que tuvo para ello, 
sin ser cacique de Chia 4 quien le venia por derecho, por favor que tuvo para esta violencia y tirania en algunos de 
los principales del reyno, llamado Thizkesuzha. Era hombre valiente, segun refieren de su persona, aunque no llegé 
su animo 4 probarlo con el de los Espafoles, pues no dejé aun que le viesen la cara, como tambien digimos. Con 
todo eso luego que heredd, mostré brios para contra el Tunja en venganza de su antecesor y tio, y por sustentar las 
perpetuas enemistades que alli se habian conservado entre los dos. Y asi ordené, con ayuda de los nobles que habian 
salido desbaratados de la del Nemequene, se juntase otro grueso egercito de mas de setenta mil combatientes, con 
todas las armas y pertrechos de guerra necesarios, para en abriendo el tiempo del verano, tomar la vuelta del Tunja, y 
probar con él la mano, si tenia mejor suerte que la pasada. Esto tuviera efecto, por estar para ello todo dispuesto, 
si no les atajara los pasos la entrada de los Espajioles que fue en este tiempo, como en el suyo ya dijo la historia. 

* Matienzo refers, in his inedited work entitled ‘ Gobierno del Peru,’ to an unpublished and probably long-lost treatise by Las Casas, concerning 
the treasures discovered by the Spaniards in the sepulchres of the Indians. That distinguished prelate raises three cases of conscience with respect 
to them; namely, whether they ought by right to belong to the king, or to the discoverer, or to the Indians whose ancestors had caused them to be 

there deposited ; and he inclines to the latter opinion. 

HISTORY 

NORTH-AMERICAN INDIANS, 

THEIR CUSTOMS, &c. 

By JAMES ADAIR. 

TO 

THE HON. COLONEL GEORGE CRAGHAN, 

GEORGE GALPHIN ann LACHLAN M‘GILWRAY, Eseurrts.* 

GENTLEMEN, 

To you, with the greatest propriety, the following sheets are addressed. Your distinguished 
abilities—your thorough acquaintance with the North-American Indians’ language, rites and cus- 
toms—your long application and services in the dangerous sphere of an Indian life, and your 

successful management of the savage natives, are well known over all the continent of America. 

You often complained how the public had been imposed upon, either by fictitious and fabulous, 
or very superficial and congectural accounts of the Indian nations, and as often wished me to devote my 
leisure hours to the drawing up an Indian system. You can witness that what I now send into the 
world was composed more from a regard to your request, than any forward desire of my own. The 
prospect of your patronage inspired me to write, and it is no small pleasure and honour to me, that 
such competent judges of the several particulars now presented to public view, expressed themselves 

with so much approbation of the contents. 

You well know the uprightness of my intentions as to the information here given, and that truth 
hath been my grand standard. I may have erred in the application of the rites and customs of the 
Indians to their origin and descent, and may have drawn some conclusions exceeding the given evi- 
dence; but candour will excuse the language of integrity: and when the genuine principles, customs, 
&c., of the Indians are known, it will be easier afterwards for persons of solid learning, and free from 
secular cares, to trace their origin, clear up the remaining difficulties, and produce a more perfect 

history. 

* The late Sir Wm. Johnson, Baronet, was another of the Author’s friends, and stood at the head of the MS. Dedication. 

276 DEDICATION. 

Should my performance be in the least degree instrumental to promote an accurate investi- 
gation and knowledge of the American Indians—thew cwilization—and the happy settlement of the 
fertile lands around them, I shall rejoice ; and the public will be greatly obhged to you, as your 

request incited to it, and to you I am also indebted for many interesting particulars and valuable 

observations. 

I embrace this opportunity of paying a public testimony of my gratitude for your many favours 
to me. Permit me also to celebrate your puble spuwit—your zealous and faithful service of your 
country—your social and domestic virtues, &c., which have endeared you to all your acquaintance, 
and to all who have heard your names, and make you more illustrious than can any high-sounding 
titles. All who know you will readily acquit me of servility and flattery in this address. Dedica- 
tions founded on these motives are the disgrace of hterature, and an insult to common sense. There 
are too many instances of this prostitution in Great Britain for it to be suffered in America. 
Numbers of high-seated patrons are prased for ther dwine wisdom and godhke virtues, and 

yet the whole empire is discontented, and America m strong convulsions. 

May you long enjoy your usual calm and prosperity ! that so the widow, the fatherless and the 
stranger may always joyfully return (as in past years) from your hospitable houses—while this 

Dedication stands as a small proof of that sincere attachment, with which I am, 

GENTLEMEN, 

Your most obedient, humble Servant, 

JAMES ADAIR. 

PREFACE. 

THE following history and observations are the production of one who hath been chiefly en- 
gaged in an Indian life ever since the year 1735 and most of the pages were written among our 
old friendly Chikkasah, with whom I first traded in the year 1744. The subjects are interesting 
as well as amusing ; but never was a literary work begun and carried on with more disadvantages. 
The Author was separated by his situation from the conversation of the learned, and from any 
libraries ; frequently interrupted also by business; and obliged to conceal his papers, through 
the natural jealousy of the natives. The traders’ letters of correspondence always excited their 
suspicions, and often gave offence. Another difficulty I had to encounter was the secrecy and 
closeness of the Indians as to their own affairs, and their prying disposition mto those of others, 
so that there is no possibility of retirement among them. 

SS 

A view of the disadvantages of my situation made me reluctant to comply with the earnest and 
repeated solicitations of many worthy friends to give the public an account of the Indian nations, 
with whom I had long resided, was so intimately connected, and of whom scarcely anything had 
yet been published but romance and a mass of fiction. My friends at last prevailed, and on 
perusing the sheets, they were pleased to approve the contents, as conveying true information and 
general entertainment. Having no ambition to appear in the world as an author, and knowing 
that my history differed essentially from all former publications of the kind, I first resolved to 
suppress my name; but my friends advised me to own the Work, and thus it is tendered to the 

Public in the present form. 

The performance hath doubtless imperfections, —humanum est errare. Some readers may think 

there is too much of what relates to myself, and of the adventures of small parties among the 
4B 

978 PREFACE. 

Indians and traders. But minute circumstances are often of great consequence, especially in 
discovering the descent and genius of a people, describing their manners and customs, and giving 
proper information to rulers at a distance. I thought it better to be esteemed prolix, than to 
omit anything that might be useful on these points. Some repetitions which occur were neces- 
sary, the history of the several Indian nations being so much intermixed with each other, and 

their customs so nearly alike. 

One great advantage my readers will here have ; I sat down to draw the Indians on the spot, 
had them many years standing before me, and lived with them as a friend and brother. My in- 
tentions were pure when I wrote, truth hath been my standard, and I have no sinister or merce- 
nary views in publishing. With inexpressible concern I read the several imperfect and fabulous 
accounts of the Indians already given to the world: fiction and conjecture have no place in the 
following pages. The public may depend on the fidelity of the Author, and that his descriptions 
are genuine, though perhaps not so polished and romantic as other Indian histories and accounts 

they may have seen. 

My grand objects were to give the Literati proper and good materials for tracing the origin 
of the American Indians, and to incite the higher powers zealously to promote the best interests 
of the British colonies, and of the mother country, for whose greatness and happiness I have 

the most ardent desires. 

The whole of the Work is respectfully submitted to the candour and judgement of the im- 
partial Public. 

HISTORY 

OF THE 

NORTH-AMERICAN INDIANS, 

THEIR CUSTOMS, &e. 

Observations on the Colour, Shape, Temper and Dress of the Indians of America. 

THE Indians are of a copper or red clay colour, and they delight in everything which they imagine may pro- 
mote and increase it: accordingly, they paint their faces with vermilion, as the best and most beautiful ingredient. 
If we consider the common laws of Nature and Providence, we shall not be surprised at this custom; for everything 
loves best its own likeness and place in the Creation, and is disposed to ridicule its opposite. If a deformed son of 
burning Africa was to paint the devil, he would not do it in black colours, nor delineate him with a shagged coarse 
woolly head, nor with thick lips, a short flat nose, or clumsy feet, like those of a bear: his devil would represent 
one of a different nation or people. But was he to draw an agreeable picture according to the African taste, he 
would daub it all over with sooty black. All the Indians are so strongly attached to, and prejudiced in favour 
of, their own colour, that they think as meanly of the Whites, as we possibly can do of them. The English traders 
among them experience much of it, and are often very glad to be allowed to pass muster with the Indian chieftains, 
as fellow-brethren of the human species. One instance will sufficiently show in what flattering glasses they view 
themselves. Some time past, a large body of the English Indian traders, on their way to the Choktah country, 
were escorted by a body of Creek and Choktah warriors. The Creeks having a particular friendship for some of 
the traders, who had treated them pretty liberally, took this opportunity to chide the Choktahs, before the traders, 
in a smart though friendly way, for not allowing to the English the name of human creatures; for the general 
name they give us, in their most favourable war speeches, resembles that of a contemptible, heterogeneous animal. 

The hotter or colder the climate is where the Indians have long resided, the greater proportion have they either 
of the red or white colour. I took particular notice of the Shawano Indians as they were passing from the 
northward, within fifty miles of the Chikkasah country, to that of the Creeks; and, by comparing them with the 
Indians whom I accompanied to their camp, I observed the Shawano to be much fairer than the Chikkasah *, 
though I am satisfied their endeavours to cultivate the copper colour were alike. Many incidents and observations 
lead me to believe that the Indian colour is not natural; but that the external difference between them and the 
Whites proceeds entirely from their customs and method of living, and not from any inherent spring of Nature ; 
which will entirely overturn Lord Kames’s whole system of colour, and separate races of men. 

% Sis not a note of plurality with the Indians; when I mention, therefore, either their national or proper names, that common error is avoided 
which writers ignorant of their language constantly commit. 

280 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

That the Indian colour is merely accidental or artificial appears pretty evident. Their own traditions record 
them to have come to their present lands by the way of the West, from a far distant country, and where there was 
no variegation of colour in human beings; and they are entirely ignorant which was the first or primitive colour. 
Besides, their rites, customs, &c., as we shall presently see, prove them to be Orientalists: and, as the difference of 
colour among the human species is one of the principal causes of separation, strife and bloodshed, would it not 
greatly reflect on the goodness and justice of the Divine Being, ignominiously to brand numerous tribes and their 
posterity with a colour odious and hateful in the sight and opinion of those of a different colour? Some writers 
have contended, from the diversity of colour, that America was not peopled from any part of Asia, or of the Old 
World, but that the natives were a separate creation. Of this opinion is Lord Kames; and which he labours to 
establish in his late publication, entitled, Sketches of the History of Man. But his reasoning on this point, for a 
local creation, is contrary both to revelation and facts. His chief argument, that “there is not a single hair on 
the body of any American, nor the least appearance of a beard,” is utterly destitute of foundation, as can be 
attested by all who have had any communication with them. Of this, more presently. Moreover, to form one 
creation of Whites, a second creation for the Yellows, and a third for the Blacks, is a weakness of which Infinite 
Wisdom is incapable. Its operations are plain, easy, constant and perfect. The variegation, therefore, of colours 
among the human race depends upon a second cause. Lord Kames himself acknowledges that “the Spanish 
inhabitants of Carthagena in South America lose their vigour and colour in afew months.” 

We are informed by the anatomical observations of our American physicians concerning the Indians, that they 
have discerned a certain fine cowl, or web, of a red gluey substance, close under the outer skin, to which it reflects 
the colour; as the epidermis, or outer skin, is alike clear in every different creature. And experience, which is 
the best medium to discover truth, gives the true cause why this corpus mucosum, or gluish web, is red in the 
Indians, and white in us: the parching winds and hot sunbeams, beating upon their naked bodies, in their various 
gradations of life, necessarily tarnish their skins with the tawny red colour. Add to this, their constant anointing 
themselves with a certain red root, which, by a peculiar property, is able alone in a few years time, to produce the 
Indian colour in those who are white born, and who have even advanced to maturity. These metamorphoses I 
have often seen. At the Shawano main camp *, I saw a Pennsylvanian, a white man by birth, and in profession 
a Christian, who, by the inclemency of the sun, and his endeavours of improving the red colour, was tarnished 
with as deep an Indian hue as any of the camp, though they had been in the woods only the space of four years. 
We may easily conclude, then, what a fixt change of colour such a constant method of life would produce ; for 
the colour being once thoroughly established, Nature would, as it were, forget herself, not to beget her own 
likeness. Besides, may we not suppose that the imagination can impress the animalcule, in the time of copula- 
tion, by its strong subtile power, with at least.such an external similitude as we speak of? The sacred oracles 
and Christian registers, as well as Indian traditions, support the sentiment: the colour of Jacob’s cattle resembled 
that of the peeled rods he placed before them in the time of conception. We have good authority of a Spanish 
lady, who conceived, and was delivered of a negro child, by means of a black picture that hung on the wall, 
opposite to the bed where she lay. There is a record among the Chikkasah Indians, that tells us of a white child 
with flaxen hair, born in their country long before any white people appeared in that part of the world; which 
they ascribed to the immediate power of the Deity impressing her imagination in a dream. And the Philosophical 
Transactions assure us of two white children having been born of black parents. But waving all other arguments, 
the different method of living, connected with the difference of climates, and extraordinary anointings and paintings, 
’ will effect both outward and inward changes in the human race all round the globe; or a different colour may be con- 
veyed to the foetus by the parents, through the channel of the fluids, without the least variation of the original stamina. 
For, though the laws of Nature cannot be traced far where there are various circumstances and combinations of 
things, yet her works are exquisitely constant and regular, being thereto impelled by unerring Divine wisdom. 

.As the American Indians are of a reddish or copper colour, so in general they are strong, well proportioned 

* In the year 1747 I headed a company of the cheerful, brave Chikkasah, with the eagle’s tails, to the camp of the Shawano Indians, to 
apprehend one Peter Shartee, (a Frenchman,) who, by his artful paintings, and the supine conduct of the Pennsylvanian Government, had decoyed 
a large body of the Shawano from the English, to the French interest. But fearing the consequences, he went round a hundred miles towards 
the Cheerake nation, with his family, and the head warriors, and thereby evaded the danger. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 281 

in body and limbs, surprisingly active and nimble, and hardy in their own way of living. They are ingenious, 
witty, cunning and deceitful; very faithful indeed to their, own tribes, but privately dishonest and mischievous to 
the Europeans and Christians. Their being honest and harmless to’each other may be through fear of resentment 
and reprisal, which is unavoidable in case of any injury. They are very close, and retentive of their secrets; never 
forget injuries ; revengeful of blood, to a degree of distraction. They are timorous, and consequently cautious ; 
very jealous of encroachments from their Christian neighbours, and likewise content with freedom in every turn 
of fortune. They are possessed of a strong comprehensive judgement, can form surprisingly crafty schemes, and 
conduct them with equal caution, silence and address : they admit none but distinguished warriors and old beloved 
men into their councils. They are slow, but very persevering in their undertakings ; commonly temperate in 
eating, but excessively immoderate in drinking. They often transform themselves by liquor into the likeness of 
mad foaming bears. The women, in general, are of a mild, amiable, soft disposition, exceedingly modest in their 
behaviour, and very seldom noisy either in the single or married state. The men are expert in the use of fire- 
arms, in shooting the bow, and throwing the feathered dart, and tomahawk, into the flying enemy. They 
resemble the lynx, with their sharp penetrating black eyes, and are exceedingly swift of foot, especially in a long 
chase: they will stretch away, through the rough woods, by the bare track, for two or three hundred miles, in 
pursuit of a flying enemy, with the continued speed and eagerness of a stanch pack of blood-hounds, till they shed 
blood. When they have allayed this their burning thirst, they return home at their leisure, unless they chance to 
be pursued, as is sometimes the case: whence the traders say, that “an Indian is never in a hurry, but when the 
devil is at his heels.” 

It is remarkable that there are no deformed Indians: however, they are generally weaker, and smaller bodied, 
between the tropics, than in the higher latitudes, but not in an equal proportion; for though the Chikkasah and 
Choktah countries have not been long divided from each other, as appears by the similarity of their language, as well 
as other things, yet the Chikkasah are exceedingly taller and stronger bodied than the latter, though their country 
is only two degrees further north. Such a small difference of latitude, in so healthy a region, could not make so wide 
a difference in the constitution of their bodies. The former are a comely, pleasant looking people ; their faces are 
tolerably round, contrary to the visage of the others, which inclines much to flatness, as is the case of most of 
the other Indian Americans. The lips of the Indians, in general, are thin: their eyes are small, sharp and black ; 
and their hair is lank, coarse and darkish. I never saw any with curled hair, but one in the Choktah country, 
where was also another with red hair: probably they were a mixture of the French and Indians. Romancing 
travellers and their credulous copyists report them to be imberbes, and as persons impuberes, and they appear so 
to strangers. But both sexes pluck all the hair off their bodies with a kind of tweezers, made formerly of clam- 
shells, now of middle-sized wire, in the shape of a gun-worm; which being twisted round a small stick, and the 
ends fastened therein, after being properly tempered, keeps its form: holding this Indian razor between their 
fore-finger and thumb, they deplume themselves, after the manner of the Jewish novitiate priests and proselytes : 
as the former could not otherwise be purified for the function of his sacerdotal office, or the latter be admitted 
to the benefit of religious communion. 

Their chief dress is very simple, like that of the patriarchal age: of choice, many of their old head-men wear 
a long wide frock, made of the skins of wild beasts, in honour of that ancient custom. It must be necessity that 
forces them to the pinching sandals for their feet. They seem quite easy and indifferent in every various scene 
of life, as if they were utterly divested of passions and the sense of feeling. Martial virtue, and not riches, is their 
invariable standard for preferment; for they neither esteem nor despise any of their people one jot more or less 
on account of riches or dress. They compare both these to paint on a warrior’s face ; because it incites others to 
a spirit of martial benevolence for their country, and pleases his own fancy and the eyes of spectators for a little 
time, but is sweated off while he is performing his war-dances, or is defaced by the change of weather. They 
formerly wore shirts made of drest deer-skins, for their summer visiting dress; but their winter hunting clothes 
were long and shaggy, made of the skins of panthers, bucks, bears, beavers and otters; the fleshy sides outward, 
sometimes doubled, and always softened like velvet-cloth, though they retained their fur and hair. The needles 
and thread they used formerly, (and now at times,) were fish-bones, or the horns and bones of deer rubbed sharp, 
and deer’s sinews, and a sort of hemp that grows among them spontaneously in rich open lands. The women’s 

dress consists only in a broad softened skin, or several small skins sewed together, which they wrap and tie round 
4 C 

982 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

their waist, reaching a little below their knees: in cold weather, they wrap themselves in the softened skins of 
buffalo calves, with the wintery shagged wool inward, never forgetting to anoint and tie up their hair, except in 
their time of mourning. The men wear for ornament, and the conveniences of hunting, thin deer-skin boots, 
well smoked, that reach so high up their thighs, as with their jackets to secure them from the brambles and braky 
thickets. They sew them about five inches from the edges, which are formed into tossels, to which they fasten 
fawns’ trotters, and small pieces of tinkling metal, or wild turkey-cock spurs. The beaus used to fasten the like 
to their war-pipes, with the addition of a piece of an enemy’s scalp with a tuft of long hair hanging down from the 
middle of the stem, each of them painted red: and they still observe that old custom, only they choose bell-buttons, 
to give a greater sound. 

The young Indian men and women, through a fondness of their ancient dress, wrap a piece of cloth round them, 
that has a near resemblance to the old Roman toga, or pretexta. “Lis about a fathom square, bordered seven or 
eight quarters deep, to make a shining cavalier of the beaw monde, and to keep out both the heat and cold. With 
this frantic apparel the red heroes swaddle themselves, when they are waddling, whooping, and prancing it away 
in their sweltery town-houses, or supposed synhedria, around the reputed holy fire. In a sweating condition, they 
will thus incommode themselves, frequently, for a whole night, on the same principle of pride that the’ grave 
Spaniard’s winter cloak must sweat him in summer. They have a great aversion to the wearing of breeches; for 
to that custom they affix the idea of helplessness and effeminacy. I know a German, of thirty years’ standing, 
chiefly among the Chikkasah Indians, who, because he kept up his breeches with a narrow piece of cloth that 
reached across his shoulders, is distinguished by them, as are all his countrymen, by the despicable appellative 
Kish-Kish Tarakshe, or Zted-Arse. They esteem the English much more than the Germans, because our limbs, 
they say, are less restrained by our apparel from manly exercise than theirs. The Indian women also discreetly 
observe, that, as all their men sit down to make water, the ugly breeches would exceedingly incommode them; and 
that if they were allowed to wear breeches, it would portend no good to their country: however, they add, should 
they ever be so unlucky as to have that pinching custom introduced among them, the English breeches would best 
suit their own female posture on that occasion ; but that it would be exceedingly troublesome either way. The 
men wear a slip of cloth, about a quarter of an ell wide, and an ell and a half long, in the lieu of breeches; which 
they put between their legs, and tie round their haunches with a convenient broad bandage. The women, since 
the time we first traded with them, wrap a fathom of the half-breadth of Stroud cloth round their waist, and tie it 
with a leathern belt, which is commonly covered with brass runners or buckles: but this sort of loose petticoat 
reaches only to their hams, in order to show their exquisitely fine proportioned limbs. They make their shoes 
for common use out of the skins of the bear and elk, well dressed and smoked, to prevent hardening; and those 
for ornament, out of deer-skins, done in the like manner: but they chiefly go bare-footed, and always bare-headed. 
The men fasten several different sorts of beautiful feathers, frequently in tufts, or the wing of a red bird, or the 
skin of a small hawk, to a lock of hair on the crown of their heads. And every different Indian nation, when at 
war, trim their hair after a different manner, through contempt of each other; thus we can distinguish an enemy 
in the woods so far off as we can see him. 

The Indians flatten their heads in divers forms; but it is chiefly the crown of the head they depress, in order to 
beautify themselves, as their wild fancy terms it; for they call us Long-heads, by way of contempt. The Choktah 
Indians flatten their foreheads, from the top of the head to the eyebrows, with a small bag of sand; which gives 
them a hideous appearance, as the forehead naturally shoots upward according as it is flattened: thus, the rising of 
the nose, instead of being equidistant from the beginning of the chin to that of the hair, is, by their wild mechanism, 
placed a great deal nearer to the one, and further from the other. The Indian nations round South Carolina and all 
the way to New Mexico (properly called Mechiko), to effect this, fix the tender infant on a kind of cradle, where 
his feet are tilted above a foot higher than a horizontal position, his head bends back into a hole made on purpose 
to receive it, where he bears the chief part of his weight on the crown of the head, upon a small bag of sand, 
without being in the least able to move himself. The skull, resembling a fine cartilaginous substance, in its infant 
state, is capable of taking any impression. By this pressure, and their thus flattening the crown of the head, they 
consequently make their heads thick and their faces broad; for when the smooth channel of nature is stopped in 
one place, if a destruction of the whole system doth not thereby ensue, it breaks out in a proportional redundancy 
in another. May we not to this custom, and as a necessary effect of this cause, attribute their fickle, wild and cruel 

=) “ae 2 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 285 

tempers,—especially when we connect therewith both a false education, and great exercise to agitate their animal 
spitits? When the brain, in cooler people, is disturbed, it neither reasons nor determines with proper judgement. 
The Indians thus look on everything around them through their own false medium, and vilify our heads because they 
have given a wrong turn to their own. 

Observations on the Origin and Descent of the Indians. 

THE very remote history of all nations is disfigured with fable, and gives but little encouragement to distant 
inquiry and laborious researches: Much of the early history and antiquities of nations is lost, and some ‘people 
have no records at all, and to this day are rude and uncivilized. Yet a knowledge of them is highly interesting, and 
would afford amusement and even instruction, in the most polished times, to the most polite. very science has 
certain principles as its basis, from which it reasons and concludes. Mathematical theorems and logical propositions 
give clear demonstrations and necessary conclusions; and thus other sciences. But history, and the origin of tribes 
and-nations, have hitherto been covered with a great deal of obscurity. ‘Some ancient historians were ignorant, 
others prejudiced. Some searchers into antiquities adopted the traditional tales of their predecessors ; and others, 
looking with contempt on the origin of tribes and societies, altogether exploded them without investigation. My 
design is to examine, and if possible ascertain, the genealogy and descent of the Indians, and to omit nothing that 
may in the least contribute to furnish the public with a full Indian system. In tracing the origin of a people where 
there are no records of any kind, either written or engraved, -who rely solely on oral tradition for the support of 
their ancient usages, and have lost great part of them, though the undertaking be difficult, yet where several 
particulars and circumstances, strong and clear, correspond, they not only make room for conjecture, but cherish 
probability, and, till better can be offered, must be deemed conclusive. 

All the various nations of Indians seem to be of one descent: they call a buffalo, in their various dialects, by oné 
and the same name, Yanasa. And there is a strong similarity of religious rites, and of civil and martial customs, 
among all the various American nations of Indians we have any knowledge of on the extensive continent, as will 
soon be shown. Their language is copious and very expressive, for their narrow orbit of ideas, and full of rhetorical 
tropes and figures, like the Orientalists. In early times, when languages were not so copious, rhetoric was invented 
to supply that defect; and, what barrenness then forced them to, custom now continues as an ornament. Formerly, 
at a public meeting of the head-men and chief orators of the Choktah nation, I heard one of their eloquent speakers 
deliver a very pathetic, elaborate, allegorical, tragic oration, in the high praise and for the great loss of their great 
judicious war-chieftain Shu-las-hum-mash-ta-be, our daring, brave friend Red-shoes. The orator compared him to 
the Sun, that enlightens and enlivens the whole system of created beings; and having carried the metaphor to a 
considerable length, he expatiated on the variety of evils that necessarily result from the disappearance and absence 
of the Sun; and, with a great deal of judgement and propriety of expression, he concluded his oration with the same 
trope with which he began. They often change the sense of words into a different signification from the natural, 
exactly after the manner also of the Orientalists. Even their common speech is full of it: like the Prophetic writings 
and the Book of Job, their orations are concise, strong, and full of fire; which sufficiently confutes the wild notion 
which some have espoused of the North American Indians being pre-Adamites, or a separate race of men, created 
for that continent. What stronger circumstantial proofs can be expected, than that they, being disjoined from the 
rest of the world, time immemorial, and destitute also of the use of letters, should have, and still retain, the ancient 
standard of speech, conveyed down by oral tradition from father to son to the present generation? Besides, their 
persons, customs, &c., are not singular from the rest of the world; which, probably, they would, were they not 
descended from one and the same common head. Their notions of things are like ours, and their organical structure 
is the same. In them the soul governs the body according to the common laws of God in the creation of Adam. 
God employed six days in creating the heavens, this earth, and the innumerable species of creatures wherewith it is 
so amply furnished. The works of a being infinitely perfect must entirely answer the design of them: hence there 
could be no necessity for a second creation, or God’s creating many pairs of the human race differing from each 
other and fitted for different climates, because that implies imperfection in the grand scheme, or a want of power 
in the execution of it. Had there been a prior or later formation of any new class of creatures, they must materially 

DBA ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

differ from those of the six days’ work; for it is inconsistent with Divine wisdom to make a vain or unnecessary 
repetition of the same act. But the American Indians neither vary from the rest of mankind in their internal 
construction, nor external appearance, except in colour, which, as hath been shown, is either entirely accidental or 
artificial. As the Mosaic account declares a completion of the manifestations of God’s infinite wisdom and power in 
creation within that space of time, it follows that the Indians have lineally descended from Adam, the first and the 
great parent of all the human species. Both the Chikkasah and Choktah Indians call a deceitful person Seente, 
a snake; and they frequently say they have not Seente Soolish, the snake’s tongue; the meaning of which is very 
analogous to 17, a name the Hebrews gave to a deceitful person; which probably proceeded from a traditional 
knowledge of Eve’s being beguiled by the tempter in that shape; for the Indians never affix any bad idea to the 
present reptile fraternity, except that of poisonous teeth, and they never use any such metaphor as that of a snake’s 
teeth. 

Some have supposed the Americans to be descended from the Chinese; but neither their religion, laws, customs, 
&c., agree in the least with those of the Chinese; which sufficiently proves they are not of that line. Besides, as 
our best ships now are almost half a year in sailing to China, or from thence to Europe, it is very unlikely 
they should attempt such dangerous discoveries in early time, with their (supposed) small vessels, against 
rapid currents, and in dark and sickly monsoons; especially as it is very probable they were unacquainted with the 
use of the loadstone to direct their course. China is above eight thousand miles distant from the American con- 
tinent, which is twice as far as across the Atlantic Ocean: and we are not informed by any ancient writer of their 
maritime skill, or so much as any inclination that way, besides small coasting voyages. The winds blow likewise, 
with little variation, from east to west, within the latitudes of thirty and odd north and south, and therefore they 
could not drive them on the American coast, it lying directly contrary to such a course. Neither could persons sail 
to America from the north by the way of Tartary, or ancient Scythia: that from its situation never was or can be 
a maritime power, and it is utterly impracticable for any one to come to America by sea from that quarter. Besides, 
the remaining traces of their religious ceremonies, and civil and martial customs, are quite opposite to the like 
vestiges of the old Scythians. Nor even in the moderate northern climates is to be seen the least vestige of any 
ancient stately buildings, or of any thick settlements, as are said to remain in the less healthy regions of Peru and 
Mexico. Several of the Indian nations assure us they crossed the Mississippi before they made their present 
northern settlements ; which, connected with the former arguments, will sufficiently explode that weak opinion, of 
the American aborigines being lineally descended from the Tartars, or ancient Scythians. 

It is a very difficult thing to divest ourselves, not to say other persons, of prejudices and favourite opinions; and I 
expect to be censured by some for opposing commonly received sentiments, or for meddling with a dispute agitated 
among the learned ever since the first discovery of America. But truth is my object: and I hope to offer some 
things which, if they do not fully solve the problem, may lead the way, and enable others, possessing stronger 
judgement, more learning, and more leisure, to accomplish it. As I before suggested, where we have not the light 
of history or records to guide us through the dark maze of antiquity, we must endeavour to find it out by probable 
arguments; and in such subjects of inquiry, where no material objections can be raised against probability, it is 
strongly conclusive of the truth, and nearly gives the thing sought for. From the most exact observations I could 
make, in the long time I traded among the Indian Americans, I was forced to believe them lineally descended from 
the Israelites, either while they were a maritime power, or soon after the general captivity: the latter however is the 
most probable. This descent I shall endeavour to prove from their religious rites, civil and martial customs, their 
marriages, funeral ceremonies, manners, language, traditions, and a variety of particulars, which will at the same 
time make the reader thoroughly acquainted with nations of which it may be said to this day very little has been 
known. 

Observations and Arguments, in proof of the American Indians being descended from the Jews. 

A number of particulars present themselves in favour of a Jewish descent. But to form a true judgement, and draw 
a solid conclusion, the following arguments must not be partially separated. Let them be distinctly considered; then 
unite them together, and view their force collectively. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 285 

ARGUMENT I. 

As the Israelites were divided into tribes, and had chiefs over them, so the Indians divide themselves: each tribe 
forms a little community within the nation ; and as the nation hath its particular symbol, so hath each tribe the badge 
from which it is denominated. The Sachem of each tribe is a necessary party in conveyances and treaties, to which 
he affixes the mark of his tribe, as a corporation with us doth their public seal*. If we go from nation to nation 
among them, we shall not find one who doth not lineally distinguish himself by his respective family. The 
genealogical names which they assume are derived, either from the names of those animals whereof the cherubim 
are said in Revelation to be compounded, or from such creatures as are most familiar to them. They have the 
families of the Eagle, Panther, Tiger and Buffalo; the family of the Bear, Deer, Racoon, Tortoise, Snake, Fish, 
and likewise of the Wind. The last, if not derived from the appearance of the Divine glory, as expressed by the 
prophet Ezekiel, may be of Tyrian extraction. We are told in the fragment of Sanchoniathon, that the Tyrians 
worshiped fire and the aérial wind as gods ; and that Usous, the son of Hypsouranias, built a sacred pillar to each 
of them: so that, if it is not of Israelitish extraction, it may be derived from the Tyrians, their neighbours, as may 
likewise the appellative name of Fish; especially as the Indians sometimes invoke the eagle and the fish when 
they are curing their sick. The Tyrians were the people, in early times, who above all others enriched themselves 
in the natural element of the fish. The Indians, however, bear no religious respect to the animals from which they 
derive the names of their tribes, but will kill any of the species when opportunity serves. The wolf, indeed, several 
of them do not care to meddle with, believing it unlucky to kill them; which is the sole reason that few of the 
Indians shoot at that creature, through a notion of spoiling their guns. Considering the proximity of Tyre to 
Egypt, probably this might be a custom of Egyptian extraction; though, at the same time, they are so far from 
esteeming it a deity, they reckon it the most abominable quadruped of the whole creation. There is no tribe or 
individual among them, however, called by the name Opossum +, which is with the Cheerake styled seequa, and 
with the Chikkasah and Choktah Indians shookka, synonymous with that of a hog. This may be more material 
than at first appears, as our natural histories tell us that the opossum is common in other parts of the world. 
Several of the old Indians assure us they formerly reckoned it as filthy uneatable an animal as a hog; although 
they confess, and we know by long observation, that from the time our traders settled among them they are every 
year more corrupt in their morals, not only in this instance of eating an impure animal, but in many other religious 
customs of their forefathers. 

When we consider the various revolutions these unlettered savages are likely to have undergone among them- 
selves, through a long-forgotten measure of time, and that probably they have been above twenty centuries without 
the use of letters to convey down their traditions, it cannot be reasonably expected they should still retain the iden- 
tical names of their primogenial tribes. Their main customs corresponding with those of the Israelites, sufficiently 
clears the subject: besides, as hath been hinted, they call some of their tribes by the names of the cherubimical 
figures that were carried on the four principal standards of Israel. 

I have observed with much inward satisfaction the community of goods that prevailed among them, after the 
patriarchal manner, and that of the primitive Christians, especially with those of their own tribe. Though they 
are become exceedingly corrupt in most of their ancient commendable qualities, yet they are so hospitable, kind- 
hearted and free, that they would share with those of their own tribe the last part of their provisions, even to a 
single ear of corn; and to others if they called when they were eating, for they have no stated meal-time. An 
open generous temper is a standing virtue among them: to be narrow-hearted, especially to those in want, or to 
any of their own family, is accounted a great crime, and to reflect scandal on the rest of the tribe. Such wretched 
misers they brand with bad characters, and wish them the fate of Prometheus, to have an eagle or vulture fastened 

* Many of the ancient heathens followed the Jewish custom of dividing themselves into tribes or families. The city of Athens was eed into 
ten parts, or tribes, and which the Greeks called Phule, a tribe. They named each of the heads that presided over them, Archegos, ECM MUeeE, 
&c. And writers inform us, that the East-Indian pagans have to this day tribes or casts; and that each cast chooses a head, © maintain its 
privileges, to promote a strict observance of their laws, and to take care that everything be managed with proper order. The ancient heathens 
mimicked a great deal of the J ewish ceremonial law. 

+ A creature that hath a head like a hog, and a tail like a rat. 

4D 

286 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

to their liver; or of Tantalus, starving in the midst of plenty, without being able to use it. The Cheerake Indians 
have a pointed proverbial expression to the same effect,—Stmnawah na wora, “The great hawk is at home.” 
However, it is a very rare thing to find any of them of a narrow temper; and though they do not keep one pro- 
miscuous common stock, yet it is to the very same effect, for every one has his own family or tribe; and when 
one of them is speaking either of the individuals or habitations of any of his tribe, he says, “ He is of my house,” 
or “It is my house.” Thus, when King David prayed that the Divine wrath might only fall on his house, he might 
mean the tribe of Judah, as well as his own particular family, exclusive of the aggregate body of Israel. 

When the Indians are travelling in their own country, they inquire for a house of their own tribe; and if there 
be any, they go to it, and are kindly received, though they never saw the persons before: they eat, drink and regale 
themselves with as much freedom as at their own tables, which is the solid ground covered with a bear-skin. It 
is their usual custom to carry nothing along with them in their journeys but a looking-glass and red paint hung to 
their back, their gun and shot pouch, or bow and quiver full of barbed arrows, and frequently. both gun and bow; 
for as they are generally in a state of war against each other, they are obliged, as soon as able, to carry those arms 
of defence. Every town has a state-house, or synedrion, as the Jewish sanhedrim, where almost every night the 
head men convene about public business, or the town’s-people to feast, sing, dance and rejoice in the Divine 
presence, as will fully be described hereafter. And if a stranger calls there, he is treated with the greatest civility 
and hearty kindness; he is sure to find plenty of their simple home fare, and a large cane-bed, covered with the 
softened skins of bears or buffalos, to sleep on. But when his lineage is known to the people, (by a stated custom 
they are slow in greeting one another,) his relation, if he has any there, addresses him in a familiar way, invites him 
home, and treats him as his kinsman. 

When a warrior dies a natural death, (which seldom happens,) the war-drums, musical instruments, and all other 
kinds of diversion are laid aside for the space of three days and nights. In this time of mourning for the dead, I 
have known some of the frolicsome young sparks to ask the name of the deceased person’s tribe; and once, being 
told it was a Racoon, (the genealogical name of the family,) one of them scoffingly replied, “Then let us away to 
another town, and cheer ourselves with those who have no reason to weep; for why should we make our hearts 
weigh heavy for an ugly dead racoon?” But notwithstanding they are commonly negligent of any other tribe bu 
their own, they regard their own particular lineal descent in as strict a manner as did the Hebrew nation. 

ARGUMENT II. 

By a strict, permanent, Divine precept, the Hebrew nation were ordered to worship at Jerusalem Jehovah, the true 
and living God, and who by the Indians is styled Yohewah, which the seventy-two interpreters, either from igno- 
rance or superstition, have translated 4donaz, and is the very same as the Greek Kurios, signifying Sir, Lord, or 
Master, which is commonly applied to earthly potentates, without the least signification of, or relation to, that most 
great and awful name which describes the Divine essence, who naturally and necessarily exists of himself, without 
beginning or end. The ancient heathens, it is well known, worshiped a plurality of gods,—gods which they formed 
to themselves, according to their own liking, as various as the countries they inhabited, and as numerous with some 
as the days of the year. But these Indian Americans pay their religious devoir to Loak-Ishtohoollo-Aba, ‘the great, 
beneficent, supreme, holy spirit of fire, who resides (as they think) above the clouds, and on earth also with 
unpolluted people. He is with them the sole author of warmth, light, and of all animal and vegetable life. T hey 
do not pay the least perceivable adoration to any images, or to dead persons; neither to the celestial luminaries, nor 
evil spirits, nor any created being whatsoever. They are utter strangers to all the gestures practised by the pagans 
in their religious rites. ‘They kiss no idols; nor, if they were placed out of their reach, would they kiss their hands, 
in token of reverence and a willing obedience. 

The ceremonies of the Indians in their religious worship are more after the Mosaic institution than of Pagan 
imitation, which could not be if the majority of the old natives were of heathenish descent; for all bigots and 
enthusiasts will fight to death for the very shadow of their superstitious worship, when they have even lost all the 
substance. ‘There yet remain so many marks, as to enable us to trace the Hebrew extraction and rites through all the 
various nations of Indians; and we may with a great deal of probability conclude, that if any heathens accompanied 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 287 

them to the American world, or were settled in it before them, they became proselytes of justice, and their pagan 
rites and customs were swallowed up in the Jewish. To illustrate the general subject, I shall give the Indian opinion 
of some of the heathen gods, contrasted with that of the Pagan. 

The American Indians do not believe the Sun to be any bigger than it appears to the naked eye. Conversing 
with the Chikkasah archi-magus, or high-priest, about that luminary, he told me, “it might possibly be as broad 
and round as his winter-house, but he thought it could not well exceed it.” We cannot be surprised at the stu- 
pidity of the Americans in this respect, when we consider the gross ignorance which now prevails among the general 
part of the Jews, not only of the whole system of nature, but of the essential meaning of their own religious cere- 
monies, received from the Divine Majesty; and also when we reflect, that the very learned and most polite of 
the ancient Romans believed (not by any new-invented mythology of their own) that the Sun was drawn round the 
Earth in a chariot. Their philosophic system was not very dissimilar to that of the wild Americans; for Cicero 
tells us Epicurus thought the Sun to be less than it appeared to the eye; and Lucretius says “tantillus ille sol,” ‘a 
diminutive thing.’ And if the Israelites had not at one time thought the Sun a portable god, they would not have 
thought of a chariot for it. This they derived from the neighbouring heathen; for we are told that they had an 
house of the Sun, where they danced in honour of him, in circuits, and had consecrated spherical figures ; and that 
they likewise built a temple to it; for “they purified and sanctified themselves in the gardens behind the house, 
or temple of Achad.” In Isai. xvii. 8, we find they had sun-images, which the Hebrews called chummanim, made to 
represent the Sun, or for the honour and worship of it; and the Egyptians met yearly to worship in the temple of 
Beth-Shemesh, a house dedicated to the Sun. Most part of the old heathens adored all the celestial orbs, especially 
the Sun; probably they first imagined its enlivening rays immediately issued from the holy fire, light and spirit, 
who either resided in, or was the identical Sun. That idolatrous ceremony of the Jews Josiah utterly abolished about 
640 years before our Christian era: the Sacred Text says, “He took away the horses which the kings of Judah 
had given to the Sun, and he burned the chariots of the Sun with fire.” At Rhodes, a neighbouring island to Judea, 
they consecrated chariots to the Sun, on account of his glorious splendour and benign qualities. Macrobius tells 
us that the Assyrians worshiped Adad, or Achad, an idol of the Sun; and Strabo acquaints us, the Arabians paid 
divine homage to the Sun, &c. But the Indian Americans pay only a civil regard to the Sun; and the more 
intelligent sort of them believe, that all the luminaries of the heavens are moved by the strong fixed laws of the 
great Author of nature. 

In 2 Kings xvii. 30, we read that the men of Babylon built Succoth-benoth, ‘tents for young women:’ having 
consecrated a temple to Venus, they fixed tents round it, where young women prostituted themselves in honour 
of the goddess. Herodotus and other authors are also sufficient witnesses on this point. Now were the Ame- 
ricans originally heathens, or not of Israel, when they wandered there from captivity in quest of liberty, or on 
any other accidental account, that vicious precedent was so well calculated for America, where every place was a 
thick arbour, it is very improbable they should have discontinued it. But they are the very reverse: to commit 
such acts of pollution while they are performing any of their religious ceremonies, is deemed so provoking an 
impiety, as to occasion even the supposed sinner to be excluded from all religious communion with the rest of the 
people: or even was a man known to have gone in to his own wife during the time of their fastings, purifications, 
&c., he would also be separated from them. There is this wide difference between the impure and obscene religious 
ceremonies of the ancient heathens, and the yet penal and strict purity of the natives of America. 

The heathens chose such gods as were most suitable to their inclinations, and the situation of their country. 
The warlike Greeks and Romans worshiped Mars, the god of war; and the savage and more bloody Scythians 
deified the Sword. The neighbouring heathens round Judea each built a temple to the supposed god that presided 
over their land. Rimmon was the Syrian god of pomegranates ; and the Philistines likewise erected a temple 
to Dagon, who had first taught them the use of wheat, which the Greeks and Romans changed into Ceres, the 
goddess of corn, from the Hebrew Geres, which signifies grain. But the Red Americans firmly believe that their 
war-captains and their reputed prophets gain success over their enemies, and bring on seasonable rains, by the 
immediate reflection of the divine fire co-operating with them. We are informed by Cicero that the maritime 
Sidonians adored fishes, and by the fragment of Sanchoniathon that the Tyrians worshiped the element of fire 
and the aérial wind as gods, probably having forgotten that the first and last names of the three celestial cherubic 

emblems only typified the Deity. Ancient history informs us that Zoroaster, who lived A.M. 3480, made light 

288 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

the emblem of good, and darkness the symbol of evil: he taught an abhorrence of images, and instructed his pupils 
to worship God under the figurative likeness of Fire; but he asserted two contrary original principles, the one of 
good and the other of evil: he allowed no temples, but enjoined sacrificing in the open air, and on the top of an 
hill. The ancient Persians kept up their reputed holy fire, without suffering it to be extinguished which their 
pretended successors observe with the strictest devotion, and affirm it has been burning without the least 
intermission several thousand years. But the Indian Americans are so far from the idolatry of the Sidonians, that 
they esteem fish only as they are useful to the support of human life; though one of their tribes is called the Fish. 
They are so far from paying any religious worship to the aérial wind, like the Tyrians, that they often call the 
bleak north wind, explicatively, very evil, and accursed; which they probably would not say if they derived the 
great esteem they now have for the divine fire from the aforesaid idolatrous nations: neither would they wilfully 
extinguish their old fire before the annual sacrifice is offered up, if, like the former heathens, they paid religious 
worship to the elementary fire; for no society of people would kill their own gods, unless the Papists, who go 
further, even to eat him. The Indians esteem the old year’s fire as a most dangerous pollution, regarding only the 
supposed holy fire, which the archi-magus annually renews for the people. They pay no religious worship to 
stocks or stones, after the manner of the old eastern pagans; neither do they worship any kind of images 
whatsoever: and it deserves our notice ina very particular manner, to invalidate the idle dreams of the jesuitical 
fry of South-America, that none of all the various nations from Hudson’s Bay to the Mississippi has ever been 
known by our trading people to attempt to make any image of the great Divine Being whom they worship. 
This is consonant to the Jewish observance of the second commandment, and directly contrary to the usage of all 
the ancient heathen world, who made corporeal representations of their deities ; and their conduct is a reproach to 
many reputed Christian temples, which are littered round with a crowd of ridiculous figures to represent God, 
spurious angels, pretended saints, and notable villains. 

The sacred penmen and prophane writers assure us that the ancient heathens had lascivious gods, particularly 
nya, 2 Chron. xv. 16. which was the abominable Priapus: but I never heard that any of our North-American 
Indians had images of any kind. There is a carved human statue of wood, to which however they pay no religious 
homage: it belongs to the head war-town of the upper Muskohge country, and seems to have been originally 
designed to perpetuate the memory of some distinguished hero who deserved well of his country; for when their 
cusseena, or bitter black drink, is about to be drunk in the synedrion, they frequently on common occasions will 
bring it there, and honour it with the first conch-shell-full, by the hand of the chief religious attendant; and then 
they return it to its former place. It is observable, that the same beloved waiter, or holy attendant, and his 
co-adjutant, equally observe the same ceremony to every person of reputed merit, in that quadrangular place. 
When I past that way, circumstances did not allow me to view this singular figure ; but I am assured by several of 
the traders, who have frequently seen it, that the carving is modest and very neatly finished, not unworthy of a 
modern civilized artist. As no body of people we are acquainted with have in general so great a share of strong 
natural parts as those savages, we may with a great deal of probability suppose, that their tradition of the second 
commandment prevented them from having one, not to say the same plentiful variety of images or idols as have 
the Popish countries. Notwithstanding they are all degenerating apace, on account of their great intercourse with 
foreigners, and other concurring causes, I well remember that, in the year 1746, one of the upper towns of the 
aforesaid Muskohge was so exceedingly exasperated against some of our Chikkasah traders, for having when in 
their cups forcibly viewed the nakedness of one of their women, (who was reputed to be an hermaphrodite,) that 
they were on the point of putting them to death, according to one of their old laws against crimes of that kind: 
but several of us, assisted by some of the Koosah town, rescued them from their just demerit. Connecting 
together these particulars, we can scarcely desire a stronger proof that they have not been idolaters since they 
first came to America, much less that they erected and worshiped any such lascivious and obscene idols as the 
heathens above recited. 

The Sidonians and Philistines worshiped Ashtaroth in the figure of the celestial luminaries, or according to 
others in the form of a sheep: but the Americans pay the former only a civil regard, because of the beneficial 
influence with which the deity hath impressed them; and they reckon sheep as despicable and helpless, and apply 
the name to persons in that predicament, although a ram was the animal emblem of power with the ancient 
eastern heathens. The Indians sometimes call a nasty fellow Chookphe kussooma, ‘a stinking sheep, and ‘a goat’ ; 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. IBY 

and yet a goat was one of the Egyptian deities, as likewise were all the creatures that bore wool; on which 
account the sacred writers frequently term idols ‘the hairy’. The despicable idea which the Indians affix to the 
species, shows they neither use it as a divine symbol, nor have a desire of being named Dorcas, which with the 
Hebrews is a proper name expressive of a wild she-goat. I shall subjoin here, with regard to Ashtaroth or 
Astarte, that though the ancients believed their deities to be immortal, yet they made to themselves both male and 
female gods, and by that means Astarte and others are of the feminine gender. ‘Trismegistus too, and the 
Platonics, affirmed there was deus masculo-feemneus, though different sexes were needful for the procreation of 
human beings. 

Instead of consulting such as the heathen oracles, or the Teraphim, the Dii Penates, or Dii Lares of the ancients, 
concerning future contingencies, the Indians only pretend to divine from their dreams; which may proceed from 
the tradition they still retain, of the knowledge their ancestors obtained from heaven in visions of the night: 
Job xxxiii. “God speaketh once, yea twice, yet man perceiveth it not. In a dream, in a vision of the night, 
when deep sleep falleth upon men, in slumberings upon the bed, then he openeth the ears of men, and sealeth 
their instruction.” When we consider how well stocked with gods all the neighbouring nations of Judea were ; 
especially the maritime powers, such as Tyre and Sidon, Carthage and Egypt, which continually brought home 
foreign gods, and entered them into their own Palladia; and that these Americans are utterly ignorant both of the 
gods and their worship, it proves with sufficient evidence that the gentlemen who trace them from either of those 
states only perplex theniselves in wild theory, without entering into the merits of the question. 

As the Bull was the first terrestrial cherubic emblem, denoting fire, the ancient Egyptians, in length of time, 
worshiped Apis, Serapis, or Osiris, under the form of an ox; but when he grew old they drowned him, and 
lamented his death in a mourning habit; which occasioned a philosopher thus to jest them, S¢ di sunt, cur 
plangitis ? Si mortui, cur adoratis? “If they be gods, why do you weep for them? and if they are dead, why 
do you worship them?” A bull, ox, cow, or calf, was the favourite deity of the ancient idolaters. Even when 
Yohewah was conducting Israel in the wilderness, Aaron was forced to allow them a golden calf, according to the 
usage of the Egyptians; and at the defection of the ten tribes, they worshiped before the emblematical images of 
two calves, through the policy of Jeroboam. The Troglodites used to strangle their aged with a cow’s tail; and 
some of the East Indians are said to fancy they shall be happy, by holding a cow’s tail in their hand when dying: 
others imagine the Ganges to wash away all their crimes and pollution. The Indian Americans, on the contrary, 
though they derive the name of cattle from part of the divine essential name, (as shall be elsewhere observed,) and 
use the name of a buffalo as a war appellative, and the name of a tribe, yet their regard to them centres only in 
their usefulness for the support of human life; and they believe they can perform their religious ablutions and 
purifications in any deep clean water. 

The superstitious heathens, whom the Hebrews called Yedonim, pretended that the bones of those they worshiped 
as gods when alive, revealed both present and future things, that were otherwise concealed; and the hieroglyphics, 
the priestly legible images, which the Egyptians inscribed on the tombs of the deceased, to praise their living virtue, 
and incite youth to imitate them, proved a great means of inducing them, in process of time, to worship their dead. 
But the Americans praise only the virtues of their dead, as fit copies of imitation for the living. They firmly believe 
that the hand of God cuts off the days of their dead friend, by his predetermined purpose. They are so far from 
deifying fellow-creatures, that they prefer none of their own people, only according to the general standard of 
reputed merit. The Chinese, likewise, though they call God by the appellative Cham Ti, and have their temples of a 
quadrangular form, yet they are gross idolaters: like the ancient Egyptians, instead of offering up religious obla- 
tions to the great Creator and Preserver of the universe, they pay them to the pictures of their deceased ancestors, 
and erect temples to them in solitary places without their cities,—likewise to the sun, moon, planets, spirits, and 
inventors of arts, especially to the great Confucius, notwithstanding he strictly prohibited the like idolatrous rites. 
And the religious modes of the ancient inhabitants of Niphon, or the Japanese, are nearly the same, which are 
diametrically opposite to the religious tenets of the wild Americans. 

The diviners among the Philistines pretended to foretell things by the flying, chirping and feeding of wild fowls. 
The Greeks and Romans called fowls wnciz deorum. And Calchas is said to have foretold to Agamemnon, by 
the number of sparrows which flew before him, how many years the Trojan war should last. The Assyrians wor- 

shiped pigeons, and bore the figure of them on their standards, as the sacred oracles show us, where the anger 
4E 

290 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

of the pigeon, and the sword of the pigeon, points at the destroying sword of the Assyrians. But though the 
American woods swarm with a surprising variety of beautiful wild fowl, yet the natives do not make the least pre- 
tension to auguries. ‘They know it is by a certain gift or instinct, inferior to human reason, that the birds have 
a sufficient knowledge of the seasons of the year. I once imdeed observed them to be intimidated at the voice 
of a small uncommon bird, when it pitched and chirped on a tree over their war-camp. But that is the. only trace 
of such superstition, as I can recollect, among them. Instead of calling birds the messengers of the gods, they call 
the great eagle Oodle, which seems to be an imitation of Eloha. This may be accounted for from the eagle being 
one of the cherubic emblems, denoting the air or spirit. They esteem pigeons only as they are salutary food, and 
they kill the turtle-dove, though they apply it as a proper name to their female children. ; 

The Babylonians were much addicted to auguries ; and they believed them to be unerring oracles, and able to 
direct them in doubtful and arduous things. Ezek. xxi. 21. Those auguries always directed their conduct in every 
material thing they undertook; such as the beginning and carrying on war, going a journey, marriage, and the like. 

But, as we shall soon see, the Americans, when they go to war, prepare and sanctify themselves only by fasting and 

ablutions, that they may not defile their supposed holy ark, and thereby incur the resentment of the Deity: and 
many of them firmly believe that marriages are made above. If the Indian Americans were descended from any 0. 
the states or people above mentioned, they could not well have forgotten, much less could they have so essentially 
departed from, their idolatrous worship. It is hence probable they came here soon after the Captivity, when the 
religion of the Hebrew nation, respecting the worship of Deity, was in its purity. And if any of the ancient 
heathens came with them, they became proselytes of habitation or justice: hereby their heathenish rites and 
ceremonies were, in process of time, entirely absorbed in the religious ceremonies of the Jews. Had the nine tribes 
and half of Israel which were carried off by Shalmaneser king of Assyria, and settled in Media, continued there 
long, it is very probable that, by intermarrying with the natives, and from their natural fickleness and proneness 
to idolatry, and the force of example, they would have adopted and bowed before the gods of the Medes and the 
Assyrians, and carried them along with them. But there is not a trace of this idolatry among the Indians. The 
severe afflictions they underwent in captivity doubtless humbled their hearts, and reclaimed them from the service 
of the calves and of Baalam to the true Divine worship, a glimpse of which they still retain. And that the first 
settlers came to America before the destruction of the first temple, may be inferred ; as it is certain, both from Philo 
and Josephus, that the second temple had no cherubim. To reflect yet greater light on the subject, I shall here add 
a few observations on the Indians’ supposed religious cherubic emblems, the cherubimical names of their tribes, and 
from whence they and the early heathens may be supposed to have derived them. 

When the goodness of Deity induced him to promise a saviour to fallen man in paradise, he stationed flaming 
cherubim in the garden. The type I shall leave: but when mankind became entirely corrupt, God renewed his 
promise to the Israelites; and to convey to posterity the true Divine worship, ordered them to fix in the tabernacle, 
and in Solomon’s temple, cherubim over the mercy-seat: the very curtains which lined the walls, and the veil of 
the temple, likewise, were to have those figures. The cherubim are said to represent the names and offices of 
Fohewah Elohim in redeeming lost mankind. The word m173 is drawn from 5, a note of resemblance, and 37, 
a great or mighty one, z. ¢. the ‘similitude of the great and mighty One, whose emblems were the bull, the lion, 
the man, and the eagle. The prophet Ezekiel has given us two draughts of the cherubim (certainly not without an 
instructive design,) in his two visions, described in the first and tenth chapters. In chap. x. ver. 20, he assures us 
that “he knew they were the cherubim.” They were uniform, and had those four compounded animal emblems ; 
“Every one had four faces”—t»29, appearances, habits or forms ; which passage is illustrated by the similar divine 
emblems on the four principal standards of Israel. The standard of Judah bore the image of a lion; Ephraim’s 
had the likeness of a du//; Reuben’s had the figure of a man’s head; and Dan’s carried the picture of an eagle, 
with a serpent in his talons *. Each of the cherubim, according to the prophet, had the head and face of a man ; 
the likeness of an eagle about the shoulders, with expanded wings; their necks, manes and breasts resembled those 
of a lion, and their feet those of a bull or calf: “The sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf’s foot.’ One 
would conclude, from Ezekiel’s visions, and Psal. xviii. 10. xcix. 1.—“ He rode upon a cherub, and did fly:” 
“The Lord reigneth, let the people tremble: he sitteth between the cherubim, let the earth be moved,”—that 

* The Man, which the lion on the standard of Judah, and the head on Reuben’s, typified, was in the fullness of time united to the Divine essence. . 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 291 

Elohim chose the cherubic emblems in condescension to man, to display his transcendent glorious title of King of 
kings. We view him seated in his triumphal chariot, and as in the midst of a formidable war camp, drawn by those 
four creatures, the bull, the lion, the man and the eagle; strong and descriptive emblems of the divine essence. 
What animal is equal to the bull or ox for strength, indefatigable service, and also for food? in Eastern countries 
they were always used to plough and beat out the grain, besides other services omitted in modern times: the lion 
excels every other animal in courage, force and prowess: man far surpasses all other creatures in understanding, 
judgement and wisdom and’there is no bird so sagacious, or can fly so swift or soar so high, as the eagle, or that 
bears so intense a love to its young ones. These are the emblems of the terrestrial cherubim: and the Psalmist calls 
them Merabha Hashekina, ‘the Chariot of Divine Majesty’: “God sitteth between, and rideth upon, the cherubim” 
or divine chariot. —The celestial cherubim were fire, light, and air or spirit, which were typified by the bull, the lion, 
and the eagle. Those divinetemblems, in a long revolution of time, induced the ancients by degrees to divide them, 
and make images of the divine persons, powers and actions which they typified, and to esteem them gods. They 
consecrated the bull’s head to the fire, the lion’s to light, and the eagle’s to the air, which they worshiped as gods. 
And in proportion as they lost the knowledge of the emblems, they multiplied and compounded their heads with 
those of different creatures. The Egyptians commonly put the head of a lion, hawk, or eagle, and sometimes that 
of a ram or bull, to their images, some of which resembled the human body. Their Apis, or Osiris, gave rise to 
Aaron’s and apostate Israel’s golden calf, and their Sphynx had three heads. Diana of Ephesus was triformis ; 
Janus of Rome biformis, and sometimes quadriformis; and Jupiter, Sol, Mercury, Proserpine and Cerberus were 
triple-headed. 

Hesiod tells us the ancient heathens had no less than thirty thousand gods. It is well known that the ancient 
heathens, especially the Greeks ‘and Romans, abounded with male and female deities, and commonly in human 
effigy. As they imagined they could not safely trust themselves to the care of any one god, they therefore chose a 
multiplicity : they multiplied and changed them from childhood to old-age. ‘The Romans proceeded so far as to 
make Cloacina the guardian goddess of each house-of-office. The heathens in general appointed one god to preside 
over the land, and another over the water; one for the mountains, and another for the valleys. And they were so 
diffident of the power of their gods, that they chose a god or goddess for each part of the body; contrary to the 
religious system of their best poets and philosophers, and that of the present savage Americans: the former 
affirmed, Sapiens dominabitur astris, &c.; “A wise good man will always be ruled by divine reason, and not pretend 
to be drawn to this or that by an overbearing power of the stars or fortune ;’ and the latter assert, that temporal 
good or evil is the necessary effect of their own conduct, and that the Deity presides over life and death. 

If the first institution of the cherubic emblems was not religious, nor derived from the compounded figures of the 
Scripture cherubim, how is it that so many various nations of antiquity, and far remote from each other, should 
have chosen them as gods, and so exactly alike? Is it not most reasonable to suppose, that as they lost the meaning 
of those symbolical figures, and their archetypes, fire, light, and air, or spirit, which represented the attributes, 
names, and offices of Yohewah Elohim, they divided them into so many various gods, and paid them divine worship ? 
Yet, though the Indian Americans have the supposed cherubimical figures in their synhedria, and through a strong 
religious principle dance there, perhaps every winter’s night, always in a bowing posture, and frequently sing Halelu- 
Yah Yo He Wah, 1 could never perceive, nor be informed, that they substituted them, or the similitude of anything 
whatsoever, as objects of divine adoration, in the room of the great invisible divine essence. They use the feathers 
of the eagle’s tail in certain friendly and religious dances; but the whole town will contribute, to the value of two 
hundred deer-skins, for killing a large eagle; (the bald eagle they do not esteem;) and the man also gets an 
honourable title for the exploit, as if he had brought in the scalp of an enemy. Now, if they reckoned the eagle a 
god, they would not only refuse personal profits and honours to him who killed it, but assuredly inflict on him the 
severest punishment for committing so atrocious and sacrilegious an act.—I have seen in several of the Indian 
synhedria two white painted eagles, carved out of poplar wood, with their wings stretched out, and raised five feet 
off the ground, standing at the corner, close to their red and white imperial seats: and on the inner side of each of 
the deep-notched pieces of wood, where the eagles stand, the Indians frequently paint with a chalky clay the figure 
of a man with buffalo horns, and that of a panther with the same colour; from which I conjecture, especially 
connected with their other rites and customs, soon to be mentioned, that the former emblem was designed to 
describe the divine attributes, as that bird excels the rest of the feathered kind in various superior qualities; and 

292 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

that the latter symbol is a contraction of the cherubimical figures, the man, the bull, and the lion. And this opinion 
is corroborated by an established custom, both religious and martial, among them, which obliges them to paint 
those sacred emblems anew at the first fruit-offering, or the annual expiation of sins. Every one of their war- 
leaders must also make three successful wolfish campaigns, with their reputed holy ark, before he is admitted to 
wear a pair of a young buffalo-bull’s horns on his forehead, or to sing the triumphal war-song, and to dance with 
the same animal’s tail sticking up behind him, while he sings Yo Yo, &e. Now we know it was a usual custom 
with the Eastern nations to affix horns to their gods. The Sidonian goddess Ashtaroth was horned; and Hero- 
dotus says the Egyptians painted their Venus, or Isis, after the same manner: and the Greek Jo (which probably 
was Yo) had horns, in allusion to the bull’s head, the chief emblem of the celestial cherubic fire, representing 
Yo (He Wah,) as its name plainly indicates. A horn was likewise a Persian emblem of power*. 

That the Indians derived those symbolical representations from the compounded figures of the cherubim, seems 
yet more clear from the present cherubic names of their tribes, and the preeminence they formerly bore over the 
rest. At present, indeed, the most numerous tribe commonly bears the highest command; yet their old warriors 
assure us it was not so even within their own remembrance. The title of ‘the old beloved men’, or ‘archi-magi’, 
is still hereditary in the panther or tiger family: as North America breeds no lions, the panther, of any animal it 
contains, is the nearest emblem of it. The Indian name of each cherub, both terrestrial and celestial, reflects great 
light on the present subject; for they call the buffalo (bull) Yanasa; the panther, or supposed lion, Koe-Ishto, or 
Koe-O, ‘the cat of God’; the man, or human creature, Ya-we; and the eagle, Oodle: fire is Loak; the solar light, 
Ashtahale; and air, Mahdle, in allusion to %, water, and 5x, the omnipotent: the note of aspiration is inserted, 
to give the word a fuller and more vehement sound. Their eagle and buffalo tribes resemble two other cherubic 
names or emblems: they have one they call Sphane, the meaning of which they have lost; perhaps it might have 
signified the man.— Near to the red and white imperial seats they have the representation of a full moon, and 
either a half-moon, or a breast-plate raised five or six feet high, at the front of the broad seats, and painted with 
chalky clay: sometimes black paintings are intermixed. But let it be noticed, that in the time of their most religi- 
ous exercises, or their other friendly rejoicings there, they do not pay the least adoration to any of those expressive 
emblems, nor seem to take any notice of them; which is the very reverse to the usage of all the ancient heathen 
world. Hence one would conclude, that they not only brought with them the letter, but the meaning of those 
reputed cherubimical figures which were designed to represent the inseparable attributes of Yohewah. 

It is universally agreed by the Christian world, that every religious observance of the ancient heathens which the 
Mosaic law approved of, was at first derived from divine appointment ; and as we are assured in the first pages of 
the sacred oracles, concerning Cain, (Gen. iv. 16.) that “he went out from the presence of the Lord,” we learn that 
God, in that early state of the world, chose a place for his more immediate presence,—D25, his faces, appearances 
or forms residing in or between the cherubim. We may therefore reasonably conclude, from the various gods and 
religious worship of the ancient heathens, and from the remaining divine emblems and family names of the Indian 
Americans, that the former deduced those emblems they deified from the compounded cherubim in paradise ; and 
that the Indians derived their cherubic figures and names of tribes from the cherubim that covered the mercy-seat in 
the tabernacle, and in Solomon’s temple, alluded to and delineated in several parts of the sacred oracles. 

ARGUMENT IU. 

Agreeable to the theocracy or divine government of Israel, the Indians think the Deity to be the immediate 
head of their state. All the nations of Indians are exceedingly intoxicated with religious pride, and have an inex- 
pressible contempt of the white people, unless we except those half-savage Europeans who are become their proselytes. 
‘Nothings’ is the most favourable name they give us, in their set speeches: even the Indians whe were formerly 
bred in amity with us, and in enmity to the French, used to call us in their war orations hottuk ookproose, ‘the 
accursed people.’ But they flatter themselves with the name hottik oretoopah, ‘the beloved people, because their 

* The metaphorical expressions and emblematical representations of the Law and the Prophets are generally suited to the usages of the 
Eastern countries: and this metaphor of a horn is commonly so used through all the divine registers, multiplying the number of horns of the 

object they are describing, to denote its various, great and perfect power; unless where seven is mentioned as a number of perfection, as in St. 
John’s figurative, magnificent, and sublime description of Christ. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM. THE JEWS. 2938 

supposed ancestors, as they affirm, were under the immediate government of the Deity, who was present with them 
in a very particular manner, and directed them by prophets; while the rest of the world were aliens and outlaws to 
the covenant. . 

When the archimagus, or any one of their magi, is persuading the people at their religious solemnities to a strict 
observance of the old beloved or divine speech, he always calls them ‘the beloved’, or holy people, agreeable to 
the Hebrew epithet 4mm, during the theocracy of Israel: he urges them with the greatest energy of expression he 
is capable of, a strong voice, and very expressive gestures, to imitate the noble actions of their great and virtuous 
forefathers, which they performed in a surprising manner by their holy things, and a strict observance of the old 
beloved speech. Then he flourishes on their beloved land that flowed with milk and honey, telling them they had 
good and the hest things in the greatest plenty, and speaks largely of their present martial customs and religious 
rites, which they derived from their illustrious predecessors, strictly charging them not to deviate in the least out of 
that old beloved beaten path, and they will surely meet with all the success that attended their beloved forefathers. 
I have heard the speaker on these occasions, after quoting the war-actions of their distinguished chieftains who fell 
in battle, urging them as a copy of imitation to the living, assure the audience that such a death, in defence of their 
beloved land and beloved things, was far preferable to some of their living pictures, that were only spending a dying 
life, to the shame and danger of the society, and of all their beloved things, while the others died by their virtue, and 
still continue a living copy. Then, to soften the thoughts of death, he tells them they who died in battle are only 
gone to sleep with their beloved forefathers, (for they always collect the bones,) and mentions a common proverb 
they have, MVeetak intahah, ‘the days appointed or allowed him were finished’. And this is their firm belief; for 
they affirm that there is a certain fixt time and place when and where every one must die, without any possibility of 
averting it. They frequently say, ‘Such a one was weighed on the path, and made to be light’; ascribing life and 
death to God’s unerring and particular providence ; which may be derived from a religious opinion and proverb of 
the Hebrews, that “the divine care extended itself from the horns of the unicorn to the very feet of the lice”: and 
the more refined part of the old heathens believed the like. The ancient Greeks and Romans, who were great 
copiers of the rites and customs of the Jews, believed there were three Destinies who presided over human life, and 
had each of them their particular office; one held the distaff of life, while another spun the thread, and Atropos cut 
it off; a strong but wild picture of the divine fire, light and spirit. When Virgil is praising the extraordinary 
virtue of Ripheus, who was killed in defence of his native city Troy, he adds, “ Diis aliter visum est,’”—submitting 
to the good and wise providence of the gods, who thought fit to call him off the stage. However, he seems to be 
perplexed on the subject, as he makes fate sometimes conditional : 

Goooboe doc Similis si cura fuisset, 

Nec pater omnipotens Trojam nec fata vetabant 
Stare :” 

‘If the usual proper care had been taken, neither Jupiter nor fate would have hindered Troy from standing at this 
time. But if the time of dying was unalterably fixed, according to the Indian system, or that of our fatalists, how 
would its yotaries reconcile the scheme of Divine Providence, which must be in conformity to truth, reason and 
goodness? and how explain the nature of moral good and evil? On their principle, self-murder would be a ne- 
cessary act of a passive being set on work by the first mover; and his obligations would be proportionable only 
to his powers and faculties, which would excuse the supposed criminal from any just future punishment for suicide. 
But religion and true reason deny the premises, and they themselves will not own the consequence. 

It is their opinion of the theocracy, or that God chose them out of all the rest of mankind as his peculiar and 
beloved people, which animates both the white Jew and the red American with that steady hatred against all the 
world except themselves, and renders them hated or despised by all. The obstinacy of the former, in shutting their 
eyes against the sacred oracles, which are very explicit and clear in the original text, and of which they were the 
trustees, incites both our pity and reproof; whereas the others’ firm adherence to, and strong retention of, the rites 
and customs of their forefathers, only attract our admiration. The American Indians are so far from being atheists, 
as some godless Europeans have flattered themselves, to excuse their own infidelity, that they have the great sacred 
name of God, that describes his divine essence, and by which he manifested himself to Moses, and are firmly 
persuaded they now live under the immediate government of the Deity. The ascension of the smoke of their 

victim as a sweet savour to Yohewah (of which hereafter,) is a full proof to the contrary, as also that they worship 
4F 

QO4. ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

God in a smoke and cloud, believing him to reside above the clouds, and in the element of the supposed holy 
annual fire. It is no way material to fx any certain place for the residence of Him who is omnipresent, and who 
sustains every system of beings. It is not essential to future happiness, whether we believe his chief place of abode 
is in colo tertio, paradiso terrestr, or elemento igneo. God hath placed conscience in us for a monitor, witness and 
judge. It is the guilty or innocent mind that accuses or excuses us to Him: if any further knowledge was 
required, it would be revealed; but St. Paul studiously conceals the mysteries he saw in the empyreal heavens. ‘The 
place of the Divine residence is commonly said to be above the clouds; but that is because of the distance of the 
place, as well as our utter ignorance of the nature of Elohim’s existence, the omnipresent spirit of the universe. 
Our finite minds cannot comprehend a being who is infinite. This inscrutable labyrinth occasioned Simonides, a 
discreet heathen poet and philosopher, to request Hiero king of Sicily, for several days successively, to grant him 
a longer time to describe the nature of the Deity; and at the end to confess ingenuously, that the further he waded 
in that deep mystery, the more he sunk out of his depth, and was less able to define it. If we trace Indian antiquities 
ever so far, we shall find that not one of them ever retained or imbibed atheistical principles, except such whose 
interest as to futurity it notoriously appeared to be, whose practices made them tremble whenever they thought of 
a just and avenging God: but these rare instances were so far from infecting the rest, that they were the more 
confirmed in the opinion, of not being able either to live or die well without a God: and this all nature proclaims 
in every part of the universe. 

ARGUMENT IV. 

We have abundant evidence of the Jews’ believing in the ministration of angels during the Old Testament dis- 
pensation: their frequent appearances and their services on earth are recorded in the oracles which the Jews them- 
selves receive as given by Divine inspiration; and St. Paul, in his Epistle addressed to the Hebrews, speaks of it 
as their general opinion, that “angels are ministering spirits to the good and righteous on earth.” And that it 
was the sentiment of those Jews who embraced Christianity, is evident from Acts xii., where an angel is said 
to deliver Peter from his imprisonment; and when the maid reported that Peter stood at the gate knocking, his 
friends doubting, said, “It is his angel.” Women also are ordered to have their heads covered in religious assem- 
blies, because of the presence of the angels, and to observe silence, the modest custom of the Eastern countries. The 
Indian sentiments and traditions are the same: they believe the higher regions to be inhabited by good spirits 
whom they call hottuk Ishtohoollo, and nana Ishtohoollo, ‘holy people’, and ‘relations to the great holy One’. 
The hottuk ookproose or nana ookproose, ‘accursed people’ or ‘accursed beings’, they say, possess the dark regions 
of the West: the former attend and favour the virtuous, and the latter in like manner accompany and have power 
over the vicious ; on which account, when any of their relations die, they immediately fire off several guns, by one, 
two, and three at a time, for fear of being plagued with the last troublesome neighbours. All the adjacent towns also 
on the occasion whoop and halloo at night; for they reckon this offensive noise sends off the ghosts to their proper 
fixed place, till they return at some certain time, to re-possess their beloved tract of land, and enjoy their terrestrial 
paradise. As they believe in God, so they firmly believe that there is a class of higher beings than men, and a future 
state and existence. 

There are not greater bigots in Europe, nor persons more superstitious, than the Indians, (especially the women,) 
concerning the power of witches, wizards and evil spirits: it is the chief subject of their idle winter night’s chat, 
and both they and several of our traders report very incredible and shocking stories. They will affirm that they 
have seen, and distinctly, most surprising apparitions, and heard horrid shrieking noises. They pretend it was 
impossible for all their senses to be deluded at the same time; especially at Okmulge, the old waste town belong- 
ing to the Muskohge, 150 miles S.W. of Augusta in Georgia, which the South-Carolinians destroyed about the 
year 1715. They strenuously aver, that when necessity forces them to encamp there, they always hear, at the 
dawn of the morning, the usual noise of Indians singing their joyful religious notes, and dancing, as if going down 
to the river to purify themselves, and then returning to the old town-house; with a great deal more to the same 
effect. Whenever I have been there, however, all hath been silent: our noisy bacchanalian company might indeed 
have drowned the noise with a greater of their own. But as I have gone the tedious Chikkasah war-path, through 
one continued desert, day and night, much oftener than any of the rest of the traders, and alone, to the Chikkasah 
country, so none of those frightful spirits ever appeared to, nor any tremendous noise alarmed me. But they say 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 295 

this was “ because I am an obdurate infidel that way.” The Hebrews seem to have entertained notions pretty much 
resembling the Indian opinions on this head, from some passages in their rabbins, and which they ground even on 
the Scriptures*. We read, Isai. xiii. 21. “* But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there, and their houses shall be full 
of doleful creatures, and owls shall dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there.” 

Several warriors have told me, that their nana Ishtohoollo, “concomitant holy spirits’, or angels, have forewarned 
them, as by intuition, of a dangerous ambuscade, which must have been attended with certain death, when they were 
alone and seemingly out of danger; and by virtue of the impulse, they immediately darted off, and with extreme 
difficulty escaped the crafty pursuing enemy. Similar to this was the opinion of many of the Jews, and several of 
the ancient and refined heathens, and is the sentiment of moderns, that intimations of this kind, for man’s 
preservation and felicity, proceed from God by the instrumentality of good angels, or superior invisible beings, 
which he employs for that purpose, who can so impress the imagination and influence the mind, as to follow the 
suggestions, but not so as to destroy the liberty, of the will. Thus Homer introduces Minerva as suggesting what 
was proper for the persons she favoured,—and other superior beings; but they deliberated on the counsel, and chose 
that which appeared to be right. 

ARGUMENT V. 

The Indian language and dialects appear to have the very idiom and genius of the Hebrew. Their words and 
sentences are expressive, concise, emphatical, sonorous and bold, and often, both in letters and signification, syno- 
nymous with the Hebrew language. Jt is a common and old remark, that there is no language in which some 
Hebrew words are not to be found. Probably Hebrew was the first and only language, till distance of time and 
place introduced a change, and then soon followed a mixture of others. The accidental position of the characters 
might also coincide with some Hebrew words, in various dialects, without the least intention. As the true pronun- 
ciation of the Hebrew characters is lost in a considerable degree, it is too difficult a task for a skilful Hebraist to 
ascertain a satisfactory identity of language between the Jews and American aborigines; much more so to an 
Indian trader, who professes but a small acquaintance with the Hebrew, and that acquired by his own application. 
However, I will endeavour to make up the deficiency of Hebrew with a plenty of good solid Indian roots. 

The Indian nouns have neither cases nor declensions: they are invariably the same through both numbers, 
after the Hebrew manner. In their verbs, they likewise sometimes use the preterperfect instead of the present 
tense of the indicative mood; as, dlahsas aiahre, apeesahre, ‘yesterday I went and saw’; and eemmako aiahre, 
apeesahre, ‘now I go and see’. Like the Hebrews, they have no comparative or superlative degree: they express 
a preference by the opposite extremes; as, chekusteene, ‘you are virtuous’; sahakse, ‘I am vicious’: but it im- 
plies a comparative degree, and signifies, ‘you are more virtuous than I am’. By prefixing the adverbs which ex- 
press ‘little’ and ‘much’ to the former words, it conveys the same meaning; the former of which is agreeable to 
the Hebrew idiom: and a double repetition of the same adjective makes a superlative, according to the Hebrew 
manner; as, Jawwa dawwa, ‘most, or very many. ‘To add hah to the end of an adjective, unless it is a noun of 
multitude like the former, makes it also a superlative ; as, hakse to hah, ‘they are most, or very, wicked’: hakse 
signifies ‘vicious’; probably when the vicious part of the Israelites were under the hand of the corrector, the judge 
repeated that word: ¢a is a note of plurality ; and hah an Hebrew accent of admiration; which makes it a superlative. 
To join the name of God, or the leading vowel of the mysterious, great, divine name, to the end of a noun, likewise 
implies a superlative; as, hakse-ishto, or hakse-o, ‘he, or she, is very wicked.’ The former method of speech 
exactly agrees with the Hebrew idiom, as the original text shows in innumerable instances. When the Hebrews 
compare two things, and would signify a parity between them, they double the particle of resemblance; “I am as 
thou art, and my people as thy people:” and the Indians, on account of that original defective standard of speech, 
are forced to use the like circumlocution; as, che ahdba sia, ‘I am like you’, and sahottuk chehotiuk tooah, &c. ; 
for hottuk signifies ‘people’, and the s expresses the pronoun ‘my, or mine’; and it likewise changes an active into a 
passive verb. Although this Indian and Hebrew method of speech is rather tedious and defective, yet, at the same 

® Ley. xix. 31; 1 Sam. xxviii. 3. &c.; Isai. viii. 19. 
+ Bochart supposes that ¢siim signify ‘wild cats’; and that ns is not any particular creature, but the crying or howling of wild beasts. His 
opinion is confirmed by many judicious writers. : 

296 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

time, they who attain any tolerable skill in the dialects of the one and language of the other, will discover the sense 
plain enough, when a comparison is implied. 

There is not, perhaps, any one language or speech, except the Hebrew and the Indian American, which has not a 
great many prepositions. The Indians, like the Hebrews, have none in separate and express words: they are 
forced to join certain characters to words, in order to supply that great defect. The Hebrew consonants called 
serviles were tools to supply the place of the prepositions. ‘The Indians, for want of a sufficient number of radical 
words, are forced to apply the same noun and verb to signify many things of a various nature: with the 
Cheerake, eeankke signifies ‘a prisoner, captive, slave, awl, pin, needle, &c., which occasions the Indian dialects to 
be very difficult to strangers. The Jewish rabbins tell us that the Hebrew language contains only a few more than 
a thousand primitive words, of which their whole language is formed: so that the same word very often denotes 
various, though not contrary things; but there is one radical meaning, which will agree to every sense that word is 
used in. By custom, a Hebrew noun frequently supplied the place of a pronoun; by which means it caused a 
tedious and sometimes an ambiguous circumlocution. From this original defective standard of speech, the Indians 
have forgotten all their pronouns, except two primitives and two relatives; as, anowah, ego, and ishna, tu: the 
latter bears a great many significations, both as singular and plural, viz. eeapa and eeako, which signify ‘he, she, 
this, that,’ &c.: and they are likewise adverbs of place; as, ‘here, there, &c. sim (hewa) signifies ‘he, or she’; 
‘IN (ant) we’; and 13 (anowa) ‘he, she, him, her, &c. 

The Hebrew language frequently uses hyberboles, or magnifying numbers, to denote a long space of time: the 
Indians accordingly apply the words neetak akroohah, ‘all days’, or in other words, ‘for ever’, to a long series of 
years. With the Jews, sitting signified dwelling; and with the Indians it is the very same; for when they ask a 
person where he dwells, they say, katémuk ishbeneele (chuak?), which is literally, “where do you sit?’ And when 
they call us irreligious, they say, nama u-bat, ‘no thing’, or literally, ‘a relation to nothing’, for nana signifies 
‘a relation’, and the other is always a negative adverbial period: which seems also to proceed from a religious custom 
of the Hebrews, in giving despicable borrowed names to idols; as to o7y1 (Baalim), ‘particles of air’, meaning 
nothing. 'To which the Psalmist alludes, saying, “I will not take up their names in my lips:” and St. Paul says, 
“We know that an idol is nothing.” This expression the Indians apply, in a pointed metaphor, to the white people, . 
but never to each other. Like the Hebrews, they seldom, if ever, double the liquid consonant r; for they generally 
seem desirous of shuffling over it, at any rate; and they often give it the sound of /: but if it precedes a word 
where the other consonant soon follows, they always give it its proper sound, contrary to the usage of the Chinese ; 
as the name of a stone they often call éah/e, instead of tahré; but the Indians say tahre lakkana, literally 
‘yellow stone’, z. e. gold. 

The Hebrews subjoined one of their serviles to words, to express the pronoun relative ‘thy, or thine’: and as that 
particle was also a note of resemblance, it shows the great sterility of that language. As a specimen: they said 
pan (abiche) ‘your father’, and Jos (ameche) ‘your mother’, &c. Only that the Hebrew period is initial in such 
a case to the Indian nouns, they always use the very same method of expression. This I shall illustrate with two 
words in the dialects of the Chikkasah and Cheerake: as, chimge, and chatokta, ‘your father’; angge and 
aketohta signifying ‘ my father’, in resemblance of 1s (abéa) of the same import: likewise chishke and chacheeah, 
‘your mother’; for saske and akachee signify ‘my mother’, in imitation of Mwx (ashe). Also sas kish signifies 
*‘podex meus’, chish kish < podex tuus’, and kesh kesh ‘podex illius’; which I guess to be an opprobrious allusion to 
Kish the father of Saul, for the son’s assuming the throne at the end of the Jewish theocracy. In their adjectives 
and verbs they use the same method of speech; as, nahooréso chin-chookoma, ‘your book is good’. The former 
word is compounded of #33 (za), ‘now, or the present time’, and hooréso, ‘delineated, marked or painted’. 4a signi- 
fies ‘to go’, and maia-cha ‘go along!’ or maia, the same; for by prefixing 1 to it, it implies a requisite obedience. 
In like manner apeesah, ‘to see’, and peesdcha, ‘look! or, see you!’ And when that particle is prefixed to a verb, it 
always expresses the accusative case of the same pronoun; as, chepeesahre, ‘I saw you, and chepeesahras, «1 shall 
see you’. Each of the Hebrew characters are radicals, although half of them are serviles, according to that proper 
term of the scholiasts ; for when they are prefixed, inserted or subjoined, either at the beginning, middle, or end of a 
radical word, they serve to form its various augments, inflexions and derivatives. According to this difficult standard 
of speech, the Indian nouns, moods and tenses are variously formed to express different things. As there is no 
other known language or dialect which has the same tedious, narrow and difficult principles, must we not consider 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 207 

them to be twin-born sisters? The want of proper skill to observe the original fixed idea of the Indian words, their 
radical letters, and the due sounds in each of them, seems to have been the only reason why the writers on the 
American aborigines have not exhibited the true and genuine properties of any one of their dialects; as they are 
all uniform in principle, so far at least as an extensive acquaintance reaches. 

The Hebrew nouns are either derived from verbs, or both of them are one and the same; as, 7271 (4eroche) 
‘blessing’, from 771 (4eroch) ‘to bless’, and 729 717 (dabar daber) ‘he spoke the speech’. This proper name 
signifies ‘loquacious’, like the Indian sekakee, signifying ‘the grasshopper’. The Indian method of expression 
exactly agrees with that Hebrew mode of speech; for they say anumbole anumbole (kis), ‘I spake the speaking’; 
and anumbole enumbole (kis), ‘he spoke the speaking, or speech’. And by inserting the name of God between 
these two words, their meaning is the very same with those two first Hebrew words. I shall subjoin another word 
of the same sort: hookseeléta signifies ‘a shutting instrument’; and they say Jshtookseeléta, or Hookseeleta, ish- 
hookseetas, or hookseeta cha, ‘you shall, or, shut you the door’. Their period of the last word always denotes the 
second person singular of the imperative mood, and that of the other preceding it, either the first or second person 
singular of the indicative mood; which is formed so by a fixed rule, on account of the variegating power of the 
serviles, by affixing, inserting, or suffixing them to any root. According to the usage of the Hebrews, they always 
place the accusative case also before the verb, as in the former Indian words. 

With the Hebrews, m79n signified ‘a prayer’, or a religious invocation, derived from m9 (phelac) ‘to pray to or 
invoke the Deity’. Ina strong resemblance thereof, when the Indians are performing their sacred dance with the 
eagles’ tails, and with great earnestness invoking Yo He Wah to bless them with success and prosperity, phale signi- 
fies ‘waving’, or invoking by waving, zshphale ‘you wave’, phalécha ‘wave you’, aphalale ‘I waved’, aphalélas ‘1 will 
wave’, &c. Psalmodists seem to have borrowed the notes fa, /a from the aforesaid Hebrew words of praying, singing 
to, or invoking Elohim. y5 (phoole) ‘to work’ is evidently drawn from the former Hebrew word, which signifies 
‘to invoke (and probably to wave the feathers of the cherubic eagle before) Yo He Wah’. The greatest part of the 
Levitical method of worshiping consisted in laborious mechanical exercises, much after the Indian manner, which 
the popish priests copy after in a great many instances ; as pulling off their clothes and putting on others, imagining 
that the Deity is better pleased with persons who variegate their external appearances, like Proteus, than with those 
who worship with a steady, sincere disposition of mind; besides a prodigious group of other superstitious ceremonies, 
which are often shamefully blended with those of the old pagans. 

As the Hebrew word 3 (xa) signifies the present time, so when the Indians desire a person to receive something 
from them speedily, they say /Va (short and gutturally) eescha, ‘ take it now’. He replies, Unta, or Omeh, which are 
good-natured affirmatives. The pronoun relative ‘you’, which they term ishna, is a compounded Hebrew word, 
signifying (by application) the person present, or ‘you’. With the Hebrews, -7 77 (hara hara) signifies ‘most, 
or very hot’; the repetition of the word makes it a superlative. In a strict resemblance of that word and mode of 
speech, when an Indian is baffled by any of their humorous wits, he says in a loud jesting manner Hara hara, or 
Hala hala, according to their capacity of pronouncing the liquid 7, and it signifies “you are very hot upon me’: 
their word which expresses ‘sharp’ conveys the idea of bitter-heartedness with them; and that of bitterness they 
apply only to the objects of taste. With the Cheerake, Chikkasah and Choktah Indians, manne signifies <a hill’; 
and zannéh, with the two last-mentioned nations, ‘a fish’; and wachaba, ‘a mountain’: but they call an alligator 
or crocodile nannéh chunchaba, literally, ‘the fish like a mountain’, which the English language would abbreviate 
into the name of ‘a mountain-fish’; but instead of a hyphen they use the Hebrew 3, a note of resemblance, which 
seems to point at the language from which they derived it. In like manner aa signifies ‘to walk’, and eeéte, ‘wood’; 
but eette chanda, any kind of wheel, which is consonant to the aforesaid Hebrew idiom; with many others of the 
like nature: but a specimen of this sort must suffice. The Hebrew and Indian words which express delineating, 
writing, deciphering, marking and painting, convey the same literal meaning in both languages; as, Exod. xvii. 14, 
=p wan> (chethéba sephdre), ‘delineate this with delineations’; and with the Indians hooréso is, in like manner, 
the radical name of books, delineating, &c., and ootehna that for numbering, instead of reading. The nearest 
approach they can make to it is dnumbole hooréso ishanumbolas, ‘you shall speak the speech which is delineated’. 
They call a razor baspoo shaphe, ‘a shaving knife’: and shaphe always signifies ‘to shave’; probably because, when 
they first began to shave themselves, they were ridiculed by the higher or more religious part of the people for 
imitating that heathenish custom ;—the Hebrew mbw (shaphe), signifying ‘lip, confession, or worship’; which divine 

4G 

298 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 
Writ assures us the descendants of Noah changed, when they opposed the divine will of settling various parts of the 
earth, and built the great tower of Babel, as an emblem of greatness, to get them a name*. Loak signifies ‘ fire’, 
and loak Ishtohoollo, ‘the holy or divine fire’, or the anger of Ishtohoollo, ‘the great holy One’, which nearly agrees 
with the Hebrew on), that which flames or scorches with vehement heat. And it is the Scripture method of convey- 
ing to us a sensible idea of the divine wrath, according to the cherubic name wx, which likewise signifies ‘fire’. But 
the Persians worshiped the burning fire by the name of Oromazes, and darkness or the spirit by that of Aramanius, 
quite contrary to the religious system of the Indian Americans : and the aforesaid Indian method of expression seems 
exactly to coincide with the Hebrew idiom. Buk-she-ah-ma is the name of their Indian flap, or broad slip of cloth, 
with which the men cover their nakedness ; but the word they use to express our sort of breeches is a compound, 
balaphooka, derived from the Hebrew 9x1, which signifies ‘behind’, and the Indian naphooka, ‘a coat, any kind of 
clothes or covering’: Jaloka signifies ‘behind’; silently telling us they formerly wore a different sort of breeches to 
what they use at present. They likewise say, neeppe-phi-ka, ‘a flesh covering’. The father of King Saul was 
called Aish, ‘ podex’; which signifies also the rear of an army, or the hindermost person, according to the Hebrew 
idiom. Thus the Indians by Aish express the podex of any animal, the hindermost person, the gavel-end of a 
house, and the like. tsh kish is with them a superlative, and, as before hinted, used to convey the contempt they 
have for that proper name. May not the contemptible idea the West-Florida-Mississippi Indians affix to the name 
of Kish be on account of his son’s succession to the throne, at the end of the theocracy of Israel, and beginning a 
despotic regal government? 

The Indians, according to the usage of the Hebrews, always prefix the substantive to the adjective; as, netak 
chookoma, ‘a good day’; nakkdne and echo chookoma, ‘a good or goodly man and woman’: the former of 
which is termed in Hebrew yoma tobe, signifying, according to our method of salutation, ‘a good day, a merry 
season, a festival day’, &c. And the Indian appellatives are similarly exprest in Hebrew, Jehtobe and ashe-tobe, 
“a good, goodly, discreet, or wise man and woman’. Chookoma, with the Indians, is the proper name of a comely 
woman, when a is prefixed to it, as a-chookoma, ‘my goodly, or beautiful’: they use it for a warrior, when it is 
compounded without the a, as chookoma hummdshtabe, < one who killed a beautiful, great, red or war-chieftain’, 
which is compounded of chookoma ‘comely’, humma ‘red’, wx, (ash) ‘fire’, and abe, a contraction of 71x, (abele), 
signifying ‘grief, or sorrow. Hence it appears, that because the Hebrews affixed a virtuous idea to tobe, ‘goodly’, 
the Indians call white by the same name, and make it the constant emblem of everything that is good, according to 
a similar Hebrew custom. Of this the sacred oracles make frequent mention. The Jews called that which was 
the most excellent of everything, the fat; and the Indians, in the like manner, say, oosto neehe, ‘the fat of the 
pompion’, tranche neehe, ‘the fat of the corn’. Veeha is the adjective, signifying ‘fat’, from which the word 
neeta, ‘a bear’, is derived. ‘They apply the word ‘heart’ only to animate beings. 

As the Deity is the soul of every system, and as every nation, from the remotest ages of antiquity, believed that 
they could not live well without some god or other, when, therefore, we clearly understand the name or names by 
which any society of people express their notions of a deity, we can with more precision form ideas of the nature of 
their religious worship, and of the object or objects of their adoration. I shall therefore here give a plain 
description of the names by which the Indian Americans speak of God. Jshtohoollo is an appellative for God, 
Ishtohoollo points at the greatness, purity and goodness of the Creator in forming wx and Nw: it is derived 
from zshto ‘great’, which was the usual name of God through all the prophetic writings; likewise, from the present 
tense of the infinitive mood of the active verb ahoollo, ‘I love’, and from the preter tense of the passive verb hoollo, 
which signifies ‘ sanctifying, sanctified, divine, or holy’. Women set apart, they term hoollo, 2. 2. sanctifying 
themselves to Ishtohoollo: likewise, me¢akhoollo signifies ‘a sanctified, divine or holy day’; and, in like manner, 
ookka hoollo, ‘water sanctified’, &c. So that Sshtohoollo, when applied to God, in its true radical meaning, imports, 
‘The great, beloved, holy Cause’; which is exceedingly comprehensive, and more expressive of the true nature of 
God than the Hebrew name Adonai, which is applicable to a human being. Whenever the Indians apply the 
epithet, compounded, to any of their own religious men, it signifies ‘the great, holy, beloved and sanctified men of 
the Holy One’. They make this divine name point yet more strongly to the supreme Author of nature; for as 
AN signifies ‘father’, and as the omnipresent Spirit of the universe, or the holy Father of mankind, is said to dwell 

* Skin signifies ‘an eye’, and skeesh@pha, ‘ one-eyed’, as if proceeding from the Divine anger. ‘They often change ¢ into ee. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 299 

above, they therefore call the immense space of the heavens dba, Abdse and Abatira; and to distinguish the King 
of kings, by his attributes, from their own minggo ish/o, or great chieftains, they frequently name him Minggo 
Ishto Aba, &c., Ishto Aba, &e., Minggo Aba, &c., and when they are striving to move the passions of the 
audience, Lshtohoollo dba. ‘The Hebrew servants were not allowed to call their master or mistress 2N, (abba,) till 
they were adopted; to which custom St. Paul alludes, Rom. viii. 15.. They have another appellative which with 
them is the mysterious, essential name of God—the tetragrammaton, or great four-lettered name, which they never 
mention in common speech: of the time and place when and where they mention it they are very particular, and 
always with a solemn air. | 

There is a species of tea that grows spontaneously, and in great plenty, along the sea-coast of the two Carolinas, 
Georgia, and East and West Florida, which we call yopon, or cusseena: the Indians transplant, and are extremely 
fond of it: they drink it on. certain stated occasions, and in their most religious solemnities, with awful invocations; 
but the women and children, and those who have not successfully accompanied their holy ark, pro aris et focis, 
dare not even enter the sacred square when they are on this religious duty, otherwise they would be dry-scratched 
with snakes’ teeth, fixed in the middle of a split reed, or piece of wood, without the privilege of warm water to 
supple the stiffened skin. When this beloved liquid, or supposed holy drink-offering, is fully prepared, and fit to 
be drank, one of their magi brings two old, consecrated, large conch-shells out of a place appropriated for 
containing the holy things, and delivers them into the hands of two religious attendants, who, after a wild ceremony, 
fill them with the supposed sanctifying, bitter liquid: then they approach near to the two central red and white 
seats, (which the traders call the war, and beloved cabins,) stooping with their heads and bodies pretty low. 
Advancing a few steps in this posture, they carry their shells with both hands, at an instant, to one of the most 
principal men on those red and white seats, saying, on a bass key, Y‘au, quite short: then, in like manner, they 
retreat backward, facing each other, with their heads bowing forward, their arms across rather below their breast, 
and their eyes half-shut.: thus, in a very grave, solemn manner, they sing, on a strong bass key, the awful 
monosyllable O, for the space of a minute; then they strike up majestic He, on the treble, with a very intent voice, 
as long as their breath allows them; and on a bass key, with a bold voice and short accent, they at last utter the 
strong mysterious sound Wan, and thus finish the great song, or most solemn invocation of the divine essence. 
The notes together compose their sacred, mysterious name Y-O-He-Wau. That this seems to be the true 
Hebrew pronunciation of the divine essential name mm, (Jehovah,) will appear more obvious from the sound they 
seem to have given their characters. The Greeks, who chiefly copied their alphabet from the Hebrew, had not jod, 
but zofa, very nearly resembling the sound of our y. The ancient Teutonic and Sclavonian dialects have Vah as 
an affirmative, and use the consonant w instead of v. The high importance of the subject necessarily would lead 
these supposed red Hebrews, when separated from other people in America, to continue to repeat the favourite 
name of God, YO He Wax, according to the ancient pronunciation. 

Contrary to the usage of all the ancient heathen world, the American Indians not only name God by several strong 
compounded appellatives, expressive of many of his divine attributes, but likewise say Yau at the beginning of 
their religious dances, with a bowing posture of body; then they sing Yo Yo, He He, and repeat those sacred 
notes on every religious occasion: the religious attendants calling to Yau to enable them humbly to supplicate, 
seems to point to the Hebrew custom of pronouncing 7m, (Vah,) which likewise signifies the divine essence. It is 
well known what sacred regard the Jews had to the four-lettered divine name, so as scarcely ever to mention it but 
once a year, when the high-priest went into the holy sanctuary, at the expiation of sins. Might not the Indians 
copy from them this sacred invocation? Their method of invoking God, in a solemn hymn, with that reverential 
deportment, and spending a full breath on each of the two first syllables of the awful divine name, hath a surprising 
analogy to the Jewish custom, and such as no other nation or people, even with the advantage of written records, 
have retained. It may be worthy of notice, that they never prostrate themselves, nor bow their bodies to each 
other, by way of salute, or homage, though usual with the Eastern nations, except when they are making or 
renewing peace with strangers, who come in the name of Yan; then they bow their bodies in that religious 
solemnity: but they always bow in their religious dances, because then they sing what they call divine hymns, chiefly 
composed of the great, beloved, divine name, and addressed to Yo He Wau. ‘The favoured persons, whom the 
religious attendants are invoking the divine essence to bless, hold up the shells with both hands to their mouths, 
during the awful, sacred invocation, and retain a mouthful of the drink, to spirt out on the ground, as a supposed 

300 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

drink-offering to the great self-existent Giver ; which they offer at the end of their draught. If any of the traders, 
who at those times are invited to drink with them, were to neglect this religious observance, they would reckon us 
as godless and wild as the wolves of the desert*. After the same manner, the supposed holy waiters proceed, from 
the highest to the lowest, in their synedrion; and when they have ended that awful solemnity, they go round the 
whole square, or quadrangular place, and collect tobacco from the sanctified sinners, according to ancient cus- 
tom; “for they who serve at the altar, must live by the altar.” 

The Cheerake method of adjuring a witness to declare the truth, strongly corroborates the former hints, and will 
serve as a key to open the vowels of the great, mysterious, four-lettered name of God. On small affairs, the judge, 
who is.an elderly chieftain, asks the witness, Cheeakohga (sko?), ‘do you lie?? To which he answers, 4nsa khai-e- 
koh-ga, ‘1 do not lie. But when the judge will search into something of material consequence, and adjures the 
witness to speak the naked truth concerning the point in question, he says, O E A (sko?), ‘What you have now 
said, is it true, by this strong emblem of the beloved name of the great self-existent God?’ To which the witness 
replies, O E A, ‘It is true, by this strong pointing symbol of YO Hz Wau. When the true knowledge of the 
affair in dispute seems to be of very great importance, the judge swears the witness thus: O E A—Yau (sho 2). 
This most sacred adjuration imports, ‘Have you now told me the real truth by the lively type of the great awful 
name of God, which describes his necessary existence, without beginning or end; and by his self-existent literal 
name, in which I adjure you?’ The witness answers,O E A—Yau, ‘I have told you the naked truth, which I 
most solemnly swear by this strong religious picture of the adorable, great, divine self-existent name, which we are 
not to profane; and I likewise attest it by his other beloved, unspeakable, sacred, essential name.’ 

When we consider that the period of the adjurations, according to their idiom, only asks a question, and that 
the religious waiters say Yau, with a profound reverence, in a bowing posture of body, immediately before they 
invoke YO He Wang, the one reflects so much light upon the other, as to convince me that the Hebrews both 
invoked and pronounced the divine tetragrammaton Yo He Wan, and adjured their witnesses to give true evidence, 
on certain occasions, according to the Indian usage; otherwise, how could they possibly, in a savage state, have a 
custom of so nice and strong-pointing a standard of religious caution? It seems exactly to coincide with the conduct 
of the Hebrew witnesses even now on the like religious occasions, who, being sworn, by the name of the great 
living God, openly to declare the naked truth, hold up their right hand, and answer, 39x 29N, (Amen Amen,) or ‘Very 
true’, ‘I am a most faithful witness’. The Hebrew word signifies ‘faithful’, and by being repeated twice, becomes 
a superlative, and O E A—Yau is one of the highest degree. St. John, in his Gospel, according to the Hebrew 
method of adjuration, often doubles the 4men. And the same divine writer, at the beginning of each of his seven 
Epistles, in describing the glorious and transcendent qualities of Jesus Christ, and particularly in the Epistle to the 
church of Laodicea, points at the same custom: “These things saith the men, the faithful and true witness, the 
beginning of the creation of God.” 

The Cheerake use another expression, which bears a strong analogy to the former method of adjuration ; though 
it is not so sacred in their opinion, because of one letter prefixed, and another subjoined. The judge, in small contro- 
versies, asks the witness, Zo ew (sko?); to which he answers, Joe u, or To eu hah, ‘It is very true, or ‘a most 
certain truth’. Such an addition of any letter, or letters, to the vowels of the supposed divine four-lettered name, 
seems to proceed from a strict religious custom of proportioning them to the circumstances of persons and things, 
lest otherwise they should blaspheme, or profane the emblems of the great divine name. And the vowel x 
seems to allude to 1x, 2. e. One—a name of God, figuratively,—for in their dialect when it is a period, it makes a 
superlative, according to their usage in applying the rest of the divine appellatives, symbols, or names. They 
esteem Zo e u hah so strong an assent to anything spoken, that Cheesto Kaizhre, ‘the old rabbit} (the name of 
the interpreter) who formerly accompanied seven of their head warriors to London, assured me they held there a 
very hot debate, in their subterranean lodgings, in the dead hours of the night of September the 7th, 1730, whether 
they should not kill him, and one of the war-chieftains, because by his mouth the other answered Zo e u hah to 
His Majesty’s speech, wherein he claimed, not only their land, but all the other unconquered countries of the 

* The Mosaic law enjoined the offering of libations; as Exod. xxix. and Numb. xv. And the heathens, especially the ancient Greeks and 
Romans, mimicked a great deal of the Mosaic institution. They observed the like ceremonies in their idolatrous sacrifices. The priests only 
tasted, and then spilt some wine, milk, or other liquor, in honour of the Deity to whom the sacrifice was offered. Alexander is said to have 
sacrificed a bull to Neptune, and to have thrown a golden yessel used for the libation into the sea. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 301 

neighbouring nations, as his right and property. When they returned home, they were tried again, by the national 
sanhedrim, for having betrayed the public faith, and sold their country for acknowledged value, by firm compact, as 
representatives of their country; they having received a certain quantity of goods, and a decoying belt of white 
wampum: but upon serious deliberation they were honourably acquitted, because it was judged the interpreter was 
bound by the like oath to explain their speeches, and that surprise, inadvertence, self-love, and the unusual 
glittering show of the courtiers, extorted the sacred assent Zo ¢ wu hah out of the other’s mouth, which spoiled the 
force of it; being much afraid lest they should say something amiss, on account of the different idiom of the 
English and Indian American dialects*. As there is no alternative between a falshood and a lie, they usually tell 
any person in plain language, ‘You lie, as a friendly negative to his reputed untruth. The cheerful inoffensive old 
rabbit told me, he had urged to them, with a great deal of earnestness, that it was certain death by our laws to give 
His Majesty the lie to his face; and cautioned them to guard their mouths very strongly from uttering such 
dangerous language: otherwise their hearts would become very heavy, and even sorrowful to death; as he would be 
bound as firmly by our holy books to relate the bare naked truth, as they were by repeating Zo e u ah, or even 
O-E-A—Yau. | 

The Chikkasah and Choktah method of adjuring a witness to give true evidence is something similar to the 
former attestation by Zo e u hah: when they ask them whether they do not lie, they adjure them thus, Cheklooska 
ke-e-u chua? The termination implies a question of the second person singular number, and the whole oath 
signifies literally, ‘Do not you lie? do you not, of a certain truth?’ To which he answers by two strong negative 
asseverations, klooska ke-e-u-que-ho, ‘I do not lie; I do not, of a certain truth. When the Choktah are 
averring anything asked of them, they assert it by saying Yah. This shows their ignorance of the vowels of the 
supposed divine four-lettered name, in comparison of the Cheerake; and that they are become less religious, by 
profaning the divine name Yau; which confirms me in the opinion, that the Cheerake Indians were a more 
civilized people than any of the other neighbouring Indians. 

We are told that the northern Indians, in the time of their rejoicings, repeat YO Ha Han; which, if true, evinces 
that their corruption advances, in proportion as they are distant from South-America, and wanted a friendly 
intercourse with those who had an open communication with those southern regions-+. Living in moderate high 
latitudes would naturally prevent them from sinking into effeminacy, and inspire them with martial tempers, (as we 
are told of the Chili Indians,) without being originally a bloodier peeple than any of the southern nations. How- 
ever, we should be sparing of credit to what unskilful writers have carefully copied from each other and transmitted 
to the learned world. I shall hereafter, under another Argument, show that the Indians variously transpose, shorten, 
and lengthen each syllable of the great divine name YO He Wau, in a very extraordinary manner, when they are 
singing and dancing to and before the divine essence; and that they commonly derive such words as convey a 
virtuous idea from, or compound them with that divine essential name. I shall now show a further parity between 

the Hebrew language and the aboriginal American dialects. 

* The strong sentiments, natural wit, and intense love of liberty, which the Indians show themselves possessed of in a high degree, should 
direct our colonists to pursue a different method of contracting Indian covenants than they have commonly used. First, let them consider the 
general good of the community, who chose them for that end; and then make a plain agreement with the Indians, adapted to their fixed notion of 
liberty, and the good of their country, without any deluding sophisms. If they do not keep these essential points of amity in view, we shall fare 
again as hath Georgia; for, by a childish treaty with the Muskohge Indians, when defeated An. 1715, its most northern boundaries are confined 
to the head of the ebbing and flowing of Savannah river. We are said to have flourished off very commodious Indian treaties in the council-books, 
with the Muskohge, which the community know nothing of, except a few plain common particulars, as they some years since declared. 

+ They who have a desire to see the genuine oratory of the Indians, may find it partly exhibited to the public by the laborious Mr. Colden, 
mostly in the manner, I am told, he found it in the council-books. As that gentleman is an utter stranger to the language and customs of the 
Indians, it was out of his power to do justice to the original. Their speech in general abounds with bolder tropes and figures than illiterate inter~ 
preters can well comprehend or explain. In the most essential part of his copied work he committed a very material blunder, by writing, in the 
first edition, the Indian solemn invocation, YO Ha Han. I was well assured by the intelligent Sir William Johnson, and the skilful, benevolent, 
pious and reverend Mr. John Ogilvie, that the northern Indians always pronounce it YO He A‘ Ah; and so it is inserted in the second edition. 
In justice to this valuable luminary of the church, and the worthy laity of the city of New York, I must observe, that while the rest of his sacer- 
dotal brethren were much blamed for neglecting their office of teaching, and instead thereof were militating for an episcopate, that gentleman was 
universally beloved by all ranks of people. He spent his time, like a true servant of God, in performing the various duties of his sacred office ; 
and had the utmost pleasure in healing breaches both in public society and in private families. Great numbers of the poor negro slaves were 
instructed by him in the principles of Christianity, while the other clergymen were earnestly employed in disturbing the quiet of the public, for the 

‘sake of their favourite Peter’s pence. 

4H 

302 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

Pushkoosh signifies ‘an infant’, neetta ‘a hear’, nassooba ‘a wolf’, &c. By joining the word ooshe to the end of the 
names of animals, it makes a distinction; as nassoob-ooshe ‘a wolf-cub’; neeti’-ooshe ‘a bear-cub’; but though the 
word oophe signifies ‘a dog’, as an exception to their general method of speech they call a puppy ooph-ishik, 
because he is so domestic, or sociable, as pw, ‘to kiss, or fondle’. In like manner prshz signifies ‘milk’; and pishik 
‘a woman’s breast’, or the udder of any animal; as the young ones, by kissing or sucking, shade the breast () with 
their mouth, and thereby receive their nourishment. With the Hebrews 75y (oophecha) signifies ‘active, or restless’, 
which, according to the Indian idiom, expresses the quality of a dog; oophe is therefore the name of this animal, 
and their period denotes a similarity, according to the usage of the Hebrews. 

Shale and shatera signify ‘to carry’, shapore ‘a load’. ‘The former word consists of sheth and ale. Illeh imports 
‘dead’, and kaneha ‘lost’. They say shat kaneha, ‘to carry a thing quite away, or to Canaan’: likewise, @/eht kaneha, 
literally, ‘dead and lost’, or probably, ‘gone to Canaan’. Several old Indian American towns are called Aandaai; and it 
hath been a prevailing notion with many Jews, that when any of their people died in a strange land they passed 
through the caverns of the earth till they arrived at Canaan, their attractive centre. And the word oobéa likewise 
imports ‘dead, or cut off by O E A, or Yohewah’; for they firmly believe, as before hinted, they cannot outlive the 
time the Deity has prescribed them. They likewise say, hasse ookklille cheele, ‘the sun is, or has been, caused 
to die in the water’, 2. e. sun-set. When they would say, ‘do not obscure or darken me,’ they cry Jsh-ookkille 
chinna, verbatim, ‘ Do not occasion zsh, me, to become like the sun dead in the water. Thev call the new moon 
hasse awahta, ‘the moon is called upon to appear by Yohewah’; which plainly shows that they believe the 
periodical revolutions of the moon to be caused, and the sun every day to die, or be extinguished in the ocean, 
by the constant laws of God. When we ask them, if today’s sun is drowned in the western ocean, how another can 
rise. out of the eastern ocean tomorrow? they only reply, Pilla Yammi or Yammi mung, or ‘such is the way 
of God with his people.’ It seems to be a plain contraction of 7» and ‘ons (4mmz), which was the name of Israel 
during the theocracy. Besides, acemmz signifies ‘I believe’; as the peculiar people believed in Yohewah. And 
it likewise imports, ‘I am the owner of, &c.’—according to the Hebrew idiom, the words and meaning nearly 
agree. 

Eette signifies ‘wood’; and they term any kind of chest, box, or trunk, cette oobe, and frequently oobe, which 
seems to point to the “ark of the purifier,” that was so fatal to the laity even to touch; a strong emanation of the 
holy fire, light, and spirit residing in it, as well as in that which the priests carried to war against the devoted enemy. 
The Chikkasah settled a town in the upper or most western part of the Muskohge country, about 300 miles east- 
ward of their own nation, and called it Ooe-dsa; which is derived from O E A, and asa ‘there, or here, is’; 
2. e. ‘YO He Wau presides in this place.’ And when a person is removing from his former dwelling, they ask him, 
Ish-ooe-a (tum?), «Are you removing hence in the name, or under the patronage, of YO HE Wau?’ And it both 
signifies ‘to ascend’, and ‘remove to another place’; as OKA, Axa, the omnipresent Father of mankind, is said to 
dwell above, so the Indian hopes to remove there from hence, by the bounty of Ishtohoollo, the great holy One: 
according to their fixed standard of speech, had they made any nearer approach to O E A, the strong religious emblem 
of the beloved four-lettered name, it would have been reckoned a profanation. 

Phutchik signifies ‘a star’, and oonna ‘he is arrived’; but phutchik oonnache ‘the morning star’, because he is 
the forerunner of light, and resembles the sun that reflects it: and oonna-hah signifies ‘tomorrow’, or ‘it is day’. 
The termination denotes their gladness that the divine light had visited them again; and when they are asking if it 
is day, they say Onna hé (tak?). The last monosyllable only asks a question; and the feminine gender treble note 
is the mid syllable of the great divine name, which may reflect some light upon the former observations. 

Although the Hebrews hada proper name for the human soul, calling it w53, yet in Prov. xx. 27. it is called M773, 
‘the candle or lamp of God’; and figuratively applied it conveys a strong idea of the human soul: thus the 
Indians term it nana Ishtohoollo, ‘something of, or a relation to, the great holy One’; very analogous to the former 
method of expressing the rational principle, in allusion to the celestial cherubic name ww (ashe), ‘fire’, as they believe 
the Deity resides in the new year’s supposed holy fire. Because ish, ‘man’, received his breath from the divine 
inspiration of the beneficent creator Yau, they term the human species, in their strong-pointing language, yahwe; 
which, though different from the divine, essential, four-lettered name in sound, has 7) (Yau) for s radix. But, be- 
cause the monkey mimics yahweh, or ‘the rational creation’, more than any other brute in features, shape, gesture, 
and actions, in proportion to the similitude, they give him a similar name, shaw-we. This indeed makes a near 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 303 

approach to Ish and Yah, and to yahwe; but it wants the radix of both, and consequently bears no signification of 
relation to either. While they urge that the regularity of the actions of the brute creatures around them expresses 
a nice understanding or instinct, they deny their being endued with any portion of the reasoning and living prin- 
ciple, but bear only a faint allusion to nana Ishtohoollo, ‘the rational soul’. The most intelligent among them say 
the human soul was not made of clay, like the brute creation, whose soul is only a corporeal substance attenuated 
by heat, and thus rendered invisible. 

Through a seeming war-contempt of each other, they all use a favourite termination to their adjectives, (very rarely 
to their substantives,) and sometimes to their verbs; especially when they are flourishing away in their rapid war- 
speeches, which on such occasions they always repeat with great vehemence. I shall give a specimen of two words 
in the dialects of our southern Indians. J is the favourite period of the Katahba Indians ; as, mare-r’i, or wahre-r'2, 
‘good’, and maretawah-r't, or wahrétawah-17, ‘best, or very good’; Wah the last syllable of the great divine name, 
is evidently the radix, and magnifies the virtuous idea to a superlative. In like manner shegare-wahr't ‘not bad’, 
but sheekare-r't signifies “bad’.. With these Indians, sheeke is the name of a buzzard, which they reckon to be a 
most impure fowl, as it lives on putrid carcasses; upon which account they choose that word to convey a vicious 
idea. Quo is the sounding termination of the Cheerake; as, seohsta-quo ‘good’, and o-se-w ‘best, or very good’. 
Here they seem to have studiously chosen the vowels; as the following words will illustrate, condite-u ‘very honest, 
or virtuous’, and Y-O-U ‘evil, or very bad’. To corroborate the hints I gave concerning the Indian names of 
monkey and the human species, let it be observed, that though their words convey a virtuous or vicious idea, in pro- 
portion as they are constituted out of any of their three divine names, YoHEwaAuH, Yau, and IsHToHOOLLo; or contain 
the vowels of the great sacred name, yet the aforesaid word Y-O-U is so far from being a deviation from that general 
custom, it is an emphatical and emblematical term to express evil by the negative of good; for as it is the only sub- 
stantive or adjective of that word, it is a strong expressive symbol of the nature and physical cause of moral evil, by 
separating YO, the first syllable of the divine four-lettered name, into two syllables; and adding U, asa superlative 
period, to make it malum malorum. \Shéh is the sounding criterion of the Muskohge or Creek Indians, a kind 
of cant jargon; for example, heettla-sheh signifies ‘good’, and heettla-wah-E-sheh ‘very good’; according to their 
universal standard of speech, it becomes a superlative by subjoining that part of the divine name to it. With the 
Chikkasah and Choktah Aeetéla signifies ‘dancing’, probably because that religious exercise was good and highly 
pleasing to them, when, according to ancient custom, they danced in their symbolical circles to and before YO Hz 
Wau. With the former, apullowhage-sheh expresses ‘bad, or evil’, thereby inverting the divine letters. Skeh is 
the favourite termination of the Chikkasah and Choktah; as chookoma-skeh < good’, chookomasto-skeh (alluding to 
Ishto) ‘very good’, and ookproo-skeh ‘bad’. Likewise, ookproosto ‘worst, or very bad’; for by annexing the con- 
tracted initial part of the divine name Zshtohoollo to the end of it, it is a superlative. These remarks may be of 
service to the inhabitants of our valuable and extensive barriers, in order to discover the national name of those savages 
who now and then cut them off. Ookproo-se, with those Indians, signifies ‘accursed’; the two last letters make 
only a samech, which implies a neuter passive; and, as ookproo is the only substantive or adjective they use to 
express ‘evil’, by doubling the leading vowel of the four-lettered divine name, both at the beginning and end of the 
word, may we not conjecture at its origin, as glancing at the introduction of sin or evil by man’s overacting or 
innovating, through a too curious knowledge or choice? “Ye shall be as gods,” and in order to gain the resemblance 
they ate what was forbidden. 

The greater number of their compounded words (and, I believe, every one of them) which convey a virtuous or 
pure idea, either have some syllables of the three divine names, or visibly glance at them, or have one or two vowels 
of the sacred name Yo Hz Wau, and generally begin with one of them; which I shall exemplify with a few Chik- 
kasah and Cheerake words :—zsse-chowweé ‘deer’, yandsa ‘buffalo’, which, as it begins with the divine name Yau, 
contains no more of their beloved vowels: in like manner, wahka ‘cattle’, zshke-oochéa ‘a mother’. This last 
seems to be drawn from Jsha, the mother of all mankind. £Aé and enekia signify ‘a woman’. The latter is 
derived from the active verb akekeuhah, signifying ‘to love ardently’, or like a woman; nakkdne askai ‘a man’. 
From this word the Chikkasah derive nakke the name of an arrow or bullet ; and with the Cheerake askai signifies 

to fear’; as all the American brute animals were afraid of man, &c. 

Words which imply either a vicious or impure idea generally begin with a consonant, and double those favourite 

vowels either at the beginning and end, or in the middle of such words; as, massooba woheea ‘a wolf’.. With 

304 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

the Chikkasah eassooba signifies ‘bewildered’, patche ‘a pigeon’, and patche eassooba ‘a turtle dove’. Soore 
and sheeke are the Chikkasah and Cheerake names of a ‘turkey-buzzard’; choola and choocdla ‘a fox’; shookqua 
and seeqgua ‘an opossum, or hog’; ookoonne ‘a polecat’; ookoonna ‘a hadger’; chookphe and cheesto ‘a rabbit’. 
The last word is derived from the defective verb chestz, ‘forbear, or do not meddle with’; and rabbits were pro- 
hibited to the Israelites. In like manner, ooppa and ookookoo ‘a night-owl’; oophe and keera ‘a dog’; nahoolla 
and u-néhka ‘white people’, or ‘impure animals’, The Chikkasah both corrupt and transpose the last part of the 
divine name Jshtohoollo; and the Cheerake invert their magnifying termination U, to convey an impure idea. And 
through the like faint allusion to this divine name, hool/o signifies ‘idols, pictures, or images’; a sharp-pointed 
sarcasm! for the word hoollo signifies also ‘menstruous women’, who were for the time an equal abomination to the 
Israelites, and with whom they were to have no communion. These two words seem to bear the same analogy to 
each other, as 9x (4/), a name of God, and 7s (leh), signifying the covenant of the Holy One to redeem man, and 
mx (aloah), < execrated, or accursed of God’, as idols were. 

With the Cheerake, awwa, or amma, signifies ‘water’, and ammot ‘a river’; not much unlike the Hebrew. 
They likewise term salt, hawa; and both the conjunction copulative, and ‘to marry’, is ¢awa. The name of a wife 
is awah, which, written in Hebrew, makes mim (ve or Hweh), the name of our general mother. So that the Indian 
name of a wife is literally and emphatically, His AND, ‘one absolutely needful for the well-being of zsh, or man’; 
eshtawa (tm?) signifies ‘have you married?’ We gain additional light from the strong significant appellative 
ish-ke, ‘a mother’; which is an evident contraction of /sha, the mother of yawe, or mankind, with their favourite 
termination ske subjoined; the word becomes thus smoother than to pronounce it at its full length, Lsha-ske. If 
we consider that the Hebrews pronounced } (vaw) when a consonant, as w, here is a very strong expressive gra- 
dation, through those various words, up to the divine, necessary AND, who formed and connected every system 
of beings; or to the Hebrew divine original, YO Hz Wau: at the same time we gain a probable reason why so 
many proper names of old Indian places in South Carolina, and elsewhere along the great continent, begin with our 
Anglo-Saxon borrowed character w; as, Wampee, Watboo, Wappoo, Wadmola, Wassamésah, &c. Chance is 
fluctuating, and can never act uniformly. . 

To elucidate the aforesaid remarks, it may not be amiss to observe, that according to the Israelitish custom both 
of mourning and employing mourners for their dead, and calling weeping the lifting up of their voices to God, the 
Choktah literally observe the same custom, and both they and the Chikkasah term a person who through a pre- 
tended religious principle bewails the dead, yah-ah, ‘Ah God!’ and one who weeps on other occasions yahma, 
‘pouring out salt tears to, or before, God’; which is similar to ‘7. When a person weeps very bitterly, they say 
yahmishto, which is a compounded word, derived from 7) and 9), with the initial part of the divine name Ishéohoollo 
subjoined, to magnify the idea, according to the usage of the Hebrews. When the divine penman is describing the 
creation, and the strong purifying wind which swept along the surface of the waters, he calls it ‘the air, or spirit’; 
and more significantly, ‘the wind of God’, or a very great wind; and in other parts of the divine oracles, great hail, 
a great lion, and the like, are by the same figure called the hail of God. They also apply the former words, yah-ah, 
yah-ma, and the like, to express the very same ideas through all the moods and tenses; as cheyaaras, ‘I shall weep 
for you’; sawa cheyadra awa, ‘wife, I will not weep for you’. And when the violence of their grief for the 
deceased is much abated, the women frequently in their plaintive notes repeat Yo Hé (ta) Wah, Yo Hé (ta) Weh, 
Yo Hé ta Hd, Yo Hé ti Héh; with a reference probably to the Hebrew custom of immoderately weeping and wail- 
ing for their dead, and invoking the name of God on such doleful occasions; and which may have induced these 
supposed red Hebrews to believe the like conduct a very essential part of religious duty. Veetak yah-ah signifies 
‘a fast day’, because they were then humbly to say 4h, and afflict their souls before Yau. In like manner, 
yah-dbe signifies ‘one who weeps for having killed or murdered another’. Its roots are 7 (yah), their continual 
war-period, and an (adele), signifying ‘sorrow or mourning’; for, as killing or murdering is an hostile act, it 
cannot be drawn from 72N, which signifies ‘ brotherly love, or tender affection’. NVana-yah-abe describes a person 
weeping while another is killing him. Now, as nana is ‘a relation’, Yah ‘God’, and ade as above, the true mean- 
ing seems to be, ‘one, like bleeding Abele, weeping to God’. Likewise their name for salt, hawa, may inform 
us that though at present they use no salt in their religious offerings, they forbore it, by reason of their distant 
situation from the sea-shore, as well as by the danger of blood attending the bringing it through an enemy’s 
country; for according to the idiom of their language, if they had not thought salt an essential part of the law 

a 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 305 

of sacrificature, they most probably would not have derived it from the two last syllables of the great divine name ; 

whereas they double the consonant when they express water, without drawing it from the clear fountain of living 
waters, Yo He Wan. 

With the Hebrews, as before observed*, 551 (éephale) signifies ‘shaking or pulling of the hand, cohesion, con- 
junction, or entering into society’, and ‘praying or invoking’. In conformity to that original standard, when the 
Indians would express a strong lasting friendship, they have no other way than by saying Aharatile-la pheena che- 
manumbole, «1 shall firmly shake hands with your discourse or speech’. When two nations of Indians are making 
or renewing peace with each other, the ceremonies and solemnities they use carry the face of great antiquity, and are 
very striking to a curious spectator, which I shall here relate, so far as it suits the present subject. When strangers 
of note arrive near the place where they design to contract new friendship, or confirm their old amity, they send a 
messenger a-head to inform the people of their amicable intention. He carries a swan’s wing in his hand, painted 
all over with streaks of white clay, as an expressive emblem of their embassy. The next day, when they have made 
their friendly parade, with firing off their guns and whooping, and have entered the beloved square, their chieftain, 
who is a-head of the rest, is met by one of the old beloved men, or magi, of the place. He and the visitant ap- 
proach one another in a bowing posture. he former says, Y0, ish la chu anggona? ‘Are you come a friend in 
the name of God?’ or, ‘Is God with you, friend?’ for Yo is a religious contraction of Yohewah,—ish ‘the man a 
faa note of joy, chw a query, and anggona ‘a friend’. The other replies, Yah—arahre-o, anggona, ‘God is 
with me, I am come, a friend, in God’s name’. The reply confirms the meaning of the questionary salute in the 
manner before explained. The magus then grasps the stranger with both his hands around the wrist of his right 
hand, which holds some green branches—again about the elbow—then around the arm close to his shoulder, as a 
near approach to the heart. Then his immediately waving the eagles’ tails over the head of the stranger is the 
strongest pledge of good faith. Similar to the Hebrew word, phdle with the Indians signifies ‘to wave’, and like- 
wise ‘ to shake’; for they say skooba—phdle, ‘shaking one’s head’. How far the Indian oath, or manner of covenant- 
ing, agrees with that of the Hebrews on the like solemn occasion, I refer to the intelligent reader. Their method 
of embracing each other seems to resemble also that custom of the Hebrews when a stranger became surety for 
another, by giving him his wrist; to which Solomon alludes, “If thou hast striken hand with the stranger,” &c.— 
Their common method of greeting each other is analogous with the above; the host only says, Ish-la chu ? and the 
guest replies, 4rahre-o, ‘I am come in the name of O E A, or Yo He Wan’. 

When O is joined to the end of words, it always denotes a superlative, according to their universal figurative 
abbreviations of the great beloved name; thus with the Chikkasah, zsse ‘deer, and isse-o ‘very great deer’; 
yandsa ‘a buffalo, yanas-o ‘a very extraordinary great buffalo’; which is, at least, as strong a superlative as 
28 D1 08, signifying ‘the house of the Omnipotent, or, the temple.’ With the Cheerake Indians, a (wih 12) howwe 
signifies ‘a great deer-killer:’ it is compounded of ahowwe ‘a deer, Wah the period of the divine name, and ¢a 
anote of plurality. he title ‘the deer-killer of God for the people’ was, since my time, very honourable among 
them, as its radical meaning likewise imports. Every town had one solemnly appointed; him, whom they saw the 
Deity had at sundry times blessed with better success than the rest of his brethren, in supplying them with an holy 
banquet, that they might eat and rejoice before the divine essence. But now it seems, by reason of their great 
intercourse with foreigners, they have left off that old social religious custom; and even their former noted hospi- 
tality. I would also observe, that though necessity obliged them to apply the bear’s grease or oil to religious uses, 
they have no such phrase as (Wah ta) eeona; not accounting the bear so clean an animal as the deer, to be offered 
and eaten in their religious friendly feasts ; where they solemnly invoked, ate, drank, sung and danced in a circular 
form, to and before Yo He Wau. : 

The Indian dialects, like the Hebrew language, have a nervous and emphatical manner of expression. The Indians 
do not personify inanimate objects, as did the Oriental heathens ; but their style is adorned with images, comparisons 
and strong metaphors, like the Hebrews, and equal in allegories to any of the Eastern nations. According to the 
ages of antiquity, their war-speeches and public orations always assume a poetical turn, not unlike the sound of the 
measures of the celebrated Anacreon and Pindar. Their poetry is seldom exact in numbers, rhymes or measure ; 
it may be compared to prose in music, or a tuneable way of speaking. The period is always accompanied with a 

* Page 297. 
Al 

306 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

sounding vehemence, to enforce their musical speech: and the music is apparently designed to please the ear and 
affect the passions. 

After what hath been said of their language, it may be proper here to show how they accent the consonants: I 
shall range them in the order of our alphabet, except those they pronounce after our manner. When ch begins a 
word, or is prefixed to a vowel, it conveys a soft sound, as chda ‘high’: but otherwise it is guttural; as is d, which 
is expressed by fixing the tip of the tongue between the teeth, as Dawi for ‘David’. G is always guttural, as we 
accent go. They cannot pronounce gz; and they have not the A, neither can it be expressed in their dialects, 
as their leading vowels bear the force of guttural consonants. They have not the jod, as I can any way recollect, 
or get information of; nor can they repeat it any nearer than chot. They pronounce & as in ko; / and x, as 
d—s, by fixing the tongue to the lower teeth; ¢ like d, as in the old Hibernian or Celtic affirmative ta. They 
cannot pronounce v or w; they call the governor of Moveel (Mobille), Goweno-Moweeleh: and they have not a 
word which begins or ends with w. As are always divided into two syllables; as hak-se ‘mad’, &e. They have 
not the letter 2; much less any such harsh sound as éz, although they have ¢/. As they use the Hebrew 
consonants y and w, in their most solemn invocation YO He Wau, instead of the present Hebrew jod and vaw, 
so they seem to exclude them entirely out of their various dialects: the pronunciation, therefore, of the Hebrew 
characters which are supposed to convey the other sounds, they are unacquainted with; and those which seem to be 
transposed may be clearly ascertained by persons of proper capacity and leisure, by comparing a sufficient number 
of Hebrew and Indian words together: the Indian accents oo and 0, gu, and é/, may prove a pretty good key to 
speculative inquirers. ZV often occur in their words; as ¢/wmba, ‘to bleed with a lancet, to bore, scoop, or 
make anything hollow’; and heettla, ‘to dance’. And the South Americans, we are told, had likewise the same 
sound, as in that national name Zlaskala: it seems to have been universal over the extensive continent. And, 
from a similarity of the Hebrew manners, religious rites, civil and martial customs, we have a strong presumptive 
proof, that they used the aforesaid double vowels, and likewise a single vowel, as a termination, to give their words 
a soft accent: and it is plain to me, that the Hebrew language did not sound so harsh as it is now commonly 
expressed, but, like the American dialects, it was interspersed with vowels, and a vowel was commonly subjoined to 
each word, for the sake of a soft cadence; as Abele, and dle, instead of 91s (Abel), and 9x (41), &e. 

The English characters cannot be brought any nearer to the true pronunciation of the Indian words, than as above 
set down: so that former writers have notoriously strayed by writing conjecturally, or taking things on the wing of 
fame. What Indian words we had, being exceedingly mangled, either by the fault of the press, or of torturing pens, 
heretofore induced skilful persons to conjecture them to be hieroglyphical characters, in imitation of the ancient 
Egyptian manner of writing their chronicles. ‘The Indians express themselves with a great deal of vehemence and 
with short pauses in all their set speeches; but in common discourse, they express themselves according to our 
usual method of speech, only when they scold each other ; which I never observed, unless they were intoxicated with 
spirituous liquors, or casually overheard a husband when sober in his own family. They always act the part of a 
stoic philosopher in outward appearance, and never speak above their natural key: and in their philosophic way of 
reasoning, their language is the more sharp and biting, like keen irony and satire, that kills whom it praises. They 
know that thus they correct and subdue the first boilings of anger; which, if unchecked, proves one of the most 
dangerous passions to which human nature is subject. So that remote savages, who have heard only the jarring 
screeches of night owls, and the roaring voices of ravenous beasts of prey, in this respect give lessons and set a 
worthy example to our most civilized nations. I have heard several eloquent Indian leaders, just as they were 
ready to set off for war, to use as bold metaphors and allegories in their speeches, and images almost as full and 
animating as the eloquent penman of the old divine Book of Job, even where he is painting with his strong colours 
the gladness and contempt of the beautiful war-horse at the near approach of the enemy. I heard one of their 
captains, at the end of his oration for war, tell the warriors that stood outermost, he feelmgly knew their guns were 
burning in their hands, their tomahawks thirsty to drink the blood of their enemy, and their trusty arrows impatient 
to be on the wing; and lest delay should burn their hearts any longer, he gave them the cool refreshing word, “ Join 
the holy ark, and away to cut off the devoted enemy!” They immediately sounded the shrill whod-whodp, and 
struck up the solemn awful song Y6, &c. 

In Virginia resides the remnant of an Indian tribe who call themselves Sepéne; which word with the Egyptians 
signifies the time of putting their wine into vessels ; derived, according to mythologists, from saphan, ‘to inclose or 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 307 

conceal’. From thence they formed the fictitious Tisiphone, the punisher of sins, animated with hatred; and also, 
the rest of their pretended furies, from the like circumstances of the year. Our early American writers have be- 
stowed on these Indians an emperor, according to the Spanish copy, calling him Pawhatan,—contrary to the Indian 
method of ending their proper names with a vowel; and have pictured them as a separate body of fierce idolatrous 
cannibals. We however find them, in the present day, of the same temper and religious tenets as the rest of the 
Indian Americans, in proportion to their situation in life. Considering the nearness of Egypt to Judea, they might 
have derived that appellative from the Egyptians,—especially as here and in several of our American colonies 
(particularly on the north side of Susquehana river, in Pennsylvania,) are old towns called Kanaa. There was about 
thirty years ago a remnant of a nation, or subdivided tribe of Indians, called Kandai; which resembles the Hebrew 
proper name 3y32, (Canaan, or Chanoona). Their proper names always end with a vowel, and they seldom use a 
consonant at the end of any word*. I cannot recollect any exceptions but the following, which are sonorous, and 
seem to be of an ancient date; ookkah ‘a swan’, tlpatak ‘a wing’, kooshik ‘reeds’, sheenuk ‘sand’, shitik ‘the 
skies’, phutchik <a star’, soonak ‘a kettle’, skin ‘the eye’, at-eep ‘a pond’,—and from which they derive the word 
ai-ee-pe ‘to bathe’, which alludes to the Eastern method of purifying themselves. J/bak signifies ‘a hand’; and there 
are a few words that end with sh, as soolish ‘a tongue’, &c. 

The Indians call the lightning and thunder e/oha, and its rumbling noise rowah, which may not improperly be 
deduced from the Hebrew. To enlighten the Hebrew nation, and impress them with a reverential awe of Divine 
majesty, God spoke to them at Sinai, and other times during the theocracy, with an awful or thundering voice. The 
greater part of the Hebrews seem to have been formerly as ignorant of philosophy as are the savage Americans 
now. They did not know that thunder proceeded from any natural cause, but from the immediate voice of Elohim, 
above the clouds: and the Indians believe, according to this Hebrew system of philosophy, that Minggo Ishto eloha 
alkaiasto, ‘the great chieftain of the thunder is very cross, or angry, when it thunders’: and I have heard them say, 
when it rained, thundered and blew sharp for a considerable time, that the beloved or holy people were at war above 
the clouds: and they believe that the war at such times is moderate or hot, in proportion to the noise and violence 
of the storm. I have seen them in these storms fire off their guns, pointed toward the sky; some in contempt 
of heaven, and others through religion ; the former, to show that they were warriors, and not afraid to die in any 
shape, much less afraid of that threatening troublesome noise ; and the latter, because their hearts directed them to 
assist Ishtohoollo Eloha-. May not this proceed from an oral tradition of the war which the rebellious angels waged 
against the great Creator, and which the ancient heathens called the war of the giants? Nothing sounds bolder, 
or is more expressive, than the Cheerake name of thunder, eentaqudrdske. It points at the effects and report of 
the battles, which they imagine the holy people are fighting above. The small-pox, a foreign disease, no way con- 
natural to their healthy climate, they call oonatdqudra, imagining it to proceed from the invisible darts of angry 
fate pointed against them, for their young people’s vicious conduct. When they say ‘I shall shoot’, their term is 
ake-rooka. The radix of this word is in the two last syllables ; the two first are expressive only of the first person 
singular ; as akeeohoosa, ‘I am dead or lost,’ and akeeohooséra, ‘1 have lost. Rooka seems to have a reference to 
the Hebrew name for the Holy Spirit. 

The most southern old town which the Chikkasah first settled, after the Chokchoomah, Choktah, and they, sepa- 

#* If we consider the proximity of those Indians to a thick-settled colony, in which there are many gentlemen of eminent learning, it will appear 
not a little surprising that the name Canaanites, in the original language, according to the Indian method of expressing it as above, did not excite 
the attention of the curious, and prompt them to some inquiry into the language, rites, and customs of those aborigines: which had they effected, 
would have justly procured them those eulogia from the learned world, which their society profusely bestowed on the artful, improved strokes of a 
former prime magistrate of South Carolina, whose conduct in Indian affairs was so exceedingly singular, if not sordid and faulty, (as I publicly 
proved when he presided there,) that another year’s such management would have caused the Cheerake to remove to the French barrier, or to have 
invited the French to settle a garrison where the late unfortunate Fort Loudon stood. But a true British administration succeeding, in the very 
critical time, it destroyed their immature but most dangerous threatening scheme. This note I insert here, though rather out of place, to show 
that the northern gentlemen have not made all those observations and inquiries with regard to the Indians, which might have been reasonably 
expected from so numerous and learned a body. 

+ The first lunar eclipse I saw, after I lived with the Indians, was among the Cheerake, An. 1736 : and during the continuance of it, their 
conduct appeared very surprising to one who had not seen the like before ; they all ran wild, this way and that WEN like innaiice; firing their guns, 
whooping and hallooing, beating of kettles, ringing horse-bells, and making the most horrid noises that human beings possibly could. This was 
" the effect of their natural philosophy, and done to assist the suffering moon, And it is an opinion of some of the East Indians, that eclipses are 
occasioned by a great monster resembling a bull-frog, which now and then gnaws one edge of the sun and moon, and would totally destroy them, 
only that they frighten it away, and by that means preserve them and their light, 

508 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

rated on our side of the Missisippi into three different tribes, they called Yanceka, thereby inverting yahkane, the 
name of the earth; as their former brotherhood was then turned into enmity*. The bold Creeks on the opposite 
or north side of them they named Vahndbe, ‘killing to God, or devoting to death; for the mid consonant expresses 
the present time. And their proper names of persons and places are always expressive of certain circumstances or 
things, drawn from roots that convey a fixed determinate meaning. — With the Muskohge, algeh signifies ‘a 
language, or speech’: and because several of the Germans among them frequently say Yah-yah, as an affirmative, 
they call them Yah-yah algeh, ‘those of the blasphemous speech’; which strongly hints to us, that they still retain 
a glimpse of the third moral command delivered at Sinai, “Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in 
vain,” or apply the name of Yohewah, thy Elohim, to vain or created things. 

These Indians, to inculcate on their young people that YO He Wau is the author of vegetation, call the growth 
of vegetables Wahrdah, ‘moved by Yohewah’: for adh signifies ‘to walk or move’; and the consonant is an ex- 
pletive of distinction. In like manner wah-dh signifies that ‘ the fruits are ripe’, or moved to their joy by Yohewah. 
They likewise call the flying of birds wahkdah, as Yohewah gave them that swift motion; and when young 
pigeons are well feathered, they say patche hishshé oolphotahdh: patché signifies ‘a pigeon’, hishshé ‘ leaves, hair 
cr feathers’, oolpha or oolpho ‘a bud’, ¢a a note of plurality, and Adh of admiration, to make it a plural superlative. 
But when the pigeons in winter fly to a moderate climate in great clouds, they use the word wah-dh, which in 
every other application describes vegetation, and say patche wah-ah, ‘the pigeons are moved to them by Yohewah’; 
which seems to allude to the quails in the wilderness, that were miraculously sent to feed the Israelites. Clay 
basins they call a-am-bo; and their old round earthen forts, atambo chdah; this last word signifying ‘high, or 
tall’: but a stockade, or wooden fort, they term hooréta; and to inswamp, book-hoore, from bookse ‘a swamp’, 
and hooréta, ‘a fort, or place of difficult access’. High waters conveys to them an idea only of deepness ; as, ookka 
phobe, ‘deep waters’. And they say ookka chookoma intda, ‘ the water glides or moves along pleasantly, or goodly’. 
That the word zztda has ya-ah for its radix is apparent from their name for a rapid current, yahnale, ‘it runs with 
a very extraordinary force’; the mid consonant is placed there to give the word a suitable vehemence of expression, 
and the word is compounded of my (Yah), and 9x (dle), two names of God. In like manner, yahnha signifies ‘a 
pleurisy, fever’, and the like; because they reckon, when Yau says Ha in anger to any of their vicious people, he 
immediately fires the blood, and makes it run violently through all the veins of the body. Ashtahdle signifies ‘ the 
reflection of the celestial luminaries’, which is composed of two of the divine names; as wx (sh), the celestial 
cherubimical name of God, signifying ‘fire’, ¢2 a contraction of the conjunction copulative, and 7 (dle), ‘the 
strong or omnipotent’. They say a river, or warm victuals, is a-shw-pa; that is, the former is become fordable, 
and the latter eatable. They here divide ash into two syllables, and the termination alludes to the word apa, which 
signifies eating. 

Pdah signifies to raise the voice, ‘ vocifero’; for (phi) signifies ‘the mouth, and dah ‘to move. Opde is the 
name of a war-leader, because he is to move his mouth to O E A, or invoke YO He Wau, while he carries the 
beloved ark to war, and is sanctifying himself and his party, that they may obtain success against the enemy. But 
pae-minggo signifies ‘ a far-off or distant chieftain’. Pa yak matihdh is the high name of a war-leader, derived from 
pdah, ‘to raise the voice to Yah’, and ¢ahdh ‘finished’, meaning his war-gradation ; the m prefixed to it makes it a 
substantive, according to the usage of the Hebrews. Anything liquid they term ookche, from ookka and che: and 
ookchaah signifies ‘alive’: it is drawn from ookka ‘ water’, ch a note of resemblance, and adh ‘moving’; 2. e. a living 
creature resembles moving water. In like manner, ookcha signifies to awake out of sleep, and also to plant any 
vegetable substance, alluding to their three different states,—they first were enabled to move about, then rest or sleep 
is necessary, and also being planted in the earth; but they hope that in due time they shall be moved upward, after 
they have slept a while in the earth, by the omnipotent power of Yau. They have an idea of a resurrection of the 
dead body, according to the general belief of the Jews, and in conformity to St. Paul’s philosophical axiom, that 
corruption precedes generation and a resurrection. Keenta signifies ‘a beaver’, ookka ‘water’, and heenna ‘a path ’s 
but, for a smooth cadence, they contract them into one word, keentookheenna, which very expressively signifies ‘a 
beaver-dam’. 

* They call the earth yahkdne, because Yah formed it as his footstool, by the power of his word. In allusion also hereto, nakkane signifies a 
man, beause of the mother-earth; and nakke, a bullet or arrow. When the Cheerake ask a person, Is it not so? they say, Wahkane? The 
Divine essential name, and kane, are evidently the roots of these words. : 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 309 

The Indian compounded words are generally pretty long ; but those that are radical, or simple, are mostly short : 
very few, if any of them, exceed three or four syllables. And as their dialects are guttural, every word contains 
some consonants, and these are the essential characteristics of language. Where they deviate from this rule, it is 
by religious emblems ; which obviously proceeds from the great regard they paid to the names of the Deity, 
especially to the four-lettered, divine, essential name, by using the letters it contains, and the vowels it was originally 
pronounced with, to convey a virtuous idea; or, by doubling or transposing them, to signify the contrary. In this 
they all agree: and as this general custom must proceed from one primary cause, it seems to assure us they were 
not in a savage state when they first separated and variegated their dialects with so much religious care and exact 
art. Blind chance could not direct so great a number of remote and warring savage nations to fix on, and unite in, 
so nice a religious standard of speech. Vowels are inexpressive of things; they only typify them, as Oo--Z, ‘to 
ascend or remove’; O £ 4, a most sacred affirmation of the truth. Similar to these are many words containing 
only one consonant, as Zo-e-w, ‘it is very true’; O-se-w, ‘very good’; Y-o-w, ‘evil, or very bad’; Y-d-a, ‘he 
moves by the divine bounty’; /Van-ne Y-a, ‘the divine hill, or the mount of God’, &c. If language was not 
originally a divine gift, which some of our very curious modern philosophers deny, and have taken great pains to 
set aside, yet human beings are possessed of the faculties of thinking and speaking, and, in proportion to their 
ideas, they easily invented and learned words mixed with consonants and vowels to express them. Natural laws 
are common and general. The situation of the Indian Americans has probably been the means of sinking them 
into that state of barbarism we now behold. Yet, though in great measure they may have lost their primitive 
language, not one of them expresses himself by the natural cries of brute animals, any further than to describe some 
of the animals by the cries they make, which we ourselves sometimes imitate, as Choo-qua-lé-qua-l0d, the name they 
give that merry night-singing bird which we call ‘ Whip her will my poor wife’, (much like our cuckoo,) so termed 
from its musical monotony. No language is exempt from the like simple copyings. The nervous, polite and 
copious Greek tongue had the loud-sounding 466 béa0, which the Romans imitated by their bellowing doves 
béum; and the Indians say pa-a, signifying the loud noise of every kind of animals, and their own loud-sounding 
war whod whodp. Where they do not use divine emblems, their words have much articulation of consonants. 
Their radicals have not the inseparable property of three consonants, though frequently they have ; and their words 
are not so long as strangers conjecturally draw them out. Instead of a simple word we too often insert the wild 
picture of a double or triple compounded one, and the conjugation of their verbs utterly deceives us: a specimen 
of this will show it with sufficient clearness, and may exhibit some useful hints to the curious searchers of antiquity. 
A-n6-wa signifies ‘a rambler, renegado, or a person of no settled place of abode’. 4-nd-wah, the first person, and 
_ish-na, the second person singular; but they have not a particular pronoun for the third: they distinguish it by 
custom. St-a, or sy-ah, is ‘I am’; chee-a, or chy-ah, ‘you are’; and too-wah, ‘he is’. y-ah signifies ‘to go’; 
ay-a-sa, ‘I remain’, 2sh-i-a-sa ‘ you remain’, a-sa ‘he remains’. 4-OO-E-A is a strong religious emblem, 
signifying ‘I climb, ascend, or remove to another place of residence’. It points to a-n0-wah, the first person 
singular, and O-E-A or YO He Wau, and implies putting themselves under his divine patronage. The beginning 
of that most sacred symbol is, by studious skill and a thorough knowledge of the power of letters, placed twice, to 
prevent them from applying the sacred name to vain purposes or created things. In like manner they say, nas- 
sap-pe-O ish-OO-E-A, ‘you are climbing a very great acorn-tree, meaning an oak; for nas-se is the name of 
an acorn; and the mid part of that triple compounded word is derived from ap-pé-la, ‘to help’; che-ap-pé-la 
a-wa, ‘I do not help you’. The termination, according to their fixed idiom, magnifies it to a superlative. @Quoo- 
ran-hé-qua, a noted old camping place, fourteen miles above the settlement of Ninety-six, and eighty-two below the 
Cheerake, signifies in their dialect ‘the large white oaks’. Oos-sak is the name of ‘a hickory nut’, and Oos-sak 
Ap-pe-O, as above. Oot-te signifies ‘a chestnut’; moot-te, ‘a tooth’; soot-te, ‘a pot’; and oo-te, ‘to make 
a fire’, which may be called an Indian type for eating boiled chestnuts. 

When they say ‘he is removing his camp’, they express it in a most religious manner, al-bé-na-OO-E-A. 
al-be-nds-le signifies ‘I camped’; al-be-nds-le-chti, ‘1 shall or will camp’, but according to their religious mode 
of speaking al-bé-na a-OO-E-A-re expresses the former, and al-bé-na a-OO-E-A-rd-chi the latter phrase ; 
likewise al-bé-na OO-E-As signifies ‘castra moveto ’ imperatively. It is worthy of notice, that as they have no 
pronoun relative to express the third person singular, they have recourse to the first syllable of the essential word 
toowah, ‘he is’. In allusion to that word, they term the conjunction copulative ¢a-wah and tee-u-wah ‘resting ’. 

4K 

310 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

So mixed a train of nice and exact religious terms could not be invented by people as illiterate and savage as the 
Indians now are, any more than happen by accident. . Mi 

Though they have lost the true meaning of their religious emblems, except what a very few of us occasionally 
revive in the retentive memories of their old inquisitive magi, yet tradition directs them to apply them properly. 
They use many plain religious emblems of the divine names YonEwau, Yau and ALE; and these are the roots of 
a prodigious number of words through their various dialects. It is surprising they were unnoticed, and that no 
use was made of them by the early voluminous Spanish writers, or by our own, for the information of the learned 
world, notwithstanding the bright lights they had to direct them in that era, when the decorations of their holy 
temples and priests, their religious ceremonies and sacred hymns of praise to the Deity (of which hereafter) so nearly 
corresponded with the Israelitish, and might have been readily discovered by any who eyed them with attention. 
In our time, by reason of their long intercourse with foreigners, we have necessarily but a few dark traces to guide 
our inquiries in the investigation of what must have been formerly shining truths. 

I must beg to be indulged with a few more remarks on their verbs.—If we prefix as to a-a, ‘to move’, it 
becomes a-sd-a, ‘to offend’. The monosyllables ish and che variously denote the second person singular; but 
when the former is by custom prefixed to a verb, the latter then expresses either the accusative or ablative case 
singular of the pronoun relative; as 2sh-a-sd-ah, ‘ you are offended, or moved to say Ah’; ish-a-sd-a-re, ‘you were 
displeased’; but che-a-sd-ah signifies ‘I am displeased with you’; and che-a-sd-a-re ‘I was offended by you’; 
che-a-sd-a-chee-le is ‘I occasion or have occasioned you to be displeased’, literally ‘I produce or have produced 
offence to. you’; and che-a-sd-a-cheé-la awa, ‘I shall not cause you to be displeased’. In like manner they say 
a-Gn-ha, which signifies ‘I despise’, or literally, ‘I move ha’; for the mid letter is inserted for distinction sake 
according to their idiom. So a-chin-ha-chu, ‘I shall contemn you’; a-chin-ha-cheé-la a-wa, ‘1 shall not cause 
you to become despicable.’ Chee-le signifies literally, ‘to bring forth young’. So that the former method of 
expression is very significant; and yet it shows a sterility of language, as that single word is applicable to every 
species of female animals, fowls not excepted: thus, phoo-she chee-le, ‘the birds lay’. Oe-she signifies ‘a young 
animal’ of any kind, and likewise ‘an egg’. When mentioned alone, by way of excellence, it is the common name 
of an infant ; but when the name of the species of animals is prefixed to it, it describes the young creature. dn- 
push-koosh oo-she, is what the tender, mother says to her well-pleased infant. The two words import the same 
thing. The former resembles the Hebrew, and the latter is likewise a substantive ; they say chool-loo-she teeth- 
lé-a-ta-hdh, ‘the fox-cubs are run off’; choo-la being the name of a fox. Phut-choos-oo-she wah-kd-as, ‘let the 
young duck fly away’; and phoo-soo-she hish-she ool-pha-qui-sa, ‘the young wild bird’s hairs, or feathers, are not 
sprung, or budded’. Pa-se signifies the hair of a man’s head, or the mane of animals. Sha-/e signifies ‘ pregnant’, 
literally, ‘to carry a burthen’; as oo-she shd-le, ‘she bears or carries an infant’; but when it is born, shoo-le is 
the name for carrying it in their arms. This bears off from the divine radix, with great propriety of language. Lm 
prefixed to a verb, denotes the masculine and feminine pronouns ‘illum’ and ‘illam’. As this is their fixed method of 
speech, the reader will easily understand the true idiom of their language. Sal-le signifies ‘I am dead’, chil-le, 
you &c., z-leh, he &c. And this is likewise a substantive, as 2/-let min-te, ‘death is approaching, or coming’: 
min-te-cha signifies ‘come you’; and a-min-té-la a-wa or ac-min-td-qua-chi, ‘1 wili not come’. The former 
word, shd-le, “to carry a burthen’, or ‘she is pregnant’, seems to be derived from w and 9x; and, as a-shd-le, ish- 
shd-le, and e-shd-le, are the first, second, and third persons singular of the present tense, the latter may allude to 
her conception by the power of the Deity: and it also points to )w, (Sha-wé-le) or Saul, ‘the grave or sepulchre’, 
out of which the dead shall come forth to a new world of light. In like manner chee-le ‘to bring forth, or 
a-chee-ld-le, ‘1 brought forth’, appears to be derived from 5, a note of resemblance, and 9x (4-le), ‘the fruitful Om- 
nipotent’. All the American nations, like the Jews, entertain a contemptible opinion of their females that are 
barren; sterility they consider as proceeding from the divine anger on account of their conjugal infidelity. 

To enable grammarians to form a clear idea of the Indian method of variegating their verbs, and of the true 
meaning they convey, we must again recur to the former essential word, or rather divine emblem, 4-ah, ‘he moves’. 
They say a-as, ‘let him move’, and ee-md-ho, or bld-sas a-d-d- re,1 now move’, or ‘yesterday I moved’; for, like the 
Hebrews, they sometimes use the preterperfect instead of the present tense. .4-d-a-ra-chitis the first person singular 
of the future tense, in the indicative mood. A-d-ta-hah expresses the third person plural of the present tense, and 
same mood. 4-d-ta-hdh-ta-ké-a signifies, by query, ‘have ye, or will ye move?” It is their method of conjugating 

2 Gare 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 311 

their verbs, that occasions any of their radical or derivative verbs to exceed three or four syllables ; as we see by this, 
which, though composed only of two vowels, or short syllables, is yet so greatly deflected. With them two nega- 
tives make an affirmative, as ak-hish-ko-qud, ‘1 shall not drink’; add the strong negative termination a-wa, it is 
‘I will certainly drink’. An affirmative question frequently implies a strong negative; as ai-a-rd-ta-k6-a, literally, 
‘will, or should I go” that is, ‘I really will not, or should not go’: and on the contrary, a negative query imports an 
affirmative assertion; as a-kai-u-qud-ta-ké-a, ‘should not I go?’ or ‘I surely should go’. Le-d-ko a-pd-ret sa- 
kdi-a-qua-ta-ké-a, is literally, ‘if I ate, should not I be satisfied?’ which implies, ‘if I ate, I should be fully 
satisfied’. To drinking they apply a word that signifies ‘content’; and indeed they are most eager to drink any sort 
of spiritous liquors, when their bellies are quite full. When they are tired with drinking, if we say to any of them, 
Un-ta ang-gé-na chee-ma-hish-k6-la chi, “Well, my friend, I will drink with you’; che-a-yéok-pa-chée-re too-gat, 
‘for indeed I rejoice in your company’; he replies, Hat-a, ook-ka hoo-me hish-ko sa-nook-td-ra; which is, 
‘No; for I am content with drinking bitter waters’. They constantly prefix the substantive before the adjective, 
and place the accusative case before the verb. If we translate the following words, ook-ka pangge hum-ma law- 
wa a-lish-ko-le bla-sas, they literally signify, ‘yesterday I drank a great deal of red-grape water’, meaning claret. 
Thus they say, tik-ké-ba, Ing-glee-she Fren-she ee-lap a-bing-ga e-tee-be, ‘formerly, when the English and French 
fought against each other’; Fren-she Ing-glee-she a-be-ta-le, ‘the French were killed by the English’. 

The verbs are seldom defective, or imperfect: though they may seem to be so to persons who do not understand 
the idiom of their language, they are not; they only appear as such by the near resemblance of words, which 
convey a different meaning; as a-kai-a, ‘1 go’, sa-kai-a, ‘I am satisfied with eating’, and sal-kar-a, ‘I am angry, 
cross, vexed or disturbed in mind’; shee-a, and che-kai-a, chil-kai-a,in the second person; at-a, e-kai-a, and al-kai-a, 
in the third person singular. 4-pee-sa signifies ‘to-see’, and al-péé-sa, ‘straight, even, or right’. _Al-poo-é-ak, the 
general name of mercantile goods, I subjoin, as such a word is uncommon with them; they seldom use so harsh a 
termination. I shall here close this Argument, and hope enough hath been said to give a clear idea of the principles 
of the Indian language and dialects, its genius and idiom, and strong similarity to, and near coincidence with, the 
Hebrew; which will be not easily accounted for, but by considering the American Indians as descended from 
the Jews. 

ARGUMENT VI. 

They count zéme after the manner of the Hebrews. They divide the year into spring, summer, autumn, or the 
fall of the leaf, and winter: which the Cheerake Indians call kogeh, akoota, oolekdhsté, kéra; and the Chikkasah 
and Choktah nation, otoolpha, téme palle, ashtora-méona, ashtora. Kégeh is drawn from anantdge, the general 
appellation for the sun and moon; because, when the sun returns from the southern hemisphere, he covers the 
vegetable world with a green livery. Akooéa alludes strongly to the essential divine name, as we have seen in the 
former Argument. With regard to oolekohste, ‘the fall of the leaf’, as they call a buzzard soore or soole, and as 
soolekohste signifies ‘troublesome, offensive, disagreeable,’ the word signifies that ‘the fall of the year is as 
disagreeable a sight as that of a buzzard’. ora, as with the Hebrews, signifies ‘the winter’; and is likewise 
the name of a bone: and by joining Aah, an Hebrew note of admiration, to the end of it, as kora-hah, it hecomes 
the proper name of a man, signifying ‘all bones, or very bony’. Ocdolpha, ‘the spring season’, is derived from 
oolpha, the name of ‘a bud’, or ‘to shoot out’; because then the solar heat causes vegetables to bud and spring. 
Témeh signifies ‘the solar light’, and palle ‘warm or hot’; ashtora ‘winter’, and moona ‘presently’, &c. They 
number their years by any of those four periods, for they have no name for a year; and they subdivide these, and 
count the year by lunar months, like the Israelites, who counted by moons, as their name sufficiently testifies; for 
they called them on7», the plural of n> ‘the moon’. 

The Indians have no distinct proper name for the sun and moon; one word, with a note of distinction, expresses 
both; for example, the Cheerake call the sun eus-se a-nan-tb-ge, ‘the day-moon, or sun’; and the latter, neus-se 
a-nan-t6-ge, or ‘the night-sun, or moon’. In like manner the Chikkasah and Choktah term the one neetak-has- 
sch, and the other neennak-hassch ; for neetak signifies ‘a day’, and neennak ‘a night’. Here I cannot forbear 
remarking that the Indians call the penis of any animal by the very same name, hasse; with this difference only, 
that the termination is in this instance pronounced short, whereas the other is long, on purpose to distinguish the 
words. This bears a strong analogy to what the rabbins tell us of the purity of the Hebrew language, that ‘it is so 

312 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

chaste a tongue, as to have no proper names for the parts of generation.” The Cheerake can boast of the same 
decency of style, for they call a corn-house watdhre, and the penis of any creature by the very same name; 
intimating, that as the sun and moon influence and ripen the fruits that are stored in it, so by the help of Ceres 
and Bacchus Venus lies warm, whereas on the contrary sine Cerere et Baccho friget Venus. 

They count certain very remarkable things by knots of various colours and make, after the manner of the South- 
American aborigines; or by notched square sticks, which are likewise distributed among the head warriors and 
other chieftains of different towns, in order to number the winters &c.,—the moons also, their sleeps, and the days 
when they travel, and especially certain secret intended acts of hostility. Under such a circumstance, if one day 
elapses, each of them loosens a knot, or cuts off a notch, or else makes one, according to previous agreement ; 
which those who are in the trading way among them call broken days. Thus they proceed day by day, till the 
whole time is expired which was marked out or agreed upon; and they know with certainty the exact time of any 
of the aforesaid periods, when they are to execute their secret purposes, be they ever so various. The authors of 
the romantic Spanish histories of Peru and Mexico have wonderfully stretched on these knotted or marked strings, 
and notched square sticks, to show their own fruitful inventions, and draw the attention and surprise of the learned 
world to their magnified bundle of trifles. ; 

The method of counting time by weeks, or sevenths, was a very ancient custom practised by the Syrians, Egyptians, 
and most of the Oriental nations, and it evidently is a remain of the tradition of the Creation. The Creator, indeed, 
renewed to the Hebrews the old precept of sanctifying the seventh day, on a particular occasion: and Christianity 
promoted that religious observance in the Western world, in remembrance of the work of redemption. The 
Greeks counted time by decads, or tens; and the Romans by nones, or ninths. The number and regular periods of 
the Indian public religious feasts (of which presently,) is a good historical proof that they counted time by, and 
observed, a weekly sabbath long after their arrival on the American continent. They count the day also by the 
three sensible differences of the sun, like the Hebrews: sun-rise they term hassé kootcha meente, ‘the sun’s 
coming out’; noon, or mid-day, ¢abookore; and sun-set, hassé oobea, literally ‘the sun is dead’; likewise hasse 
ookka tora, that is, ‘the sun is fallen into the water’: the last word is compounded of ookka ‘water’, and etora 
‘to fall’; it signifies also ‘to swim’, as instinct would direct those to do who fell into the water. And they call 
‘dark’ ookklille, derived from ookka ‘water’, and illeh‘dead’; which shows their opinion of the sun’s disappearance 
according to the ancients, who said the sun slept every night in the western ocean. They subdivide the day by 
any of the aforesaid three standards; as half way between the sun’s coming out of the water; and in like manner 
by midnight, or cock-crowing, &c. 

They begin the year at the first appearance of the first new moon of the vernal equinox, according to the 
ecclesiastical year of Moses: and those synodical months each consist of twenty-nine days, twelve hours, and forty 
odd minutes, which make the moons alternately to consist of twenty-nine and of thirty days. They pay a great 
regard to the first appearance of every new moon, and on the occasion always repeat some joyful sounds, and 
stretch out their hands towards her, but at such times they offer no public sacrifice. Till the seventy years 
captivity commenced, (according to Dr. Prideaux, 606 years before the Christian era,) the Israelites had only 
numeral names for the solar and lunar months, except 1.18 and ONNT; the former signifies ‘a green ear of corn’, 
and the latter ‘robust or valiant’. And by the first name the Indians, as an explicative, term their Passover, which 
the trading people call ‘the green-corn dance.’ As the Israelites were a sensual people, and generally understood 
nothing but the shadow or literal part of the law, so the Indians closely imitate them, minding only that tradi- 
tional part which promised them a delicious land flowing with milk and honey. The two Jewish months just 
mentioned were zquinoctial. Abib, or their present Nisan, was the seventh of the civil, and the first of the 
ecclesiastical year, answering to our March and April: and Ethanim, which began the civil year, was the seventh of 
that of the ecclesiastical, the same as our September and October. And the Indians name the various seasons of 
the year from the planting or the ripening of the fruits. ‘The green-eared moon’ is the most beloved or sacred, 
when the first-fruits become sanctified by being annually offered up: and from this period they count their beloved 
or holy things. When they lack a full moon, or when they travel, they count by sleeps, which is a very ancient 
custom, probably from the Mosaic method of counting time, that “the evening and the morning were the first day.” 
Quantity they count by tens, the number of their fingers, which is a natural method to all people. In the 

mercantile way they mark on the ground their numbers by units, or by X for ten, which I presume they learned 

pean 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 313 

fromm the white people who traded with them: they readily add together their tens, and find out the number 
sought. They call it yakd-ne tldpha, or ‘scoring on the ground’. But old time they can no way trace only by 
remarkable circumstances and eras. As they trade with each other only by the hand, they have no proper name 
for a pound weight. | 

The Cheerake count as high as an hundred, by various numeral names; whereas the other nations of East and 
West Florida rise no higher than the decimal number, adding units after it by a conjunction copulative; which 
intimates, that nation was either more mixed or more skilful than the rest: the latter seems most probable. They 
call a thousand skoech chooke katére, ‘the old, or the old one’s, hundred’; and so do the rest, in their various 
dialects, by interpretation, which argues their former skill in numbers. I shall here give a specimen of the 
Hebrew method of counting, and that of the Cheerake, Chikkasah, and Muskohge or Creeks, by which some 
further analogy will appear between the savage Indians and their supposed Israelitish brethren. The Hebrew 
characters were numeral figures: they counted by them alphabetically, s (1), 2 (2), and so on to the letter 5, the 
tenth letter of the alphabet, and which stands for 10; then by prefixing » to those letters they proceeded with their 
rising numbers, as x» (11), 2» (12), » (13), 7 (14), &e. They had words also of a numeral power, as 7x (1), ‘sw (2), 
wow (3), yanN (4), &c. We shall now see how the Indian method of numbering agrees with this old standard, as 
well as with the idiom of the Hebrew language in similar cases. The Cheerake number thus: soquo 1, tahre 2, 
choeh 3, nankke 4, shke 5, sootare 6, karekége 7, suhndyra 8, sohndyra 9, skoch 10, soatoo 11, taratoo 12, &c. 
And here we may see a parity of words between two of the Indian nations; for the Muskohge term a stone ¢ahre, 
which glances at the Hebrew, as they not only built with such materials, but used it as a word of number, ex- 
pressive of two. In like manner, ishke ‘five’, signifies ‘a mother’, which seems to show that their numeral words 
were formerly significant, and that they are one stock of people. The Chikkasah and Choktah count in this 
manner: chephpha 1, toogalo 2, tootchéna 3, oosta 4, tathlabe 5, hannahle 6, untoogalo 7, untootchéna 8, 
chakkale 9, pokoole 10, pokoole aawa chephpha, ‘ten and one’, and so on. The Cheerake have an old waste 
town, on the Georgia south-west branch of Savannah river, called Zoogdlo; which word may come under the former 
observation, upon the numerical word ‘two’: and they call a pompion oosto, which resembles costa, ‘four’. The 
Cheerake call twenty tahre skoeh, ‘two tens’, and the Chikkasah term it pokoole toogalo ‘ten twos’: as if the 
former had learned to number from the left hand to the right, according to the Syriac custom; and the latter from 
the right to the left hand, after the Hebrew manner. The former call an hundred skoeh chooke; and, as before 
observed, a thousand skoeh chooke kaiére, or ‘the old one’s hundred’; for with them, kaiére signifies ‘ancient, or 
aged’, whereas eé2, or et?-w, expresses ‘former old time’. May not this have some explanation by the “ Ancient of 
days,” as expressed by the prophet Daniel, magnifying the number by joining one of the names of God to it, 
according to a frequent custom of the Hebrews? This seems to be illustrated with sufficient clearness by the 
numerical method of the Chikkasah; for they call an hundred pokoole tathleepa, and a thousand pokoole 
tathleepa tathleepa ishto; the last of which is a strong double superlative, according to the usage of the Hebrews, 
by a repetition of the principal word, or by affixing the name of God to the end of it to heighten the number. 
Ishto is one of their names of God, expressive of majesty or greatness; and soottathleepa*, the name of a drum, 
derived from sootte ‘an earthen pot’, and ¢athleepa, perhaps the name or number of some of their ancient legions. 
The Muskohge method of counting is, hommait 1, hokkéle 2, tootchéna 3, ohsta 4, chakape 5, eepdhge 6, hool- 
ophdge 7, cheenepa 8, ohstipe 9, pokdéle 10, &c. 1 am sorry that I have not sufficient skill in the Muskohge dialect 
to make any useful observations on this head ; however, the reader can easily discern the parity of language between 
their numerical words and those of the Chikkasah and Choktah nations, and may from thence conclude that they 
were formerly one nation and people. | 

I have seen their symbols or signatures in a heraldry way, to count or distinguish their tribes, done with what may 
be called wild exactness. The Choktah use the like in the dormitories of their dead ; which seems to argue that the 
ancienter and thicker-settled countries of Peru and Mexico had, formerly at least, the use of hieroglyphic characters, 
and that they painted the real or figurative images of things to convey their ideas. The present American aborigines 
seem to be as skilful pantomimi as ever were those of ancient Greece or Rome, or the modern Turkish mutes, who 
describe the meanest things spoken by gesture, action, and the passions of the face. Two far-distant Indian nations, 

* The double vowels 00 and ee are always to be joined in one syllable, and pronounced long. 

4 1L 

314 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

who understand not a word of each other's language, will intelligibly converse together, and contract engagements, 
without any interpreter, in such a surprising manner as is scarcely credible. As their dialects are guttural, the indi- 
cations they use with the hand or fingers, in common discourse, to accompany their speech, is the reason that 
strangers imagine they make only a gaggling noise, like what we are told of the Hottentots, without any articulate 
sound; whereas it is an ancient custom of the Eastern countries, which probably the first emigrants brought with 
them to America, and still retain over the far-extended continent *. 

ARGUMENT VII. 

In conformity to, or after the manner of, the Jews, the Indian Americans have their Prophets, High-priests, and 
others of a religious order. As the Jews had a sanctum sanctorum, or most holy place, so haye all the Indian nations, 
particularly the Muskohge. It is partitioned off by a mud wall about breast-high behind the white seat, which 
always stands to the left hand of the red painted war-seat: there they deposit their consecrated vessels, and supposed 
holy utensils, none of the laity daring to approach that sacred place, for fear of particular damage to themselves, and 
general hurt to the people, from the supposed divinity of the place. With the Muskohge, hitch Jalage signifies 
‘cunning men’, or persons prescient of futurity, much the same as the Hebrew seers. Cheerdtahége is the name of 
the pretended prophets, with the Cheerake, and nearly approaches to the meaning of 42) (nedia), the Hebrew name 
of a prophet. Cheera is their word for ‘ fire’, and the termination points out men possessed of or endued with it: 
the word seems to allude to the celestial cherubim, fire, light and spirit, which centered in O E A, or Yonrwan. 
These Indians call their pretended prophets also /od-che, ‘men resembling the holy fire’, or ‘as Elohim’; for the 
termination expresses a comparison, and /oa is a contraction of Joak, drawn from 7>x (Eléah) the singular number. 
of ox (Elohim) the name of the holy ones: And, as the Muskohge call the noise of thunder erowah, so the 
Cherakee, by inverting it, worah, ‘he is’; thereby alluding to the divine essence: and as those term the lightning 
eléa, and believe it immediately to proceed from the voice of Istohoollo El6a ba, it shows the analogy to the 
Hebrews, and their sentiments to be different from all the early heathen world. 

The Indian tradition says, that their forefathers were possessed of an extraordinary divine spirit, by which they 
foretold things future, and controlled the common course of nature: and this they transmitted to their offspring, 
provided they obeyed the sacred laws annexed to it. They believe that by the communication of the same divine 
fire working on their lodche, they can now effect the like. They say it is out of the reach of Vana Ookproo either 
to comprehend or perform such things, because the beloved fire, or the holy spirit of fire, will not co-operate with or 
actuate hottwk ookproose, ‘the accursed people’. Ishtohoollo is the name of all their priestly order, and their 
pontifical office descends by inheritance to the eldest: those friend-towns which are firmly confederated in their 
exercises and plays, never have more than one archimagus ata time: but lameness, contrary to the Mosaic law, 
it must be confessed, does not now exclude him from officiating in his religious function; though it is not to be 
doubted, as they are naturally a modest people, and highly ridicule those who are incapable of procreating their 
species, that formerly they excluded the lame and impotent: they who have the least knowledge in Indian affairs 
know that the martial virtue of the savages obtains them titles of distinction; but yet their old men, who could 
scarcely correct their transgressing wives, much less go to war and perform those difficult exercises that are essentially 
needful in an active warrior, are often promoted to the pontifical dignity, and have great power over the people, by 
the pretended sanctity of the office. Notwithstanding the Cheerake are now a nest of apostate hornets, pay little 
respect to grey hairs, and have been degenerating fast from their primitive religious principles for above thirty years 
past, yet before the last war, Old Hop, who was helpless and lame, presided over the whole nation as archimagus, 
and lived in Choate, their only town of refuge. It was entirely owing to the wisdom of those who then presided in 
South Carolina, that his dangerous, pontifical and regal-like power was impaired, by their setting up Atta Kulla 
Kulla, and supporting him so well as to prevent the then easy transition of an Indian high-priesthood into a French 

* The first numbering was by their fingers, to which custom Solomon alludes, Prov. iii. 16. “ length of days is in her right hand.” The Greeks 
called this aroreymopaerv, because they numbered on their five fingers ; and Ovid says, “ Seu, quia tot digitis, per quos numerare solemus;” likewise 
Juvenal, “Sud deatrd computat annos.” Others numbered on their ten fingers, as we may see in Bede “De ratione temporum.” And the ancients not 

only counted, but are said to speak with their fingers, Prov. vi. 13. “The wicked man he teacheth with his fingers.” And Neevius, in Tarentilla, 
says, dat digiio hteras. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 315 

American bloody chair, with a bunch of red and black beads; where the devil and they could as easily have instructed 
them in the infernal French catechism, as they did the Canada Indians ; as, Who killed Christ? Answer, The bloody 
English; &c.* 

- To discover clearly the origin of the Indian religious system, I must occasionally quote as much from the Mosaic 
institution, as the savages seem to copy after or imitate in their ceremonies ; and only the faint image of the Hebrew 
can now be expected to be discerned as in an old imperfect glass. The priesthood originally centered with the first 
male born of every family : with the ancient heathens the royalty was annexed to it in a direct line, and it descended 
in that manner as low as the Spartans and Romans. But, to secure Israel from falling into heathenish customs and 
worship, God in the time of Moses set apart the Levites for religious services in the room of the first-born; and 
one high-priest was elected from the family of Aaron, and anointed with oil, who presided over the rest: this holy 
office descended by right of inheritance. However, they were to be free of bodily defects, and were by degrees 
initiated to their holy office, before they were allowed to serve in it. They were consecrated by having the water of 
purifying sprinkled upon them, washing all their body and their clothes clean, anointing them with oil, and offering 
a sacrifice. 

It is not surprising that the dress of the old savage archimagus, and that of the Levitical high-priest, is some- 
what different. It may well be supposed, they wandered from captivity to this far-distant wilderness, in a distressed 
condition, where they could scarcely cover themselves from the inclemency of heat and cold. Besides, if they 
had always been possessed of the greatest affluence, the long want of written records would sufficiently excuse the 
difference, because oral traditions are liable to variation: however, there are some traces of agreement in their 
pontifical dress. Before the Indian archimagus officiates in making the supposed holy fire, for the yearly atonement 
of sin, the Sagan clothes him with a white ephod, which is a waistcoat without sleeves: when he enters on that 
solemn duty, a beloved attendant spreads a white-dressed buck-skin on the white seat, which stands close to the 
supposed holiest, and then puts some white beads on it, that are given him by the people. Then the archimagus 
wraps around his shoulders a consecrated skin of the same sort, which reaching across under his arms he ties behind 
his back with two knots on the legs, in the form of a figure of eight. Another custom he observes on this’ solemn 
occasion is, instead of going barefoot, he wears a new pair of buck-skin white maccasenes made by himself, and 
stitched with the sinews of the same animal-~. The upper leather across the toes he paints for the space of three 
inches with a few streaks of red,—not with vermilion, for that'is their continual war-emblem, but with a certain red 
root, its leaves and stalk resembling the ipecacuanha, which is their fixed red symbol of holy things: these shoes he 
never wears but in the time of the supposed Passover; for at the end of it, they are laid up in the beloved place, or 
holiest, where much of the like sort quietly accompanies an heap of old broken earthenware, conch-shells, and other 
consecrated things. — 

The Mosaic ceremonial institutions are acknowledged by our best writers to represent the Messiah under various 
types and shadows: in like manner, the religious customs of the American Indians seem to typify the same; 
according to the early divine promise, that the seed of the woman should bruise the head of the serpent, and that it 
should bruise his heel. The Levitical high-priest wore a breast-plate, which they called hosechem, and on it the Urem 
and Thummim, signifying lights and perfections ; for they are the plurals of Ww (wera), (which inverted makes 
Evowa,) and pin (thdrdh), ‘the law’, as it directed them under dark shadows to Messiah, the lamp of light and 
perfections. In resemblance of this sacred pectoral, or breast-plate, the American archimagus wears a breast-plate 
made of a white conch-shell, with two holes bored in the middle of it, through which he puts the end of an otter- 
skin strap, and fastens a buck-horn white ‘button to the outside of each, as if in imitation of the precious stones of 
Urim, which miraculously blazoned from the high-priest’s breast the unerring words of the divine oracle. Instead 

* A wrong belief has a most powerful efficacy in depraving men’s morals, and a right one has a great power to reform them. The bloody Romish 
Bulls, that France sent over to their Indian converts, clearly prove the former ; and our peaceable conduct as plainly showed the latter, till Britannia 
sent out her lions to retaliate. 

+ Observant ubi festa mero pede sabbata reges, 
Et vetus indulget senibus clementia porcis.—Juvenal. Sat. vi. 
When the high-priest entered into the holiest, on the day of expiation, he clothed himself in white; and when he finished that day’s service, he laid 
aside those clothes, and left them in the tabernacle.—Lev. xvi. 28. When the Egyptian priests went to worship in their temples, they wore shoes 
of white parchment.—Herodotus, lib. 11. cap. 5. 

316 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

of the plate of gold which the Levite wore on his forehead, bearing these words, Mm»? wap (kadesh li Vohewah,) 
“holy or separate to God’, the Indian wears around his temples either a wreath of swan-feathers, or a long piece 
of swan-skin doubled, so as only the fine snowy feathers appear on each side. And, in likeness to the tiara of the 
former, the latter wears on the crown of his head a tuft of white feathers which they call Yatera. He likewise 
fastens a tuft of blunted wild turkeycock-spurs toward the toes of the upper part of his maccasenes, as if in 
resemblance to the seventy-two bells which the Levitical high-priest wore on his coat of blue. Those are as strong 
religious pontifical emblems as any old Hebrews could have well chosen, or retained under the like circumstances 
of time and place. Thus appears the Indian archimagus,—not as Merubha Begadim, ‘the man with many clothes’, 
as they called the high-priest of the second temple, but with clothes proper to himself when he is to officiate in his 
pontifical function, at the annual expiation of sins*. As religion is the touchstone of every nation of people, and 
as these Indians cannot be supposed to have been deluded out of theirs, separated from the rest of the world, for 
many long-forgotten ages, the traces which may be discerned among them will help to corroborate the other argu- 
ments concerning their origin. 

These religious beloved men are also supposed to be in great favour with the Deity, and able to procure rain 
when they please. In this respect also we shall observe a great conformity to the practice of the Jews. The 
Hebrew records inform us, that in the moon 47), or Nisan, they prayed for the spring or latter rain to be so 
seasonable and sufficient as to give them a good harvest. And the Indian Americans have a tradition that their 
forefathers sought for, and obtained, such seasonable rains as gave them plentiful crops ; and they now seek them 
in a manner agreeable to the shadow of this tradition. When the ground is parched, their rain-makers (as they are 
commonly termed) are to mediate for the beloved red people with the bountiful holy Spirit of fire. But their old 
cunning prophets are not fond of entering on this religious duty, and avoid it as long as they possibly can, till the 
murmurs of the people force them to the sacred attempt for the security of their own lives. If he fails, the prophet 
is shot dead, because they are so credulous of his divine power conveyed by the holy Spirit of fire, that they reckon 
him an enemy to the state by averting the general good, and bringing desolating famine upon the beloved people. 
But in general he is so discerning in the stated laws of nature, and skilful in priestcraft, that he always seeks for 
rain either at the full or change of the moon; unless the birds, either by instinct, or the temperature of their bodies, 
should direct him otherwise. However, if in a dry season the clouds by the veering of the winds pass wide of their 
fields, while they are inveighing bitterly against him, some in speech, and others in their hearts, he soon changes 
their well-known notes; he assumes a displeased countenance and carriage, and attacks them with bitter reproaches 
for their vicious conduct in the marriage-state, and for their notorious pollutions by going to the women in their 
religious retirements, and for multifarious crimes that never could enter into his head to suspect them of perpetra- 
ting, but that the divinity his holy things were endued with had now suffered a great decay, although he had fasted, 
purified himself, and on every other account had lived an innocent life, according to the old beloved speech; adding, 
‘Loak Ishtohoollo will never be kind to bad people.’ He concludes with a religious caution to the penitent, advising 
them to mend their manners, and the times will mend with them: then they depart with sorrow and shame. The old 
women, as they go along, will exclaim loudly against the young people, and protest they will watch their manners 
very narrowly for the time to come, as they are sure of their own steady virtue. If a two-years’ drought happens, 
the synedrim, at the earnest solicitation of the mortified sinners, convene in a body, and make proper inquiry into 
the true cause of their calamities; because (say they) it is better to spoil a few roguish people, than a few roguish 
people should spoil hotiwk oretoopah: the lot soon falls upon Jonas, and he is immediately swallowed up. Too 
much rain is equaily dangerous to those red prophets. I was lately told by a gentleman of distinguished character, 
that a famous rain-maker of the Muskohge was shot dead, because the river overflowed their fields to a great height 
in the middle of August, and destroyed their weighty harvest. They ascribed the mischief to his ill-will; as the 
Deity, they say, doth not injure the virtuous, and designed him only to do good to the beloved people. In the year 
1747 a Nachee warrior told me, that while one of their prophets was using his divine invocations for rain, according 
to the faint image of their ancient tradition, he was killed with thunder on the spot; upon which account, the spirit 
of prophecy ever after subsided among them, and he became the last of their reputed prophets. They believed the 

* The only ornaments that distinguished the high-priest from the rest, were a coat with seventy-two bells, an ephod, or jacket without sleeves, 
a breast-plate set with twelve stones, a linen mitre, and a plate of gold upon his forehead. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 317 

holy Spirit of fire had killed him with some of his angry darting fire for wilful impurity; and by his threatening 
voice forbade them to renew the like attempt; and justly concluded, that if they all lived well, they should fare well, 
and have proper seasons. This opinion coincides with that of the Israelites in taking fire for the material emblem 
of Yohewah; by reckoning thunder the voice of the Almighty above, according to the Scriptural language ; by 
esteeming thunderstruck individuals under the displeasure of heaven ; and by observing and enforcing such rules 
of purity as none of the old pagan nations observed, nor any except the Hebrews. As the prophets of the 
Hebrews had oracular answers, so the Indian magi who are to invoke YO He Wau and mediate with the supreme 
holy fire that he may give seasonable rains, have a transparent stone of supposed great power in assisting to bring | 
down the rain, when it is put in a basin of water, by a reputed divine virtue impressed on one of the like sort in 
time of old, which communicates it circularly. This stone would suffer a great decay, they assert, were it even seen 
by their own laity; but if by foreigners, it would be utterly despoiled of its divine communicative power. Doth 
not this allude to the precious blazoning stones of Urim and Thummim ? 

In Tymahse, a lower Cheerake town, lived one of their reputed great divine men, who never informed the people 
of his seeking for rain, but at the change or full of the moon, unless there was some promising sign of the change 
of the weather, either in the upper regions or from the feathered kalender, such as the quacking of ducks, the 
croaking of ravens, and from the moistness of the air felt in their quills ; consequently, he seldom failed of success, 
which highly increased his name and profits; for even when it rained at other times, they ascribed it to the inter- 
cession of their great beloved man. Rain-making in the Cheerake mountains is not so dangerous an office as in 
the rich level lands of the Chikkasah country near the Missisippi. The above Cheerake prophet had a carbuncle, 
near as big as an egg, which they said he found where a great rattlesnake lay dead, and that it sparkled with such sur- 
prising lustre as to illuminate his dark winter-house, like strong flashes of continued lightning, to the great terror of 
the weak, who durst not upon any account approach the dreadful fire-darting place, for fear of sudden death. When 
he died, it was buried along with him according to custom in the town-house of Tymahse, under the great beloved 
cabin, which stood in the westernmost part of that old fabric, where they who will run the risk of searching 
may luckily find it; but if any of that family detected them in disturbing the bones of their deceased relation, they 
would resent it as the basest act of hostility. The inhuman conduct of the avaricious Spaniards toward the dead 
Peruvians and Mexicans, irritated the natives to the highest pitch of distraction against those ravaging enemies of 
humanity. The intense love the Indians bear to their dead, is the reason that so few have fallen into the hands of 
our physicians to dissect or anatomise. We will hope also, that from a principle of humanity, our ague-charmers 
and water-casters, who like birds of night keep where the Indians frequently haunt, would not cut up their fellow- 
creatures, as was done by the Spanish butchers in Peru and Mexico. 

Not long ago at a friendly feast, or feast of love, in West-Florida, during the time of a long-continued drought, 
I earnestly importuned the old rain-maker for a sight of the pretended divine stone, which he had assured me he was 
possessed of; but he would by uo means gratify my request. He told me, as I was an infidel, literally ‘one who 
shakes hands with the accursed speech’, and did not believe its being endued with a divine power, the sight of it 
could no ways benefit me; and that as their old unerring tradition assured them it would suffer very great damage 
in case of compliance, he hoped I would kindly acquiesce; especially as he imagined I believed every nation of 
people had certain beloved things, that might be easily spoiled by being polluted. I told him I was fully satisfied 
with the friendly excuse he made to my inconsiderate request, but that I could scarcely imagine there were any 
such beloved men and beloved things in so extremely fertile but now sun-burnt soil. Their crops had failed the 
year before, by reason of several concurring causes; and for the most part of the summer season he had kept his 
bed through fear of incurring the punishment of a false prophet; which, joined with the religious regimen and 
abstemious way of living he was obliged strictly to pursue, it sweated him so severely, as to reduce him to a 
skeleton. I jested him in a friendly way, saying, I imagined the supreme holy fire would have proved more kind to 
his honest devotees than to sicken him so severely, especially at that critical season, when the people’s food and 
his own entirely depended on his health; that though our beloved men never undertook to bring down seasonable 
rains, yet we very seldom failed of good crops, and always paid them the tenth basket-full of our yearly produce; 
because they persuaded our young people, by the force of their honest example, and kind-hearted enchanting 
language, to shun the crooked ways of hottwk kalldkse, ‘the mad light people’, and honestly to shake hands with 
the old beloved speech; that the great, supreme, fatherly Chieftain had told his dodche to teach us how to obtain 

4M 

318 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

peace and plenty, and every other good thing, while we live here; and when we die, not only to shun the accursed 
dark place where the Sun is every day drowned, but likewise to live again for ever, very happily in the favourite 
country. He replied, that my speech consisted of a mixture of good and ill; the beginning of it was crooked, and 
the conclusion straight. He said, I had wrongfully blamed him, for the effect of the disorderly conduct of the red 
people and himself, as it was well known he fasted at different times for several days together; at other times ate 
green tobacco-leaves; and some days drank only a warm decoction of the button-snake-root, without allowing 
any one except his religious attendant to come near him; and in every other respect had honestly observed the 
austere rules of his religious place, according to the beloved speech that Jshtohoollo Elda Aba gave to the lodche 
of their forefathers: but Loak Ishtohoollo was sorely vexed with most of their young people for violating the 
chastity of their neighbours’ wives, and even among the thriving green corn and pease, as their beds here and there 
clearly proved; thus they spoiled the power of his holy things, and tempted Minggo Ishto Elda, ‘the great 
chieftain of the thunder’, to bind up the clouds, and withold the rain. Besides, that the old women were less honest 
in paying their rain-makers than the English women behaved to their beloved men, unless I had spoken too well of 
them. The wives of this and the other person, he said, had cheated him, in not paying him any portion of the 

last year’s bad crop, which their own bad lives greatly contributed to, as that penurious crime of cheating him of his 

dues sufficiently testified; not to mention a late custom they had contracted since the general peace, of planting a 
great many fields of beans and pease in distant places after the summer crops were over, on the like dishonest 
principle; likewise, in affirming that when the first harvest was over it rained for nothing; by that means they had 
blackened the old beloved speech, that Zshtohoollo Elva of old spoke to his Jodche, and conveyed down to him only 
that they might paint their own bad actions white. He concluded by saying, that all the chieftains, and others 
present as well as myself, knew now very well, from his honest speech, the true cause of the earth’s having been so 
strangely burnt till lately ; and that he was afraid, if the hearts of those light and mad people he complained of did 
not speedily grow honest, the dreadful day would soon come in which Ldak Ishtohoollo would send phutchik 
keeraah Ishto ‘the great blazing star’, yahkane eeklénna, loak lodchaché, ‘to burn up half of the earth with fire’, 
pherimmi avibe, ‘from the north to the south’, hassé oobea pera, ‘toward the setting of the Sun’, where they 
should in time arrive at the dreadful place of darkness, be confined:ihere hungry, and otherwise sorely distrest, 
among hissing snakes and many other frightful creatures, according to the ancient true speech that Lshtohoollo Aba 
spoke to his beloved dodche. 

Under this Argument I will also mention another striking resemblance to the Jews, as to their tithes. As the 
sacerdotal office was fixed in the tribe of Levi, they had forty-eight cities allotted them from the other tribes. And 
Moses assures us, in Deut. xiv. 28, 29, that those tribes paid them also once in three years the tithe or tenth of all 
they possessed, which is supposed to be about the thirtieth part of their annual possessions ; by which means they 
were reasonably maintained as spiritual pastors, and enabled to fulfil the extensive and charitable application of 
their dues as enjoined. It hath been already hinted, that the Indian prophets undertake by the emanation of the 
divine spirit of fire, co-operating with them, to bring down proper rains for crops, on the penalty of losing their 
own lives; as the Indians reckon that a regular virtuous life will sufficiently enable their great beloved men to bring 
blessings of plenty to the beloved people; and if they neglect it, they are dangerous enemies, and a great curse to 
the community. They imagine his prophetic power is also restrictive as to winter rains, they doing more hurt than 
good; for they justly observe, that their ground seldom suffers by the want of winter rains. Their sentiments on this 
head are very strong ; they say, Ishtohoollo Aba allows the winter rain to fall unsought, but that he commanded 
their forefathers to seek for the summer rain according to the old law, otherwise he would not give it to them. If 
the seasons have been answerable, when the ripened harvest is gathered in, the old women pay their reputed prophet 
with religious good-will a certain proportional quantity of each kind of the new fruits, measured in the same large 
portable back-baskets wherein they carried home the ripened fruits. This stated method they yearly observe ; 
which is as consonant to the Levitical institution, as can be reasonably expected, especially as their traditions have 
been time out of mind preserved only by oral echo. 

Modern writers inform us that the Persees pay a tithe of their revenues to the chief Destour, or Archimagus, of 
a city or province, who decides cases of conscience and points of law according to the institution of Zoroaster,—a 
mixture of Judaism and Paganism. Their annual religious offering to the archimagi is a misapplication of the 
Levitical law concerning tithes, contrary to the usage of the American aborigines, which it may be supposed they 

Son ee ee 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 319 

immediately derived from the Hebrews; for, as the twelfth tribe was devoted to the divine service, they were by 
divine appointment maintained at the public expense. However, when we consider that their government was of a 
mixed kind, first a theocracy, then by nobles and by kings, and at other times by their high-priest, it seems to 
appear pretty plain that the Deity raised, preserved, and governed those people to oppose idolatry, and continue, till 
the fulness of time came, the true divine worship on earth, under ceremonial dark shadows, without exhibiting their 
government in the least as a plan of future imitation. Besides, as Messiah is come according to the predictions of 
the divine oracles, which represented him under various strong types and shadows, surely Christians ought to follow 
the copy of their humble Master and his holy disciples, and leave the fleecing of the flock to the avaricious Jews, 
whose religious tenets and rapacious principles support them in taking annual tithes from each other, who affect to 
believe that all the Mosaic law is perpetually binding, and that the predicted Shiloh, who is to be their purifier, king, 
prophet, and high-priest, is not yet come. The law of tithing was calculated only for the religious ceconomy of the 
Hebrew nation ; for as the merciful Deity, who was the immediate head of that state, had appropriated the Levites to 
his service, and prohibited them purchasing land, lest they should be seduced from their religious duties by worldly 
cares, He, by a most bountiful law, ordered the state to give them the tithe and other offerings for the support of 
.themselves and their numerous families, and also of the widow, the fatherless, and the stranger. 
‘I shall insert a dialogue that formerly passed between the Chikkasah Lodche and me, which will illustrate both 
this and other particulars of the general subject, and also show the religious advantages and arguments by which 
the French used to undermine us with the Indians. We had been speaking of trade, which is the usual topic of 
discourse with those craftsmen. I asked him how he could reasonably blame the English traders for cheating Tekapé 
hummah, ¢ the red folks’, even allowing his accusations to be just; as he, their divine man, had cheated them out of 
a great part of their crops, and had the assurance to claim it as his religious due, when at the same time, if he had 
shaked hands with the straight old beloved speech, or strictly observed the ancient divine law, his feeling heart 
would not have allowed him to have done such black and crooked things, especially to the helpless, the poor, and 
the aged; it rather would have strongly moved him to stretch out to them a kind and helping hand, according to 
the old beloved speech of Jshtohoolla Aba to his hottuk Ishtohoollo, who were sufficiently supported at the public 
expense, and strictly ordered to supply with the greatest tenderness the wants of others. He smartly retorted my 
objections, telling me that the white people’s excuses for their own wrong conduct were as false and weak as my 
complaints were against him. The red people, he said, saw very clearly through such thin black paint, though his 
sacred employment was equally hid from them and me; by which means neither of us could reasonably pretend to 
be proper judges of his virtuous conduct, nor blame him for the necessary effect of our own crimes, or urge it as a 
plea for cheating him out of his yearly dues, contrary to the old divine speech; for the crops became light by their 
own vicious conduct, which spoiled the power of his holy things. So that it was visible both the red and white 
people were commonly too partial to themselves; and that by the bounty of the supreme fatherly chieftain it was as 
much out of his power, as distant from his kindly heart, either to wrong the beloved red people or the white nothings ; 
and that it became none, except mad light people, to follow the crooked steps of hottwk ookproose, ‘the accursed 
people’. As there was no interruption to our winter-night’s chat, I asked him in a friendly manner whether he was not 
afraid thus boldly to snatch at the divine power of distributing rain at his pleasure, as it belonged only to the great 
beloved thundering Chieftain, who dwells far above the clouds in the new year’s unpolluted holy fire, and who 
gives it in common to all nations of people alike, and even to every living creature over the face of the whole earth, 
because he made them, and his merciful goodness always prompts him to supply the wants of all his creatures. He 
told me that by an ancient tradition their Jodeche were possessed of an extraordinary divine power, by which they 
foretold hidden things, and by the beloved speech brought down showers of plenty to the beloved people; that he 
very well knew the giver of virtue to nature resided on earth in the unpolluted holy fire, and likewise above the 
clouds and the sun, in the shape of a fine fiery substance, attended by a great many beloved people; and that he 
continually weighs us, and measures out good or bad things to us according to our actions. He added, that though 
the former beloved speech had a long time subsided, it was very reasonable they should still continue this their old 
beloved custom ; especially as it was both profitable in supporting many of their helpless old beloved men, and very 
productive of virtue, by aweing their young people from violating the ancient laws. This showed him to be cunning 
in priestcraft, if not possessed of a tradition from the Hebrew records, that their prophets by the divine power had, 
on material occasions, acted beyond the stated laws of nature and wrought miracles.. My old prophetic friend told 

$20 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

me, with a good deal of surprise, that though the beloved red people had by some means or other lost the old 
beloved speech, yet Frenshe lakkane ookproo, ‘the ugly yellow French,’ (as they term the Missisippians,) had by 
some wonderful method obtained it; for his own people, he assured me, had seen them at New Orleans to bring 
down rain in a very dry season, when they were giving out several bloody speeches to their head-warriors against the 
English Chikkasah traders. On a mischievous politic invitation of the French, several of the Chikkasah had then 
paid them a visit, in the time of an alarming drought and a general fast, when they were praying for seasonable rains 
at mass. When they came, the interpreter was ordered to tell them that the French had holy places and holy things 
after the manner of the red people; that if their young people proved honest, they could bring down rain whenever 
they stood in need of it; and that this was one of the chief reasons which induced all the various nations of the 
beloved red people to bear them so intense a love; and, on the contrary, so violent and inexpressible an hatred even 
to the very name of the English, because every one of them was marked with Anumbole ookkproo, ‘the curse of 
God’. 

The method the Chikkasah prophet used in relating the affair has some humour in it, for their ignorance of the 
Christian religion and institutions perplexes them when they are on the subject; on which account I shall literally 
transcribe it. He told me that the Chikkasah warriors, during three successive days, accompanied the French dodche 
and Ishtohoollo to the great beloved house, where a large bell hung a-top, which strange sight exceedingly surprised 
them; for instead of being fit for a horse, it would require a great many ten horses to carry it. Around the inside 
of the beloved house there was a multitude of he and she beloved people, or male and female saints or angels, whose 
living originals, they affirmed, dwelt above the clouds, and helped them to get every good thing from Ishtohoollo 
Aba when they earnestly crave their help. The French beloved men spoke a great deal with much warmth; the 
rest were likewise busily employed in imitation of their Ishtohoollo and lodche. At one time they spoke high, at 
another low. One chose this, and another chose that song. Here the men kneeled before the images of their she- 
beloved people; there the women did the like before their favourite and beloved he-pictures, entreating them for 
some particular favour which they stood in need of. Some of them, he said, made very wild motions over their 
heads and breasts; and others struck their stomachs with a vehemence like their warriors when they drink much 
ookka homma, ‘bitter waters’ or spirituous liquor; while every one of them had a bunch of mixed beads, to which 
they frequently spoke, as well as counted over; that they loved these beads, for our people strictly observed they 
did not give them to their lodche and Ishtohoollo, as the red people would have done to those of their own country, 
though it was very plain they deserved them for beating themselves so much for the young people's roguish actions, 
and likewise for labouring so strongly in pulling off their clothes and putting them on again, to make the beloved 
physic work, which they took in small pieces, to help to bring on the rain. On the third day (added he) they 
brought it down in great plenty, which was certainly a very difficult performance, and as surprising, too, that they 
who are always, when opportunity answers, persuading the red people to take up the bloody hatchet against their 
old steady friends, should still have the beloved speech which Ishtohoollo Aba Eloa formerly spoke to his beloved 

lodche. ‘Thus ended our friendly discourse. 

ARGUMENT VIII. 

Their Festivals, Fasts, and Religious Rites have also a great resemblance to those of the Hebrews. It will be ne- 
cessary here to take a short view of the principal Jewish feasts, &c. They kept every year a sacred feast called the 
Passover, in memory of their deliverance from Egyptian bondage. Seven days were appointed, Lev. xxi. To these 
they added an eighth, through a religious principle, as preparatory to clear their houses of all leaven, and to fix their 
minds before they entered on that religious duty. The name of this festival is derived from a word which signifies 
“to pass over’; because, when the destroying angel flew through the Egyptian houses and killed their first-born, he 
passed over those of the Israelites, the tops of whose doors were stained with the blood of the lamb which they 
were ordered to kill: This solemnity was instituted with the strongest injunctions to let their children know the 
cause of that observance, and to mark that night through all their generations. Three days before this sacred fes- 
tival, they chose a lamb, without spot or blemish, and killed it on the evening of the fourteenth day of Abib, which 
was the first moon of the ecclesiastical, and the seventh of the civil, year; and they ate it with bitter herbs, without 
breaking any of the bones of it, thus prefiguring the death of Messiah. This was the reason that this was the chief 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 321 

of the days of unleavened bread, and they were strictly forbidden all manner of work on that day; besides, no uncir- 
cumcised or unclean persons ate of the paschal lamb. Those of the people whom diseases or long journeys prevented 
from observing the passover on that day, were obliged to keep it in the next moon. On the sixteenth day, which 
was the second of the passover, they offered up to God a sheaf of the new barley-harvest, because it was the earliest 
grain. The priest carried it into the temple, and having cleaned and parched it, he grinded or pounded it into flour, 
dipt it in oil, and then waved it before the Lord, throwing some into the fire. The Jews were forbidden to eat any 
of their new harvest till they had offered up a sheaf, the grain of which filled an omer,—a small measure of about 
five pints. All was impure and unholy till this oblation was made; but afterwards it became hallowed, and every one 
was at liberty to reap and get in his harvest. On the tenth day of the moon Ethanim, the first day of the civil year, 
they celebrated the great fast, or feast of expiation, afflicted their souls, and ate nothing the whole day. The high- 
priest offered several sacrifices ; and having carried the blood of the victims into the temple, he sprinkled it upon the 
altar of incense and the veil that was before the holiest, and went into that most sacred place where the divine 
Shekinah resided, carrying a censer smoking in his hand with incense, which hindered him from having a clear 
sight of the ark. But he was not allowed to enter that holy place only once a year, on this great day of expiation, 
to offer the general sacrifice both for the sins of the people and of himself. Nor did he ever mention the divine 
four-lettered name, YO. Hz Wau, except on this great day, when he blessed the people. Because the Israelites lived 
in tabernacles, or booths, while they were in the wilderness, as a memorial therefore of the divine bounty to them 
they were commanded to keep the feast of tabernacles, on the fifteenth day of the month Tisri, which they called 
Rosh Hosanah, or Hoshianah: it lasted eight days, during which time they lived in arbours, (covered with green 
boughs of trees,) unless when they went to worship at the temple, or sung Hoshuniyo around the altar. When they 
were on this religious duty, they were obliged each to carry in their hands a bundle of the branches of willows, 
palm-trees, myrtles, and others of different sorts, laden with fruit and tied together with ribbons; and thus rejoice 
together with the appointed singers, and vocal and instrumental music, in the divine presence before the altar. On 
the eighth day of the feast, one of the priests brought some water in a golden vessel from the pool of Siloam, mixed 
it with wine, and poured it on the morning sacrifice, and the first-fruits of their latter crops, which were then 
presented as an emblem of the divine graces that should flow to them when Shiloh came, who was to be their 
anointed king, prophet, and high-priest. The people in the mean time singing out of Isaiah, ‘‘ With joy shall ye draw 
water out of the wells of salvation.” 

‘Let us now turn to the copper-colour American Hebrews. While their sanctified new fruits are dressing, a reli- 
gious attendant is ordered to call six of their old beloved women to come to the temple, and dance the beloved dance 
with joyful hearts, according to the old beloved speech. They cheerfully obey, and enter the supposed holy ground 
in solemn procession, each carrying in her hand a bundle of small branches of various green trees; and they join the 
same number of old magi, or priests, who carry a cane in one hand adorned with white feathers, having likewise 
green boughs in their other hand, which they pulled from their holy arbour, and carefully place there, encircling it 
with several rounds. Those beloved men have their heads dressed with white plumes; but the women are decked 
in their finest, and anointed with bear’s-grease, having small tortoise-shells and white pebbles fastened to a piece of 
white-drest deer-skin, which is tied to each of their legs. The eldest of the priests leads the sacred dance ahead of the 
innermost row, which of course is next to the holy fire. He begins the dance round the supposed holy fire by 
invoking Yau, after their usual manner, on a bass key, and with a short accent; then he sings YO YO, which is 
repeated by the rest of the religious procession ; and he continues his sacred invocations and praises, repeating the 
divine word, or notes, till they return to the same point of the circular course where they began: then He He in 
like manner, and Wan Wau. While dancing they never fail to repeat those notes; and frequently the holy train 
strike up Halelu, Halelu; then Haleluiah, Halelu- Yah, and Ave.uiau and ALELU-Yau, ‘Irradiation to the divine 
essence’, with great earnestness and fervour, till they encircle the altar, while each strikes the ground with right and 
left feet alternately, very quick, but well timed. Then the awful drums join the sacred choir, which incite the old 
female singers to chant forth their pious notes and grateful praises before the. divine essence, and to redouble their 
former quick joyful steps, in imitation of the leader of the sacred dance, and the religious men ahead of them. What 
with the manly strong notes of the one, and the shrill voices of the other, in concert with the bead-shells, and the 
two sounding drum-like earthen vessels, with the voices of the musicians who beat them, the reputed holy ground 
echoes with the praises of YO He Wau. Their singing and dancing in three circles around their sacred fire appears 

4N 

329 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

to have a reference to a like religious custom of the Hebrews. And may we not reasonably suppose that they 
formerly understood the psalms, or divine hymns? at least those that begin with Halelu- Yah. Otherwise, how came 
all the inhabitants of the extensive regions of North and South America to have and retain those very expressive 
Hebrew words? or how repeat them so distinctly, and apply them after the manner of the Hebrews in their song op 
acclamations? The like cannot be found in any other countries. Mes 

In like manner they sing on other religious occasions, and at their feasts of love, 4le-Yo Ale- Yo; which is 9x, 
the divine name, by his attribute of omnipotence; and », alluding to mm. They sing likewise Hewah Hewah, 
which is m7 ‘the immortal soul’, drawn from the divine essential name, as deriving its rational faculties from 
Yourewau. | Those words that they sing in their religious dances they never repeat at any other time, which seems 
to have greatly occasioned the loss of the meaning of their divine hymns; for I believe they are now so corrupt, as 
not to understand either the spiritual or literal meaning of what they sing, any further than by allusion. In their 
circuiting dances, they frequently sing on a bass key, dlué Alud, Aluhé, Aluhé, and Aluwah Aluwah, which is the 
Hebrew mx. They likewise sing Shalw-Y6 Shilu-¥6, Shilu-Hé Shilu-Hé, Shilt-W ah Shilu-W ch, and Shili-Hah 
Shilu- Hah. They transpose them also several ways, but with the very same notes. The three terminations make 
up in their order the four-lettered divine name. Hah is a note of gladness: the word preceding it, Shilz, seems to 
express the predicted human and divine mw, Shiloh, who was to be the purifier and peace-maker. They continue 
their grateful divine hymns for the space of fifteen minutes, when the dance breaks up. As they degenerate, they 
lengthen their dances, and shorten the time of their fasts and purifications; insomuch, that they have so exceed- 
ingly corrupted their primitive rites and customs, within the space of the last thirty years, that at the same rate of 
declension, there will not be long a possibility of tracing their origin, but by their dialects and war-customs. 

At the end of this notable religious dance, the old beloved or holy women return home to hasten the feast of the 
new-sanctified fruits. In the mean while every one at the temple drinks very plentifully of the cusseena and other 
bitter liquids, to cleanse their sinful bodies; after which they go to some convenient deep water, and there, according 
to the ceremonial law of the Hebrews, they wash away their sins with water. Thus sanctified, they return with 
joyful hearts in solemm procession, singing their notes of praise, till they enter into the holy ground to.eat of the 
new delicious fruits of wild Canaan*. The women now with the utmost cheerfulness bring to the outside of the 
sacred square a plentiful variety of all those good things with which the divine fire has blessed them in the new 
year; and the religious attendants lay it before them, according to their stated order and reputed merit. Every seat 
is served in a gradual succession, from the white and red imperial long broad seats, and the whole square is soon 
covered: frequently they have a change of courses of fifty or sixty different sorts, and thus they continue to regale 
themselves till the end of the festival; for they reckon they are now to feast themselves with joy and gladness, as 
the divine fire is appeased for past crimes, and has propitiously sanctified their weighty harvest. They all behave 
so modestly, and are possessed of such an extraordinary constancy and equanimity, in the pursuit of their religious 
mysteries, that they do not show the least outward emotion of pleasure at the first sight of the sanctified new fruits, 
nor the least uneasiness to be tasting those tempting delicious fat things of Canaan. If one of them acted in a 
contrary manner, they would say to him, Che-Hakset Kaneha, ‘You resemble such as were beat: in Canaan’. This 
unconcern doubtless proceeded originally from a virtuous principle; but now, it may be the mere effect of habit: 
for, jealousy and revenge excepted, they seem to be divested of every mental passion, and entirely incapable of any 
lasting affection. I shall give an instance of this. If the husband has been a year absent on a visit to another 
nation, and should by chance overtake his wife near home, with one of his children skipping alongside of her, 
instead of those sudden and strong emotions of joy that naturally arise in two generous breasts at such an unex- 
pected meeting, the self-interested pair go along as utter strangers, without seeming to take the least notice of one 
another, till a considerable time after they get home. : 

The Indians formerly observed the grand festival of the annual expiation of sin at the beginning of the first new 
moon, in which their corn become full-eared; but for many years past they are regulated by the season of their 
harvest. And on that head they show more religious patience than the Hebrews formerly did; who, instead of 
waiting till their grain was ripe, forced their barley, which ripened before any other sort they planted. And they 

% They are so strictly prohibited from eating salt or flesh meat till the fourth dew, that during the interval the very touch of either is accounted 
a great pollution: after that period, they are deemed lawful to be eaten. All the hunters and able-bodied men kill and barbecue wild game in 

the woods at least ten days before this great festival, and religiously keep it for that sacred use. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 323 

are perhaps as skilful in observing the revolutions of the moon as ever the Israelites were, at least till the end of 
the first temple; for during that period, instead of measuring time by astronomical calculations, they knew it only by 
the phases of the moon. In like manner, the supposed red Hebrews of the American deserts annually observed their 
festivals, and Meetak Yah-ah, ‘days of afflicting themselves before the Deity’, at a prefixed time of a certain moon. 

To this day, a war-leader, who by the number of his martial exploits is entitled to a drum, always sanctifies himself, 

and his out-standing company, at the end of the old moon, so as to go off at the appearance of the new one by day- 

light; whereas he who has not sufficiently distinguished himself must set out in the night. As the first of the 

Neetak Hoollo precedes a long strict fast of two nights anda day, they gormandize such a prodigious quantity of 
strong food, as to enable them to keep inviolate the succeeding fast, the sabbath of sabbaths, the eetak Yah-ah: the 

feast lasts only from morning till sun-set. Being great lovers of the ripened fruits, and only tantalized as yet with 

a near view of them, and having lived at this season but meanly on the wild products of nature, such a fast as this 

may be truly said to afflict their souls, and to prove a sufficient trial of their religious principles. During the 

festival, some of their people are closely employed in putting their temple in proper order for the annual expiation ; 

and others are painting the white cabin, and the supposed holiest, with white clay; for it is a sacred peaceable 

place, and white is its emblem. Some at the same time are likewise painting the war-cabin with red clay, or their 
emblematical red root, as occasion requires; while others of an inferior order are covering all the seats of the 

beloved square with new mattresses, made out of the fine splinters of long canes tied together with flags. In the 

mean time several of them are busy in sweeping the temple, clearing it of every supposed polluting thing, and 

carrying out the ashes from the hearth, which perhaps had not been cleaned six times since the last year’s general 

offering. Several towns join together to make the annual sacrifice; and if the whole nation lies in a narrow 

compass, they make but one annual offering: by which means, either through a sensual or religious principle, they 

strike off the work with joyful hearts. Everything being thus prepared, the archimagus orders some of his 

religious attendants to dig up the old hearth or altar, and to sweep out the remains that by chance might either be 

left or drop down. Then he puts a few roots of the button-snake-root, with some green leaves of an uncommon 

small sort of tobacco, and a little of the new fruits, at the bottom of the fire-place, which he orders to be covered up 

with white marley clay, and wetted over with clean water*. Immediately the magi order them to make a thick 
arbour over the altar, with green branches of the various young trees, which the warriors had designedly chosen, 

and laid down on the outside of the supposed holy ground: the women in the interim are busy at home in cleaning 
out their houses, renewing the old hearths, and cleansing all their culinary vessels, that they may be fit to receive 

the pretended holy fire, and the sanctified new fruits, according to the purity of the law, lest by a contrary conduct 

they should incur damage in life, health, future crops, &c. It is fresh in the memory of the old traders, that 

formerly none of these numerous nations of Indians would eat or even handle any part of the new harvest, till some 

of it had been offered up at the yearly festival by the archimagus, or those of his appointment, at their plantations, 

though the light harvest of the past year had forced them to give their women and children of the ripening fruits to 

sustain life. Notwithstanding they are visibly degenerating, both in this, and every other religious observance, 

except what concerns war, yet their magi and old warriors live contentedly on such harsh food as nature affords 

them in the woods, rather than transgress that divine precept given to their forefathers. 

Having everything in order for the sacred solemnity, the religious waiters carry off the remains of the feast, and 
lay them on the outside of the square; others of an inferior order carefully sweep out the smallest crumbs, for fear of 
polluting the first-fruit offering; and before sunset the temple must be cleared, even of every kind of vessel or 
utensil, that had contained or been used about any food in that expiring year. The women carry all off; but none 
of that sex, except half a dozen of old beloved women, are allowed in that interval to tread on the holy ground till 
the fourth day.. Now, one of the waiters proclaims with a loud voice, for all the warriors and beloved men, whom 
the purity of the law admits, to come and enter the beloved square and observe the fast ; he likewise exhorts all the 
women and children, and those who have not initiated themselves in war, to keep apart.from them according to law. 
Should any of them prove disobedient, the young ones would be dry-scratched, and the others stript of everything 
they had on them. They observe the same strict law of purity in their method of sanctifying themselves for war, 
in order.to obtain the divine protection, assistance, and success. But afew weeks since, when a large company of 

* Under the palladium of Troy were placed things of the like nature, as a preservative from evil ; but the above practice seems to be pretty 
much tempered with the Mosaic institution ; for God commanded them to make an altar of earth, to sacrifice thereon, (Exod. xx. 24.) 

394 ON THE DESCENT OF THE : 
these warlike savages were on the point of setting off to commence war against the Muskohge, some of the wags 
decoyed a heedless trader into their holy ground, and they stript him so as to oblige him to redeem his clothes with 
vermilion. And, on account of the like trespass, they detained two Indian children two nights and a day, till their 
obstinate parents paid the like ransom. 

Their great beloved man, or archimagus, now places four sentinels, one at each corner of the holy square, to keep 
out every living creature as impure, except the religious order, and the warriors who are not known to have violated 
the law of the first-fruit offering and that of marriage since the last year’s expiation. Those sentinels are regularly 
relieved, and firm to their sacred trust ; if they discerned a dog or cat on the out-limits of the holy square, before 
the first-fruit offering was made, they would kill it with their arrows on the spot. They observe the fast till the 
rising of the second sun; and be they ever so hungry in that sacred interval, the healthy warriors deem the duty so 
awful, and the violation so inexpressibly vicious, that no temptation would induce them to violate it; for, like the 
Hebrews, they fancy temporal evils are the necessary effect of their immoral conduct, and they would for ever ridicule 
and reproach the criminal for every bad occurrence that befell him in the new year, as the sinful author of his evils, 
and would sooner shoot themselves than suffer such long-continued sharp disgrace. The religious attendants boil a 
sufficient quantity of button-snake-root, highly imbittered, and give it round pretty warm, in order to vomit and purge 
their sinful bodies. Thus they continue to mortify and purify themselves till the end of the fast. When we consider 
their earnest invocations of the divine essence in this solemnity, their great knowledge of specific virtues in simples, 
—that they never apply the aforesaid root only on religious occasions, that they frequently drink it to such excess 
as to impair their health, and sometimes so as to poison themselves by its acrid quality, and take into the account 
its well-known medicinal property of curing the bite of the most dangerous sort of the serpentine generation,—must 
not one think that the aboriginal Americans chose it as a strong emblem of the certain cure of the bite of the old 
serpent in Eden? That the women and children, and those worthless fellows who have not hazarded their lives in 
defence of their holy places and holy things, and for the beloved people, may not be entirely godless, one of the old 
beloved men lays down a large quantity of the small-leafed green tobacco on the outside of a corner of the sacred 
square ; and an old beloved woman carries it off, and distributes it to the sinners without in large pieces, which they 
chew heartily and swallow, in order to afflict their souls. She commends those who perform the duty with cheerful- 
ness, and chides those who seem to do it unwillingly, by their wry faces, on account of the bitterness of the supposed 
sanctifying herb. She distributes it in such quantities as she thinks are equal to their capacity of sinning, giving to 
the reputed worthless old he-hen-pickers the proportion only of a child, because she thinks such spiritless pictures 
of men cannot sin with married women, as all the females love only the virtuous manly warrior, who has often 
successfully accompanied the beloved ark. 

In the time of this general fast, the women, children, and men of weak constitutions, are allowed to eat as soon 
as they are certain the sun has begun to decline from his meridian altitude, but not before that period. Their 
indulgence to the sick and weak seems to be derived from divine precept, which forbade the offering of sacrifice at 
the cost of mercy; and the snake-root, joined with their sanctifying hitter green tobacco seem to be as strong 
expressive emblems as they could have possibly chosen, according to their situation in life, to represent the sacred 
institution of eating the paschal lamb with bitter herbs ; and to show that though the old serpent bit us in Eden, 
yet there is a branch from the root of Jesse, to be hoped for by those who deny themselves their present sweet taste, 
which will be a sufficient purifier and effect the cure. The whole time of this fast may with truth be called a fast, 
and to the archimagus, to all the magi and pretended prophets in particular; for by ancient custom the former is 
obliged to eat of the sanctifying small-leafed tobacco and drink the snake-root, in a separate hut, for the space of 
three days and nights without any other subsistence, before the solemnity begins; besides his full portion along with 
the rest of the religious order and the old war-chieftains, till the end of the general fast, which he pretends to observe 
with the strictest religion. After the first-fruits are sanctified, he lives most abstemiously till the end of the annual 
expiation, only sucking water-melons now and then to quench thirst and support life, spitting out the more sub- 
stantial part. By the Levitical law the priests were obliged to observe a stricter sanctity of life than the laity; all the 
time they were performing the sacerdotal offices, both women and wine were strictly forbidden to them. Thus the 
Indian religious are retentive of their sacred mysteries to death, and the archimagus is visibly thin and meagre at 
the end of the solemnity. That rigid self-denial seems to have been designed to initiate the Levite, and give the rest an 
example of leading an innocent simple life, that thereby they might be able to subdue their unruly passions ; and that 

ge 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 325 

by mortifying and purifying himself so excessively, the sacrifice by passing through his pure hands may be accepted, 
and the holy Spirit of fire atoned according to the divine law. The superannuated religious are also emulous in the 
highest degree of excelling one another in their long fasting; for they firmly believe, that such an annual self-deny- 
ing method is so highly virtuous, when joined to an obedience of the rest of their laws, as to be the infallible means 
of averting evil and producing good things through the new year. They declare that a steady virtue, through the 
divine co-operating favour, will infallibly insure them a lasting round of happiness. 

At the end of this solemn fast, the women by the voice of a crier bring to the outside. of the holy square a 

plentiful variety of the old year’s food newly drest, which they lay down, and immediately return home ; for every 
one of them know their several duties, with regard both to time and place. The sentinels report the affair, and soon 
afterward the waiters by order go, and reaching their hands over the holy ground, they bring in the provisions and 
set them down before the famished multitude. Though most of the people may have seen them, they reckon it 
vicious and mean to show a gladness for the end of their religious duties; and shameful to hasten the holy attendants 
as they are all capable of their sacred offices. They are as strict observers of all their set forms, as the Israelites 
were of those they had from Divine appointment. 
. Before noon the temple is so cleared of everything the women brought to the square, that the festival after that 
period resembles a magical entertainment that had no reality in it, consisting only in a delusion of the senses. The 
women then carry the vessels from the temple to the water, and wash them clean for fear of pollution. As soon as 
the sun is visibly declining from his meridian, this third day of the fast, the archimagus orders a religious attendant 
to cry aloud to the crowded town, that the holy fire is to be brought out for the sacred altar, commanding every one 
of them to stay within their own houses, as becomes the beloved people, without doing the least bad thing, and to be 
sure to extinguish and throw away every spark of the old fire; otherwise the divine fire will bite them severely with 
_ bad diseases, sickness, and a great many other evils, which he sententiously enumerates, and finishes his monitory 
caution by laying life and death before them. Now everything is hushed: nothing but silence all around: the 
archimagus and his beloved waiter, rising up with a reverend carriage, steady countenance, and composed behaviour, 
go into the beloved place, or holiest, to bring them out the beloved fire. The former takes a piece of dry poplar 
willow, or white oak, and having cut a hole so as not to reach through it, he then sharpens another piece, and 
placing that with the hole between his knees, he drills it briskly for several minutes, till it begins to smoke ; or by 
rubbing two pieces together for about a quarter of an hour, by friction he collects the hidden fire, which all 
of them reckon to immediately issue from the holy Spirit of fire. The Muskohge call the fire their Grandfather, 
and the supreme Father of mankind, Lsakdta-Emishe, ‘the breath-master’, as it is commonly explained. When the 
fire appears, the beloved waiter cherishes it with fine chips, or shaved splinters of pitch-pine, which had been 
deposited in the holiest: then he takes the unsullied wing of a swan, fans it gently, and cherishes it to a flame. On 
this the archimagus brings it out in an old earthen vessel, whereon he had placed it, and lays it on the sacred altar, 
which is under an arbour, thick-weaved a-top with green boughs. It is observable, that when the Levites laid wood 
on the sacred fire, it was unlawful for them either to blow it with bellows or their breath. The Magians, or followers 
of Zoroaster, poured oil on their supposed holy fire, and left it to the open air to kindle it into flame. Is not this 
religious ceremony of these desolate Indians a strong imitation, or near resemblance, of the Jewish customs ? 

Their hearts are enlivened with joy at the appearance of the reputed holy fire, as the divine fire is supposed to 
atone for all their past crimes, except murder: and the beloved waiter shows his pleasure by his cheerful industry in 
feeding it with dry fresh wood; for they put no rotten wood on it, any more than the Levites would on their sacred 
altars. Although the people without may well know what is transacting within, yet by order a crier informs them 
of the good tidings, and orders an old beloved woman to pull a basketful of the new-ripened fruits, and bring them 
to the beloved square. As she before had been appointed, and religiously prepared for that solemn occasion, she 
readily obeys, and soon lays it down with a cheerful heart at the out-corner of the beloved square. By ancient cus- 
tom she may either return home, or stand there, till the expiation of sin hath been made, which is thus performed. 
The archimagus, or fire-maker, rises from his white seat, and walks northward three times round the holy fire, with 
a slow pace and in a very sedate and grave manner, stopping now and then, and speaking certain old ceremonial 
words with a low voice and a rapidity of expression which none understand but a few of the old beloved men, who 
equally secrete their religious mysteries, that they may not be profaned. He then takes a little of each sort of the 
new harvest, which the old woman had brought to the extremity of the supposed holy ground, rubs some bear’s oil 

4 O 

326 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

over it, and offers it up together with some flesh to the bountiful holy Spirit of fire, as a first-fruit offering, and an 
annual oblation for sin. He likewise consecrates the button-snake-root, and the cusseena, by pouring a little of 
those two strong decoctions into the pretended holy fire. He then purifies the red and white seats with those 
bitter liquids, and sits down. Now, every one of the outlaws who had been catched a-tripping, may safely creep out 
of their lurking holes, anoint themselves and dress in their finest, to pay their grateful thanks at an awful distance, 
to the forgiving divine fire. A religious waiter is soon ordered to call to the women around to come for the sacred 
fire: they gladly obey. When they come to the outside of the quadrangular holy ground, the archimagus addresses 
the warriors, and gives them all the particular positive injunctions and negative precepts they yet retain of the ancient 
law, relating to their own manly station. Then he changes his note, and uses a much sharper language to the women, 
as suspecting their former virtue. He first tells them very earnestly, that if there are any of them who have not 
extinguished the old evil fire, or have contracted any impurity, they must forthwith depart, lest the divine fire should 
spoil both them and the people; he charges them to be sure not to give the children a bad example of eating any 
unsanctified or impure food, otherwise they will get full of worms, and be devoured by famine and diseases, and bring 
many other dangerous evils both upon themselves and all the beloved or holy people. This seems to allude to the 
theocratic government of the Jews, when such daring criminals were afflicted with immediate and visible divine 
punishment. In his female lecture, he is sharp and prolix: he urges them with much earnestness to an honest 
observance of the marriage-law, which may be readily excused on account of the prevalent passion of self-interest. 
Our own Christian orators do not exert themselves with half the eloquence or eagerness, as when that is at stake 
which they most value: and the old wary savage has sense enough to know that the Indian female virtue is very 
brittle, not being guarded so much by inward principle as the fear of shame, and of incurring severe punishment ; 
but if every bush of every thicket was an hundred-eyed Argos, it would not be a sufficient guard over a wanton 
heart. So that it is natural they should speak much on this part of the subject, as they think they have much at 
stake. After that, he addresses himself to the whole-body of the people, and tells them, in rapid bold language, 
with great energy and expressive gestures of body, to look at the holy fire, which again has introduced all those 
shameful adulterous criminals into social privileges ; he bids them not.to be guilty of the like for time to come, but 
be sure to remember well, and strongly shake hands with the old beloved straight speech; otherwise the divine fire, 
which sees, hears, and knows them, will spoil them exceedingly, if at any time they relapse and commit that detest- 
able crime.. Then he enumerates all the supposed lesser crimes, and moves the audience by the great motives of the 
hope of temporal good, and the fear of temporal evil, assuring them, that upon their careful observance of the ancient 
law, the holy fire will enable their prophets, the rain-makers, to procure them plentiful harvest, and give their war- 
leaders victory over their enemies ; and by the communicative power of their holy things, health and prosperity are 
certain ; but on failure, they are to expect a great ‘many extraordinary calamities, such as hunger, uncommon diseases, 
a subjection to witchcraft, and captivity and death by the hands of the hateful enemy in the woods, where the wild 
fowls will eat their flesh, and beasts of prey destroy the remaining bones, so as they will not be gathered to their 
forefathers ; because their ark abroad, and beloved things at home, would lose their virtual power of averting evil. 
He concludes by advising them to a strict observance of their old rites and customs, and then everything shall go 
well with them. He soon orders some of the religious attendants to take a sufficient quantity of the supposed holy 
fire, and lay it down on the outside of the holy ground, for all the houses of the various associated towns, which 
sometimies lie several miles apart. The women, hating sharp and grave lessons, speedily take it up, gladly carry it 
home, and lay it down on their unpolluted hearths, with the prospect of future joy and peace. While the women 
are running about, and getting ready to dress the sanctified new fruits on the sacred fire, the archimagus sends a 
religious attendant to pull some cusseena, or yopon, belonging to the temple; and having parched it brown on the 
altar, he boils it with clear running water in a large earthen pot about half full: it has such a strong body as to froth 
above the top by pouring it up and down with their consecrated vessels, which are kept only for that use: of this 
they drink now and then till the end of the festival, and on every other religious occasion from year to year. Some 
of the old beloved men, through a religious emulation in sanctifying themselves, often’ drink this and other bitter 
decoctions to such excess as to purge themselves very severely: when they drink it, they always invoke YO Hz 
Wau. If any of the warriors are confined at home by sickness or wounds, and are either deemed incapable or unfit 
to come to the annual expiation, they are allowed one of the old consecrated conch-shells full of their sanctifying 
bitter cusseena by their magi. The traders hear them often dispute for it as their proper due by ancient custom, and 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. O27 

they often repeat their old religious ceremonies to one anotier, especially that part which they imagine most affects 
their present welfare: the aged are sent to instruct the young ones in these particulars. The aboye allowance seems 
to be derived from the divine precept of mercy, in allowing a second passover in favour of those who could not go, or 
were not admitted, to the first; and the latter custom, to be in obedience to the divine law, which their supposed pro- 
genitors were to write on the posts of the doors to wear as frontlets before their eyes, and teach to their children. 

Though the Indians do not use salt in their first-fruit oblation till the fourth day, it is not to be doubted but 

they formerly did. They reckon they cannot observe the annual expiation of sins, without bear’s oil, both to mix 
with that yearly offering, and to eat with the new sanctified fruits; and some years they have a great deal of trouble 
in killing a sufficient quantity of bears for the use of this religious solemnity, and their other sacred rites for the 
approaching year; for at such seasons they are hard to be found and quite lean. The traders commonly supply 
themselves with plenty of this oil from winter to winter; but the Indians are so prepossessed with a notion of the 
white people being all impure and accursed, that they deem their oil as polluting on those sacred occasions, as 
Josephus tells us the Jews reckoned that of the Greeks. An Indian warrior will not light his pipe at a white man’s 
fire, if he suspects any unsanctified food has been dressed at it in the new year.. And in the time of the new-ripened 
fruits, their religious men carry a flint, punk and steel, when they visit us, for fear of polluting themselves by lighting 
their pipes at our supposed /oak ookproose, ‘accursed fire’; and spoiling the power of their holy things. The 
polluted would, if known, be infallibly anathematized and expelled from the temple, with the women who are 
suspected of gratifying their vicious taste. During the eight days festival they are forbidden even to touch the skin 
of a female child: if they are detected either in cohabiting with, or laying their hand on, any of their own wives, in 
that sacred interval, they are stripped naked, and the offender is universally deemed so atrocious a criminal, that he 
lives afterwards a miserable life. Some have shot themselves dead, rather than stand the shame, and the long year’s 
continual reproaches cast upon them for every mischance that befalls any of their people or the ensuing harvest,—a 
necessary effect of the divine anger, they say, for such a crying sin of pollution. An instance of this kind I heard 
happened some years ago in Talase, a town of the Muskohge seven miles above the Alebama garrison. 

When we consider how sparingly they eat in their usual way of living, it is surprising to see what a vast quantity 
of food they consume on their festival days. It would equally surprise a stranger to see how exceedingly they vary 
their dishes, their dainties consisting only of dried flesh, fish, oil, corn, beans, pease, pompions, and wild fruit. 
During this rejoicing time the warriors are drest in their wild martial array, with their heads covered with white 
down: they carry feathers of the same colour, either in their hands, or fastened to white scraped canes, as emblems 
of purity and sceptres of power, while they are dancing in three circles, and singing their religious praises around 
the sacred arbour, in which stands the holy fire. Their music consists of two clay-pot drums, covered on the top 
with thin wet deer-skins, drawn very tight, on which each of the noisy musicians beats with a stick, accompanying 
the noise with their voices ; at the same time the dancers prance it away, with wild and quick-sliding steps, and varie- 
gated postures of body, to keep time with the drums, and the rattling calabashes shaked by some of their religious 
heroes, each of them singing their old religious songs, and striking notes 7m ¢ympano et choro. Such is the graceful 
dancing, as well as the vocal and instrumental music, of the red Hebrews on religious and martial occasions, which 
they must have derived from early antiquity! Toward the conclusion of the great festival, they paint and dress 
themselves anew, and give themselves the most terrible appearance they possibly can. They take up their war- 
instruments, and fight a mock battle in a very exact manner: after which, the women are called to join in a grand 
dance, and if they disobey the invitation they are fined. But as they are extremely fond of such religious exercise, 
and deem it productive of temporal good, all soon appear in their finest apparel, as before suggested, decorated with 
silver ear-bobs, or pendants to their ears, several rounds of white beads about their necks, rings upon their fingers, 
large wire or broad plates of silver on their wrists, their heads shining with oil, and torrepine-shells containing 
pebbles fastened to deer-skins tied to the outside of their legs. Thus adorned, they join the men in three circles, 

and dance a considerable while around the sacred fire, and then they separate. 

At the conchision of this long and solemn festival the archimagus orders one of the religious men to proclaim 
to all-the people that their sacred annual solemnity is now ended, and every kind of evil averted from the beloved 
people, according to the old straight beloved speech ; they must therefore paint themselves, and come along with 
him, according to ancient custom. As they know the stated time, the joyful sound presently reaches their longing 
ears: immediately they fly about to grapple up a kind of chalky clay, to paint themselves white. By their religious 

328 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

emulation, they soon appear covered with that emblem of purity, and join at the outside of the holy ground, with all 
who had sanctified themselves within it, who are likewise painted, some with streaks and others all over, as white as 
the clay can make them: recusants would undergo a heavy penalty. They go along in a very orderly solemn pro- 
cession, to purify themselves in running water. The archimagus heads the holy train, his waiter next, the beloved 
men according to their seniority, and the warriors by their reputed merit. The women follow them in the same 
orderly manner, with all the children that can walk behind them, ranged commonly according to their height; the 
very little ones they carry in their arms. Those who are known to have eaten of the unsanctified fruits, bring up 
the rear. In this manner the procession moves along, singing ALELUIAH to YO He Wau, &c.; till they get to the 
water, which is generally contiguous, when the archimagus jumps into it, and all the holy train follow him in the 
same order they observed from the temple. Having purified themselves, or washed away their sins, they come out with 
joyful hearts, believing themselves out of the reach of temporal evil for their past vicious conduct: and they return 
in the same religious cheerful manner into the middle of the holy ground, where having made a few circles, singing 
and dancing around the altar, they thus finish their annual great festival, and depart in joy and peace. 

Ancient writers inform us, that while the Scythians or Tartars were heathens, their priests in the time of their 
sacrifices took some blood, and mixing it with milk, horse-dung, and earth, got on a tree, and having exhorted the 
people, they sprinkled them with it, in order to purify them, and defend them from every kind of evil: the heathens 
also excluded some from religious communion. The Egyptians excommunicated those who ate of animals that bore 
wool, or cut the throat of a goat*: and in ancient times they, and the Pheenicians, Greeks, &c., adored the serpent, 
and expelled those who killed it. The East-Indians, likewise, drive those from the supposed benefit of their altars, 
who eat of a cow and drink wine, or that eat with foreigners or an inferior caste. Though the heathen world 
offered sacrifice, had ablutions and several other sorts of purifications, and frequently by fire ; yet at the best their 
religious observances differed widely from the divine institutions ; whereas the American aborigines observe strict 
purity in the most essential parts of the divine law. The former concealed their various worship from the light of 
the sun ; some seeking thick groves, others descending into the deep valleys, others crawling to get into caverns and 
under their favourite rocks. But we find the latter, in their state-houses and temples, following the Jerusalem copy 
in a surprising manner. Those of them who yet retain a supposed most holy place, contrary to the usage of the old 
heathen world, have it standing at the west end of the holy quadrangular ground: and they always appoint those of 
the meanest rank to sit on the seats of the eastern square, so that their backs are to the east, and faces to the 
west-~. The red square looks north; and the second men’s cabin, as the traders term the other square, of course 
looks south, which is a strong imitation of Solomon’s temple, that was modelled according to the divine plan of the 
Israelitish camp in the wilderness. We find them also sacntifying themselves, according to the emblematical laws of 
purity, offering their annual sacrifice in the centre of their quadrangular temples, under the meridian light of the sun. 
Their magi are devoted to, and bear the name of, the great holy One ; their supposed prophets, likewise, that of the 
divine fire; and each of them bear the emblems of purity and holiness, while in their religious duties they sing 
AveLuian, YO He Wau, &c., both day and night. Thus different are the various gods, temples, prophets, and priests 
of all the idolatrous nations of antiquity, from the savage Americans; which shows with convincing clearness, especially 
by recollecting the former arguments, that the American aborigines were never idolaters, nor violated the second 
commandment in worshiping the incomprehensible, omnipresent, Divine essence, after the manner described by the 
Popish historians of Peru and Mexico ; but that the greatest part of their civil and religious system is a strong old 
picture of the Israelitish, much less defaced than might be reasonably expected from the circumstances of time 
and place. 

EN cae valine Lanatis animalibus abstinet omnis 
Mensa; nefas illic foetum jugulare capellee.—Juvenal, Sat. xv. 

+ The Hebrews had two presidents in the great synhedrion. The first was called Nashe Yo, ‘a prince of God’. They elected him on account 
of his wisdom. The second was called Rosh Ha-Yoshibbah, ‘the father of the assembly’: he was chief in the great council. And 4b beth din, or 
‘the father of the consistory’, sat at his right hand as the chief of the seventy-two, of which the great synhedrion consisted; the rest sitting, according 
to their merit, in a gradual declension from the prince to the end of the semicircle. The like order is observed by the Indians,—and Jer. ii. 27, 
God commanded the Israelites that they should not turn their backs to him, but their faces toward the propitiatory, when they worshiped him. 
I remember, in Koosah, the uppermost western town of the Muskohge, which was a place of refuge, their supposed holiest consisted of a neat 
house in the centre of the western square, and the door of it was in the south gable-end, close to the white cabin, each on a direct line north 
and south. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 329 

Every spring season, one town or more of the Missisippi Floridians keep a great solemn feast of love, to renew 
their old friendship. . They call this annual feast, hottwk aimpa, heettla, tanda, ‘the people eat, dance, and walk as 
twined together’. The short name of their yearly feast of love, is hottwk wmpanda, ‘eating by a strong religious or 
social principle’; zmpanda signifies several threads or strands twisted or warped together. Hissoobistardkshe, and 
yelphoha panda, ‘a twisted horse-rope’, and ‘warped garter*’. This is also contrary to the usage of the old heathen 
world, whose festivals were in honour to their chief idols, and very often accompanied with detestable lewdness and 
debauchery. They assemble three nights previous to their annual feast of love: on the fourth night they eat 
together. During the intermediate space, the young men and women dance in circles from the evening till morning. 
The men mask their faces with large pieces of gourds of different shapes and hieroglyphic paintings. Some of 
them fix a pair of young buffalo horns to their head; others the tail, behind. When the dance and their time is 
expired, the men turn out a-hunting, and bring in a sufficient quantity of venison for the feast of renewing their love 
and confirming their friendship with each other. The women dress it, and bring the best they have along with it; 
which, a few springs past, was only a variety of Esau’s small red acorn pottage, as their crops had failed. “When 
they have eaten together they fix in the ground a large pole with a bush tied at the top, over which they throw a 
ball. Till the corn is in, they meet there almost every day, and play for venison and cakes, the men against the 
women ; which the old people say they have observed for time out of mind. 

Before I conclude this Argument, I must here observe, that when the Indians meet at night to gladden and unite 
their hearts before Yourwau, they sing Yohewd-shoo Yohewa-shoo, Vohewahshee Yohewashee, and Yohewahshai Yohe- 
wahshai, with much energy. The first word is nearly in Hebrew characters, yw, the name of Joshua, or ‘saviour’, 
Numb. xiii. 8. That y is properly expressed by our double vowel oo, let it be observed, that as Syn is ‘a ruler’, or 
‘commanding’, so the Indians say boole hakse ‘strike a person that is criminal’. In like manner they sing Aeshi 
Yo Meshi Yo, Meshi He Meshi He, Meshi Wah Meshi Wah; \ikewise, Mesht Hah Yo, &c.; and Meshi Wah 
Hah Meshi Wah Fé, transposing and accenting each syllable differently, so as to make them appear different words. 
But they commonly make those words end with one syllable of the divine name, Yo He Wah. If we connect this 
with the former part of the subject, and consider they are commonly anointed all over in the time of their religious 
songs and circuiting dances, the words seem to glance at the Hebrew original, and perhaps they are sometimes 
synonymous; for Ww signifies ‘oil’, the person anointed nw (Messiah), and he who anointed inwn, which with the 
Indians is Mleshihdh Yo. "That these red savages formerly understood the radical meaning and emblematical design 
of the important words they use in their religious dances and sacred hymns is pretty obvious, if we consider the 
reverence they pay to the mysterious divine name YO He Wau, in pausing during a long breath on each of the - 
two first syllables; their defining good by joining Wah to the end of a word which otherwise expresses moral evil, 
as before noticed; and again by making the same word a negative of good, by separating the first syllable of that 
divine name into two syllables, and adding U as a superlative termination, Y-O-U: all their sacred songs seem like- 
wise to illustrate it very clearly; Halelu-Yah, Shilu Wah, Meshi Wah, Meshiha Yo, &c. The words which they 
repeat in their divine hymns while dancing in three circles around their supposed holy fire, are deemed so sacred, 
that they have not been known ever to mention them at any other time; and as they are a most erect people, their 
bowing posture during the time of those religious acclamations and invocations helps to confirm their Hebrew: 

origin. 

ARGUMENT IX. 

The Hebrews offered Daily Sacrifice, which the prophet Daniel calls Zamid, ‘the daily’. It was an offering of .a 
lamb every morning and evening, at the charges of the common treasury of the temple, and except the skin and 
entrails it was burnt to ashes; upon which account they called it Oolah kalile, ‘to ascend and consume’. The Indians 
have a similar religious service. The Indian women always throw a small piece of the fattest of the meat into the 
fire when they are eating, and frequently before they begin to eat. Sometimes they view it with a pleasing attention, 
and pretend to draw omens from it. They firmly believe such a method to be a great means of producing temporal 
good things, and of averting those that are evil; and they are so far from making this fat-offering through pride or 

* The name of a horse-rope is derived from tardkshe ‘to tie’, and hissooba ‘an elk or horse that carries a burthen’; which suggests that they 
formerly saw elks carry burthens, though perhaps not in the northern provinces. 

4P 

330 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

hypocrisy, that they perform it when they think they are not seen by those of contrary principles, who might ridicule 
them without teaching them better. Instead of blaming their religious conduct, as some have done, I advised them 
to persist in their religious duty to Ishtohoollo Aba, because he never failed to be kind to those who firmly shaked 
hands with the old beloved speech, particularly the moral precepts, and after they died he would bring them to their 
beloved land; and took occasion to show them the innumerable advantages their reputed forefathers were blessed 
with while they obeyed the divine law. : 

The white people (I had almost said Christians) who have become Indian proselytes of justice by living accord- 
ing to the Indian religious system, assure us that the Indian men observe the daily sacrifice both at home and in the 
woods with new-killed venison, but that otherwise they decline it. The difficulty of getting salt for religious uses 
from the sea-shore, and likewise its irritating quality when eaten by those who have green wounds, might in time 
occasion them to discontinue that part of the sacrifice. They make salt for domestic use out of a saltish kind of 
grass which grows on rocks, by burning it to ashes, making strong lye of it, and boiling it in earthen pots to a 
proper consistence. They do not offer any fruits of the field, except at the first-fruit offering ; so that their neglect 
of sacrifice at certain times, seems not to be the effect of an ignorant or vicious, but of their intelligent and virtuous 
disposition, and to be a strong circumstantial evidence of their Israelitish extraction. Though they believe the upper 
heavens to be inhabited by Jshtohoollo Aba, and a great multitude of inferior good spirits, yet they are firmly per- 
suaded that the divine omnipresent spirit of fire and light resides on earth, in their annual sacred fire while it is 
unpolluted; and that he kindly accepts their lawful offerings, if their own conduct is agreeable to the old divine law 
which was delivered to their forefathers. The former notion of the Deity is agreeable to those natural images with 
which the divine penmen, through all the prophetic writings, have drawn Yourwan Ex1onim. When God was pleased 
with Aaron’s priesthood and offerings, the holy fire descended and consumed the burnt-offering on the altar, &c. 
By the divine records of the Hebrews, this was the emblematical token of the divine presence; and the smoke of the 
victim ascending toward heaven is represented as a sweet savour to God. ‘The people who have lived so long apart 
from the rest of mankind are not to be wondered at, if they have forgotten the end and meaning of the sacrifice; 
and are rather to be pitied for seeming to believe, like the ignorant part of the Israelites, that the virtue is either in 
the form of offering the sacrifice, or in the divinity they imagine to reside on earth in the sacred annual fire; like- 
wise, for seeming to have forgotten that the virtue was in the thing typified. 

In the year 1748, when I was at the Koosah on my way to the Chikkasah country, I had a conversation on this 
subject with several of the more intelligent of the Muskohge traders. One of them told me that just before, while 
he and several others were drinking spirituous liquors with the Indians, one of the warriors, having drank to excess, 
reeled into the fire and burned himself very much. He roared, foamed, and spoke the worst things against God that 
their language could express. He upbraided him with ingratitude for having treated him so barbarously in return for his 
religious offerings, affirming he had always sacrificed to him the first young buck he killed in the new year; as in a con- 
stant manner he offered him when at home some of the fattest of the meat, even when he was at short allowance, on 
purpose that he might shine upon him as a kind God. And he added, “ Now you have proved as an evil spirit, by 
biting me so severely who was your constant devotee, and are a kind God to those accursed nothings who are laugh- 
ing at you as a rogue, and at me as a fool, I assure you, I shall renounce you from this time forward, and instead of 
making you look merry with fat meat you shall appear sad with water, for spoiling the old beloved speech. Iam a 
beloved warrior, and consequently I scorn to lie; you shall therefore immediately fly up above the clouds, for I shall 
piss upon you.” From that time, his brethren said, God forsook that terrestrial residence, and the warrior became 
godless. This information exactly agrees with many such instances of Indian impiety, that happened within my own 
observation, and shows the bad consequences of that evil habit of using spirituous liquors intemperately, which they 
have been taught by the Europeans. 

The Indians have among them the resemblance of the Jewish sin-offering and trespass-offering, for they commonly 
pull their new-killed venison (before they dress it) several times through the smoke and flame of the fire, both by 
the way of a sacrifice, and to consume the blood, life or animal spirits of the beast, which with them would be a most 
horrid abomination to eat. And they sacrifice in the woods, the milt, or a large fat piece of the first buck they kill, 
both in their summer and winter hunt, and frequently the whole carcass. This they offer up, either as a thanksgiving 
for the recovery of health, and for their former success in hunting, or that the divine care and goodness may be 
still continued to them. When the Hebrews doubted whether they had sinned against any of the divine precepts, 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. SHOR! 

they were obliged by the law to bring to the priest a ram of their flock to be sacrificed, which they called Ascham. 
When the priest offered this, the person was forgiven, Their sacrifices and offerings were called Shé/omim, as they 
typified Shelo-Berith, ‘the purifying root’, who was to procure them peace, rest and plenty. The Indian imitates 
the Israelite in his religious offerings, according to the circumstances of things ; the Hebrew laid his hands on the 
head of the clean and tame victim, to load it with his sins, when it was to be killed. The Indian religiously chooses 
that animal which in America comes nearest to the divine law of sacrifice, according to what God has enabled him ; 
he shoots down a buck, and sacrifices either the whole carcass or some choice part of it, upon a fire of green wood 
to burn away and ascend to Yohewah. Then he purifies himself in water, and believes himself secure from temporal 
evils. Formerly, every hunter observed the very same religious economy ; but now it is practised only by those who 
are the most retentive of their old religious mysteries. The Muskohge Indians sacrifice a piece of every deer they kill 
at their hunting camps, or near home; if the latter, they dip their middle finger in the broth, and sprinkle it over 
the domestic tombs of their dead, to keep them out of the power of evil spirits, according to their mythology ; which 
seems to proceed from a traditional knowledge, though corruption of the Hebrew law of sprinkling and of blood. 

The Indians observe another religious custom of the Hebrews, in making a peace-offering, or sacrifice of grati- 
tude, if the Deity in the supposed holy ark is propitious to their campaign against the enemy, and brings them all 
safe home. .If they have lost any in war, they always decline it, because they imagine by some neglect of duty, they 
are impure: then they only mourn their vicious conduct which defiled the ark, and thereby occasioned the loss. Like 
the Israelites, they believe their sins are the true cause of all their evils, and that the divinity in their ark will always 
bless the more religious party with the best success. ‘This is their invariable sentiment, and is the sole reason of 
their mortifying themselves in so severe a manner while they are out at war, living very scantily, even in a buffalo- 
range under a strict rule, lest by luxury their hearts should grow evil and give them occasion to mourn. The common 
sort of Indians, in these corrupt times, only sacrifice a small piece of unsalted fat meat, when they are rejoicing in 
the divine presence, singing Yo Yo, &c. for their success and safety ; but, according to the religious custom of the 
Hebrews, who offered sacrifices of thanksgiving for every notable favour that Elohim had conferred either on indivi- 
duals or the body,—both the war-leader and his religious assistant go into the woods as soon as they are purified, 
and there sacrifice the first deer they kill; yet, as hath been observed, they always celebrate the annual expiation of 
sins in their religious temples. 

The red Hebrews imagine their temples to have such a typical holiness, more than any other place, that if they 
offered up the annual sacrifice elsewhere, it would not atone for the people, but rather bring down the anger of /sh- 
tohoolle Aba, and utterly spoil the power of their holy places and holy things. They who sacrifice in the woods, do 
it only on the particular occasions now mentioned, unless incited by a dream, which they esteem a monitory lesson 
of the Deity, according to a similar opinion of the Hebrews. To conclude this argument, it is well known that the 
heathens offered the most abominable and impure sacrifices to a multiplicity of idol gods ; some on favourite high 
places, others in thick groves, yea, offerings of their own children were made! and they likewise prostituted their 
young women in honour of their deities. The former is so atrocious in the eyes of the American Hebrews, that 
they reckon there needs no human law to prevent so unnatural a crime; the vilest reptiles being endued with an 
intense love to their young ones; and as to the latter, if even a great war-leader is known to cohabit with his own 
wife while sanctifying himself according to their mode on any religious occasion, he is deemed unclean for the space 
of three days and nights; or should he during the annual atonement of sins, it is deemed so dangerous a pollution, 
as to demand a strict exclusion from the rest of the sanctified head-men and warriors, till the general atonement has 
been made at the temple, to appease the offended Deity: besides, as a shameful badge of his impiety, his clothes are 
stripped off. Thus different are the various modes and subjects of the heathenish worship and offerings, from those 

of the savage Americans. The surprising purity the latter still observe in their religious ceremonies, under the cir- 
cumstances of time and place, points strongly at their origin. 

ARGUMENT X. 

The Hebrews had various Ablutions and Anointings, according to the Mosaic ritual; and all the Indian nations 
constantly observe similar customs from religious motives. Their frequent bathing, or dipping themselves and their 
children in rivers, even in the severest weather, seems to be as truly. Jewish as the other rites and ceremonies which 

332 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

have been mentioned. Frequent washing of the body was highly necessary to the health of the Hebrews in their 
warm climate and populous state; but it is useless in this point of view to the red Americans, as their towns are 
widely distant from each other, thin-peopled, and situated in cold regions.. However, they practise it as a religious 
duty, unless in very hot weather, which they find by experience to be prejudicial to their health, when they observe 
the law of mercy, rather than that of sacrifice. In the coldest weather, and when the ground is covered with snow, 
against their bodily ease and pleasure, men and children turn out of their warm houses or stoves, reeking with sweat, 
singing their usual sacred notes, Yo Vo, &c., at the dawn of day, adoring Yo Hz Wax, at the gladsome sight of 
the morn; and thus they skip along, echoing praises, till they get to the river, when they instantaneously plunge 
into it. If the water is frozen, they break the ice with a religious impatience. After bathing, they return home, 
rejoicing as they run for having so well performed their religious duty, and thus purged away the impurities of the 
preceding day by ablution. The neglect of this hath been deemed so heinous a crime, that they have raked the legs 
and arms of the delinquent with snake’s teeth, not allowing warm water to relax the stiffened skin. This is called 
dry-scratching ; for their method of bleeding consists in scratching the legs and arms with goir-fish teeth, when the 
skin has been first well loosened by warm water. The criminals, through a false imitation of true martial virtue, scorn 
to move themselves in the least out of their erect posture, be the pain ever so intolerable ; if they did, they would be 
laughed at, even by their own relations,—first for being vicious, and next for being timorous. This will help to 
lessen our surprise at the uncommon patience and constancy with which they are endued, beyond the rest of 
mankind, in suffering long-continued torture ; especially as it is one of the first and strongest impressions they take; 
and they have constant lessons and examples of fortitude exhibited before their eyes. 

The Hebrews had convenient separate places for their women to bathe in, and purify themselves as occasion 
required; and at the temple (and the synagogues, after the captivity,) they worshiped apart from the men, lest they 
should attract one another’s attention from the divine worship; and it was customary for the women to go veiled, 
for fear of being seen, when they walked the streets. No doubt but jealousy had as great a share in introducing 
this custom as modesty, especially while polygamy was suffered in the rich. But the scantiness of the Jewish 
Americans’ circumstances, has obliged them to purify themselves in the open rivers, where modesty forbade them to 
expose their women; who by this means are now less religious than the men in that duty, for they only purify 
themselves as their discretion directs them. In imitation of the Hebrew women being kept apart from the men at 
their worship, the Indians entirely exclude their females from their temples by ancient custom, except six old beloved 
women, who are admitted to sing, dance and rejoice, in the time of their annual expiation of sins, and then retire. 
In their town-houses also they separate them from the warriors, placing them on the ground at each side of the 
entrance of the door within, as if they were only casual spectators. It may be objected, that the ancient Egyptians, 
Greeks and Romans worshiped their gods at the dawn of day; and the Persian magi, with all the other worshipers of 
fire, paid their religious devoirs to the rising sun ; but, as the Indians are plainly not idolaters or polytheists, as they 
sing to and invoke Yau, and YO He Wax, the divine essence, as they run along at the dawn of day to purify them- 
selves by ablution, it seems sufficiently clear they are not descended from either of the last-mentioned states, but 
that their origin is from the Israelites. This law of purity, bathing in water, was essential to the Jews; and the 
Indians to this day would exclude the men from religious communion who neglected to observe it. It was 
customary with the Jews also after bathing to anoint themselves with oil. All the Orientalists had a kind of sacred 
respect to oil; particularly the Jews. With them, the same word which signified ‘noon-day or splendour’, =x, 
denoted also ‘lucid oil’. And the olive tree is derived from the verb ‘to shine’, because the fruit thereof tended to 
give their faces a favourite glistering colour. ’Tis well known that oil was applied by the Jews to the most sacred, 
as well as common uses. Their kings, prophets and priests, at their inauguration and consecration were anointed 
with oil; and the promised Saviour was himself described by the epithet “anointed”, and is said, Psal. xlv. 7., to be 
“ anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows.” We shall on this point discover no small resemblance and 
conformity in the American Indians. The Indian priests and prophets are initiated by unction. The Chikkasah 
some time ago set apart some of their old men of the religious order. They first obliged them to sweat themselves 
for the space of three days and nights, in a small green hut made on purpose, at a considerable distance from any 
dwelling, through a scrupulous fear of contracting pollution by contact, or from the effluvia of polluted people, 
and a strong desire of secreting their religious mysteries. During that interval, they were allowed to eat nothing 
but green tobacco, nor to drink anything except warm water, highly imbittered with the button-snake-root, to cleanse . 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 3393 

their bodies, and prepare them to serve in their holy or beloved office, before the divine essence, whom during this 
preparation they constantly invoke by his essential name, as before described. After which, their priestly garments 
and ornaments, mentioned under a former Argument, (pages 315, 316,) are put on, and then bear’s oil is ‘poured upon 
their head. If they could procure olive or palm oil, instead of bear's oil, doubtless they would prefer and use it in 
their sacred ceremonies, especially as they are often destitute of their favourite bear’s oil for domestic uses. 

The Jewish women were so exceedingly addicted to anoint their faces and bodies, that they often preferred oil to 
the necessaries of life ; the widow who addressed herself to Elisha, though she was in the most pinching straits, and 
wanted everything else, yet had a pot of oil to anoint herself. This custom of anointing became universal among 
the eastern nations. They were not satisfied with perfuming themselves with sweet oils and fine essences, but 
anointed birds ; as in the ninth ode of Anacreon;. 

Tot unde nunc odores? 

Huc advolans per auras, 

Spirasque, depluisque ; 
The poet introduces two doves conversing together; one of which carried a letter to Bathyllus, the anointed beau, 
and the other wishes her much joy for her perfumed wings that diffused such an agreeable smell around. And the 
same poet orders the painter to draw this Samian beau with his hair wet with essence, to give him a fine appearance. 
“ Nitidas comas ejus facilto.” (Ode 29.) Virgil describes Turnus, just after the same manner: 

Vibratos calido ferro, myrrhaque madentes.— inetd. lib. 12. 

Homer tells us that Telemachus and Philistratus anointed their whole bodies with essences, after they had visited the 
palace of Menelaus, and before they sat down at table.— Odyss. lib. 4. 

The Jews reckoned it a singular piece of disrespect to their guest, if they offered him no oil. When any of them 
paid a friendly visit, they had essences presented to anoint their heads; to which custom of civility the Saviour 
alludes in his reproof of the parsimonious Pharisee at whose house he dined.—Lwke vii. 46. 

All the Indian Americans, especially the female sex, reckon their bear’s oil or grease very valuable, and use it 
after the same manner as the Asiatics did their fine essences and sweet perfumes; the young warriors and women 
are uneasy unless their hair is always shining with it, which is probably the reason that none of their heads are 
bald. But enough is said on this head to show that they seem to have derived this custom from the East. 

ARGUMENT XI. 

The Indians have customs consonant to the Mosaic Laws of Uncleanness. They oblige their women, in their 
lunar retreats, to build small huts at as considerable a distance from their dwelling-houses as they imagine may be 
out of the enemies’ reach ; where, during the space of that period, they are obliged to stay at the risk of their lives. 
Should they be known to violate that ancient law, they must answer for every misfortune that befalls any of the 
people, as a certain effect of the divine fire; though the lurking enemy sometimes kills them in their religious 
retirement. Notwithstanding they reckon it conveys a most horrid and dangerous pollution to those who touch or 
go near them, or walk anywhere within the circle of their retreats, and are in fear of thereby spoiling the supposed 
purity and power of their holy ark, which they always carry to war, yet the enemy believe they can so cleanse 
themselves with the consecrated herbs, roots, &c., which the chieftain carries in the beloved war-ark, as to secure 
them, in this point, from bodily danger, because it was done against their enemies. The non-cbservance of this 
separation, a breach of the marriage-law, and murder, they esteem the most capital crimes. When the time of the 
women’s separation is ended, they always purify themselves in deep running water, return home, dress, and anoint 
themselves. They ascribe these monthly periods to the female structure, not to the anger of Lshtohoollo Aba. 

Correspondent to the Mosaic law of women’s purification after travail, the Indian women absent themselves from 
their husbands and all public company for a considerable time. The Muskohge women are separate for three moons, 
exclusive of that moon in which they are delivered. By the Jewish law, women, after a male-birth, were forbidden to 
enter the temple, and even the very touch of sacred things, forty days; and after a female, the time of separation 
was doubled. Should any of the Indian women violate this law of purity, they would be censured, and suffer for any 
sudden sickness or death that might happen among the people, as the necessary effect of the divine anger for their 
polluting sin, contrary to their old traditional law of female purity. Like the greater part of the Israelites, it is the 

4Q 

334 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

fear of temporal evils, and the prospect of temporal good, that makes them so tenacious and observant of their laws, 
At the stated period, the Indian women’s impurity is finished by ablution, and they are again admitted to social and 
holy privileges. : iad sees ; £6 

By the Levitical law, the people who had running issues, or sores, were deemed unclean, and strictly ordered apart 
from the rest, for fear of polluting them; for everything they touched became unclean. _ The Indians, in as strict a 
manner, observe the very same law; they follow the ancient Israelitish copy so close, as to build a.small hut at a con- 
siderable distance from the houses of the village for every one of their warriors wounded in war, and confine them 
there (as the Jewish lepers formerly were, without the walls of the city,) for the space of four moons, including: that 
moon in which they were wounded, as in the case of their women after travail; and they keep them strictly separate, 
lest the impurity of the one should prevent the cure of the other. The reputed prophet, or divine physician, daily 
pays them a due attendance, always invoking YO He Wan to bless the means they apply on the sad occasion, which 
is chiefly mountain alum and medicinal herbs, always enjoining a very abstemious life, prohibiting them women and 
salt in particular, during the time of the cure, or sanctifying the reputed sinners. Like the Israelites, they firmly 
believe that safety, or wounds, &c., immediately proceed from the pleased or angry Deity for their virtuous or vicious 
conduct in observing or violating the divine law. In this long space of purification, each patient is allowed only a 
superannuated woman to attend him, who is past the temptations of sinning with men, lest the introduction of a 
young one should either seduce him to folly, or she, having committed it with others, or by not observing her 
appointed time of living apart from the rest, might thereby defile the place, and totally prevent the cure. But what 
is yet more surprising in their physical, or rather theological regimen, is, that the physician is so religiously cautious 
of not admitting polluted persons to visit any of his patients, lest the defilement should retard the cure, or spoil the 
warriors, that before he introduces any man, even any of their priests, who are married according to the law, he 
obliges him to assert, either by a double affirmative or by two negatives, that he has not known even his own wife 
in the space of the last natural day. This law of purity was peculiar to the Hebrews, to deem those unclean who 
cohabited with their wives, till they purified themselves in clean water. Now as the heathen world observed no such 
law, it seems that the primitive Americans derived this religious custom also from divine precept; and that these 
ceremonial rites were originally copied from the Mosaic institution. 

The Israelites became unclean only by touching their dead, for the space of seven days; and the high priest was 
prohibited to come near the dead. *Tis much the same with the Indians to this day. To prevent pollution, when 
the sick person is past hope of recovery, they dig a grave, prepare the tomb, anoint his hair, and paint his face ; 
and when his breath ceases, they hasten the remaining funeral preparations, and soon bury the corpse. One of a 
different family will never, or very rarely, pollute himself for a stranger; though, when living, he would cheerfully 
hazard his life for his safety. The relations who become unclean by performing the funeral duties, must live apart 
from the clean for several days, and be cleansed by some of their religious order, who chiefly apply the button-snake- 
root for their purification, as formerly described ; then they purify themselves by ablution. After three days, the 
funeral assistants may convene at the town-house, and follow their usual diversions. But the relations live recluse a 
long time, mourning the dead*. The Cheerake, notwithstanding they have corrupted most of their primitive customs, 
observe this. law of purity in so strict a manner, as not to touch the corpse of their nearest relation, though in the 
woods. The fear of pollution (not the want of natural affection, as the unskilful observe,) keeps them also from 
burying their dead in our reputed unsanctified ground, if any die as they are going to Charles-town and returning 
home; because they are distant from their own holy places and holy things, where only they could perform the 
religious obsequies of their dead, and purify themselves according to law. An incident of this kind happened 
several years since a little below /Vmety-six, as well as at the Conggarees, in South Carolina: at the former place, 
the corpse, by our humanity, was interred; but at the latter, even the twin-born brother of an Indian Christian lady, 
well known by the name of the Dark-lanthorn, left her dead and unburied. 

* One of the Cheerake traders, who now resides in the Choktah country, assures me that a little before the commencement of the late war with 
the Cheerake, when the Buck, a native of Nuqudse-town, died, none of the warriors would help to bury him, because of the dangerous pollution they 
imagined they should necessarily contract from such a white corpse; as he was begotten by a white man and a half-breed Cheerake woman, and 
as the women are only allowed to mourn for the death of a warrior, they could not assist in this friendly duty. By much solicitation, the gentleman 
(my author) obtained the help of an old friendly half-bred warrior. They interred the corpse; but the savage became unclean, and was separate 
from every kind of communion with the rest, for the space of three days. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 335 

The conversion of this rara avis was in the following extraordinary manner: There was a gentleman who married 
her according to the manner of the Cheerdke; but observing that marriages were commonly of a short duration in 
that wanton female government, he flattered himself of engrossing her affections, could he be so happy as to get her 
sanctified by one of our own beloved men with a large quantity of holy water in baptism, and be taught the conjugal 
duty, by virtue of her new Christian name, when they were married anew. As she was no stranger in the English 
settlements, he soon persuaded her to go down to the Conggarees, to get the beloved speech, and many fine things 
beside. - As the priest was one of those sons of wisdom the Church sent us in her maternal benevolence, both to keep 
and draw us from essential errors, he readily knew the value of a convert, and grasping at the opportunity, he changed 
her from a wild savage to a believing Christian in a trice. He asked her a few articles of her creed, which were soon 
answered by the bridegroom, as interpreter, from some words she spoke on a trifling question he asked her. When the 
priest proposed to her a religious question, the bridegroom, by reason of their low ideas and the idiom of their dialects, 
was obliged to mention some of the virtues, and say he recommended to her a very strict chastity in the married state: 
“Very well,” said she, “that’s a good speech, and fit for every woman alike, unless she is very old; but what says 
he now?”: The interpreter, after a short pause, replied, that he was urging her to use a proper care in domestic life. 
“You evil spirit,’ said she, “when was I wasteful or careless at home?” He replied, “ Never.” ‘Well then,” said she, 
“tell him his speech is troublesome and light; but first, where are those fine things you promised me?” He bid her be 
patient a little, and she should have plenty of everything she liked best ; at this she smiled. Now the religious man 
was fully confirmed in the hope of her conversion; however, he asked if she understood and believed that needful 
article, the doctrine of the Trinity. The bridegroom swore heartily, that if he brought out all the other articles of 
his old book, she both knew and believed them, for she was a sensible young woman. The bridegroom had a 
very difficult part to act, both to please the humour of his Venus and to satisfy the inquisitive temper of our religious 
son of Apollo; he behaved pretty weil, however, till he was desired to ask her belief of the uni-trinity and tri-unity 
of the Deity; which the beloved man endeavoured to explain. . On this, she smartly asked him the subject of their 
long and crooked-like discourse. But, as his patience was now exhausted, instead of answering her question, he 
said with a loud voice that he believed the religious man had picked out all the crabbed parts of his old book, only 
to puzzle and stagger her young Christian faith; otherwise how could he desire him to persuade such a sharp, 
discerning young woman, that one was three, and three, one? Besides, that if his book had any such question, it 
belonged only to the deep parts of arithmetic, in which the very Indian beloved men were untaught. He assured the 
priest that the Indians did not mind what religion the women were of, or whether they had any, and that the bride would 
take it very kindly if he shortened his discourse, as nothing can disturb the Indian women so much as long lectures. 
The Dark-lanthorn (which was the name of the bride,) became very uneasy, both by the delay of time, and the 
various passions she attentively read in the bridegroom’s face and speech, and’she asked him sharply the meaning 
of such a long discourse. - He instantly cried out that the whole affair was spoiled unless it was brought to a speedy 
conclusion; but the religious man insisted upon her belief of that article before he could proceed any further. But 
by way of comfort, he assured him it should be the very last question he would: propose, till he. put the holy water 
on her face, and read over the marriage ceremony. The bridegroom, revived at this good news, immediately sent the 
bowl around, with a cheerful countenance; which the bride observing, she asked him the reason of his sudden joyful 
looks. But what with the length of the lecture, the close application of the bowl, and an over-joy of soon obtaining 
his wishes, he proposed the wrong ’question ; for instead of asking her belief of the mysterious union of the tri-une 
Deity, he only mentioned the manly faculties of nature. The bride smiled, and asked if the beloved man borrowed 
that speech from his beloved marriage-book? or whether he was married, as he was so waggish and knowing in 
those affairs. The priest, imagining her cheerful looks proceeded from her swallowing his docirine, immediately 
called for a bowl of water to initiate his new convert.. As the bridegroom could not mediate with his usual friendly 
offices in this affair, he: persuaded her to let the beloved man put some beloved water on her face, and it would 
be a sure pledge of a lasting friendship between her and the English, and entitle her to everything she liked best. 
By the persuasive force of his promises, she consented, and had the constancy, though so ignorant a novitiate 
in our sacred mysteries, to go through her catechism, and the long marriage ceremony,—although it was often 
interrupted by the bowl. This being over, she proceeded to go to bed with her partner, while the beloved 
man sung a psalm at the door concerning the fruitful vine. Her name he soon entered in capital letters, 
to, grace the first title-page of his church book of converts, which he often showed to his English sheep, and 

336 _ ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

with much satisfaction would inform them how, by the co-operation of the Deity, his earnest endeavours changed 
an Indian Dark-lanthorn into a lamp of Christian light. However, afterward, to his great grief, he was obliged, 
on account of her adulteries, to erase her name from thence, and enter it anew in some of the crowded pages of 
female delinquents. 

When an Israelite died in any house or tent, all who were in it, and the furniture belonging to it, contracted a pol- 
lution, which continued for seven days. All, likewise, who touched the body of a dead person, or his grave, were im- 
pure for seven days. Similar notions prevail among the Indians. The Choktah are so exceedingly infatuated in favour 
of the infallible judgement of their pretended prophets, as to allow them, without the least regret, to dislocate the necks 
of any of their sick who are in a weak state of body, to put them out of their pain, when they presume to reveal 
the determined will of the Deity to shorten his days, which is asserted to be communicated in a dream; by the time 
that this theo-physical operation is performed on a patient, they have a scaffold prepared opposite to the door, 
whereon he is to lie till they remove the bones, in the fourth moon after, to the remote bone-house of that family : 
they immediately carry out the corpse, mourn over it, and place it in that dormitory, which is strongly pallisadoed 
around, lest the children should become polluted even by passing under the dead. Formerly, when the owner of a 
house died, they set fire to it and to all the provisions of every kind; or sold the whole at a cheap rate to the 
trading people, without paying the least regard to the scarcity of the times. Many of them still observe the same 
rule, through a wild imitation of a ceremonial observance of the Israelites in burning the bed whereon a dead person 
lay, because of its impurity. This is no copy from the ancient heathens, but from the Hebrews. 

ARGUMENT XII. 

Like the Jews, the greatest part of the southern Indians abstain from most things that are, either in themselves 
or in the general apprehension of mankind, loathsome or unclean: where we find a deviation from that general rule 
among any of them, it is a corruption, either owing to their intercourse with Europeans, or having contracted an ill 
habit from necessity. They generally affix very vicious ideas to the eating of impure things; and all their prophets, 
priests, old warriors and war-chieftains, before they enter on their religious duties, and while they are engaged in 
them, observe the strictest abstinence in this point. Formerly, if any of them did eat in white people’s houses, or 
even of what had been dressed there, while they were sanctifying themselves, it was deemed a dangerous sin of 
pollution. When some of them first corrupted their primitive virtue, by drinking of our spirituous liquors, the 
religious spectators called it ooka hoome, ‘bitter waters’; alluding, I conjecture, to the bitter waters of jealousy that 
produced swelling and death to those who committed adultery, but had no power over the innocent. That this name 
is not accidental, but designedly pointed, and expressive of the bitter waters of God, seems obvious, not only from 
the image they still retain of them, but likewise, when any of them refuse our invitation of drinking spirituous liquors 
in company with us, they say, dhiskola awa, ooka hoomeh [shto, <I will not drink; they are the bitter waters of the 
great one. Though Jshto, one of the names of God, subjoined to nouns denotes a superlative degree, in this case 
they deviate from that general rule, and for this reason they never affix the idea of bitter to the spirituous liquors 
we drink among them. Hoomeh is the only word they have to convey the meaning of bitter; as, aneh hoomeh, 
‘bitter ears’, or pepper. 

They reckon all birds of prey and birds of night to be unclean, and unlawful to be eaten. Not long ago, when 
the Indians were making their winter’s hunt, and the old women were without flesh-meat at home, I shot a small fat 
hawk, and desired one of them to take and dress it; but though I strongly importuned her by way of trial, she as 
earnestly refused it, for fear of contracting pollution, which she called the ‘accursed sickness’, supposing disease 
would be the necessary effect of such an impurity. Eagles of every kind they esteem unclean food; likewise ravens, 
(though the name of a tribe with them,) crows, buzzards, swallows, bats, and every species of owls; and they believe 
that swallowing flies, musketoes or gnats, always breeds sickness or worms according to the quantity that goes into 
them ; which, though it may not imply extraordinary skill in physic, shows their retention of the ancient law which 
prohibited the swallowing of flies; for to this that divine sarcasm alludes, “ swallowing a camel, and straining at a 
gnat.” Such insects were deemed unclean, as well as vexatious and hurtful. The God of Ekron was Beelzebub, or 
the God and ruler of flies. None of them will eat of any animal whatsoever, if they either know or suspect that it 
died of itself. I lately asked one of the women the reason of throwing a dunghill fowl out of doors, on the corn- 

’ 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. | 837 
house ; she said that she was afraid oophe abeeka hakset illeh, ‘it died with the distemper of the mad dogs’, and that 
if she had eaten it, it would have affected her in the very same manner. I said, if so, she did well to save herself from 
danger, but at the same time it seemed she had forgotten the cats. She replied, “that such impure animals would 
not contract the accursed sickness, on account of any evil thing they eat ; but that the people who ate of the flesh 
of the swine that fed on such polluting food, would certainly become mad.” In the year 1766, a madness seized the 
wild beasts in the remote woods of West Florida, and about the same time the domestic dogs were attacked with the 
like distemper ; the deer were equally infected. The Indians in their winter’s hunt found several lying dead, some 
in a helpless condition, and others fierce and mad. But though they are all fond of increasing their number of deer- 
skins, both from emulation and for profit, yet none of them durst venture to flay them, lest they should pollute 
themselves and thereby incur bodily evils. The head-man of the camp told me, ‘he cautioned one of the hottuk 
hakse, who had resided a long time at Savannah, from touching such deer, saying to him chehaksinna, ‘do not 
become vicious and mad’, for tsse hakset illehtahah ‘the deer were mad, and are dead’; adding, that if he acted the 
part of hakse he would cause both himself and the rest of the hunting camp to be spoiled; nevertheless he shut his 
ears against his honest speech, and brought those dangerous deer-skins to camp. But the people would not after- 
ward associate with him; and he soon paid dear for being hakse, by a sharp splintered root of a cane running 
almost through his foot, near the very place where he first polluted himself; and he was afraid some worse ill was 
still in wait for him. 

In 1767 the Indians were struck with a disease which they were unacquainted with before. It began with sharp 
pains in the head, at the lower part of each of the ears, and swelled the face and throat in a very extraordinary man- 
ner, and also the testicles. It continued about a fortnight, and in the like space of time went off gradually, without 
any dangerous consequence, or use of outward or inward remedies: they called it wahka abeeka, ‘the cattle’s 
distemper, or sickness’. Some of their young men had by stealth killed and eaten a few of the cattle which the traders 
had brought up, and they imagined they had thus polluted themselves, and were smitten in that strange manner, by 
having their heads, necks, &c., magnified like the same parts of a sick bull. They first concluded, either to kill all 
the cattle or send them immediately off their land, to prevent the like mischief or greater ills from befalling the 
beloved people, for their cunning old physicians or prophets would not undertake to cure them, in order to inflame 
the people to execute the former resolution; being jealous of encroachments, and afraid the cattle would spoil their 
open corn-fields ; upon which account, the traders’ arguments had no weight with these red Hebrew philosophers. 
But fortunately one of their head warriors had a few cattle soon presented to him, to keep off the wolf; and his 
reasoning proved so weighty, as to alter their resolution, and produce in them a contrary belief. 

They reckon all those animals to be unclean, that are either carnivorous or live on nasty food; as hogs, wolves, 
panthers, foxes, cats, mice, rats. And if we except the bear, they deem all beasts of prey unhallowed and pol- 
luted food; all amphibious quadrupeds they rank in the same class. Our old traders remember when they first 
began the custom of eating beavers; and to this day none eat of them except those who kill them; though the 
flesh is very wholesome, on account of the bark of trees they live upon. It must be acknowledged, they are all 
degenerating apace, insomuch that the Choktah Indians, on account of their scantiness of ammunition while they 
traded with the French, took to eat horse-flesh, and even snakes of every kind; though each of these species, and 
every sort of reptiles, are accounted by the other neighbouring nations impure food in the highest degree. And they 
ridicule the Choktah for their cannibal apostacy, and term them, in common specch, ‘the evil, ugly Choktah’. They 
abhor moles so exceedingly, that they will not allow their children even to touch them, for fear of hurting their eye- 
sight; reckoning it contagious. They believe that nature is possessed of such a property, as to transfuse into men 
and animals the qualities either of the food they use, or of those objects that are presented to their senses ; he who 
feeds on venison is, according to their physical system, swifter and more sagacious than the man who lives on the 
flesh of the clumsy bear or helpless dunghill fowls, the slow-footed tame cattle or the heavy wallowing swine. . This 
is the reason that several of their old men recommend, and say, that formerly their greatest chieftains observed a 
constant rule in their diet, and seldom ate of any animal of a gross quality or heavy motion of body, fancying it 
conveyed a dullness through the whole system, and disabled them from exerting themselves with proper vigour in 
their martial, civil and religious duties. I have already sohwn their aversion to eating of unsanctified fruits; and in 
this Argument, that they abstain from several other things, contrary to the usage of all the old heathen world. It 
may be objected, that now they seldom refuse to eat hog’s flesh, when the traders invite them to it; but this proceeds 

4B 

338 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

entirely from vicious imitation, and which is common with the most civilized nations. When swine were first 
brought among them, they deemed it such a horrid abomination in any of their people to eat that filthy and impure 
food, that they excluded the criminal from all religious communion in their circular town-house, or in their quadran- 
gular holy ground. at the annual expiation of sins, equally as'if he had eaten unsanctified fruits. After the yearly 
atonement was made at the temple, he was indeed readmitted to his usual privileges. Formerly none of their 
beloved men or warriors would eat or drink with us'on the most pressing invitation, through fear of polluting them- 
selves; they deemed us such impure animals: Our eating the flesh of swine and venison with the gravy in it 
helped to rivet their dislike, for this they reckon as blood. 

I once asked the Archimagus to sit down and partake of my dinner; but he excused himself, saying, he had in a 
few days some holy duty to perform, and that if he eat evil or accursed food, it would spoil him,—alluding to swine’s 
flesh. Though most of their virtue hath lately been corrupted in this. particular, they still affix vicious and con- 
temptible ideas to the eating of swine’s flesh ; insomuch, that shikapa, “swine-eater’, is the most opprobrious epithet 
they can use to brand us with: they commonly subjoin akanggapa, ‘eater of dunghill fowls’. Both together 
signify ‘filthy helpless animals’. By our surprising mismanagement in allowing them a long time to insult, abuse, 
rob and murder the innocent British subjects at pleasure, without the least satisfaction, all the Indian nations 
formerly despised the English as a swarm of tame fowls, and termed them so in their set speeches. The Indians, 
through a strong principle of religion, abstain in the strictest manner from eating the BLoop of any animal; as it con- 
tains the life and spirit of the beast, and was the very essence of the sacrifices that were to be offered up for sinners. 
And this was the Jewish opinion and law of sacrifice, Lev. xvii: 11: “ For the life of the flesh is in the blood: and I 
have given it to you upon the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it is the blood which maketh an atone- 
ment for the soul.” When the English traders have been making sausages mixed with hog’s blood, I have observed 
the Indians to cast their eyes upon them with the horror of their reputed forefathers when they viewed the 
predicted abomination of desolation fulfilled by Antiochus in defiling the temple. An instance lately happened, 
which sufficiently shows their utter aversion to blood. A Chikkesah woman, a domestic of one of the traders, being 
very ill with a complication of disorders, the Indian physician seemed to use his best endeavours to cure her, but 
without the least visible effect. To preserve his medical credit with the people, he at last ascribed her ailment to the 
eating of swine’s flesh, blood, and other polluting food; and said, that such an ugly or accursed sickness overcame 
the power of all his beloved songs and physic; and in anger, he left his supposed criminal patient to be punished 
by Loak Ishtohoollo. I asked her some time afterwards what her ailments were, and what she imagined might 
have occasioned them? She said, she was full of pain, that she had abeeka ookproo, ‘the accursed sickness’, 
because she had eaten a great many fowls after the manner of the white people, with the zsstsh ookproo, ‘accursed 
blood’, in them. In time she recovered, and now strictly abstains from tame fowls, unless they are bled to death, for 
fear of incurring future evil by the like pollution. 

There is not the least trace, among their ancient traditions, of their deserving the hateful name of cannibals, as 
our credulous writers have carefully copied from each other. Their taste is so opposite to that of the Anthropophagi, 
that they always over-dress their meat, whether roasted or boiled. ‘The Muskohge, who have heen at war time out 
of mind against the Indians of Cape Florida, and at length reduced them to thirty men, who removed to the 
Havannah along with the Spaniards, affirm, they could never be informed by their captives of the least inclination 
they ever had of eating human ffesh, only the heart of the enemy, which they all do sympathetically (blood for blood) 
in order to inspire them with courage; and yet the constant losses they suffered might have highly provoked them 
to exceed their natural barbarity. To cat the heart of an enemy will, in their opinion, like eating other things before 
mentioned, communicate and give greater heart against the enemy. They also think that the vigorous faculties of 
the mind are derived from the brain; on which account I have seen some of their heroes drink out of a human skull; 
they imagine, they only imbibe the good qualities it formerly contained. 

When speaking to the Archimagus concerning the Hottentots, those heterogeneous animals, according to the 
Portuguese and Dutch accounts, he asked me, whether they builded and planted, and what sort of food they chiefly 
lived upon. I told him I was informed that they dwelt in small nasty huts, and lived chiefly on sheep’s guts and 
crickets. He laughed, and said there was no credit to be given to the far-distant writers of those old books, because 
they might not have understood the language and customs of the people; but that those whom our books reported 
to live on such nasty food, (if they did not deceive us,) might have been forced to it for the want of better, to keep 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 339 

them from dying; or by the like occasion they might have learned that ugly custony and could not quit it when they 
were free from want, as the Choktah eat horse-flesh, though they have plenty of venison ; however, it was very easy, 
he said, to know whether they were possessed of human reason, for if they were endued with shame to have a desire 
of covering their nakedness, he concluded them to be human. He then asked me whether I had been informed of 
their having any sort of language, or method of counting as high as the number of their fingers, either by words or 
expressive motion; or of bearing a nearer resemblance to ydwe, the human creature, in laughter, than shawe, the 
ape, bore; or of being more social and gregarious than those animals of the country where they lived. If they were 
endued with those properties, he affirmed them to be human creatures, and that such old lying books should not be 
credited. 

The more religious, or the least corrupted, of the various remote Indian nations, will not eat of any young beast 
when it is newly -yeaned; and their old men think they would suffer damage even by the bare contact ; which seems 
to be derived from the Mosaic law, that prohibited such animals to be:offered up or eaten, till they were eight days 
old; because, till then, they were in an imperfect and polluted state! They appear, however, to be utterly ignorant of 
the design and meaning of this appointment and practice, as well as of some other customs and institutions. But as the 
time of circumcising the Israelitish children was founded on this law of purity, it seems probable that the American 
aborigines observed-the law of circumcision for some time after they arrived here, and desisted from it when it became 
incompatible with the hard daily toils and sharp exercises which necessity must have forced them to pursue, to support 
life ; especially when we consider, that the sharpest and most lasting affront, the most opprobrious indelible epithet, with 
which one Indian can possibly brand another, is to call him, in public company, hoobuk waske, eunuchus, preputio 
detecto. They resent it so highly, that in the year 1750, when the Cheerake were on the point of commencing a war 
against us, several companies of the northern Indians, in concert with them, compelled me, in the lower Cheerake 
town, to write to the government of South Carolina, that they made it their earnest request to the English not to 
mediate in their war with the Katahba Indians, as they were fully resolved to prosecute it with the greatest eagerness 
while there was one of that hateful name alive; because in the time of battle, they had given them the ugly name of 
short-tailed eunuchs. Now as an eunuch was a contemptible name with the Israelites, and none of them could serve 
in any religious office, it should seem that the Indians derived this opprobrious and singular epithet from Jewish 
tradition, as castration was never in use among the ancient or present Americans. The Israelites were but forty 
years in the wilderness, and would not have renewed the painful act of circumcision, only that Joshua enforced it ; 
and by the necessary fatigues and difficulties to which, as already hinted, the primitive Americans must be exposed 
at their first arrival in this waste and extensive wilderness, it is likely they forbore circumcision, upon the divine 
principle extended to their supposed predecessors in the wilderness, of not accepting sacrifice at the expense of 
mercy. This might soothe them afterwards wholly to reject it as a needless duty, especially if any of the eastern 
heathens accompanied them in their travels in quest of freedom. And as itis probable that by the time they reached 
America they had worn out their knives and every other sharp instrument fit for the occasion, so, had they 
performed the operation with flint stones, or sharp splinters, there is no doubt that each of the mothers would have 
likewise said, “This day thou art to me a bloody husband*.” However, from the contemptible idea the Americans 
fix to castration, &c., it seems very probable the more religious among them used circumcision in former ages. 

Under this Argument I must. observe, that az-z-be signifies ‘the thigh’ of any animal, and e¢-ee-pattah tekale, 
‘the lower part of the thigh’, or literally, ‘the hanging of the foot’. And when in the woods, the Indians cut a small 
piece out of the lower part of the thighs of the deer they kill, lengthways and pretty deep... Among the great num- 
ber of venison-hams they bring to our trading houses, I do not remember to have observed one without it; from 
which I conjecture, that as every ancient custom was designed to convey either a typical or literal instructive lesson 
of some useful thing, and as no usage of the old heathen world resembled this custom, it seems strongly to point 
at Jacob’s wrestling with an angel, and obtaining for himself and his posterity the name QN“7Ww, (perhaps, yosher- 
ale,) ‘divine guide’, or ‘ one who prevails with the Omnipotent’, and to the children of Israel not eating the sinew of 
the thigh of any animal, to perpetuate the memory of their ancestor’s sinew being shrunk, which was to obtain the 
blessing. The Indians always sew their maccasenes with deer’s smews, though of a sharp cutting quality, for they 
reckon them more fortunate than the wild hemp; but to eat such, they imagine, would breed worms and other 

* Exod. iy. 25, 26. 

340 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

ailments, in proportion to the number they eat. And I have been assured by a gentleman of character, who is now an 
inhabitant of South Carolina, and well acquainted with the customs of the northern Indians, that they also cut a 
piece out of the thigh of every deer they kill, and throw it away; and reckon it such a dangerous pollution to eat it, 
as to occasion sickness and other misfortunes of sundry kinds, especially by spoiling their guns from shooting with 
proper force and direction. Now as none of the old heathens had such a custom, must it not be considered as of 

Israelitish extraction ? 

ARGUMENT XIII. 

The Indian Marriages, Divorces, and Punishments of Adultery still retain a strong likeness to the Jewish laws and 
customs in these points. The Hebrews had sponsalia de presenti and sponsalia de futuro. A considerable time 
generally intervened between their contract and marriage ; and their nuptial ceremonies were celebrated in the night. 
The Indians observe the same customs to this day; insomuch that it is usual for an elderly man to take a girl, or 
sometimes a child to be his wife, because she is capable of receiving good impressions in that tender state: frequently 
a moon elapses after the contract is made and the value received, before the bridegroom sleeps with the bride; and 
on the marriage day he does not appear before her till night introduces him, and then without tapers. The grandeur 
of the Hebrews consisted pretty much in the multiplicity of their wives to attend them as a showy retinue: as the 
meaner sort could not well purchase one, they had a light sort of marriage suitable to their circumstances, called by 
the scholiasts wsw capio, ‘taking the woman for present use’. When they had lived together about a year, if 
agreeable, they parted good friends by mutual consent. The Indians also are so fond of variety, that they ridicule the 
white people, as a tribe of narrow-hearted and dull-constitutioned animals, for having only one wife at a time, and 
being bound to live with and support her, though numberless circumstances might require a contrary conduct. 
When a young warrior cannot dress @ la mode America, he strikes up one of those matches for a few moons, which 
they term toopsa tawah, ‘a make haste marriage’, because it wants the usual ceremonies and duration of their 
other kind of marriages. 

The friendliest kind of marriage among the Hebrews was eating bread together. The bridegroom put a ring on 
the fourth finger of the bride’s left hand before two witnesses, and said, “ Be thou my wife, according to the law of 
Moses.” Her acceptance and silence implying consent, confirmed her part of the marriage contract, because of the 
rigid modesty of the eastern women. When the short marriage contract was read over, he took a cake of bread 
and broke it in two, for himself and her; or otherwise, he put some corn between their hands; which customs were 
used as strong emblems of the necessity of mutual industry and concord, to obtain present and future happiness. 
When an Indian makes his first address to the young woman he intends to marry, she is obliged by ancient custom 
to sit by him till he hath done eating and drinking, whether she likes or dislikes him; but afterward she is at her 
own choice whether to stay or retire*. When the bridegroom marries the bride, after the usual prelude, he takes a 
choice ear of corn, and divides it in two before witnesses, gives her one half in her hand, and keeps the other half 
to himself ; or otherwise, he gives her a deer’s foot, as an emblem of the readiness with which she ought to serve 
him. In return, she presents him with some cakes of bread, thereby declaring her domestic care and gratitude in 
return for the offals; for the men feast by themselves, and the women eat the remains. When this short ceremony 
is ended, they may go to bed like an honest couple. Formerly, this was an universal custom among the native 
Americans; but this, like every other usage of theirs, is wearing out apace. The West Floridans, in order to keep 
their women subject to the law of adultery, bring some venison or buffalo’s flesh to the house of their nominal wives, 
at the end of every winter’s hunt; that is reckoned a sufficient annual tie of their former marriages, although the 
husbands do not cohabit with them. The Muskohge men, if newly married, are obliged by ancient custom to get 
their own relations to hoe out the corn-fields of each of their wives, that their marriages may be confirmed; and 
the more jealous repeat the custom every year, to make their wives subject to the laws against adultery. But the 
Indians in general reckon that before the bridegroom can presume to any legal power over the bride, he is, after the 
former ceremonies, or others something similar, obliged to go into the woods to kill a deer, bring home the carcass 
of venison, and lay it down at her house, wrapped up in its skin; and if she opens the pack, carries it into the house, 

* Cant. ii. 4. “I held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my mother’s house, and into the chamber of her that conceived 
me.” See Gen, xxiv. 67. Such was the custom of the Hebrews. 

i 
= 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 3 

and then dresses and gives him some of it to eat with cakes before witnesses, she becomes his lawful wife, and 
obnoxious to all the penalties of an adulteress. 

The Hebrews had another sort of marriage,—by purchase: the bridegroom gave the father of the bride as much as 
he thought she was worth; and according to the different valuation, so, sooner or later, she went off at market. The 
only way to know the merit of a Hebrew lady was to inquire the value for which her father would sell her; and the 
less rapacious he was, the sooner she might get an husband. Divine writ abounds with instances of the like kind; 
as Gen. xxxiv. 12. “Ask me never so much dowry, and I will give it.” David bought Michal, and Jacob dearly 
purchased Rachel, &c. The women brought nothing with them, except their clothes, rings and bracelets, and a few 
trinkets. When the Indians would express a proper marriage, they have a word adapted according to their various 
dialects, to give them a suitable idea of it; but when they are speaking of their sensual marriage-bargains, they 
always term it, “buying a woman”; for example, they say with regard to the former, Che-Awalas, ‘I shall marry 
you’; the last syllable denotes the first person of the future tense, the former “I shall make you as 4wa or Hewa 
was to Ish,” which is confirmed by a strong negative similar expression, Che-Awala Awa, ‘1 shall not marry you’. 
But the name of their market-marriages is otoolpha; Eho achumbaras saookchda, ‘In the spring I shall buy a 
woman, if I am alive’. Or Eho achumbara Awa, ‘I shall not buy a woman’, sdlbasa toogat, ‘for indeed I am poor’. 
The former usage and method of language is exactly calculated to express that singular custom of the Hebrews, per 
coemptionem. 'They sometimes marry by deputation or proxy. The intended bridegroom sends so much in value 
to the nearest relations of the intended bride as he thinks she is worth: if they are accepted, it is a good sign that 
her relations approve of the match, but she is not bound by their contract alone; her consent must likewise be 
obtained; but persuasions most commonly prevail with them. However, if the price is reckoned too small, or the 
goods too few, the law obliges them to return the whole, either to himself, or some of his nearest kindred. If they 
love the goods, as they term it, according to the like method of expression with the Hebrews, the loving couple may 
in a short time bed together upon trial, and continue or discontinue their love according as their fancy directs them. 
If they like each other, they become an honest married couple when the nuptial ceremony is performed, as already 
described. When one of their chieftains is married, several of his kinsmen help to kill deer and buffalos, to make a 
rejoicing marriage-feast, to which their relations and neighbours are invited: there the young warriors sing with 
their two chief musicians, who beat on their wet deer-skin tied over the mouth of a large clay-pot, and raise their 
voices, singing Yo Yo, &c. When they are tired with feasting, dancing, and singing the epithalamium, they depart 
with friendly glad hearts from the house of praise. 

If an Israelite lay with a bond-woman betrothed, and not redeemed, she was to be beaten, but not her fellow- 
criminal; for in the original text, Lev. xix. 20., the word is in the feminine gender. When offenders were beaten, 
they were bowed down, as Deut. xxv. 2., so that they neither sat nor stood, and their whip had a large knot to it, 
which commanded the thongs so as to expand or contract them; the punishment was always to be suited to the 
nature of the crime, and the constitution of the criminal. While the offenders were under the lash, three judges 
stood by to see that they received their full and just due. The first repeated the words of Deut. xxviii. 58., the 
second counted the stripes, and the third said, “Hack, or lay on.” The offender received three lashes on the breast, 
three on the belly, three on each shoulder, &c. But adultery was attended with capital punishment, as Deut. xxii. 22. 
The parties, when legally detected, were tried by the lesser judicatory, which was to consist at least of twenty-three. 
The Sanhedrim gave the bitter waters to those women who were suspected of adultery. The former were stoned to 
death, and the latter burst open, according to their imprecation, if they were guilty: the omnipotent divine wisdom 
impressed those waters with that wonderful quality, contrary to the common course of nature. The men married 
and were divorced as often as their caprice directed them; for if they imagined their wives did not value them 
according to their own partial opinion of themselves, they notified the occasion of the dislike in a small billet, that 
her virtue might not be suspected ; and when they gave any of them the ticket, they ate together in a very civil 
manner, and thus dissolved the contract. 

I have premised this to trace the resemblance to the marriage divorces and punishments of the savage Americans. 
The middle-aged people of a place which lies about half-way to Mobille, and the Illinois, assure us that they 
remember when adultery was punished among them with death by shooting the offender with barbed arrows, as 
there are no stones there. But what with the losses of their people at war with the French and their savage 
confederates, and the constitutional wantonness of their young men and women, they have, through a political desire 

4 $5 

342 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

of continuing or increasing their numbers, moderated the severity of that law, and reduced it to the present standard of 
punishment, which is in the following manner. If a married woman is detected in adultery by one person, the evi- 
dence is deemed good in judgement against her ; the evidence of a well-grown boy or girl they even reckon sufficient, 
because of the heinousness of the crime, and the difficulty of discovering it in their thick forests. This is a cor- 
ruption of the Mosaic law, which required two evidences, and exempted both women and slaves from public faith, 
because of the reputed fickleness of the one, and the base grovelling temper of the other. When the crime is proved 
against the woman, the enraged husband, accompanied by some of his relations, surprises and beats her most 
barbarously, and then cuts off her hair and nose, or one of her lips. There are many of that sort of disfigured 
females among the Chikkasah, and they are commonly the best-featured and the most tempting of any of their 
countrywomen, which exposed them to the snares of young men. But their fellow-criminals, who’ probably first 
tempted them, are partially exempted from any kind of corporal punishment. 
With the Muskohge Indians, it was formerly reckoned adultery if a man took a pitcher of water off a married 
woman’s head, and drank of. it. But their law said, if he was a few steps apart, and she at his request set it down, 
and retired a little way off, he might then drink without exposing her to any danger. If we seriously reflect on the 
rest of their native customs, this old law, so singular to themselves from the rest of the world, gives us room to think 
they drew it from the Jewish bitter waters that were given to real or suspected adulteresses, either to prove 
their guilt or attest their innocence. Among those Indians, when adultery is discovered, the offending parties 
commonly set off speedily for the distant woods, to secure themselves from the shameful badge of the sharp penal 
law, which they inevitably get if they can be taken before the yearly offering for the atonement of sin; afterward 
every crime except murder is forgiven. But they are always pursued and frequently overtaken; though perhaps 
three or four moons absent, and two hundred miles off, over hills and mountains, up and down many creeks and 
rivers, on contrary courses, and by various intricate windings, the pursuers are eager and their hearts burn within 
them for revenge. When the husband has the chilling news first whispered in his ear, he steals off with his wit- 
ness to some of his kinsmen to get them to assist him in revenging his injury: they are soon joined by a sufficient 
number of the same family, if the criminal was not of the same tribe; otherwise, he chooses to confide in his nearest 
relations. When the witness has asserted to them the truth of his evidence, by a strong asseveration, they separate 
to avoid suspicion, and meet, commonly in the dusk of the evening, near the town of the adulterer, where each of 
them provides a small hoop-pole, tapering to the point, with knobs half an inch long, (allowed by ancient custom,) 
with which they correct the sinners; for as their law in this case doth not allow partiality, if they punished one of 
them, and either excused or let the other escape from justice, like the Illinois, they would become liable to such 
punishment as they had inflicted upon either of the parties. They commonly begin with the adulterer, because of 
the two he is the more capable of making his escape: they generally attack him at night by surprise, lest he should 
make a desperate resistance, and blood be shed to cry for blood. They fall on eager and merciless, whooping their 
revengeful noise, and thrashing their captive with their long-knobbed hoop-flails; some over his head and face; 
others on his shoulders and back. His belly, sides, legs and arms are gashed all over, and at last he happily seems 
to be insensible of pain: then they cut off his ears*. They observe, however, a gradation of punishment, according 
to the criminality of the adulteress. For the first breach of the marriage faith they crop her ears and hair, if the 
husband is spiteful; either of those badges proclaim her to be a whore, or Aakse Kaneha, ‘such as were evil in 
Canaan,’ for the hair of their head is their ornament: when loose, it commonly reaches below their back; and when 
tied, it stands below the crown of the head, about four inches long and two broad. As the offender cuts a comical 
figure among the rest of the women, by being trimmed so sharp, she always keeps her dark winter hot house, till by 

* Among these Indians, the trading people’s ears are often in danger, by the sharpness of this law, and their suborning false witnesses, or 
admitting foolish children as legal evidence; but generally either the tender-hearted females or friends give them timely notice of their danger. 
Then they fall to the rum-keg, and as soon as they find the’pursuers approaching, they stand to arms in a threatening parade. Formerly the traders, 
like so many British tars, kept them in proper awe, and consequently prevented them from attempting any mischief. But since the patenteed race og 
Daublers set foot in their land, they have gradually become worse every year, murdering valuable innocent British subjects at pleasure : and when 
they go down, they receive presents as a tribute of fear, for which these Indians upbraid and threaten us. The Muskohge lately clipt off the ears 
of two white men for supposed adultery. One had been a disciple of Black Beard the pirate, and the other, at the time of going under the hands 
of those Jewish clippers, was deputed by the whimsical war-governor of Georgia to awe the traders into an obedience of his despotic power. His 
successor lost his life on the Chikkasah war-path, twenty miles above the Koosah, or uppermost western town of the Muskohge, in an attempt to 
arrest the traders ; which should not by any means be undertaken in the Indian country. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 343 

keeping the hair moistened with grease, it grows so long as to bear tying. Then she accustoms herself to the light 
by degrees; and soon some worthless fellow, according to their standard, buys her for his and; which term hath 
been already explained. The adulterer’s ears are slashed off close to his head, for the first act of adultery, because he 
is the chief in fault. If the criminals repeat the crime with any other married persons, their noses and upper lips 
are cut off. But the third crime of the like nature is attended with more danger; for their law says, that for public 
heinous crimes, satisfaction should be made visible to the people, and adequate to the injuries of the virtuous, to 
set their aggrieved hearts at ease, and prevent others from following such a dangerous crooked copy. As they will 
not comply with their mitigated law of adultery, nor be terrified nor shamed from their ill course of life, that the 
one may not frighten and abuse their wives, nor the other seduce their husbands and be a lasting plague and shame 
to the whole society, they are ordered by their ruling magi and war-chieftains to be shot to death, which is accord- 
ingly executed; but this seldoms happens. 

When I asked the Chikkasah the reason of the inequality of their marriage-law, in punishing the weaker passive 
party, and exempting the stronger, contrary to reason and justice, they told me it had been so a considerable time, 
because their land being a continual seat of war, and the lurking enemy for ever pelting them without, and the 
women decoying them within, if they put such old cross laws of marriage in force, all their beloved brisk warriors 
would soon be spoiled, and their habitations turned to a wild waste. It is remarkable that the ancient Egyptians cut 
off the ears and nose of the adulteress; and the prophet alludes to this sort of punishment, Ezek. xxiii. 25. “They 
shall deal furiously with thee: they shall take away thy nose and thine ears.” And they gave them also a thousand 
stripes with canes on the buttocks*.. The Cheerake are an exception to all civilized or savage nations, in having no 
laws against adultery; they have been a considerable while under petticoat-government, and allow their women full 
liberty to plant their brows with horns as oft as they please, without fear of punishment. On this account their 
marriages are ill observed and of a short continuance; like the Amazons, they divorce their sighing bed-fellows at 
their pleasure, and fail not to execute their authority when their fancy directs them to a more agreeable choice. 
However, once in my time a number of warriors belonging to the family of the husband of the adulteress, revenged 
the injury committed by her, in her own way; for they said, as she loved a ‘great many men instead of a husband, 
justice told them to gratify her longing desire,—wherefore, by the information of their spies, they followed her into 
the woods a little way from the town, (as decency required,) and then stretched her on the ground, with her hands 
tied to a stake, and her feet also extended, where upwards of fifty of them lay with her, having a blanket for a 
covering. The Choktah observe the same savage custom with adulteresses. They term their female delinquents, 
ahowwe Ishto; the first is a Cheerake word, signifying ‘a deer’. And through contempt of the Chikkasah, they 
altered their penal law of adultery. The Muskohge Indians, either through the view of mitigating their law against 
adultery, that it might be adapted to their patriarchal-like government, or by misunderstanding the Mosaic precept, 
from length of time and uncertainty of oral tradition, oblige the adulteress, under the penalty of the severest law, not 
to be free with any man (unless she is inclined to favour her fellow-sufferer,) during the space of four moons after 
the broken moon in which they suffered for each other, according to the custom of the Maldivians. But her husband 
exposes himself to. the utmost severity of the marriage law, if he is known to hold a familiar intercourse with her 
after the time of her punishment. 

ARGUMENT XIV. 

Many other of the Indian Punishments resemble those of the Jews. Whosoever attentively views the features of 
the Indian, and his eye, and reflects on his fickle, obstinate and cruel disposition, will naturally think on the Jews. 
English America feelingly knows the parity of the temper of their neighbouring Indians with that of the Hebrew 
nation. The Israelites cut off the hands and feet of murderers, 2 Sam. iv. 12., strangled false prophets, and some- 
times burned, stoned, or beheaded those malefactors who were condemned by the two courts of judgement. The 
Indians, either by the defect of tradition, or through a greedy desire of revenge, torture their prisoners and devoted 
captives with a mixture of all those Jewish capital punishments. They keep the original so close in their eye, as to 
pour cold water on the sufferers when they are fainting, or overcome by the fiery torture, to refresh and enable them 

* When human laws were first made, they commanded that if the husband found the adulterer in the fact, he should kill them both. Thus 
the laws of Solon and Draco ordained; but the law of the twelve tables softened it. 

344 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

to undergo longer tortures. The Hebrews gave wine mixt with the juice of myrrh to their tortured criminals, to 
revive their spirits ; and sometimes vinegar, to prevent too great an effusion of blood, lest they should be disappointed 
in glutting their greedy eyes with their favourite tragedy of blood; which was eminently exemplified in their 
insulting treatment of Christ on the cross. ‘The Indians, beyond all the rest of mankind, seem in this respect to be 
actuated with the Jewish spirit. They jeer, taunt, laugh, whoop and rejoice at the inexpressible agonies of those unfor- 
tunate persons who are under their butchering hands; which would excite pity and horror in any heart but that of a 
Jew. When they are far from home, they keep as near to their distinguishing customs as circumstances allow 
them: not being able formerly to cut off the heads of those they killed m war, for want of proper weapons, nor 
able to carry them three or four hundred miles without putrefaction, they cut off the skin of their heads with their 
flnt-stone knives, as speaking trophies of honour, and which register them among the brave by procuring them war 
titles. Though now they have plenty of proper weapons, they vary not from this ancient barbarous custom of the 
American aborigines ; which has been too well known by many of our northern colonists, and is yet shamefully so 
to South Carolina and Georgia barriers, by the hateful name of scalping. 

The Indians strictly adhere more than the rest of mankind to that positive, unrepealed law of Moses, “ He who 
sheddeth man’s blood, by man shall his blood be shed.” Like the Israelites, their hearts burn violently day and night 
without intermission, till they shed blood for blood. They transmit from father to son the memory of the loss of 
their relation, or one of their own tribe or family, though it were an old woman,—if she was either killed by the 
enemy or by any of their own people. If indeed the murder be committed by a kinsman, the eldest can redeem : 
however, if the circumstances attending the fact be peculiar and shocking to nature, the murderer is condemned to 
die the death of a sinner, ‘‘ without any one to mourn for him,” as in the case of suicide, contrary to nate usage 
toward the rest of their dead, and which may properly be called the death or burial of a Jewish ass. When they 
have had success in killing the enemy, they tie firebrands in the most frequented places, with grape vines which 
hang pretty low, in order that they may be readily seen by the enemy. As they reckon the aggressors have loudly 
declared war, it would be madness or treachery in their opinion to use such public formalities before they have 
revenged crying blood; it would inform the enemy of their design of retaliating, and destroy the honest intention 
of war. They likewise strip the bark off several large trees in conspicuous places, and paint them with red and black 
hieroglyphics, thereby threatening the enemy with more blood and death. The last were strong and similar emblems 
with the Hebrews, and the first is analogous to one of their martial customs; for when they arrived at the enemies’ 
territories, they threw a firebrand within their land, as an emblem of the anger of sh, ‘the holy fire’, for their 
ill deeds to his peculiarly beloved people. ‘To which custom Obadiah alludes, when he says, (ver. 18.) “they shall 
kindle in them and devour them; there shall not be any remaining of the house of sau, &c.,” which the Septuagint 
translates, “one who carries a firebrand.” The conduct of the Israelitish champion Samson, against the Philistines, 
proceeded from the same war custom, when he took three hundred shugnalim, (which is a bold strong metaphor,) 
signifying vulpes, foxes, or sheaves of corn; and tying them tail to tail, or one end to the other in a continued 
train, he set fire to them, and by that means burned down their standing corn. | 

In the late Cheerake war, at the earnest persuasions of the trading people, several of the Muskohge warriors came 
down to the barrier-settlements of Georgia, to go against the Cheerake and revenge English crying blood; but the 
main body of the nation sent a running embassy to the merchants there, requesting them immediately to forbear 
their unfriendly proceedings, otherwise they should be forced by disagreeable necessity to revenge their relations’ 
blood, if it should chance to be spilt contrary to their ancient laws: this alludes to the levitical law, by which he who 
decoyed another to his end was deemed the occasion of his death, and consequently answerable for it. If an unruly 
horse belonging to a white man should chance to be tied at a trading-house and kill one of the Indians, either the 
owner of Me house or the person who tied the beast there is responsible for it by their ler talionis; which seems to 
be derived also from the Mosaic precept,—if an ox known by its owner to push with its horn, should kill a person, they 
were both to die the death. Ifthe Indians have a dislike to a person who by any casualty was the death of one of their 
people, he stands accountable, and will certainly suffer for it unless he takes sanctuary. I knew an under trader, who 
being intrusted by his employer with a cargo of goods for the country of the Muskohge, was forced by the common 
law of good faith to oppose some of those savages in the remote woods, to prevent their robbing the camp: the chief- 
tain being much intoxicated with spirituous liquors, and becoming outrageous in proportion. to the resistance he 
met with, the trader, like a brave man, opposed lawless force by force: some time after the lawless bacchanal was 

ies 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 345 

attacked with a pleurisy, of which he died. Then the heads of the family of the deceased convened the lesser 
judicatory, and condemned the trader to be shot to death for the supposed murder of their kinsman; which they 
easily effected, as he was off his guard, and knew nothing of their murdering design. His employer, however, had 
such a friendly intercourse with them, as to gain timely notice of anything that might affect his person or interest ; 
but he was so far from assisting the unfortunate brave man, as the laws of humanity and common honour obliged 
him, that, as a confederate, he not only concealed their bloody intentions, but went basely to the next town while 
the savages painted themselves red and black, and gave them an opportunity of perpetrating the horrid murder. 
The poor victim could have easily escaped to the English settlements if forewarned, and got the affair accommodated 
by the mediation of the government. In acts of blood, if the supposed murderer escapes, his nearest kinsman either 
real or adopted, or, if he has none there, his friend, stands according to their rigorous law answerable for the fact. 
But though the then governor of South Carolina was sufficiently informed of this tragedy, and that it was done 
contrary to the treaty of amity, and that there is no possibility of managing them but by their own notions of virtue, 
he was passive, and allowed them with impunity to shed this innocent blood; which they ever since have improved, 
to our shame and sorrow. They have gradually become worse every year, and corrupted other nations by their 
contagious copy, so as to draw them into the like bloody scenes, with the same contempt as if they had killed so 
many helpless timorous dunghill fowls, as they despitefully term us. 

There never was any set of people who pursued the Mosaic law of retaliation with such fixt eagerness as these 
Americans. They are so determined in this point, that formerly a little boy shooting birds in the high and thick corn- 
fields, unfortunately chanced slightly to wound another with his childish arrow; the young vindictive fox was excited 
by custom to watch his ways with the utmost earnestness, till the wound was returned in as equal a manner as could 
be expected. Then, “all was straight,” according to their phrase. Their hearts were at rest by having executed that 
strong law of nature, and they sported together as before. This observation, though small in itself, is great in its 
combined circumstances, as it is contrary to the usage of the old heathen world. They forgive all crimes at the 
annual atonement of sins, except murder, which is always punished with death. The Indians constantly upbraid us 
in their bacchanals for inattention to this maxim of theirs; they say that all nations of people who are not utterly 
sunk in cowardice, take revenge of blood before they can have rest, cost what it will. The Indian Americans are 
more eager to revenge blood than any other people on the whole face of the earth. And when the heart of the 
revenger of blood in Israel was hot within him, it was a terrible thing for the casual manslayer to meet him, 
Deut. xix. 6. “ Lest the avenger of the blood pursue the slayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the 
way is long, and slay him; whereas he was not worthy of death, in as much as he hated him not in time past.” I 
have known the Indians to go a thousand miles for the purpose of revenge, in pathless woods, over hills and 
mountains, through large cane swamps, full of grape-vines and briars, over broad lakes, rapid rivers and deep 
creeks ; and all the way endangered by poisonous snakes, if not with the rambling and lurking enemy, while at the 
same time they were exposed to the extremities of heat and cold, the vicissitude of the seasons; to hunger and 
thirst, both by chance, and their religious scanty method of living when at war; to fatigues, and other difficulties. 
Such is their overboiling revengeful temper, that they utterly contemn all those things as imaginary trifles, if they 
are so happy as to get the scalp of the murderer, or enemy, to satisfy the supposed craving ghosts of their deceased 
relations. Though they imagine the report of guns will send off the ghosts of their kindred that died at home, to 
their quiet place, yet they firmly believe that the spirits of those who are killed by the enemy, without equal 
revenge of blood, find no rest, and at night haunt the houses of the tribe to which they belonged*; but, when that 
kindred duty of retaliation is justly executed, they immediately get ease and power to fly away. This opinion, and 
their method of burying and mourning for the dead, of which we shall speak presently, occasion them to retaliate in 
so earnest and fierce a manner. It is natural for friends to study each other’s mutual happiness, and we should pity 
the weakness of those who are destitute of our advantages ; whose intellectual powers are unimproved, and who are 
utterly unacquainted with the sciences, as well as every kind of mechanical business, to engage their attention at 
home. Such persons cannot well live without war; and being destitute of public faith to secure the lives of 
ambassadors in time of war, they have no sure method to reconcile their differences ; consequently, when any casual 

* As the Hebrews supposed there was a holiness in Canaan, more than in any other land, so they believed that their bodies buried out of it, 
would be carried through caverns, or subterraneous passages of the earth, to the holy land, where they shall rise again and dart up to their holy 

attracting centre. 

4 T 

346 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

thing draws them into a war, it grows every year more spiteful, till it advances to,a bitter enmity, so as to excite 
them to an implacable hatred to one another's very national names. Then they must go abroad to spill the enemy's 
blood, and to revenge crying blood. We must also consider, it is by scalps they get all their war titles, which distinguish 
them among the brave; and these they hold in as high esteem as the most ambitions Roman general ever did a 
great triumph. By how much the deeper any society of people are sunk in ignorance, so much the more they value 
themselves on their bloody merit. This was long the characteristic of the Hebrew nation, and has been conveyed 
down to these their supposed red descendants. However, notwithstanding their bloody temper and conduct towards 
enemies, when their law of blood does not interfere, they observe that Mosaic precept, “‘He shall be dealt with 
according as he intended to do to his neighbour, but the innocent and righteous man thou shalt not slay.” I must 
observe also that as the Jewish priests were by no means to shed human blood, and as king David was forbidden by 
the prophet to build a temple because he was a man of war and had shed blood, so the Indian Jshtohoollo, ‘ holy 
men’, are by their function absolutely forbidden to slay, notwithstanding their propensity thereto, even for small 
injuries. They will not allow the greatest warrior to officiate, when the yearly grand sacrifice of expiation is offered 
up, or on any other religious occasion, except the leader. All must be performed by their beloved men, who are 
clean of every stain of blood, and have their foreheads circled with streaks of white clay. 

As this branch of the general subject cannot be illustrated but by well-known facts, I shall exemplify it with the 
late and long-continued conduct of the northern Indians, and those of Cape Florida, whom our navigators have 
reported to be cannibals. ‘The Muskohge who have been bitter enemies to the Cape Florida Indians, time 
immemorial, affirm their manners, tempers, and appetites, to be the very same as those of the neighbouring Indian 
nations. And the Florida captives who were sold in Carolina have told me that the Spaniards of St. Augustine 
and St. Mark’s garrisons, not only hired and paid them for murdering our seamen who were so unfortunate as to be 
shipwrecked on their dangerous coast, but that they delivered up to the savages those of our people they did not, 
like, to be put to the fiery torture. From their bigoted persecuting spirit, we may conclude the victims to have 
been those who would not worship their images and crucifixes. The Spaniards no doubt could easily influence this 
decayed small tribe to such a practice, as they depended upon them for the necessaries of life; and though they 
could never settle out of their garrisons in West Florida, on account of the jealous temper of the neighbouring 
unconquered Indians, yet the Cape Floridans were only Spanish mercenaries, shedding blood for their maintenance. 
A seduced Indian is certainly less faulty than the apostate Christian who instigated him. When an Indian sheds 
human blood, it does not proceed from wantonness, or the view of doing evil, but solely to put the law of retaliation 
in force, to return one injury for another; but if he has received no ill, and has no suspicion of the kind, he usually 
offers no damage to those who fall in his power, but is moved with compassion, in proportion to what they seem to 
have undergone. Such as they devote to the fire, they flatter with the hope of being redeemed, as long as they can, 
to prevent the giving them any previous anxiety or grief, which their law of blood does not require. 

The French Canadians are highly censurable, and their bloody popish clergy, for debauching our peaceable 
northern Indians with their infernal catechism,—the first introduction into their religious mysteries. Formerly 
when they initiated the Indian sucklings into their mixt idolatrous worship, they fastened round their necks a bunch 
of their favourite red and black beads, with a silver cross hanging down on their breasts, thus engaging them, as they 
taught, to fight the battles of God. Then they infected the credulous Indians with a firm belief that God once sent 
his own beloved son to fix the red people in high places of power, over the rest of mankind; that he passed 
through various countries, to the universal joy of the inhabitants, in order to come to the beloved red people, and 
place them in a superior station of life to the rest of the American world; but when he was on the point of sailing 
to America, to execute his divine embassy, he was murdered by the bloody monopolizing English, at the city of 
London, only to make the red people weigh light. Having thus instructed, and given them the catechism by 
way of question and answer, and furnished them with two thousand gross of scalping-knives and other murdering 
articles, the catechumens soon sallied forth, and painted themselves all over with the innocent blood of our fellow- 
subjects of different stations and ages, and without any distinction of sex, contrary to the standing Indian laws of blood. 
The British lion at last however triumphed, and forced the French themselves to sue for that friendly intercourse 
and protection which their former catechism taught the Indians to hate and fly from, as dangerous to their uni- 
versal happiness. 

When I have reasoned with some of the old headmen, against their barbarous custom of killing defenceless 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS BAT 

innocent persons, who neither could nor would oppose them in battle, but begged that they might only live to be their 
slaves, they told me that formerly they never waged war but in revenge of blood; and that in such cases they always 
devoted the guilty to be burnt alive when they were purifying themselves at home, to obtain victory over their enemies. 
But otherwise they treated the vanquished with the greatest clemency, and adopted them in the room of their relations 
who had either died a natural death or had before been sufficiently revenged, though killed by the enemy. The 
Israelites thus often devoted their captives to death, without any distinction of age or sex, as when they took Jericho, they 
saved only merciful Rahab and her family ; after they had plundered the Midianites of their riches, they put men, women 
and children to death, dividing among themselves a few virgins and the plunder; with other instances that might be 
quoted. The Indian Americans, beyond all the present race of Adam, are actuated by this bloody war-custom of the 
Israelites; they put their captives to various lingering torments, with the same unconcern as the Levite, when he cut 
up his beloved concubine into eleven portions, and sent them to the eleven tribes, to excite them to revenge the affront 
the Benjamites had given him. When equal blood has not been shed to quench the crying blood of their relations 
and give rest to their ghosts, according to their credenda, while they are sanctifying themselves for war, they always 
allot their captives either to be killed or put to the fiery torture ; and they who are ¢hus devoted, cannot by any 
means be saved, though they resembled an angel in beauty and virtue. Formerly, the Indians defeated a great body 
of the French, who at two different times came to invade their country. They put to the fiery torture a considerable 
number of them, and two in particular, whom they imagined to have carried the French ark against them. The 
English traders solicited, with the most earnest entreaties, in favour of the unfortunate captives; but they averred, 
that as it was not our business to intercede in behalf of a deceitful enemy who came to shed blood, unless we were 
resolved to share their deserved fate, so was it entirely out of the reach of goods, though piled as high as the skies, 
to redeem them, because they were not only the chief support of the French army, in spoiling so many of their 
warriors by the power of their ugly ark, before they conquered them, but were delivered over to the fire before 
they entered into battle. When I was on my way to the Chikkasah, at the Okchai, in the year 1745, the conduct 
of the Muskohge Indians was exactly the same with regard to a Cheerake stripling, whose father was a white man, 
and mother an half-breed; regardless of the pressing entreaties and very high offers of the English traders, they 
burned him in their usual manner. This seems to be copied from that law which expressly forbade the redeeming any 
devoted persons, and ordered that they should be surely put to death, Lev. xxvii. 29. This precept had evidently a 
reference to the law of retaliation. Saul, in a superstitious and angry mood, wanted to have murdered or sacrificed to 
God his favourite son Jonathan, because when he was fainting he ¢asted some honey which casually fell in his way, 
just after he had performed a prodigy of martial feats in behalf of Israel; but the gratitude and reason of the people 
prevented him from perpetrating that horrid murder. If devoting to death was of divine extraction, or if God 
delighted in human sacrifices, the people would have been criminal for daring to oppose the divine law,—which was 
not the case. Such a law, if taken in an extensive and literal sense, is contrary to all natural reason and religion, 
and consequently, in a strict sense, could not be enjoined by a benevolent and merciful God, who commands-us to 
do justice and show mercy to the very beasts; not to muzzle the ox while he is treading out the grain, nor to » 
ensnare the bird when performing her parental offices. “Are ye not of more value than many sparrows ;” 

The Indians use no stated ceremony in immolating their devoted captives, although it is the same thing to the 
unfortunate victims, what form their butcherers use. They are generally sacrificed before their conquerors set off 
for war with their ark and supposed holy things. And sometimes the Indians devote every one they meet in certain 
woods or paths, to be killed there, except their own people; this occasioned the cowardly Cheerake in the year 
1753 to kill two white men on the Chikkasah war-path, which leads from the country of the Muskohge. And the 
Shawanoh Indians who settled between the Ooe-Asa and Koosah-towns, told us that their people to the northward 
had devoted the English to death for the space of six years; but when that time was expired, and not before, they 
would live in friendship, as formerly. If the English had at that time executed their own law against them, and 
demanded equal blood from the Cheerake, and stopt all trade with them before they dipt themselves too deep in 
blood, they would soon have had a firm peace with all the Indian nations. This is the only way of treating them 
now; for when they have not the fear of offending, they will shed innocent blood, and proceed in the end to lay all 
restraint aside. The late conduct of the Chikkasah war-council, in condemning two pretended friends to death, who 
came with a view of shedding blood, shows their knowledge of that equal law of divine appointment to the Jews, 
«“ He shall be dealt with exactly as he intended to do to his neighbour.” 

348 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

It ought to be remarked that they are careful of their youth, and fail not to punish them when they transgress. 
Anno 1766, I saw an old headman, called the Dog-King (from the nature of his office), correct several young 
persons,—some for supposed faults, and others by way of prevention. He began with a lusty young fellow who 
was charged with being more effeminate than became a warrior, and with acting contrary to their old religious rites 
and customs, particularly because he lived nearer than any of the rest to an opulent and helpless German, by whom 
they supposed he might have been corrupted. He bastinadoed the young sinner severely, with a thick whip about 
a foot and a half long, composed of plaited silk grass, and the fibres of the button-snake-root stalks, tapering to the 
point, which was secured with a knot. He reasoned with him, as he corrected him: he told him that he was 
chehakse kanéha-he, literally, “you are as one who is wicked and almost lost*.” The grey-haired corrector said 
he treated him in that manner, according to ancient custom, through an effect of love, to induce him to shun vice, 
and to imitate the virtues of his illustrious forefathers, which he endeavoured to enumerate largely. When the young 
sinner had received his supposed due, he went off seemingly well pleased. This Indian correction lessens gradually 
in its severity, according to the age of the pupils. While the Dog-King was catechising the little ones, he said, che 
haksinna, ‘do not become vicious.” And when they wept he said, che-abela awa, “I shall not kill you,” or “I 
shall not put you into the state of bleeding dddle-+.” Like the present Jews, their old men are tenacious of their 
ancient rites and customs; imagining them to be the sure channel through which all temporal good things flow to 
them, and by which the opposite evils are averted. No wonder, therefore, that they still retain a multiplicity of 
Hebrew words, which were repeated often with great reverence in the temple, and adhere to many of their ancient 
rules and methods of punishment. 

ARGUMENT XV. 

The Israelites had Cities of Refuge, or places of safety, for those who killed a person unawares and without 
design, to shelter them from the bloodthirsty relations of the deceased, or the revenger of blood, who always 
pursued or watched the unfortunate person, like a ravenous wolf; but after the death of the high priest the man- 
slayer could safely return home, and nobody durst molest him. According to the same particular divine law of 
mercy, each of these Indian nations have either a house or town of refuge, which is a sure asylum to protect a man- 
slayer, or the unfortunate captive, if they can once enter into it. The Cheerake, though now exceedingly corrupt, 
still observe that law so inviolably, as to allow their beloved town the privilege of protecting a wilful murderer; 
but they seldom allow him to return home afterwards in safety; they will revenge blood for blood, unless in some 
very particular case when the eldest can redeem. However, if he should accept of the price of blood to wipe away 
its stains, and dry up the tears of the rest of the nearest kindred of the deceased, it is generally productive of future 

ills ; either when they are drinking spirituous liquors, or dancing their enthusiastic war-dances, a tomohawk is likely 
to be sunk into the head of some of his relations. 

Formerly, when one of the Cheerake murdered an English trader, he immediately ran off for the town of refuge ; 

* As chin-kanehah signifies ‘you have lost’, and che-kanehah ‘you are lost’, it seems to point at the method the Hebrews used in correcting 
their criminals in Canaan, and to imply a similarity of manners. The word they use to express ‘forgetfulness’, looks the very same way, ish al 
kanehah, ‘ you forget’, meaning that Ish and Canaan are forgotten by Ale. 

+ The Indians use the word hakse to convey the idea of a person’s being criminal in anything whatsoever. If they mention not the particular 
crime, they add, hakset kanehah, pointing as it were to those who where punished in Canaan. Such unfortunate persons as are mad, deaf, dumb 
or blind, are called by no other name than hakse. In like manner kallakse signifies ‘contemptible, unsteady, light, or easily thrown aside’,—it is 
a diminutive of 5p, of the same meaning. And they say such an one is kallaks’-Ishto, ‘execrated, or accursed to God’, because found light in 
the divine balance. As the American aborigines used no weights, the parity of language here with the Hebrew seems to assure us, they originally 
derived this method of expression from the Israelites, who took the same idea from the poise of a balance, which divine writ frequently mentions. 
Job, chap. xxxi., describes justice with a pair of scales, “ Let me be weighed in an even balance, that I may know my perfection.” And they call 
weighing, or giving a preference, tekdle, according to the same figure of speech; and it agrees, both in expression and meaning, with the Chaldean 
tekel, if written with Hebrew characters, as in that extraordinary appearance on the wall of the Babylonish monarch, interpreted by the prophet 
Daniel. When they prefer one person and would lessen another, they say eedpa wehke tekdle, ‘this one weighs heavy’, and eedko kallakse, 
or kall’aks’ooshe tekdle, ‘ that one weighs light, very light’. When any of their people are killed on any of the hunting paths, they frequently say, 
heenna tungga tannip tekdle, ‘right on the path he was weighed for the enemy, or the opposite party’, for tannip is the only word they have to 
express the words ‘enemy’ and ‘the opposite’; as ook’heenna tannip, ‘the opposite side of the water path’: hence it is probable, they borrowed 

that notable Assyrian expression while in their supposed captivity, brought it with them to America, and introduced it into their language, to com- 
memorate so surprising an event. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 349 

but as soon as he got in view of it, the inhabitants discovered him by the close pursuit of the shrill war-whoo- 
whoop, and for fear of irritating the English, they instantly answered the war cry, ran to arms, intercepted, and 
drove him off into Tennase river, (where he escaped, though mortally wounded,) lest he should have entered the 
reputed holy ground, and thus it had been stained with the blood of their friend; or he had obtained sanctuary to 
the danger of the community and the foreign contempt of their sacred altars. This town of refuge, called Choate, is 
situated on a large stream of the Missisippi, five miles above the late unfortunate Mort-Loudon, where some years 
ago a brave Englishman was protected after killing an Indian warrior in defence of his property. The gentleman 
told me that as his trading-house was near to that town of refuge, he had resolved with himself, after some months’ 
stay in it, to return home; but the head-men assured him that though he was then safe, it would prove fatal if he 
removed thence; so he continued in his asylum still longer, till the affair was, by time, more obliterated, and he had 
wiped off all their tears with various presents. In the upper or most western part of the country of the Muskohge, 
there was an old beloved town, now reduced to a small ruinous village called Koosah, which is still a place of safety 
for those who kill undesignedly. It stands on commanding ground, overlooking a bold river, which after running 
about forty leagues, sweeps close by the late mischievous French garrison Alebdmah and down to Mobille-Sound, 
two hundred leagues distance, and so into the Gulf of Florida. In almost every Indian nation, there are several 
peaceable towns, which are called ‘ old-beloved’, ‘ancient, holy, or white towns*’; they seem to have been formerly 
‘towns of refuge’, for it is not in the memory of their oldest people that ever human blood was shed in them, 
although they often force persons from thence, and put them to death elsewhere. 

ARGUMENT XVI. 

Before the Indians go to War, they have many preparatory ceremonies of purification and fasting, like what is 
recorded of the Israelites. In the first commencement of a war, a party of the injured tribe turns out first, to 
revenge the innocent eryimg blood of their own bone and flesh, as they term it. When the leader begins to beat up 
for volunteers, he goes three times round his dark winter-house, contrary to the course of the sun, sounding thé 
war-whoop, singing the war song, and beating the drum. Then he speaks to the listening crowd with very rapid 
language, short pauses, and an awful commanding voice, tells them of the continued friendly offices they have done 
the enemy, but which have been ungratefully returned with the blood of his kinsmen; therefore as the white paths 
have changed their beloved colour, his heart burns within him with eagerness to tincture them all along, and even to 
make them flow over with the hateful blood of the base contemptible enemy. Then he strongly persuades his 
kindred warriors and others, who are not afraid of the enemies’ bullets and arrows, to come and join him with manly 
cheerful hearts ; he assures them, he is fully convinced, as they are all bound by the love-knot, so they are ready to 
hazard their lives to revenge the blood of their kindred and countrymen ; that the love of order and the necessity 
of complying with the old religious customs of their country had hitherto checked their daring generous hearts, 
but now those hindrances are removed; he proceeds to whoop again for the warriors to come and join him and 
sanctify themselves for success against the common enemy, according to their ancient religious law. By his 
eloquence, but chiefly by their own greedy thirst of revenge, and intense love of martial glory, on which they conceive 
their liberty and happiness depend, and which they constantly instill into the minds of their youth, a number soon join 
him in his winter-house, where they live separate from all others and purify themselves for the space of three days 
and nights, exclusive of the first broken day. In each of those days they observe a strict fast till sunset, watching 
the young men very narrowly who have not been initiated in war-titles, lest unusual hunger should tempt them to 
violate it, to the supposed danger of all their lives in war, by destroying the power of their purifying beloved physic, 
which they drink plentifully during that time. This purifying physic is warm water highly imbittered with button- 
rattle-snake-root, which, as hath been before observed, they apply only to religious purposes. Sometimes, after 
bathing, they drink a decoction made of the said root, and in like manner the leader applies aspersions, or 
sprinklings, both at home and when out at war. They are such strict observers of the law of purification, and 
think it so essential in obtaining health and success in war, as not to allow the best beloved trader that ever lived 
among them even to enter the beloved ground appropriated to the religious duty of being sanctified for war ; 

* White is their fixt emblem of peace, friendship, happiness, prosperity, purity, holiness, &c., as with the Israelites. 

4U 

350 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

much less to associate with the camp in the woods, though he went (as I have known it to happen,) on the same 
war design; they oblige him to walk and encamp separate by himself, as an impure dangerous animal, till the 
leader hath purified him, according to their usual time and method, wth the consecrated things of the ark. With the 
Hebrews, the ark of Berith, ‘the purifier’, was a small wooden chest, of three feet nine inches in length, two feet 
three inches broad, and two feet three inches in height. It contained the golden pot that had manna in it, Aaron’s 
rod, and the tables of the law. The Indian ark is of a very simple construction, and it is only the intention and 
application of it, that makes it worthy of notice; for it is made with pieces of wood securely fastened together in 
the form of a square. The middle of three of the sides extend a little out, but one side is flat for the conveniency 
of the person’s back who carries it. Their ark has a cover, and the whole is made impenetrably close with hiccory- 
splinters ; it is about half the dimensions of the divine Jewish ark, and may very properly be called the red Hebrew 
ark of the purifier, imitated. The leader and a beloved waiter carry it by turns. It contains several consecrated 
vessels, made by beloved superannuated women, and of such various antiquated forms, as would have puzzled Adam 
to have given significant names to each. The leader and his attendant are purified longer than the rest of the 
company, that the first may be fit to act in the religious office of a priest of war, and the other to carry the 
awful sacred ark. All the while they are at war, the hetissw, or ‘beloved waiter’, feeds each of the warriors by an 
exact stated rule, giving them even the water they drink, out of his own hands, lest by intemperance they should 
spoil the supposed communicative power of their holy things, and occasion fatal disasters to the war-camp. 

The ark, mercy-seat, and cherubim, were the very essence of the levitical law, and often called “ the testimonies of 
Yohewah.” The ark of the temple was termed his throne, and David calls it his footstool. In speaking of the 
Indian places of refuge for the unfortunate, I observed, that if a captive taken by the reputed power of the beloved 
things of the ark, should be able to make his escape into one of these towns, or even into the winter-house of 
the archimagus, he is delivered from the fiery torture otherwise inevitable. This, when joined to the rest of the 
faint images of the Mosaic customs they still retain, seems to point at the mercy-seat in the sanctuary. It is also 
highly worthy of notice, that they never place the ark on the ground, nor sit on the bare earth while they are 
carrying it against the enemy. On hilly ground where stones are plenty, they place it on them; but in level land 
upon short logs, always resting themselves on the like materials. Formerly, when this tract was the Indian Flanders 
of America, as the French and all their red Canadian confederates were bitter enemies to the inhabitants, we often 
saw the woods full of such religious war-relics. The former is a strong imitation of the pedestal on which the 
Jewish ark was placed, a stone rising three fingers’ breadth above the floor. And when we consider,—in what a 
surprising manner the Indians copy after the ceremonial law of the Hebrews, and their strict purity in their war- 
camps; that Opae, ‘the leader, obliges all during the first campaign they make with the beloved ark, to stand, 
every day they lie by, from sunrise to sunset, and after a fatiguing day’s march and scanty allowance, to drink 
warm water imbittered with rattle-snake-root very plentifully, in order to be purified; that they have also as strong 
a faith of the power and holiess of their ark as ever the Israelites retained of their’s, ascribing the superior success 
of the party, to their stricter adherence to the law than the other; and after they return home, hang it on the leader’s 
red-painted war pole,—we have strong reason to conclude their origin is Hebrew. From the Jewish ark of the 
tabernacle and the temple, the ancient heathens derived their arks, their cés¢e or religious chests, their Teraphim or 
Dii Lares, and their tabernacles and temples. But their modes and objects of worship differed very widely from 
those of the Americans. The Indian ark is deemed so sacred and dangerous to be touched, cither by their own 
sanctified warriors or the spoiling enemy, that they durst not touch it upon any account*. It is not to be meddled 

* A gentleman who was at the Ohio in the year 1756, assured me he saw a stranger there very importunate to view the inside of the Cheerake 
ark, which was covered with a drest deer-skin, and placed on a couple of short blocks. An Indian centinel watched it, armed with a hiccory bow 
and brass-pointed barbed arrows, and he was faithful to his trust; for finding the stranger obtruding to pollute the supposed sacred vehicle, he drew 
an arrow to the head, and would have shot him through the body, had he not suddenly withdrawn. The interpreter, when asked by the gentleman 
what it contained, told him there was nothing in it but a bundle of conjuring traps. This shows what conjurers our common interpreters are, and 
how much the learned world have really profited by their informations. The Indians have an old tradition, that when they left their own native 
land, they brought with them a sanctified rod, by order of an oracle, which they fixed every night in the ground ; and were to remove from place 
to place on the continent towards the sun-rising, till zt budded in one night’s time; that they obeyed the sacred mandate, and the miracle took place 
after they arrived to this side of the Missisippi, on the present land they possess, This, they say, was the sole cause of their settling here,—of 
fighting so firmly for their reputed holy land and holy things,—and that they may be buried with their beloved forefathers. I have seen other 

Indians who pretend to the like miraculous direction, and I think it plainly to refer to Aaron’s rod, which was a branch of an almond-tree, and that 
budded and blossomed in one night. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 351 

with by any, except the war chieftain and his waiter, under the penalty of incurring great evil. Nor would the most 
inveterate enemy touch it in the woods for the very same reason; which is agreeable to the religious opinion and 
customs of the Hebrews, respecting the sacredness of their ark, witness what befell Uzzah for touching it, though 
with a religious view, and the Philistines for carrying it away, so that they soon thought proper to return it with 
presents. The leader virtually acts the part of a priest of war, pro lempore, in imitation of the Israelites fighting 
under the divine military banner. If they obtain the victory and get some of the enemies’ scalps, they sanctify 
themselves when they make their triumphal entrance, in the manner they observed before they set off to war; but, if 
their expedition proves unfortunate, they only mourn over their loss, ascribing it to the vicious conduct! of some of 
the followers of the beloved ark. What blushes should this savage virtue raise in the faces of nominal Christians, 
who ridicule the unerring divine wisdom for the effects of their own imprudent or vicious conduct ! May they learn 
from the rude uncivilized Americans, that vice necessarily brings evil, and virtue happiness ! 

The Indians will not cohabit with women while they are out at war; they religiously abstain from every kind of 
intercourse even with their own wives, for the space of three days and nights before they go to war, and so after they 
return home, because they are to sanctify themselves. This religious war custom, especially in so savage a 
generation, seems to be derived from the Hebrews, who thus sanctified themselves to gain the divine protection, 
and victery over their common enemies; as in the precept of Moses to the war camp when he ascended mount 
Sinai; and in Joshua’s prohibition to the Israelites*; and in the case of Uriah. The warriors consider themselves 
as devoted to God apart from the rest of the people, while they are at war accompanying the sacred ark with the 
supposed holy things it contains. The French Indians are said not to have deflowered any of our young women 
they captivated, while at war with us; and unless the black tribe, the French Canadian priests, corrupted their 
traditions, they would think such actions defiling, and what must bring fatal consequences on their own heads. We 
have an attested narrative of an English prisoner, who made his escape from the Shawanoh Indians, which was 
printed at Philadelphia, anno 1757, by which we were assured that even that bloodthirsty villain Captain Jacob did 
not attempt the virtue of his female captives, lest (as he told one of them,) it should offend the Indian’s God; 
though at the same time his pleasures heightened in proportion to the shrieks and groans of our people of different 
ages and both sexes, while they were under his tortures. Although the Choktah are libidinous, and lose their 
customs apace, yet I have known them to take several female prisoners without offering the least violence to their 
virtue, till the time of purgation was expired; then some of them forced their captives, notwithstanding their pressing 
entreaties and tears. As the aforesaid Shawanoh renegado professed himself so observant of this law of purity, so 
the other northern nations of Indians, who are free from adulteration by their far-distance from foreigners, do not 
neglect so great a duty; and it is highly probable, notwithstanding the silence of our writers, that as purity was 
strictly observed by the Hebrews in the temple, field and wilderness, the religious rites and customs of the northern 
Indians differ no further from those of the nations near our southern settlements than reason will admit, allowing 
for their distant situation from Peru and Mexico, whence they seem to have travelled. 

When they return home victorious over the enemy, they sing the triumphal song to Yo-He-Wan, ascribing the 
victory to him, according to a religious custom of the Israelites, who were commanded always to attribute their 
success in war to Jehovah, and not to their swords and arrows. In the year 1765, when the Chikkasah returned 
with two French scalps, from the Illinois, (while the British troops were on the Missisippi about 170 leagues below 
the Illinois,) as my trading-house was near the Chikkasah leader, I had a good opportunity of observing his conduct, 
as far as it was exposed to public view. Within a day’s march of home, he sent a runner a-head with the glad 
tidings, and to order his dark winter-house to be swept out very clean, for fear of pollution. _ By ancient custom, 
when the out-standing party set off for war, the women are so afraid of the power of their holy things and of 
profaning them, that they sweep the house and earth quite clean, place the sweepings in a heap behind the door, 
leaving it there undisturbed, till Opde, who carries the ark, orders them, by a faithful messenger, to remove it. He 
likewise orders them to carry out every utensil which the women had used during his absence, for fear of incurring 
evil by pollution. The party appeared next day painted red and black, their heads covered all over with swan down, 
and a tuft of long white feathers fixt to the crown of their heads. Thus they approached, carrying each of the 

* Joshua commanded the Israelites the night before they marched, to sanctify themselves by washing their clothes, avoiding all impurities, and 

abstaining from matrimonial intercourse. 

352 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

scalps on a branch of the evergreen pine*, singing the awful death song, with a solemn striking air, and sometimes 
Yo He Wau; now and then sounding the shrill death Who whoop whoop. When they arrived, the leader went 
a-head of his company round his winter hot-house contrary to the course of the sun, singing the monosyllable YO, 
for about the space of five seconds, on a tenor key; again, He He short, on a bass key; then Wan Wan, 
gutturally on the treble, very shrill, but not so short as the bass note. In this manner they repeated those sacred 
notes, YO, He He, Wau Wau, three times, while they were finishing the circle, a strong emblem of the eternity of 
Him, “ who is, was, and is to come,” to whom they sung their triumphal song, ascribing the victory over their 
enemies to hes strong arm, instead of their own, according to the usage of the Israelites by divine appointment. 
The duplication of the middle and last syllables of the four-lettered essential name of the Deity, and the change of 
the key from their established method of invoking YO Hz Wau, when they are drinking their bitter drink (the 
cusseena,) in their temples, where they always spend a long breath on each of the two first syllables of that awful 
divine song, seems designed to prevent a profanation. ‘The leader’s hetissu, or ‘ waiter’, placed a couple of new 
blocks of wood near the war pole, opposite to the door of the circular hot-house, in the middle of which the fire- 
place stood; and on these blocks he rested the supposed sacred ark, so that it and the holy fire faced each other. 
The party were silent a considerable time. At length the chieftain bade them sit down, and then inquired whether 
his house was prepared for the solemn occasion, according to his order the day before: being answered in the 
affirmative, they soon rose up, sounded the death whoop, and walked round the war pole; during which they 
invoked and sung three times, YO, He He, Wan Wau, in the manner already described. Then they went with 
their holy things in regular order into the hot-house, where they continued, exclusive of the first broken day, three 
days and nights apart from the rest of the people, purifying themselves with warm lotions and aspersions of the 
emblematical button-snake-root, without any other subsistence between the rising and the setting of the sun. 
During the other part of the time, the female relations of each of the company, after having bathed, anointed and 
drest themselves in their finest, stood in two rows, one on each side of the door, facing each other, from the evening 
till the morning, singing Ha Ha, Ha He, with a soft shrill voice and a solemn moving air for more than a minute, 
and then paused about ten minutes, before they renewed their triumphal song. While they sung, they gave their 
legs a small motion, by the strong working of their muscles without seeming to bend their joints. When they had 
no eccasion to retire, they have stood erect in the same place a long frosty night, and, except when singing, 
observed a most profound silence the whole time. During that period, they have no intercourse with their 
husbands; and they avoid several other supposed pollutions, as not to eat or touch salt, and the like. The leader 
once in two or three hours came out at the head of his company, and raising the death whoop, made one circle 
round the red painted war pole, holding up in their right hands the small boughs of pine with the scalps fixt to 
them, singing as above, waving them to and fro, and then returned again. This religious order they strictly 
observed the whole time they were purifying themselves, and singing the song of safety and victory, to the 
goodness and power of the divine essence. When the time of their purification and thanksgiving expired, the 
men and women went and bathed themselves separately, returned in the same manner, and anointed again according 
to their usual custom. They joined soon after in a solemn procession, to fix the scalps on the tops of the houses of 
their relations who had been killed without revenge of blood. The war chieftain went first ; his religious attendant 
followed him; the warriors next, according to their rising merit; and the songstresses brought up the rear. In this 
order they went round the leader’s winter-house from the east to the north, the men striking up the death whoop, 
and singing the death song; and then YO, He He, Wan Wau, as described; the women also warbling Ha Ha, 
Ha He, so that one might have said, according to the sacred text, “ Great was the company of the women who sung 
the song of triumph+.” ‘hen they fixed on the top of the house a twig of the pine they had brought with them, 
with a small piece of one of the scalps fastened to it; and this order they observed from house to house, till in their 

* As the Indians carry their enemies’ scalps on small branches of evergreen pine, and wave the martial trophies on a pine-branch before 
Yo He Wax, I cannot help thinking that the pine was the emblematical tree so often mentioned in divine writ, by the plural name, Shittim; 
especially as the mountain Cedar, comparatively speaking, is ow and does not seem to answer the description of the inspired writers; besides that 
489 (Chepher), is figuratively applied to the mercy-seat, signifying, literally, a screen, or cover against storms; which was pitched over with the gum 
of the pine-tree. 

+ Last year I heard the Choktah women, in those towns which lie next to New Orleans, sing a regular anthem and dirge, in the dusk of the 
evening, while their kinsmen were gone to war against the Muskohge. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 353 

opinion they had appeased the ghosts of their dead. They went and bathed again; and thus ended their purifica- 
tion, and triumphal solemnity; only the leader and his religious waiter kept apart three days longer, purifying them- 
selves. I afterwards asked the reason of this; they replied they were Ishtohoollo. This seems to be so plain a copy 
of the old Jewish customs, I am satisfied the reader will easily discern the analogy, without any further observa- 
tions. 

I cannot, however, conclude this Argument without a few remarks concerning the Indian methods of making peace, 
and of renewing their old friendship. They first smoke out of the friend-pipe, and eat together; then they drink of 
the cusseena, using such invocations as have been mentioned, and proceed to wave their large fans of eagles’ tails, 
concluding with a dance. The persons visited appoint half a dozen of their most active and expert young warriors to 
perform this religious duty, who have had their own temples adorned with the swan-feather cap. They paint their 
bodies with white clay, and cover their heads with swan-down; then, approaching the chief representative of the 
strangers, who, by way of honour and strong assurance of friendship, is seated on the central white, or holy seat, 
“the beloved cabbin” (which is about nine feet long and seven feet broad), they wave the eagles’ tails backward and 
forward over his head*. Immediately they begin the solemn song with an awful air; and presently they dance ina 
bowing posture; then they raise themselves so erect that their faces look partly upwards, waving the eagles’ tails 
with their right hand toward heaven, sometimes with a slow, at others with a quick motion ; at the same time they 
touch their breast with their small calabash and pebbles fastened to a stick of about a foot long, which they hold in 
their left hand, keeping time with the motion of the eagles’ tails: during the dance they repeat the usual divine 
notes, YO, &c. and wave the eagles’ tails now and then over the stranger’s head, not moving above two yards back- 
ward or forward before him. They are so surprisingly expert in their supposed religious office, and observe time so 
exactly, with their particular gestures and notes, that there is not the least discernible discord. If the Hebrews 
danced this way, (as there is strong presumptive proof,) they had very sweating work, for every joint, artery, and 
nerve is stretched to the highest pitch of exertion; and this may account for Saul’s daughter Michal chiding David 
for falling in with the common dancers. 

The Indians cannot show greater honour to the greatest potentate on earth than to place him in the white seat, 
invoke YO Hr Wan, while he is drinking the cusseena, and dance before him with the eagles’ tails. When two 
chieftains are renewing or perpetuating friendship with each other, they are treated with the same ceremonies. And 
in their circular friendly dances, when they honour their guests, and pledge themselves to keep good faith with them, 
they sometimes sing their divine notes with a very awful air, pointing their right hand towards the sky. Some years 
ago, I saw the Kooasahte Indians (two hundred miles up Mobille river,) perform this rite with much solemnity; as 
if invoking the Deity by their notes and gestures, to enable them to show good will to their fellow-creatures, and to ~ 
bear witness of their faithful vows and conduct. This custom is plainly not derived from the old Scythians, or any 
other part of the heathen world. Their forms and usages when they made peace, or pledged faith, and contracted 
friendship with each other, were widely different ; but to those of the Jews it hath the nearest resemblance. 

ARGUMENT XVII. 

The Indian origin and descent may also be in some measure discerned by their taste for, and kind of, Ornaments. 
The Israelites were fond of wearing beads and other ornaments, even as early as the patriarchal age, and the taste 
increased to such a degree that it became criminal, and was sharply reprehended by the prophets, particularly Isaiah. 

* When they are disaffected, or intend to declare war, they will not allow any of the party against whom they have hostile views, to approach the 
white seat; as their holy men and holy places are considered firmly bound to keep good faith and give sure refuge. Indeed in the year 1750, after 
having narrowly escaped with my life from the Cheerake lower towns, I met two worthy gentlemen at the settlement of Ninety-six, who were going 
to them. I earnestly dissuaded them against pursuing their journey, but without effect: when they arrived at the middle Cheerake towns, the old 
beloved men and war chieftains invited them and twenty of the traders to go in the evening to their town-house, to sit on their white beloved seat, 
partake of their feast, and smoke together with kindly hearts, according to their old friendly custom. The gentlemen happily rejected the invita- 
tion, and boldly told them they were apprised of their treacherous intentions ; they braved a little, to surprise and intimidate the Indians, and then 
mounted, and directed their course toward the place where a treacherous ambuscade had been laid for them ; but they soon silently took another 
course, and passing through an unsuspected difficult marsh, and almost pathless woods, by the dawn of the morning they reached the Georgia 
side of Savannah river, which was about 80 miles, where a body of the Muskohge chanced to be preparing for war against the treacherous 
Cheerake. These protected them from their pursuers, and the gentlemen arrived safe at Augusta, the upper barrier and Indian mart of Georgia. 

4X 

354 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

The Israclitish women wore rich garters about their legs, and, against the rules of modesty, they shortened their 
under garments, in order to show how their legs and feet were decorated. Isaiah, chap. iii. 18, “The Lord will 
take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their feet,’ which loaded them so heavy that they could 
scarcely walk ; and ver. 19, 20, 21, “The chains and the bracelets, the ornaments of the legs, and the ear-rings, the 
rings and nose zewels.” In resemblance to these customs, the Indian females continually wear @ beaded string round 
their legs, made of buffalo-hair, which is a species of coarse wool; and they reckon it a great ornament, as well as a 
preservative against miscarriages, hard labour, and other evils. They wear also a heap of land tortoise-shells, with 
pebbles or beads in them, fastened to pieces of deer-skins, which they tie to the outside of their legs when’ they mix — 
with the men in their religious dances. The Indian nations are agreed in the custom of thus adorning themselves 

with beads of various sizes and colours ; sometimes wrought in garters, sashes, necklaces, and in strings round their 

wrists, and so from the crown of their heads sometimes to the cartilage of the nose. And they doat on them’so 

much as to make them their current money in all payments to this day. Before we supplied them with our European 

beads they had great quantities of wampum, (the buccinum of the ancients,) made out. of conch-shell, by rubbing 

them on hard stones, and so they form them according to their liking. With these they bought and sold at a stated 

current rate, without the least variation for circumstances either of time or place; and now they will hear nothing 

patiently of loss or gain, or allow us to heighten the price of our goods, be our reasons ever so strong, or though 

the exigencies and changes of time may require it. Formerly, four deer-skins was the price of a large conch-shell 

bead, about the length and thickness of a man’s fore-finger, which they fixed to the crown of their head as a high 

ornament; so greatly they valued them. Their beads bear a very near resemblance to ivory, which was highly 

esteemed by the Hebrews. The New England writers assure us that the Naragansat Indians paid to the colony of 

Massachusetts two hundred fathoms of wampum, only in part of a debt; and at another payment one hundred 

fathoms: which shows the Indian custom of wearing beads has prevailed far north on this continent, and before the 

first settling of our colonies. According to the Oriental custom, they wear ear-rings and finger-rings in abundance. 

Tradition says, they followed the like custom before they became acquainted with the English. The men and women 

in old times used such coarse diamonds as their own hilly country produced, when each had a bit of stone fastened 

with a deer’s sinew to the tying of their hair, their nose, ears, and maccaseenes; but from the time we supplied them 

with our European ornaments they have used brass and silver ear-rings, and finger-rings ; the young warriors now 

frequently fasten bell-buttons or pieces of tinkling brass to their maccascenes, and to the outside of their boots, 

instead of the old turkey-cock spurs which they formerly used. Both sexes esteem the above things as very great 

ornaments of dress, and commonly load the parts with each sort, in proportion to their ability of purchasing them: 

it is a common trading rule with us to judge of the value of an Indian’s effects by the weight of his fingers, wrists, — 
ears, crown of his head, boots, and maccaseenes ; by the quantity of red paint daubed on his face, and by the shirt 

about the collar, shoulders, and back, should he have one. Although the same things are commonly alike used or 

disused by males and females, yet they distinguish their sexes in as exact a manner as any civilized nation. The 

women bore small holes in the lobe of their ears for their rings, but the young heroes cut a hole round almost the 

extremity of both their ears, which, till healed, they stretch out with a large tuft of buffalo’s wool mixt with bear’s 

oil; then they twist as much small wire round as will keep them extended in that hideous form. This custom how- 
ever is wearing off apace. They formerly wore nose-rings, or jewels, both in the northern and southern regions of 
America, according to a similar custom of the Jews and easterns; and in some places they still observe it. At pre- 

sent, they hang a piece of battered silver or pewter, or a large bead to the nostril, like the European method of — 
treating swine to prevent them from rooting the earth; this, as well as the rest of their customs, is a true picture 
and good copy of their supposed early progenitors. I have been among the Indians at a drinking match, when 
several of their beaus have been humbled as low as death for the great loss of their big ears. Being so widely ex- 
tended, it is as easy for a person to take hold of, and pull them off, as to remove a couple of small hoops, were they 
hung within reach ; but if the ear, after the pull, stick to their head by one end, when they get sober they pare and 
sew it together with a needle and deer’s sinews, after sweating him in a stove. Thus the disconsolate warrior re- 
covers his former cheerfulness, and hath a lasting caution of not putting his ears a second time in danger with bad 
company: however, it is not deemed a scandal to lose their ears by any accident, because they became slender and 
brittle by their virtuous compliance with that favourite custom of their ancestors. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 

is) 
Or 
Or 

ARGUMENT XVIII. 

The Indian manner of Curing their Sick is very similar to that of the Jews. They always invoke YO He Wau 
a considerable space of time before they apply any medicines, let the case require ever so speedy an application: the 
more desperately ill their patients are, the more earnestly they invoke the Deity on the sad occasion. Like the. 
Hebrews, they firmly believe that diseases and wounds are occasioned by the holy fire, or divine anger, in proportion 
to some violation of the old beloved speech. The Jews had but small skill in physic: they called a physician “a 
binder of wounds,” for he chiefly poured oil into the wounds and bound them up. They were no great friends to 
this kind of learning and science, and their Talmud has this proverb, “ Zhe best physicians go to hell.” King Asa was 
reproved for having applied to physicians for his disease in his feet. The little use they made of the art of medicine, 
especially for internal maladies, and their persuasion that distempers were either the immediate effects of God’s anger, or 
caused by evil spirits, led them to apply themselves ¢o the prophets, or to diviners, magicians and enchanters. Hezekiah’s 
boil was cured by Isaiah ; Benhadad king of Syria, and Naaman the Syrian applied to the prophet Elisha; and Aha- 
ziah king of Israel sent to consult Baal-zebub. The Indians deem the curing their sick or wounded a very religious 
duty ; and it is chiefly performed by their supposed prophets and magi, because they believe they are inspired with a 
great portion of the divine fire. On these occasions they sing YO YO on a low bass key for two or three minutes 
very rapidly ; in like manner, He Hz, and Wa Wa. Then they transpose and accent those sacred notes with great 
vehemence and supplicating fervour, rattling all the while a calabash with small pebble-stones, in imitation of the 
old Jewish rattles, to make a greater sound, and, as it were, move the Deity to cooperate with their simple means and 
finish the cure*. When the Indian physicians visit their supposed irreligious patients, they approach them in a 
bending posture, with their rattling calabash, preferring that sort to the North American gourds, and in that bent 
posture of body, they run two or three times round the sick person, contrary to the course of the sun, invoking God 
as already exprest. Then they invoke the raven, and mimic his croaking voice: now this bird was an ill omen to 
the ancient heathens, as we may see by the prophet Isaiah; so that common wisdom, or self-love, would not have 
directed them to such a choice if their traditions had represented it as a bad symbol. But they chose it as an em- 
blem of recovery, probably from its indefatigableness in flying to and fro when sent out of the ark, till he found dry 
ground to rest on}. They also place a basin of cold water with some pebbles in it on the ground, near the patient; 
then they invoke the fish, because of its cold element, to cool the heat of the fever. Again, they invoke the eagle 
(codle); they solicit him, as he soars in the heavens, to bring down refreshing things for their sick, and not to delay 
them, as he can dart down upon the wing, quick as a flash of lightning. They are so tedious on this subject, that 
it would be a task to repeat it: however, it may be needful to observe, that they choose the eagle because of its 
supposed communicative virtues ; and that it is, according to its Indian name, a cherubinical emblem, and the king of 
birds, of prodigious strength, swiftness of wing, majestic stature, and loving its young ones so tenderly as to carry 
them on its back, and teach them to fly.—Josephus tells us that Solomon had a@ divine power conferred upon him, 

* Formerly an old Nachee warrior who was blind of one eye, and very dim-sighted in the other, having heard of the surprising skill of the 
European oculists, fancied I could cure him. He frequently importuned me to perform that friendly office, which I as often declined. But he, imagining 
all my excuses were the effect of modesty and caution, was the more importunate, and would take no denial. I was at last obliged to commence 
Indian oculist. I had just drank a glass of rum when he came to undergo the operation at the time appointed ; he observing my glass, said it was 
best to defer it till the next day. I told him I drank so on purpose, for as the white people’s physic and beloved songs were quite different from 
what the red people applied and sung, it was usual with our best physicians to drink a little to heighten their spirits and enable them to sing with a 
strong voice, and likewise to give their patients a little, to make their hearts weigh even within them; he consented, and lay down as if he was dead, 
according to their usual custom. After a good many wild ceremonies I sung up sheela na guira, ‘ will you drink wine?’ Then I drank to my 
patient, which on my raising him up he accepted: I gave him several drinks of grog, both to divert myself, and purify the obtruding supposed 
sinner. At last I applied my materia medica, blowing a quill full of fine burnt alum and Roman vitriol into his eye. Just as I was ready to repeat 
it, he bounded up out of his seemingly dead state, jumped about, and said my songs and physic were not good. When I could be heard I told him 
the English beloved songs and physic were much stronger than those of the red people, and that when they did not immediately produce such an 
effect as he found, it was a sure sign they were good for nothing, but as they were taking place he would soon be well. He acquiesced because of 
the soporific dose I gave him; but ever after he reckoned he had a very narrow chance of having his eye burnt out by Loak Ishtohoollo, for drinking 
ooka hoome, ‘the bitter waters’, and presuming to get cured by an impure accursed nothing, who lied, drank, ate hog’s flesh, and sung tarooa 
ookproo’sto, ‘the devil’s tune’, or the song of the evil ones. 

+ The ancients drew bad presages from the situation and croaking of ravens and crows. They looked on that place as unhappy where either of 
them had. croaked in the morning. Hesiod forbids to leave a house unfinished, lest a crow should chance to come and croak when sitting on it. 
And most of the illiterate peasants in Europe are tinctured with the like superstition, pretending to draw ill omens from its voice. 

356 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

of driving evil spirits out of possessed persons ; that he invented several zmcantations by which diseases were cured, 
and left behind him such a sure method of exorcising, as the demons never returned again; and he assures us the 
Jews followed the like custom as late as his own time, and that he saw such a cure performed by one Eleazar. They 
likewise imagined that the liver of a fish would keep away evil spirits, as one of the apocryphal writers ac- 
quaints us*. 

In the summer season of the year 1746 I chanced to see the Indians playing at a house of the former Missisippi 
Nachee, on one of their old sacred musical instruments. It pretty much resembled the Negroe Banger in shape, but 
far exceeded it in dimensions, for it was about five feet long, and a foot wide on the head-part of the board, with eight 
strings made out of the sinews of a large buffalo. But they were so unskilful in acting the part of the lyric, that the 
loache, or prophet, who held the instrument between his feet and alongside of his chin, took one end of the bow, 
whilst a lusty fellow held the other: by sweating labour they scraped out such harsh jarring sounds as might have been 
reasonably expected by a soft ear to have been sufficient to drive out the devil if he lay anywhere hid in the house. 
When I afterward asked him the name and the reason of such a strange method of diversion, he told me the dance 
was called keetla Ishto Hoolo, ‘a dance to, or before, the great holy one’; that it kept off evil spirits, witches, and 
wizards from the red people, and enabled them to ordain elderly men to officiate in holy things, as the exigency of 
the times required. He who danced to it kept his place and posture in a very exact manner, without the least per- 
ceivable variation: yet, by the prodigious working of his muscles and nerves, he in about half an hour foamed in a 
very extraordinary manner, and discontinued it proportionally till he recovered himself. This surprising custom I 
have mentioned here because it was usual among the Hebrews for their prophets to become furious, and, as it were, 
beside themselves, when they were about to prophesy. Thus with regard to Saul, it seems that he became furious, 
and tortured his body by violent gestures; and when Elisha sent one of the children of the prophets to anoint Jehu, 
one said to him, Wherefore cometh this mad fellow? The Chaldee paraphrast, on | Sam. xviii. 10, concerning Saul’s 
prophesying, paraphrases it, cape furire, “he began to grow mad,” &c. 

When the East Indian Fakirs are giving out their pretended prophecies, they choose drums and trumpets, that 
by such confused striking sounds their senses may be luiled asleep, or unsettled, which might otherwise render them 
incapable of receiving the supposed divine inspiration. And they endeavour to become thus possessed before crowds 
of people with a furious rage, by many frantic and violent motions of body and changes of posture, till they have 
raised it to the highest pitch they are capable of, and then fall on the ground almost breathless; when they recover 
themselves a little, they give out their prophecies, which are deemed oracular. Lactantius and others tell us that the 
Sibyls were possest of the like fury, and most part of the ancients believed they ought to become furious, the mem- 
bers of the body to shake and the hairs of their head to stand on end before they could be divinely inspired; which 
seems plainly to show, that though the ancient heathens mimicked a great deal of the Mosaic law, yet theirs had but 
a faint glance on the Hebrew manner of consulting Yohewah; whereas ¢he Indian Americans invoke the true God by 
his favourite essential name, in a bowing posture, on every material occasion, whether civil, martial, or religious, con- 
trary to the usage of all the old heathen world. 

In the year 1765 an old physician, or prophet, almost drunk with spirituous liquors, came to pay me a friendly 
visit: his situation made him more communicative than he would have been if quite sober. When he came to the 
door, he bowed himself half bent, with his arms extended north and south, continuing so perhaps for the space of a 
minute. Then raising himself erect, with his arms in the same position, he looked in a wild, frightful manner from 
the south-west toward the north, and sung on a low bass key Yo Yo Yo Yo, almost a minute, then He He He He, 

* They imagined incense also to be a sure means to banish the devil, though asafcetida, or the devil’s dung, might have been much better. On 
Cant. iv. 6. “I will get me to the hill of incense,” the Chaldee paraphrast says, that while the house of Israel kept the ark of their holy forefathers, 
both the morning and mid-day, evil spirits fled away, because the divine glory dwelt in the sanctuary which was built on Mount Moriah; and that 
all the devils fled when they smelled the effluvia of the fine incense that was there. They likewise believed that herbs and roots had a power 
to expel daemons. And Josephus tells us, that the root bara immediately drives out the devil. I suppose it had such a physical power against 
fevers and agues, as the jesuit’s bark. 

The Church of Rome, in order to have powerful holy things, as well as the Jews, applies salt, spittle, holy-water, and consecrated oil, to expel 
the devils from the credulous of their own persuasion; and the oil alone is used as a viaticum, on account of its lubricous quality, to make them 
slippery, and thereby prevent the devil from laying hold, and pulling them down when they ascend upward. ‘They reckon that observance a most 
religious duty, and an infallible preservative against the legions of evil spirits who watch in the aérial regions ; and also necessary to gain celestial 
admission for believers. 

Ce 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 357 

for perhaps the same space of time, and Wa Wa Wa Wa, in like manner; and then transposed and accented those 
sacred notes several different ways, in a most rapid guttural manner. Now and then he looked upwards, with his 
head considerably bent backward; his song continued about a quarter of an hour. As my door, which was then 
open, stood east, his face of course looked toward the west; but whether the natives thus usually invoke the Deity, 
I cannot determine; yet as all their winter houses have their doors toward the east, had he used the like solemn 
invocations there, his face would have consequently looked the same way, contrary to the usage of the heathens. 
After his song, he stepped in: I saluted him, saying, “Are you come, my beloved old friend?” He replied, Arahre- O. 
“T am come in the name of Oka.” I told him, I was glad to see that in this mad age he still retained the old 
Chikkasah virtues. He said, that as he came with a glad heart to see me, his old friend, he imagined he could not 
do me a more kind service, than to secure my house from the power of the evil spirits of the north, south, and west, 
and from witches and wizards, who go about in dark nights, in the shape of bears, hogs, and wolves, to spoil people: 
«The very month before,” added he, “we killed an old witch for having used destructive charms.” Because a child was 
suddenly taken ill and died, on the physician’s false evidence, the father went to the poor helpless old woman, who was 
sitting innocent and unsuspecting, and sunk his tomohawk into her head, without the least fear of being called to 
an account. They call witches and wizards zshtabe and hoollabe, ‘ man-killers’, and ‘ spoilers of things sacred’. My 
prophetic friend desired me to think myself secure from those dangerous enemies of darkness, for (said he) tarooa 
Ishtohoollo-antarooare, “I have sung the song of the great holy one.” The Indians are so tenacious of concealing 
their religious mysteries, that I never before observed such an invocation on the like occasion, adjuring evil spirits, 
witches, &c., by the awful name of Deity. 

ARGUMENT XIX. 

The Hebrews have at all times been very careful in the Burial of their Dead : to be deprived of it was considered as 
one of the greatest of evils. They made it a point of duty to perform the funeral obsequies of their friends, often 
embalmed the dead bodies of those who wererich, and even buried treasure in the tombs with their dead. Josephus tells 
us, that in king David’s sepulchre, was buried such a prodigious quantity of treasures, that Hyrcanus the Maccabean 
took three thousand talents out of it, about thirteen hundred years after, to get rid of Antiochus then besieging 
Jerusalem. And their people of distinction, we are told, followed the like custom of burying gold and silver with 
the dead. Thus, it was an universal custom with the ancient Peruvians, when the owner died to bury his effects with 
him, which the avaricious Spaniards perceiving, they robbed these store-houses of the dead of an immense quantity 
of treasures. The modern Indians bury all their moveable riches, according to the custom of the ancient 
Peruvians and Mexicans, insomuch that the grave is heir of all. Except the Cheerake, only one instance of 
deviation from this ancient and general Indian custom occurs to me; which was that of MJalahche, the late famous 
chieftain of the Kowwetah head war-town of the lower part of the Muskohge country, who bequeathed all he 
possessed to his real and adopted relations, being sensible they would be much more useful to his living friends 
than to himself during his Jong sleep: he displayed a genius far superior to the crowd. The Cheerake of late years, 
by the reiterated persuasion of the traders, have entirely left off the custom of burying effects with the dead body: 
the nearest of blood inherits them. They, and several other of our Indian nations, used formerly to shoot all the 
live stock that belonged to the deceased, soon after the interment of the corpse ; not according to the Pagan custom 
of the funeral piles, on which they burned several of the living, that they might accompany and wait on the dead, 
but from a narrow-hearted avaricious principle, derived from their Hebrew progenitors. Notwithstanding the 
North American Indians, like the South Americans, inter the whole riches of the deceased with him, and so make 
his corpse and the grave heirs of all, they never give them the least disturbance: even a bloodthirsty enemy will 
not despoil nor disturb the dead. The grave proves an asylum and a sure place of rest to the sleeping person, till 
at some certain time, according to their opinion, fe rises again to inherit his favourite place, unless the covetous 
or curious hand of some foreigner should break through his sacred bounds. This custom of burying the dead 
person’s treasures with him, has entirely swallowed up their medals, and other monuments of antiquity, without any 
probability of recovering them*. 

* In the Tuccabatches on the Tallapoose river, thirty miles above the Allabahamah garrison, are two brazen tables, and five of copper. They 
esteem them so sacred as to keep them constantly in their holy of holies, without touching them in the least, only in the time of their compounded 
first-fruit offering, and annual expiation of sins ; at which season, their magus carries one under his arm, a-head of the people, dancing round the 

4 Y 

58 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

Ss) 

As the Hebrews carefully buried their dead, so, on any accident, they gathered their bones and laid them in the 
tombs of their forefathers: thus, all the numerous nations of Indians perform the like friendly office to every 
deceased person of their respective tribe; insomuch that those who lose their people at war, if they have not 
corrupted their primitive customs, are so observant of this kindred duty, as to appropriate some time to collect the 
bones of their relations; which they call bone gathering, or “gathering the bones to their kindred,” according to 
the Hebrew idiom*. The Cheerake, by reason of their great intercourse with foreigners, have dropped that friendly 
office; and as they seem to be more intelligent than the rest of our English American Indians in their religious 
rites and ceremonial observances, so I believe the fear of pollution has likewise contributed to obliterate that ancient 
kindred duty. However, they separate those of their people who die at home, from others of a different nation ; 
and every particular tribe indeed of each nation bears an intense love to itself, and divides every one of its people 
from the rest, both while living and after they are dead. When any of them die at a distance, if the company be 
not driven and pursued by the enemy, they place the corpse on a scaffold, covered with notched logs to secure it 
from being torn by wild beasts, or fowls of prey: when they imagine the flesh is consumed, and the bones are 
thoroughly dried, they return to the place, brmg them home, and inter them in a very solemn manner. They will 
not associate with us when we are burying any of our people who die in their land; and they are unwilling we 
should join with them while they are performing this kindred duty to theirs. Upon which account, though I have 
lived among them in the raging time of the small-pox, even of the confluent sort, I never saw but one buried, who 
was a great favourite of the English, and chieftain of Oocasa, as formerly described. 

The Indians use the same ceremonies to the bones of their dead, as if they were covered with their former skin, 
flesh, and ligaments. It is but a few days since I saw some return with the bones of nine of their people, who had 
been two months before killed by the enemy. They were tied in white deer-skins separately ; and when carried by 
the door of one of the houses of their family, they were laid down opposite to it, till the female relations convened, 
with flowing hair, and wept over them about half an hour. Then they carried them home to their friendly magazines 
of mortality, wept over them again, and then buried them with the usual solemnities ; putting their valuable effects, 
and, as I am informed, other convenient things in along with them, to be of service to them in the next state. The 
chieftain carried twelve short sticks tied together in the form of a quadrangle ; so that each square consisted of 
three. The sticks were only peeled, without any paintings; but there were swan’s feathers tied to each corner, and 
as they called that frame, tereekpe tobeh, ‘a white circle’, and placed it over the door while the women were 
weeping over the bones, perhaps it was originally designed to represent the holy fire, light, and spirit, who formerly 
presided over the four principal standards of the twelve tribes of Israel. When any of their people die at home, 

sacred arbour ; next to him their head warrior carries another ; and those warriors who choose it carry the rest after the manner of the high priest : all 
the others carry white canes with swan-feathers at the top. Hearing accidentally of these important monuments of antiquity, and inquiring pretty 
much about them, I was certified of the truth of the report by four of the southern traders, at the most eminent Indian trading-house of all English 
America. One of the gentlemen informed me, that at my request he endeavoured to get a liberty of viewing the aforesaid tables, but it could not 
possibly be obtained, only inthe time of the yearly grand sacrifice, for fear of polluting their holy things, at which time gentlemen of curiosity may 
see them. Old Bracket, an Indian of perhaps 100 years old, lives in that old beloved town, who gave the following description of them: 

Old Bracket’s account of the five copper and two brass plates under the beloved cabin in Tuccabatchey-square. 

f 
| The shape of the five copper plates; one is a foot and half long and seven inches wide, the other four are 
shorter and narrower. 

The largest stamped thus @’) The shape of the two brass plates,—about a foot and a half in diameter. 

He said, he was told by his forefathers that those plates were given to them by the man we call God; that there had been many more of other 
shapes, some as long as he could stretch with both his arms, and some had writing upon them which were buried with particular men; and that they 
had instructions given with them, viz. they must only be handled by particular people, and those fasting; and no unclean woman must be suffered 
to come near them or the place where they are deposited. He said, none but this town’s people had any such plates given them, and that they 
were a different people from the Creeks. He only remembered three more which were buried with three of his family, and he was the only man 
of the family now left. He said, there were two copper plates under the king’s cabin, which had lain there from the first settling of the town. 

This account-was taken in the Tuccabatchey-square, 27th July, 1759, per Will. Bolsover. 

* With the Hebrews, “ to gather,” usually signified to die. Gen. xlix. 38. Jacob is said to be gathered to his people. sal. xxvi. 9. Gather 
not my soul with sinners. And Numb. xx. 24. Aaron shall be gathered to his people. 4 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 359 

they wash and anoint the corpse, and soon bring it out of doors for fear of pollution; then they place it opposite to 
the door, on the skins of wild beasts, in a sitting posture, as looking into the door of the winter house, westward, 
sufficiently supported with all his moveable goods; after a short eulogium, and space of mourning, they carry him 
three times around the house in which he is to be interred, stopping half a minute each time, at the place where 
they began the circle, while the religious man of the deceased person’s family, who goes before the hearse, says 
each time, Yah, short with a bass voice, and then invokes on a tenor key, Yo, which at the same time is likewise 
sung by all the procession, as long as one breath allows. Again, he strikes up, on a sharp treble key, the feminine 
note He, which in like manner is taken up and continued by the rest: then all of them suddenly strike off the 
solemn chorus and sacred invocation, by saying, on a low key, Wah; which constitute the divine essential name, 
Yohewah. This is the method in which they performed the funeral rites of the chieftain before referred to; during 
which time, a great many of the traders were present, as our company was agreeable at the interment of our declared 
patron and friend. It seems as if they buried him in the name of the divine essence, and directed their plaintive 
religious notes to the author of life and death, in hopes of a resurrection of the body; which hope engaged the 
Hebrews to style their burying-places, “the house of the living.” When they celebrated these funeral rites of the 
above chieftain, they laid the corpse in his tomb, i a sittmg posture with his face towards the east, his head anointed 
with bear’s oil, and his face painted red, but not streaked with black, because that is a constant emblem of war and 
death ; he was drest in his finest apparel, having his gun and pouch, and trusty hiccory bow, with a young panther’s 
skin full of arrows, along side of him, and every other useful thing he had been possessed of,—that when he rises 
again, they may serve him in that tract of land which pleased him best before he went to take his long sleep. His 
tomb was firm and clean inside. They covered it with thick logs, so as to bear several tiers of cypress-bark, and 
such a quantity of clay as would confine the putrid smell, and be on a level with the rest of the floor. They often 
sleep over those tombs; which, with the loud wailing of the women at the dusk of the evening and dawn of the day, 
on benches close by the tombs, must awake the memory of their relations very often; and if they were killed by an 
enemy, it helps to irritate and set on such revengeful tempers to retaliate blood for blood. 

The Egyptians either embalmed or buried their dead: other heathen nations imagined that fire purified the body ; 
they burned therefore the bodies of their dead, and put their ashes into small urns, which they religiously kept by 
them as sacred relics. The Tartars called Ayrgesst, near the frozen sea, formerly used to hang their dead relations 
and friends upon trees, to be eaten by ravenous birds, to purify them. But the Americans seem evidently to have 
derived their copy from the Israelites, as to the place where they bury their dead, and the method of their funeral 
ceremonies, as well as the persons with whom they are buried, and the great expenses they are at in their burials. 
The Hebrews buried near the city of J erusalem, by the brook Kedron; and they frequently hewed their tombs out 
of rocks, or buried their dead opposite to their doors, implying a silent lesson of friendship, and a pointing caution 
to live well. They buried all of one family together; to which custom David alludes, when he says, “ Gather me 
not with the wicked;” and Sophronius said, with regard to the like form, “Noli me tangere, heretice, neque vivum 
nec mortuum.” ‘But they buried strangers apart by themselves, and named the place, Kebhare galeya, ‘the burying- 
place of strangers’. And these rude Americans are so strongly partial to the same custom, that they imagine if any 
of us were buried in the domestic tombs of their kindred, without being adopted, it would be very criminal in them 
to allow it; and that our spirits would haunt the eaves of their houses at night, and cause several misfortunes to 
their family. “In resemblance to the Hebrew custom of embalming their dead, the Choktah treat the corpse just as 
the religious Levite did his beloved concubine, who was abused by the Benjamites ; for having placed the dead on a 
high scaffold stockaded, round, at the distance of twelve yards from his house, opposite to the door, the whole family 
convene there at the beginning of the fourth moon after the interment, to lament and feast together: after wailing 
a while on the mourning benches, which stand on the east side of the quadrangular tomb, they raise and bring out 
the corpse, and while the feast is getting ready, a person whose office it is, and properly called the bone-picker, 
dissects it, as if it was intended for the shambles in the time of a great famine, with his sharp-pointed bloody knife. 
He continues busily employed in his reputed sacred office, till he has finished the task, and scraped all the flesh off 
the bones; which may justly be called the Choktah method of embalming their dead. Then, they carefully place 
the bones in a kind of small chest, in their natural order, that they may with ease and certainty be some time after- 
ward reunited, and proceed to strike up asong of lamentation, with various wailing tunes and notes : afterwards 
they join as cheerfully in the funeral feast, as if their kinsman was only taking his usual sleep. Having regaled 

360 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

themselves with a plentiful variety, they go along with those beloved relics of their dead, in solemn procession, 
lamenting with doleful notes, till they arrive at the bone-house, which stands in a solitary place apart from the 
town; then they proceed around it, much after the manner of those who performed the obsequies of the Chikkasah 
chieftain, already described, and there deposit their kinsman’s bones to lie alongside of his kindred bones, till in 
due time they are revived by Ishtohoollo Aba, that he may repossess his favourite place. Those bone-houses are 
scaffolds raised on durable pitch-pine forked posts, in the form of a house covered a-top, but open at both ends. I 
saw three of them in one of their towns, pretty near each other; the place seemed to be unfrequented: each house 
contained the bones of one tribe separately, with the hieroglyphical figures of the family on each of the old-shaped 
arks: they reckon it irreligious to mix the bones of a relation with those of a stranger, as bone of bone and flesh 
of the same flesh should be always joined together; and much less will they thrust the body of their beloved 
kinsman into the abominable tomb of a hateful enemy. I observed a ladder fixed in the ground opposite to the 
middle of the broadside of each of those dormitories of the dead, which was made out of a broad board, and stood 
considerably bent over the sacred repository, with the steps on the inside. On the top was the carved image of a 
dove, with its wings stretched out, and its head inclining down, as if earnestly viewing or watching over the bones of 
the dead; and from the top of the ladder to almost the surface of the earth, there hung a chain of grape-vines 
twisted together in circular links; and the same likewise at their domestic tombs. Now the dove, after the Deluge, 
became the emblem of Rowah, the holy spirit, and in process of time was deified by the heathen world, instead of 
the divine person it typified: the vine was likewise a symbol of fruitfulness, both in the animal and vegetable world. 
To perpetuate the memory of any remarkable warriors killed in the woods, I must here observe, that every Indian 
traveller, as he passes that way, throws a stone on the place, according as he likes or dislikes the occasion or manner 
of the death of the deceased. In the woods we often see innumerable heaps of small stones in those places, where, 
according to tradition, some of their distinguished people were either killed or buried, till the bones could be 
gathered: there they add Pelion to Ossa, still increasing each heap, as a lasting monument and honour to them, 
and an incentive to great actions. Mercury was a favourite god with the heathens, and had various employments ; 
one of which was to be god of the roads, to direct travellers aright, from which the ancient Romans derived their 
Dii Compitales or Dei Viales, which they likewise placed at the meeting of roads, and in the high-ways, and 
esteemed them the patrons and protectors of travellers. The early heathens placed great heaps of stones at the 
dividing of the roads, and consecrated those heaps to him by unction*, and other religious ceremonies. And in 
honour to him, travellers threw a stone to them, and thus exceedingly increased their bulk: this might occasion 
Solomon to compare the giving honour to a fool, to throwing a stone into a heap, as each were alike insensible of the 
obligation; and to cause the Jewish writers to call this custom a piece of idolatrous worship. But the Indians place 
those heaps of stones where there are no dividings of the roads, nor the least trace of any road-. And then they 
observe no kind of religious ceremony, but raise those heaps merely to do honour to their dead, and incite the 
living to the pursuit of virtue. Upon which account, it seems to be derived from the ancient Jewish custom of 
zncreasing Absalom’s tomb; for the last things are easiest retained, because people repeat them oftenest, and imitate 

them most. 

* They rubbed the principal stone of each of those heaps all over with oil, as a sacrifice of libation; by which means they often became black 
and slippery ; as Arnobius relates of the idols of his time: ‘“ Lubricatum lapidem, et ex olivi unguine sordidatum, tanquam inesset vis presens, 
adulabar.”—Arnob. advers. Gent. 

‘+ Laban and Jacob raised a heap of stones, as a lasting monument of their friendly covenant. And Jacob called the heap galeed, “ the heap of 
witness.” Gen. xxxi. 47. 

Though the Cheerake do not now collect the bones of their dead, yet they continue to raise and multiply heaps of stones, as monuments for their 
dead; this the English army remembers well, for in the year 1760, having marched about two miles along a woodland path, beyond a hill where 
they had seen a couple of these reputed tombs, at the war-woman’s creek, they received so sharp a defeat by the Cheerake, that another such must 
have inevitably ruined the whole army. 

Many of those heaps are to be seen in all parts of the continent of North America; where stones could not be had, they raised large hillocks or 
mounds of earth, wherein they carefully deposited the bones of their dead, which were placed either in earthen vessels or in a simple kind of arks, 
or chests. Although the Mohawk Indians may be reasonably expected to have lost their primitive customs, by reason of their great intercourse 
with foreigners, yet I was told by a gentleman of distinguished character, that they observe the aforesaid sepulchral custom to this day, insomuch 
that when they are performing that kindred-duty, they cry out, Mahoom taguyn kameneh, “‘ Grandfather, I cover you.” 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 361 

ARGUMENT XxX. 

The Jewish records tell us, that their women mourned for the loss of their deceased husbands, and were reckoned 
vile by the civil law, if they married in the space, at least, of ten months after their death. In resemblance to that 
custom, all the Indian widows, by an established strict penal law, mourn for the loss of their deceased husbands ; 
and among some tribes for the space of three or four years. But the East India pagans forced the widow to sit on 
a pile of wood, and hold the body of her husband on her knees, to be consumed together in the flames. The 
Muskohge widows are obliged to live a chaste single life for the tedious space of four years; and the Chikkasah 
women, for the term of three, at the risk of the law of adultery being executed against the recusants. Every evening, 
and at the very dawn of day, for the first year of her widowhood, she is obliged through the fear of shame to lament 
her loss in very intense audible strains. As Yah ah signifies weeping, lamenting, mourning, or ‘Ah God’; and as the 
widows and others, in their grief, bewail and cry Yo He (ta) Wah, Yohetaweh; Yohetaha Yohetahe, the origin is 
sufficiently clear. For the Hebrews reckoned it so great an evil to die unlamented, like Jehoiakim, Jer. xxii. 18, 
«who had none to say, Ah, my brother! Ah, my sister! Ah, my Lord! Ah, his glory!” that it is one of the four 
judgements they pray against, and it is called the burial of an ass. With them, burying signified lamenting, and so 
the Indian widows direct their mournful cries to the Author of life and death, insert a plural note in the sacred name, 
and again transpose the latter, through an invariable religious principle, to prevent a profanation. Their law compels 
the widow, through the long term of her weeds, to refrain all public company and diversions, at the penalty of an 
adulteress ; and likewise to go with flowing hair, without the privilege of oil to anoint it. The nearest kinsmen of 
the deceased husband keep a very watchful eye over her conduct in this respect. The place of interment is also 
calculated to wake the widow’s grief, for he is entombed in the house under her bed. And if he was a war-leader, 
she is obliged for the first moon to sit in the day-time under his mourning war-pole*, which is decked with all his 
martial trophies, and must be heard to cry with bewailing notes. But none of them are fond of that month’s 
supposed religious duty: it chills, or sweats, and wastes them so exceedingly; for they are allowed no shade or 
shelter. This sharp rigid custom excites the women to honour the marriage state, and keeps them obliging to their 
husbands, by anticipating the visible sharp difficulties which they must undergo for so great aloss. The three or 
four years monastic life, which she lives after his death, makes it her interest to strive by every means to keep in 
his lamp of life, be it ever so dull and worthless; if she is able to shed tears on such an occasion, they often 
proceed from self-love. We can generally distinguish between the widow’s natural mourning voice, and her tuneful 
laboured strain. She doth not so much bewail his death, as her own recluse life and hateful state of celibacy ; which 
to many of them is as uneligible as it was to the Hebrew ladies, who preferred death before the unmarried state, 
and reckoned their virginity a bewailable condition, like the state of the dead. 

The Choktah Indians hire mourners to magnify the merit and loss of their dead, and if their tears cannot be seen 
to flow, their shrill voices will be heard to cry, which answers the solemn chorus a great deal better{. However, 
they are no way churlish of their tears, for I have seen them on the occasion pour them out like fountains of water; 
but after having thus tired themselves, they might with equal propriety have asked bystanders, in the manner of the 
native Irish, Ara ci fuar bass, “ And who is dead?” They formerly dressed their heads with black moss on those solemn 
occasions; and the ground adjacent to the place of interment they now beat with laurel bushes, the women having 
their hair disheveled: the first of which customs seems to be derived from the Hebrew custom of wearing sackcloth 
at their funeral solemnities, and on other occasions, when they afflicted their souls before God, to which divine writ 
often alludes in describing the blackness of the skies ; and the laurel, being an evergreen, is a lively emblem of the 
eternity of the human soul, and the pleasant state it enters into after death, according to antiquity. They beat it on 
the ground to express their sharp pungent grief; and, perhaps, to imitate the Hebrew trumpeters for the dead, in 
order to make as striking a sound as they possibly can on so doleful an occasion. ‘Though the Hebrews had no 
positive precept that obliged the widow to mourn the death of her husband or to continue her widowhood for any 

* The war-pole is a small peeled tree painted red, the top and boughs cut off short: it is fixt in the ground opposite to his door, and all: his 
implements of war are hung on the short boughs of it till they rot. 

+ Jer.ix.17, 19. Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Consider ye, and call for the mourning women, that they may come ; and send for cunning women, 
that they may come......For a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion, How are we spoiled! we are greatly confounded, because we have forsaken 
the land, because our dwellings have cast us out. 

4Z, 

362 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

time, yet the gravity of their tempers, and their scrupulous nicety of the law of purity, introduced the observance of 
those modest and religious customs, as firmly under the penalty of shame, as if they bore the sanction of law*. In 
imitation of them, the Indians have copied so exactly, as to compel the widow to act the part of the disconsolate 
dove, for the irreparable loss of her mate. Very different is the custom of other nations: the Africans, when any 
of their head men die, kill all their slaves, their friends that were dearest to them, and all their wives whom they 
loved best, that they may accompany and serve them in the other world, which is a most diabolical Ammonitish 
sacrifice of human blood. The East India widows may refuse to be burned on their husbands’ funeral piles, with 
impunity, if they become prostitutes, or public women to sing and dance at marriages, or on other occasions of 
rejoicing. How superior is the virtuous custom of the savage Americans concerning female chastity during the 
time of their widowhood! The Indian women mourn three moons for the death of any female of their own family 
or tribe. During that time, they are not to anoint or tie up their hair; neither is the husband of the deceased 
allowed, when the offices of nature do not call him, to go out of the house, much less to join any company; and in 
that time of mourning he often lies among the ashes. The time being expired, the female mourners meet in the 
evening of the beginning of the fourth moon, at the house where their female relation is entombed, and stay there 
till morning, when the nearest surviving old kinswoman crops their fore-locks pretty short. This they call ehd 
wntandah, ‘the women have mourned the appointed time’. ho signifies ‘a woman’, ina ‘finished by divine 
appointment’, ad ‘moving’ or walking, and ah, their note of grief, sorrow, or mourning: the name expresses, 
and the custom is a visible certificate of, their having mourned the appointed time for their dead. When they have 
eaten and drank together, they return home by sunrise, and thus finish their solemn Vah-ah. 

ARGUMENT XXI. 

The surviving brother, by the Mosaic law,. was to raise seed to a deceased brother who left a widow childless, to 
perpetuate his name and family, and inherit his goods and estate, or be degraded ; and, if the issue he begat was a 
male child, it assumed the name of the deceased. The Indian custom looks the very same way; yet it is in this as 
in their law of blood, the eldest brother can redeem. Although a widow is bound, by a strict penal law, to mourn 
the death of her husband for the space of three or four years, yet, if she be known to lament her loss with a sincere 
heart for the space of a year, and her circumstances of living are so strait as to need a change of her station, and 
the elder brother of her deceased husband lies with her, she is thereby exempted from the law of mourning, has a 
liberty to tie up her hair, anoint and paint herself in the same manner as the Hebrew widow, who was refused by 
the surviving brother of her deceased husband, became free to marry whom she pleased. The warm-constitutioned 
young widows keep their eye so intent on this mild beneficent law, that they frequently treat their elder brothers-in- 
law with spirituous liquors till they intoxicate them, and thereby decoy them to make free, and so put themselves 
out of the reach of that mortifying law. If they are disappointed, as it sometimes happens, they fall on the men, 
calling them hoobuk wakse, or skoobdle, hassé kroopha, ‘eunuchus preputio detecto, et pene brevi’; the most 
degrading of epithets. Similar to the Hebrew ladies, who, on the brother's refusal, loosed his shoe from his foot, and 
spit in his face, (Deut. xxv. 9.) ; and, as some of the Rabbies tell us, they made water in his shoe, and threw it with 
despite in his face, and then readily went to bed to any of his kinsmen, or most distant relations of the same line 
that she liked best ; as Ruth married Boaz. Josephus, to palliate the fact, says she only beat him with the shoe 
over his face. David probably alludes to this custom, Psalm lx. 8, “ Over Edom I will cast out my shoe,” or de- 
traction. Either by corruption, or misunderstanding that family-kissing custom of the Hebrews, the corrupt Chee- 
rake marry both mother and daughter at once; though, unless in this instance, they and all the other savage nations 
observe the degrees of consanguinity in a stricter manner than the Hebrews, or even the Christian world. The 
Cheerake do not marry their first or second cousins ; and it is very observable, that the whole tribe reckon a friend 
in the same rank with a brother, both with regard to marriage and any other affair in social life. This seems to 
evince that they copied from the stable and tender friendship between Jonathan and David ; especially as the Hebrews 
had legal, or adopted, as well as natural brothers. 

* Theodosius tells us, Lib. 1. Legum de secundis Nuptiis, that women were infamous by the civil law, who married a second time before a year, 
or at least ten months-were expired. 

©9 
=P 
es) 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 

ARGUMENT XXII. 

When the Israelites gave names to their children or others, they chose such appellatives as suited best with their 
circumstances and the times. This custom was as early as the Patriarchal age; for we find Abram was changed 
into Abraham; Sarai into Sarah, Jacob into Israel; and afterwards Oshea, Joshua, Solomon, Jedidiah, &c. &c. 
This custom is a standing rule with the Indians, and I never observed the least deviation from it. They give their 
children names expressive of their tempers, outward appearances, and other various circumstances; a male child 
they will call choola, ‘the fox’; and a female, pakahle, ‘the blossom, or flower’. The father and mother of the 
former are called choollingge, and choollishke, ‘the father and mother of the fox’; in like manner, those of the latter, 
pakahlingge, and pakahlishke; for ingge signifies the father, and zshke the mother. In private life they are so 
termed till that child dies; but after that period they are called by the name of their next surviving child, or if they 
have none, by their own name ; and it is not known they ever mention the name of the child that is extinct. They 
only faintly allude to it, saying, “the one that is dead,” to prevent new grief, as they had before mourned the ap- 
pointed time. They who have no children of their own, adopt others, and assume their names, in the manner 
already mentioned. This was of divine appointment, to comfort the barren, and was analogous to the kindred 
method of counting with the Hebrews: instead of surnames, they used in their genealogies the name of the father, 
and prefixed ben, ‘a son’, to the person’s name. And thus the Greeks in early times. No nation used surnames, 
except the Romans after their league and union with the Sabines. And they did not introduce that custom with 
the least view of distinguishing their families, but as a politic seal to their strong compact of friendship; for as the 
Romans prefixed Sabine names to their own, the Sabines took Roman names in like manner. A specimen of the 
Indian war-names, will illustrate this argument with more clearness. 

They crown a warrior who has killed a distinguished enemy, with the name, Vanasabe, ‘the buffalo-killer’ ; 
yanasa is a buffalo, compounded of Yah, the divine essence, and asa, ‘there, or here is’, as formerly mentioned ; 
and ade is their constant war-period, signifying, by their rhetorical figure, ‘ one who kills another’. It signifies also 
to murder a person, or beat him seyerely. This proper name signifies, the prosperous killer, or destroyer of the 
buffalo or strong man; it cannot possibly be derived from MAN (abeh), which signifies good-will, brotherly love, or 
tender affection; but from 91~ (aée/e), grief, sorrow, or mourning, as an effect of that hostile act. noah, with the 
Indians, is the name of a rambling person, or one of unsettled residence, and anoah ookproo, is literally a bad 
rambling person, ‘a renegadoe’: likewise anoah ookproo’shto makes it a superlative, on account of the abbreviation 
of Ishto, one of the divine names which they subjoin. In like manner, \Voade is the war-name of a person who kills 
a rambling enemy, or one detached as a scout, spy, or the like. It consists of the patriarchal name, /Voah, and abe, 
‘to kill’, according to the Hebrew original, of which it is a contraction, to make it smoother, and to indulge a 
rapidity of expression. There is so strong an agreement between this compounded proper name, and two ancient 
Hebrew proper names, that it displays the greatest affinity between the warfaring red and white Hebrews ; especially 
as it so clearly alludes to the divine history of the first homicide, and the words are adapted to their proper signifi- 
cations. 

Because the Choktah did not till lately trim their hair, the other tribes, through contempt of their custom, called 
them Pas’ Pharauh, ‘long hair’, and they, in return, gave them the contemptuous name, Shoobdle’shtd, ‘very naked, 
or bare heads’, compounded of skooba, ale, and Ishto: the same word, or waksishto, with hasseh prefixed, 
expresses the penem preputio detecto; which shows they lately retained a glimmering, though confused notion, of 
the law of circumcision, and the prohibition of not polling their hair. They call a crow, pharah; and pas’phardabe 
is the proper name of a warrior who killed an enemy wearing long hair. It is a triple compound from pdséh, 
‘the hair of one’s head’, pharaah ‘long’, and ade, ‘killing’, which they crowd together. They likewise say, their 
tongue is not pharakto, ‘forked’, thereby alluding probably to the formerly hateful name of the Egyptian kings, 
Pharaoh. 

_ When the Indians distinguish themselves in war, their names are always compounded, drawn from certain roots 
suitable to their intention, and expressive of the characters of the persons; so that their names joined together, often 
convey a clear and distinct idea of several circumstances, as of the time and place where the battle was fought, of 
the number and rank of their captives, and the slain. The following is a specimen: one initiating in war-titles, is 
called Tannip-Abe, ‘a killer of the enemy’ ; he who kills a person carrying a kettle, is crowned Soonak-Abe- Tuska ; 

364. ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

the first word signifies a kettle, and the last a warrior. Minggdshtabe signifies ‘one who killed a very great chieftain’, 
compounded of mngo, ash, and abe. Pae-Mdshtabe is one in the way of war-gradation, or below the highest in 
rank, pae signifying ‘far off’. TZtsshu Mashtabe is the name of a warrior who kills the war-chieftain’s waiter 
carrying the beloved ark. Shulashummashtabe, the name of the late Choktah great war-leader, our firm friend Red- 
shoes, is compounded of shulass’, ‘Maccaseenes’, or deer-skin shoes, humma ‘red’, ash ‘the divine fire: 7’ is 
inserted for the sake of a bold sound, or to express the multiplicity of the exploits he performed in killing the 
enemy. In treating of their language, I observed, they end their proper names with a vowel, and contract their 
war-titles, to give more smoothness and a rapidity of expression. Ltehk is the general name they give to any 
female creature; but by adding their constant war-period to it, it signifies ‘weary’, as chetehkabe, ¢ you are weary’: 
to make it a superlative, they say chetehkabe-o, or chetehkabeshto. The Cheerake call a dull stalking fellow, 
Sooreh, ‘the turkey-buzzard’, and one of an ill temper, Kana Cheesteche, ‘the wasp’, or a person resembling the 
dangerous Canaan rabbit, being compounded of the abbreviated name of Canaan, and cheesto ‘a rabbit’, which the 
Israelites were not to meddle with. One of our chief traders, who was very loquacious, they called Sekakee, ‘the 
grass-hopper’, derived from sekako, ‘to make haste’. 'To one of a hoarse voice, they gave the name, Kanoona, ‘ the 
bull-frog’. The Katahba Indians call their chief old interpreter, on account of his obscene language, Lmate-Atkkhe, 
‘the smock-interpreter’. The ‘raven’ is one of the Cheerake favourite war-names. Carolina and Georgia remember 
Quorinnah, « the raven’, of Huwhase.town; he was one of the most daring warriors of the whole nation, and by far 
the most intelligent; and this name, or war-appellative, admirably suited his well-known character. Though with al/ 
the Indian nations the raven is deemed an ¢mpure bird, yet they have a kind of sacred regard to it, whether from the 
traditional knowledge of Noah’s employing it while he was in the ark, or from that bird having fed Elijah in the 
wilderness, (as some suppose,) cannot be determined ; however, with our supposed red Hebrews the name points out 
an indefatigable, keen, successful warrior. 

ARGUMENT XXIII. 

Although other resemblances of the Indian rites and customs to those of the Hebrews might be pointed out, not 
to seem tedious, I proceed to the last argument of the origin of the Indian Americans, which shall be from their 
own traditions, from the accounts of our English writers, and from the testimonies which the Spanish writers have 
given, concerning the primitive inhabitants of Peru and Mexico. 

The Indian tradition says, that their forefathers in very remote ages came from a far distant country, where all the 
people were of one colour; and that in process of time they moved eastward to their present settlements. So that 
what some of our writers have asserted is not just, who say the Indians affirm, that there were originally three dif- 
ferent tribes in those countries, when the supreme chieftain, to encourage swift running, proposed a proportionable 
reward of distinction to each, as they excelled in speed in passing a certain distant river; as, that the first should be 
polished white, the second red, and the third black; which took place accordingly after the race was over. This 
story sprung from the innovating superstitious ignorance of the popish priests to the south-west of us. Our own 
Indian tradition is literal, and not allegorical, and ought to be received; because people who have been long 
separated from the rest of mankind must know their own traditions the best, and could not be deceived in so 
material and frequently repeated an event. Though they have been disjoined through different interests, time 
immemorial, yet (the rambling tribes of northern Indians excepted,) they aver that they came over the Missisippi 
from the westward, before they arrived at their present settlements. This we see verified by the western old towns 
they have left behind them; and by the situation of their old beloved towns, or places of refuge, lying about a west 
course from each different nation. Such places in Judea were chiefly built in the most remote parts of the country ; 
and the Indians deem those only as beloved towns where they first settled. This tradition is corroborated by a 
current report of the old Chikkasah Indians to our traders, “that about forty years since, there came from Mexico 
some of the old Chikkasah nation, (the Chichemicas, according to the Spanish accounts,) in quest of their brethren, 
as far north as the Aquahpah nation, about 130 miles above the Nachee old towns, on the south side of the 
Missisippi; but through French policy, they were either killed or sent back, so as to prevent their opening a 
brotherly intercourse, as they had proposed.” And it is worthy of notice, that the Muskohge cave, out of which 
one of their politicians persuaded them their ancestors formerly ascended to their present terrestrial abode, lies in 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 365 

the Nanne Hamgeh old town, inhabited by the Missisippi Nachee Indians, which is one of thé most western parts 
of their old-inhabited country. 

I hope I shall be excused in reciting their ancient oral tradition from father to son to the present time. They 
say, that one of their cunning old religious men, finding that religion did not always thrive best, resolved with 
himself to impose on his friends’ credulity, and alter in some respects their old tradition; he accordingly pretended 
to have held for a long time a continual intercourse with their subterranean progenitors, in a cave above 600 miles 
to the westward of Charlestown in South Carolina, adjoining to the old Chikkasah trading path; this people were 
then possest of everything convenient for human life, and he promised them fully to supply their wants, in a 
constant manner, without sweating in the field; the most troublesome of all things to manly brisk warriors. He 
insisted, that all who were desirous of so natural and beneficial a correspondence, should contribute large presents, 
to be delivered on the embassy, to their brethren, terre filii, to clear the old chain of friendship from the rust it had 
contracted through the fault of cankering time. He accordingly received presents from most of the people, to 
deliver them to their beloved subterranean kindred; but it seems, they shut up the mouth of the cave, and detained 
him there in order to be purified. The old waste towns of the Chikkasah lie to the west and south-west, from 
where they have lived since the time we first opened a trade with them; on which course they formerly went to 
war over the Missisippi, because they knew it best, and had disputes with the natives of those parts, when they 
first came from thence. Wisdom directed them then to connive at some injuries, on account of their itinerant camp 
of women and children; for their tradition says, it consisted of ten thousand men, besides women and children, 
when they came from the west, and passed over the Missisippi. The fine breed of running wood horses they brought 
with them, were the present Mexican or Spanish barbs. They also aver, that their ancestors cut off and despoiled 
the greatest part of a caravan loaded with gold and silver; but the carriage of it proved so troublesome to them, 
that they threw it into a river where it could not benefit the enemy. If we join together these circumstances, it 
utterly destroys the fine Peruvian and Mexican temples of the sun, &c., which the Spaniards have lavishly painted 
from their own fruitful imaginations, to show their own capacity of writing, though at the expense of truth; and to 
amuse the gazing distant world, and lessen our surprise at the sea of reputed heathenish blood, which their avaricious 
tempers, and flaming superstitious zeal, prompted them to spill. 

If any English reader have patience to search the extraordinary volumes of the Spanish writers, or even those of 
His Catholic Majesty’s chief historiographer, he will not only find a wild portrait, but a striking resemblance and 
unity of the civil and martial customs, the religious rites and traditions, of the ancient Peruvians and Mexicans, and 
the North Americans, according to the manner of their moresque paintings; likewise, the very national name of 
the primitive Chikkasah, which they style Chichemicas, and whom they repute to have been the first inhabitants of 
Mexico. However, I lay little stress upon Spanish testimonies, for time and ocular proof have convinced us of the 
laboured falsehood of almost all their historical narrations concerning every curious thing relative to South America. 
They were so divested of those principles inherent to honest inquirers after truth, that they have recorded them- 
selves to be a tribe of prejudiced bigots, striving to aggrandize the Mahometan valour of about nine hundred 
spurious Catholic Christians, under the patronage of their favourite saint, as persons by whom Heaven designed to 
extirpate those two great nominal empires of pretended cannibals. They found it convenient to blacken the natives 
with ill names, and report them to their demi-god the mufti of Rome, as sacrificing every day a prodigious multitude 
of human victims to numerous idol-gods. The learned world is already fully acquainted with the falsehood of their 
histories; reason and later discoveries condemn them. Many years have elapsed since I first entered into Indian 
life, besides a good acquaintance with several southern Indians, who were conversant with the Mexican Indian rites 
and customs ; and it is incontrovertible, that the Spanish monks and jesuits, in describing the language, religion, and 
customs of the ancient Peruvians and Mexicans, were both unwilling and incapable to perform so arduous an 
undertaking with justice and truth. They did not converse with the natives as friends, but despised, hated, and 
murdered them, for the sake of their gold and silver ; and to excuse their own ignorance, and most shocking, cool, 
premeditated murders, they artfully described them as an abominable swarm of idolatrous cannibals offering human 
sacrifices to their various false deities, and eating of the unnatural victims. Nevertheless, from their own partial 
accounts, we can trace a near agreement between the civil and martial customs, the religious worship, traditions, 
dress, ornaments, and other particulars of the ancient Peruvians and Mexicans, and those of the present North 

American Indians. 
5 A 

366 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

Acosta tells us, that though the Mexicans have no proper name for God, yet they allow a supreme omnipotence 
and providence : his capacity was not sufficient to discover the former; however, the latter agrees with the present 
religious opinion of the English-American Indians, of an universal divine wisdom and government. The want of a 
friendly intercourse between our northern and southern Indians, has in length of time occasioned some of the former 
a little to corrupt or alter the name of the self-existing creator and preserver of the universe, as they repeat it in 
their religious invocations, YO He a An. But with what show of truth, consistent with the above concession, can 
Acosta describe the Mexicans as offering human sacrifices also to devils, and greedily feasting on the victims? We 
are told also that the Nauatalcas believe they dwelt in another region before they settled in Mexico; that they 
wandered eighty years in search of it, through a strict obedience to their gods, who ordered them to go in quest of 
new lands, that had such particular signs; that they punctually obeyed the divine mandate, and by that means found 
out and settled the fertile country of Mexico. This account corresponds with the Chikkasah tradition of settling 
in their present supposed holy land, and seems to have been derived from a compound tradition of Aaron's rod, and 
the ight or divine presence with the Israelites in the wilderness, when they marched. And probably the Mexican 
number of years was originally forty, instead of eighty. Lopez de Gomara tells us, that the Mexicans were so 
devout as to offer to the sun and earth a small quantity of every kind of meat and drink, before any of themselves 
tasted it; and that they sacrificed part of their corn, fruits, &c., in like manner; otherwise, they were deemed haters 
of, and contemned by, their gods. Is not this a confused Spanish picture of the Jewish daily sacrifice, and first- 
fruit-offering, as formerly observed? and which, as we have seen, are now offered up by the northern Indians, to the 
bountiful giver, the supreme holy spirit of fire, whom they invoke in that most sacred and awful song, YO He Wan, 
and loudly ascribe to him Hallelu-Yah, for his continued goodness to them. The Spanish writers say, that when 
Cortes approached Mexico, Montezuma shut himself up, and continued for the space of eight days in prayers and 
fasting; but to blacken him, and excuse their own diabolical butcheries, they assert he offered human sacrifices at 
the same time to abominable and frightful idols. But the sacrifices with more justice may be attributed to the 
Spaniards than to the Mexicans, as their narratives also are a sacrifice of truth itself. Montezuma and his people’s 
fastings, prayers, &c. were doubtless the same with those of the northern Indians, who on particular occasions, by 
separate fastings, ablutions, purgations, &c., seek to sanctify themselves, and so avert the ill effects of the divine 
anger, and regain the favour of the deity. They write, that the Mexicans offered to one of their gods, a’sacrifice 
compounded of some of all the seeds of their country, grinded fine, and mixed with the blood of children and of 
sacrificed virgins ; that they plucked out the hearts of those victims, and offered them as first-fruits to the idol; and 
that the warriors imagined the least relic of the sacrifice would preserve them from danger. They soon afterwards 
tell us of a temple of a quadrangular form, called Tewcalli, ‘Gods house’, and Chacalmua, ‘a minister of holy 
things’, who belonged to it. They likewise speak of “the hearth of God, the continual fire of God, the holy ark,” 
&c. If we cut off the jesuitical paintings of the unnatural sacrifice, the rest is consonant to what hath been observed 
concerning the North American Indians. And it is very obvious, the North and South American Indians are alike 
of vindictive tempers, putting most of their invading enemies that fall into their power to the fiery torture. The 
Spaniards, looking upon themselves as divine ambassadors, under the imperial signature of the Holy Lord of Rome, 
were excessively enraged against the simple native South Americans, because they tortured forty of their captivated 
people by reprisal, devoting them to the fire, and ate their hearts, according to the universal war-custom of our 
northern Indians, on the like occasion. The Spanish terror and hatred on this account, their pride, religious 
bigotry, and an utter ignorance of the Indian dialects, rites and customs, excited them thus to delineate the 
Mexicans; and equally hard names and unjust charges, the bloody members of their diabolical Inquisition used to 
bestow on those pretended heretics whom they gave over to be tortured and burnt by the secular power. But it is 
worthy of notice, the Spanish writers acknowledge that the Mexicans brought their human sacrifices from the 
opposite sea ; and did not offer up any of their own people; so that this was but the same as our North American 
Indians still practise, when they devote their captives to death; which is ushered in with ablutions and other methods of 
sanctifying themselves, as have been particularly described ; and they perform the solemnity with singing the sacred 
triumphal song, with beating of the drum, dances, and various sorts of rejoicings, through gratitude to the beneficent 
and divine author of success against their common enemy. By the description of the Portuguese writers, the 
Indian-Brazilian method of war, and of torturing their devoted captives, very nearly resembles the customs of our 
Indians. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 307 

Acosta, according to his usual ignorance of the Indian customs, says, that some in Wiesiosvanabesrced one another 
by whistling, on which he attempts to be witty, but notwithstanding the great contempt and surprise of the Spaniards 
at those Indians who whistled as they went, this whistle was no other than the war-whoop or a very loud and shrill 
shout, denoting death, or good or bad news, or bringing in captives from war. The same writer says they had three 
kinds of knighthood, with which they honoured the best soldiers; the chief of which was the red ribbon; the next 
the lion or tiger knight; and the meanest was the grey knight. He might with as much truth have added the 
turkey-buzzard knight, the sun-blind bat knight, and the night-owl knight. His account of the various gradations of 
the Indian war-titles, shows the unskillfulness of that voluminous writer, even in the first principles of his Indian 
subject, and how far we ought to rely on his marvellous works. The accounts the Spaniards formerly gave us of 
Florida and its inhabitants, are written in the same romantic strain with those of Mexico. Ramusius tells us that 
Alvaro Nunes and his company reported the Apalahchee Indians to be such a gigantic people, as to carry bows, thick 
as a man’s arm, and of eleven or twelve spans long, shooting with proportional force and direction. It seems they 
lived then a sober and temperate life, for Morgues says, one of their kings was three hundred years old; though 
Laudon reckons him only two hundred and fifty; and Morgues assures us, he saw this young Indian Methusalah’s 
father, who was fifty years older than his son, and that each of them was likely, by the common course of nature, to 
live thirty or forty years longer, although they had seen their fifth generation. Since that time they have so ex- 
ceedingly degenerated in height of body, largeness of defensive arms, and antediluvian longevity, that I am afraid. 
these early and extraordinary writers would scarcely know the descendants of those Apalahche Anakim, if they now 
saw them. They are at present the same as their dwarfish red neighbours; sic transit gloria mundi. 

Nicholaus Challusius paints. Florida full of winged serpents ; he affirms he saw one there, and that the old natives 
were very careful to get its head, on account of some supposed superstition. Ferdinando Soto tells us, that when he 
entered Florida he found a Spaniard (J. Ortez,) whom the natives had captivated during the space of twelve years; 
consequently he must have gained in that time sufficient skill in their dialect to give a true interpretation and 
account, and he assures us, that Ucita, the lord of the place, made that fellow “temple-keeper” to prevent the night- 
wolves from carrying away the dead corpse; that the natives worshiped the devil and sacrificed to him the life and 
blood of most of their captives; who spoke with them face to face, and ordered them to bring those offerings to 
quench his burning thirst. And we are told by Benzo, that when Soto died, the good-natured Cacique ordered two 
likely young Indians to be killed according to custom, to wait on him where he was gone. But the Christian 
Spaniards denied his death, and assured them he was the son of God, and therefore could not die. If we except the 
last sentence, which bears a just analogy to the presumption and arrogance of the popish priests and historians, 
time and opportunity have fully convinced us, ‘that all the rest is calumny and falsehood. It must be confessed, 
however, that none, even of the Spanish monks and friars, have gone so deep in the marvellous, as our own 
sagacious David Ingram: he assures us, “that he not only heard of very surprising animals in these parts of the 
world, but saw elephants, horses, and strange wild animals twice as big as our species of horses, formed like a grey- 
hound in their hinder parts; he saw likewise bulls with ears like hounds; and another surprising species of 
quadrupeds bigger than bears, without head or neck, but nature had fixed their eyes and mouths more securely in 
their breasts.” At the end of his monstrous ideal productions, he justly introduces the devil in the rear, sometimes 
assuming the likeness of a dog; at other times the shape of a calf, &c. Although this legendary writer has 
transcended the bounds of truth, yet where he is not emulous of outdoing the jesuitical romances, it would require 
a good knowledge of America to confute him in many particulars: this shows how little the learned world can rely 
on American narrators; and that the origin of the Indian Americans. is yet to be traced in a quite different path to 
what any of those hyperbolical or wild conjectural writers have prescribed. The Spaniards have given us many fine 
polished Indian orations, but they were certainly fabricated at Madrid; the Indians have no such ideas, or methods 
of speech, as they pretend to have copied from a faithful interpretation on the spot: however, they have religiously 
supported those monkish dreams, and which are the chief basis of their Mexican and Peruvian treaties. According 
to them, the Mexican arms was an eagle ona tunal or stone, with a bird in his talons, which may look at the. 
armorial ensign of Dan. And they say, the Mexicans worshiped Vitzliputzi, who promised them a land 
exceedingly plenty in riches and all other good things; on which account they set off in quest of the divine 
promise, four of their priests carrying their idol in a coffer of reeds, to whom he communicated his oracles, giving 
them laws at the same time, teaching them the ceremonies and sacrifices they should observe ; and. directed them 

368 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

when to march, and when to stay in camp, &c. Somuch might have been collected from them by signs and other 
expressive indications; for we are well assured, that the remote. uncorrupted part of the Mexicans still retain the 
same notions as our northern Indians, with regard to their arriving at, and settling in, their respective countries, 
living under a theocratic government, and having the divine war-ark as a most sacred seal of success to the beloved 
people against their treacherous enemies, if they strictly observe the /aw of purity, while they accompany it. This 
alone, without any reflection on the rest, is a good glass to show us, that the South and North American Indians 
are twin-born brothers; though the Spanish clergy, by their dark but fruitful inventions, have set them at a 
prodigious variance. 

Acosta tells us, that the Peruvians held a very extraordinary feast called Yéw, which they prepared themselves for, 
by fasting two days, not accompanying with their wives, nor eating salt-meat or garlic, nor drinking chica during 
that period; that they assembled all together in one place, and did not allow any stranger or beast to approach them; 
that they had clothes and ornaments which they wore only at that great festival ; that they went silently and sedately 
in procession, with their heads veiled, and drums heating, and thus continued one day and night; but the next day 
they danced and feasted; and for two days successively, their prayers and praises were heard. This is another strong 
picture of the rites of the Indian North Americans, during the time of their great festival, to atone for sin; and. 
with a little amendment, would exhibit a surprising analogy of sundry essential rites and customs of the Northern 
and South American Indians, which equally glance at the Mosaic system. Lerius tells us, that he was present at the 
triennial feast of the Caribbians, where a multitude of men, women and children were assembled; that they soon 
divided themselves into three orders, apart from each other, the women and children being strictly ordered to stay 
within, and to attend diligently to the singing ; that the men sung in one house He, He, He, while the others, in 
their separate houses, answered by a repetition of the same notes; that having thus continued a quarter of an hour, 
they all danced in three different rings, each with rattles, &c. And the natives of Sir Francis Drake’s New Albion 
were desirous of crowning him Alio, or Ofio, a name well known in North America, and hath an evident relation to 
the great beloved name. Had the former been endued with a proper capacity, and given a suitable attention to the 
Indian general law of purity, he would probably have described them singing Yo He Wah, Hallelu-Yah, &c., after 
the present manner of our North American red natives; and as giving proper names to persons and things from a 
religious principle, to express the relation they bore to the sacred four-lettered name. These writers report also, 
that the Mexicans sacrificed to the idol Z/aloc, ‘their god of water’, to give them seasonable rains for their crops ; 
and they tell us, that the high priest was anointed with holy oil, and dressed with pontifical ornaments peculiar to 
himself, when he officiated in his sacred function; that he was sworn to maintain their religion, rights and liberties, 
according to their ancient law; and to cause the sun to shine, and all their vegetables to be properly refreshed with 
gentle showers. If we throw down the “monkish idol god of water,” we here find a strong parity of religious 
customs and ceremonies, between the pretended prophets and high priests of the present northern Indians and the 
ancient Mexicans. 

Acosta tells us, that the Peruvians acknowledged a supreme God, and author of all things, whom they called 
Viracocha, and worshiped as the chief of all the gods, and honoured when they looked at the heavens or any of 
the celestial orbs; that for want of a proper name for that divine spirit of the universe, they, after the Mexican 
manner, described him by his attributes, as Pachacamae, ‘the Creator of heaven and earth’. But, though he hath 
described them possessed of these strong ideas of God, and to have dedicated a sacred house to the great first 
cause, bearing his divine prolific name, yet the Spanish priesthood have at the same time painted them as 
worshiping. the devil in the very same temple. Here and there a truth may be found in their writings; but, if we 
except the well-designed performance of Don Antonio de Ulloa, one duodecimo volume would have contained all the 
accounts of any curious importance, which the Spaniards have exhibited to the learned world, concerning the 
genuine rites and customs of the ancient Peruvians and Mexicans, ever since the seizure of those countries, and the 
horrid murders committed on the inhabitants. But among all the Spanish friars, Heronimo Roman was the greatest 
champion in hyperbolical writing. He has produced three volumes concerning the Indian American rites and 
ceremonies ; he stretches very far in his second part of the commonwealths of the world; but when he gets to Peru 
and Mexico, the distance of those remote regions enables him to exceed himself: beyond all dispute, the other 
writers of his black fraternity are only younger brethren, when compared to him, in the marvellous. His is the chief 
of all the Spanish romances of Peru and Mexico. He says, the Indian natives, from Florida to Panama, had little 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 369 

religion or policy ; and yet he affirms a few pages after, that they believed in one true, immortal and invisible God, 
reigning in Heaven, called Yocahuuagnamaorocoti ; and is so kind as to allow them images, priests and popes, their 
high priests being called papa in that language. The origin of images among them is accounted for in a dialogue 
he gives us between a shaking tree and one of the Indian priests: after a great deal of discourse, the tree ordered 
the priest to cut it down, and taught him how to make images thereof, and erect a temple. The tree was obeyed, 
and every year their votaries solemnized the dedication. The good man has laboured very hard for the images, and 
ought to have suitable applause for so useful an invention, as it shows the universal opinion of mankind, concerning 
idols and images. With regard to that long conjectural divine name, by which they expressed the one true God, 
there is not the least room to doubt, that the South Americans had the divine name Yohewah in as great purity as 
those of the North, especially as they were at the fountain head; adding to it occasionally some other strong 
compound words. He says also, that the metropolis of Cholola had as many temples as there were days in the year, 
and that one of them was the most famous in the world, the basis of the spire being as broad as a man could shoot 
with a cross bow, and the spire itself three miles high. The temples which the holy man speaks of, seem to have 
- been only the dwelling-houses of strangers, who incorporated with the natives, differing a little in their form of 
structure, according to the usual custom of our northern Indians; and his religious principles not allowing him to 
go near the reputed shambles of the devil, much less to enter the supposed territories of hell, he has done pretty well 
by them, in allowing them golden suns and moons, vestry-keepers, &c. The badness of his optic instruments, if 
joined with the supposed dimness of his sight, may plead in excuse for the spiral altitude, which he fixes at 
15,480 feet; for from what we know of the northern Indians, we ought to strike off the three first figures of its 
height, and the remaining 80 is very likely to have been the just height of the spire, alias the red-painted, great, 
war-pole. The same writer tells us that the Peruvian pontifical office belonged to the eldest son of the king, or 
some chief lord of the country; and that it devolved by succession. But he anoints him after a very solemn 
manner with an ointment which he carefully mixes with the blood of circumcised infants. This priest of war 
dealing so much in blood himself, without doubt suspected them of the like; though at the same time no Indian 
priest will either shed or touch human blood; but that they formerly circumcised may with great probability be 
allowed to the holy man. The temples of Peru were built on high grounds, or tops of hills, he says, and were 
surrounded with four circular mounds of earth the one rising gradually above the other, from the outermost circle ; 
and that the temple stood in the centre of the inclosed ground, built in a quadrangular form, having altars, &c. 
‘He has officiously obtruded the sun into it, perhaps because he thought it dark within. He describes another 
religious house, on the eastern part of that great inclosure, facing the rising sun, to which they ascended by six 
steps, where, in the hollow of a thick wall, lay the image of the sun, &c. This thick wall having an hollow part _ 
within it, was no other than their sanctum sanctorum, conformably to what I observed concerning the pretended 
holiest place of the Muskohge Indians. Any one who is well acquainted with the language, rites and customs of the 
North American Indians, can see with a glance when these monkish writers stumble on a truth, or ramble at large. 
Acosta says that the Mexicans observed their chief feast in the month of May, and that the nuns two days before 
mixed a sufficient quantity of beets with honey, and made an image of it. He trims up the idol very genteelly, 
and places it on an azure-coloured chair, every way becoming the scarlet-coloured pope. — He soon after introduces 
flutes, drums, cornets and trumpets, to celebrate the feast of Eupania Vitzliputzl, as he thinks proper to term it: 
on account of the nuns, he gives them pania, ‘ feminine bread’, instead of the masculine, pans, which he makes 
his nuns to distribute at this love-feast to the young men, in large pieces resembling great bones. When they 
receive them, they religiously lay them down at the feast of the idol, and call them the flesh and bones of the god 
Vitzliputzli. Then he brings in the priests veiled, with garlands on their heads, and chains of flowers about their 
necks, each of them strictly observing their place: if the inquisitive reader should desire to know how he discovered 
those garlands and flowery chains, (especially as their heads were covered, and they are secret in their religious 
ceremonies,) I must inform him, that Acosta wrought a kind of cotton or woollen cloth for them, much finer than 
silk, through which he might have easily seen them; besides, such a religious dress gave him a better opportunity 
of hanging a cross, and a string of beads afterwards round their necks. Next to those religious men, he ushers in a 
fine company of gods and goddesses, in imagery, dressed like the others, the people paying them divine worship ; 
this without doubt, is intended to support the popish Saint-Worship. Then he makes them sing and dance round the 
paste, and use several other ceremonies. And when the eyes are tired with viewing those wild circlings, he solemnly 
5B 

3{0 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

blesses and consecrates those morsels of paste, and thus makes them the real flesh and bones of the idol; which the 
people honour as gods. When he has ended his feast of transubstantiation, he sets his sacrificers to work, and 
orders them to kill and sacrifice more men than at any other festival, as he thinks proper to make this a greater 
carnival than any of the rest. When he comes to finish his bloody sacrifices, he orders the young men and women 
into two rows, directly facing each other, to dance and sing by the drums, in praise of the feast and the god; and he 
sets the oldest and the greatest men to answer the song, and dance around them in a great circle. This, with a 
little alteration, resembles the custom of the northern Indians. He says that all the inhabitants of the city and 
country came to this great feast,—that it was deemed sacrilegious in any person to eat of the honeyed paste, on this 
great festival-day, or to drink water till the afternoon, and that they earnestly advised those who had the 
use of reason to abstain from water till the afternoon, and carefully concealed it from the children during the time 
of this ceremony. But at the end of the feast, he makes the priests and ancients of the temple to break:the image 
of paste and consecrated rolls into many pieces, and give them to the people by the way of sacrament, according to 
the strictest rules of order, from the greatest and eldest, to the youngest and least, men, women and children; and 
he says they received it with bitter tears, great reverence, and a very awful fear, with other strong signs of devotion, 
saying at the same time, “they did eat the flesh and bones of their God.” He adds, that they who had sick people 
at home, demanded a piece of the said paste, and carried and gave it to them, with the most profound reverence and 
awful adoration ; that all who partook of this propitiating sacrifice were obliged to give a part of the seed of maiz, 
of which the idol was made; and then at the end of the solemnity, a priest of high authority preached to the people 
on their laws and ceremonies with a commanding voice and expressive gestures; and thus dismissed the assembly. 
Well may Acosta blame the devil in the manner he does, for introducing among the Mexicans so near a resemblance 
of the popish superstitions and idolatry. But whether shall we blame or pity this writer, for obscuring the truth 
with a confused heap of falsehoods? The above is however a curious Spanish picture of the Mexican passover, or 
annual expiation of sins, and of their second passover in favour of their sick people, and of paying their tithes, 
according to similar customs of our North American Indians. We are now sufficiently informed of the rites and 
customs of the remote and uncorrupt South Americans, by the Missisippi Indians, who have a communication with 
them both in peace and war. 

Ribault Laudon, describing the yearly festival of the Floridans, says, that the day before it began, the women 
sweeped out a great circuit of ground, where it was observed with solemnity ; that when the main body of the people 
entered the holy ground, they all placed themselves in good order, stood up painted, and decked in their best apparel, 
when three Jawas, or priests, with different paintings and gestures followed them, playing on musical instruments, 
and singing with a solemn voice, the others answering them; that when they made three circles in this manner, the 
men ran off to the woods, and the women staid weeping behind, cutting their arms with muscle-shells, and throwing 
the blood towards the sun; and that when the men returned, the three days’ feast was finished. This is another 
confused Spanish draught of the Floridan passover, or feast of love; and of their universal method of bleeding 

themselves after much exercise, which, according to the Spanish plan, they offered up to the sun. From these 

different writers, it is plain that where the Indians have not been corrupted by foreigners, their customs and religious 
worship are nearly alike; and also that every different tribe or nation of Indians, uses suchlike divine proper 
name and awful sounds as Yah-Wah, Hetovah, &c., being transpositions of the divine essential name as our northern 
Indians often repeat in their religious dances. As the sound of Yah-wah jarred in Laudon’s ear, he called it Java, 
in resemblance to the Syriac and Greek method of expressing the ¢etra-grammaton, from which Galatinus imposed 
it upon us, calling it Jehowah, instead of Yohewah. 

The Spanish writers tell us, that the Mexicans had a feast, and month, which they called Hueztozolt:, when the 
maiz was ripe; every man at that time bringing an handful to be offered at the temple, with a kind of drink called 
utuli, made out of the same grain. But they soon deck up an idol with roses, garlands, and flowers, and describe 
them as offering to it sweet gums, &c. Then they speedily dress a woman with the apparel of either the god or 
goddess of salt, which must be to season the human sacrifices, as they depicture them according to their own 
dispositions. But they soon change the scene, and bring*in the god of gain, in a rich temple dedicated to him, 
where the merchants apart sacrifice vast numbers of purchased captives. It often chagrines an inquisitive and 
impartial reader to trace the contradictions and chimerical inventions of those aspiring bigoted writers, who speak 
of what they did not understand, only by signs and a few chance words. The discerning reader can easily perceive 

ie 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. a7] 

them from what hath been already said, and must know that this Spanish mountain in labour is only the Indian 
first-fruit offering, according to the usage of our North American Indians. It is to be lamented that writers will 
not keep to matters of fact: some of our own historians have described the Mohawks as cannibals, and continually 
hunting after man’s flesh; with equal truth Diodorus Siculus, Strabo and others report that in Britain there were 
; formerly anthropophagi, ‘man-eaters’. Garcillasso de La Vega, another Spanish romancer, says, that the Peruvian 
shepherds worshiped the star called Lyra, as they imagined it preserved their flocks; but he ought first to have 
supplied them with flocks, for they had none except a kind of wild sheep, that kept in the mountains, and which are 
of so fetid a smell, that no creature is fond to approach them. ‘The same aspiring fictitious writer tells us, the 
Peruvians worshiped the Creator of the world, whom he is pleased to call Viracocha Pachuyacha ha hic: any person 
who is in the least acquainted with the rapid flowing manner of the Indian American dialects, will conclude from 
the wild termination that the former is not the Peruvian divine name. Next to this great Creator of the universe, 
he affirms they worshiped the sun; and next to the solar orb, they deified and worshiped thunder, believing it 
proceeded from a man in heaven, who had power over the rain, hail and thunder, and everything in the aerial regions ; 
and that they offered up sacrifices to it, but none to the universal Creator. To prefer the effect to the acknowledged 
prime cause, is contrary to the common reason of mankind, who adore that object which they esteem either the 
most beneficent or the most powerful. 

Monsieur Le Page Du Pratz tells us, he lived seven years among the Nachee Indians, about one hundred leagues 
up the Missisippi from New Orleans ; and in order to emulate the Spanish romances of the Indians, in his perfor- 
mance, he affirms their women are double-breasted, which he particularly describes ; and then following the Spanish 
copy he assures us, the highest rank of their nobles is called suns, and that they only attend the sacred and eternal 
fire; which he doubtless mentioned merely to introduce his convex lens, by which he tells us with a great air of 
confidence, he gained much esteem among them, as by the gift of it he enabled them to continue their holy fire, if 
it should casually be near extinguished. According to him, the Chikkasah tongue was the court language of the 
Missisippi Indians, and that it had not the letter R. The very reverse of which is the truth; for the French and all 
their red savages were at constant war with them, because of their firm connexion with the English, and hated their 
national name; and as to the language, they could not converse with them, as their dialects are so different from each 
other. I recited a long string of his well-known stories to a body of gentlemen well skilled in the languages, rites 
and customs of our East and West Florida Indians, and they agreed that the Koran did not differ more widely from 
the divine oracles, than the accounts of this writer from the genuine customs of the Indian Americans. 

The Spanish artists have furnished the savage war-chieftain, or their emperor Montezuma, with very spacious and 
beautiful palaces, one of which they raised on pillars of fine jasper, and another wrought with exquisite skill out of 
marble, jasper, and other valuable stones, with veins glistering like rubies: they have finished the roof with equal 
skill, composed of carved and painted cypress, cedar, and pine-trees, without any kind of nails. They should have 
furnished some of the chambers with suitable pavilions and beds of state; but the bedding and furniture in our 
northern Indian huts is the same with what they were pleased to describe in the wonderful Mexican palaces. In this 
they have not done justice to the grand red monarch, whom they raised up (with his 1000 women, or 3000 accord- 
ing to some,) only to magnify the Spanish power by overthrowing him. Montezuma, in an oration to his people at 
the arrival of the Spaniards, is said by Malvendar to have persuaded his people to yield to the power of His Catholic 
Majesty’s arms, for their own forefathers were strangers in that land, and brought there long before that period in a 
fleet. The emperor, who they pretend bore such universal arbitrary sway, is raised by their pens from the usual 
rank of a war-chieftain, to his imperial greatness: but despotic power is death to their ears, as it is destructive of 
their darling liberty and reputed theocratic government; they have no name for a subject, but say “the people.” 
In order to carry on the self-flattering war-romance, they began the epocha of that great fictitious empire, in the 
time of the ambitious and formidiable Montezuma, that their handful of heaven-favoured popish saints might have 
the more honour in destroying it: had they described it of a long continuance, they foresaw that the world would 
detect the fallacy, as soon as they learned the language of the pretended empire: correspondent to which, our own 
great emperor Powhatan of Virginia was soon dethroned. We are sufficiently informed by the rambling Missisippi 
Indians, that Motehshuma is a common high war-name of the South American leaders; and which the fate he is 
said to receive strongly corroborates. Our Indians urge with a great deal of vehemence, that as every one is 
promoted only by public virtue, and has his equals in civil and martial affairs, those Spanish books that have 

372 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

mentioned red emperors, and great empires in America, ought to be burnt in some of the remaining old years ac- 
cursed fire. And this Indian fixed opinion seems to be sufficiently confirmed by the situation of Mexico, as it is 
only about 315 miles from south to north, and narrower than 200 miles along the northern coast, and lies between 
Tlascala and Mechoacan, to the west of the former, and east of the latter, whence the Mexicans were continually 
harassed by those lurking swift-footed savages, who could secure their retreat home in the space of two or three 
days. When we consider the vicinity of those two inimical states to the pretended puissant empire of Mexico, 
which might have easily crushed them to pieces with her formidable armies, in order to secure the lives of the 
subjects and credit of the state, we may safely venture to affirm, from the long train of circumstances already 
exhibited, that the Spanish Peruvian and Mexican empires are without the least foundation in nature; and that the 
Spaniards defeated the tribe of Mexico (properly called Mechiko) &c. chiefly by the help of their red allies. 

In their descriptions of South America and its native inhabitants, they treat largely of heaven, hell, and purgatory; 
lions, salamanders, maids of honour, maids of penance, and their abbesses; men whipping themselves with cords ; 
idols, mattins, monastic vows, cloisters of young men, with a prodigious group of other popish inventions; and we 
must not forget to do justice to those industrious and sagacious observers who discovered two golgothas, or towers 
made of human skulls, plaistered with lime. Acosta tells us that Andrew de Topia assured him, he and Gonsola de 
Vimbria reckoned one hundred and thirty-six thousand human skulls in them. The temple dedicated to the air is 
likewise worthy of being mentioned, as they assert in the strongest manner, that five thousand priests served 
constantly in it, and obliged every one who entered to bring some human sacrifice; that the walls of it were an 
inch thick, and the floor a foot deep with black, dry, clotted blood. If connected herewith, we reflect, that beside 
this bloodthirsty god of the air, the Spaniards have represented them as worshiping a multitude of idol gods and 
goddesses, (no less than two thousand according to Lopez de Gomara,) and sacrificing to them chiefly human 
victims ; and that the friars are reported by a Spanish bishop of Mexico, in his letters of the year 1532, to have 
broken down twenty thousand idols, and desolated five hundred idol temples, where the natives sacrificed every 
year more than twenty thousand hearts of boys and girls; and that if the noblemen were burnt to ashes, they 
killed their cooks, butlers, chaplains and dwarfs *, and had a plenty of targets, maces and ensigns hurled into their 
funeral piles: this terrible slaughter points out to us clearly from their own accounts, that these authors either gave 
the world a continued chain of falsehoods, or those sacrifices and human massacres they boastingly tell us of, 
would have, long before they came, utterly depopulated Peru and Mexico. 

I shall now quote a little of their less romantic description, to confirm the account I have given concerning the 
genuine rites and customs of our North American Indians. The ornaments of the Indians of South and North 
America were formerly and still are alike, without the least difference, except in value. Those superficial writers 
agree that the men and women of Peru and Mexico wore golden ear-rings and bracelets around their necks and 
wrists; that the men wore rings of the same metal in their nose, marked their bodies with various figures, painted 
their faces red, and the women their cheeks, which seems to have been a very early and general custom. They tell 
us, that the coronation of the Indian kings, and instalment of their nobles, was solemnized with comedies, banquets, 
lights, &c., and that no plebeians were allowed to serve before their kings; they must be knights or noblemen. 
All those sounding high titles are only a confused picture of the general method of the Indians in crowning their 
warriors, performing their war-dances, and esteeming those fellows as old women who never attended the reputed 
holy ark with success for the beloved brethren. Don Antonio de Ulloa informs us, that some of the South 
American natives cut the lobes of their ears, and for a considerable time fastened small weights to them, in order to 
lengthen them; that others cut holes in their upper and under lips; through the cartilage of the nose, their chins, 
and jaws, and either hung or thrust through them such things as they most fancied, which also agrees with the 
ancient customs of our Northern Indians. Emanuel de Moraes and Acosta affirm that the Brasilians marry in their 
own family or tribe. And Jo. de Laet. says, they call their uncles and aunts, “fathers and mothers,” which is a 
custom of the Hebrews, and of all our North American Indians ; and he assures us they mourn very much for their 
dead; and that their clothes are like those of the early Jews. Ulloa assures us that the South American Indians 
have no other method of weaving carpets, quilts, and other stuffs, but to count the threads one by one, when they 
are passing the woof; that they spin cotton and linen, as their chief manufacture, and paint their cloth with the 

* With regard to Indian dwarfs, I never heard of, or saw any in the northern nations, but one in Ishtatoe, a northern town of the middle pe of 

the Cheerake country, and he was a great beloved man. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 373 

images of men, beasts, birds, fishes, trees, flowers, &c., and that each of those webs was adapted to one certain use, 
without being cut, and that their patience was equal to so arduous a task. According to this description, there is 
not the least disparity between the ancient North American method of manufacturing, and that of the South 
Americans. Acosta writes, that the clothes of the South American Indians are shaped like those of the ancient 
Jews, being a square little cloak, and a little coat; and the Rev. Mr. Thorowgood, anno 1650, observes, that this 
is a proof of some weight in showing their original descent ; especially to such who pay a deference to Seneca’s 
parallel arguments of the Spaniards having settled Italy ; for the old mode of dress is universally alike among 
the Indian Americans. Liaet, in his description of America, and Escarbotus, assure us, they often heard the South 
American Indians to repeat the sacred word Halleluiah, which made them admire how they first attained it. And 
Malvenda says, that the natives of St. Michael had tombstones, which the Spaniards digged up, with several 
ancient Hebrew characters upon them, as, “ Why is God gone away?” and “He is dead, God knows.” Had his 
curiosity induced him to transcribe the epitaph, it would have given more satisfaction; for, as they yet repeat the 
divine essential name, Yo he (ta) Wah, so as not to profane it, when they mourn for their dead, it is probable 
they could write or engrave it, after the like manner, when they first arrived on this main continent. 

We are told that the South American Indians have a firm hope of the resurrection of their bodies at a certain 
period of time; and that on this account they bury their most valuable treasures with their dead, as well as the 
most useful conveniencies for future domestic life, such as their bows and arrows; and when they saw the Spaniards 
digging up their graves for gold and silver, they requested them to forbear scattering the bones of their dead in that 
manner, lest it should prevent their being raised and united again*. Monsieur de Poutrincourt says, that when the 
Canada Indians saluted him, they said Ho Ho Ho; but as we are well assured they express Yo He a Ah in the 
time of their festivals and other rejoicings, we have reason to conclude he made a very material mistake in setting 
down the Indian solemn blessing or invocation. He likewise tells us, that the Indian women will not marry on the 
graves of their husbands, i. e. “soon after their decease,” but wait a long time before they even think of a second 
husband ; that if the husband was killed, they would neither enter into a second marriage nor eat flesh till his 
blood had been revenged; and that after child-bearing they observe the Mosaic law of purification, shutting up 
themselves from their husbands: for the space of forty days. Peter Martyr writes, that the Indian widow married 
the brother of her deceased husband, according to the Mosaic law; and he says, the Indians worship that God 
who created the sun, moon, and all invisible things, and who gives them everything that is good. He affirms, the 
Indian priests had chambers in the temple, according to the custom of the Israelites, by divine appointment, as 
1 Chron. ix. 26, 27 ; and that there were certain places in it which none but their priests could enter, i. e. “the 
holiest.” And Key says also, they have in some parts of America an exact form of king, priest and prophet, as. 
was formerly in Canaan. Robert Williams, the first Englishman in New England who is said to have learned the 
Indian language in order to convert the natives, believed them to be Jews; and he assures us, that their tradition 
records that their ancestors came from the south-west, and that they return there at death; that their women 
separate themselves from the rest of the people at certain periods ; and that their language bore some affinity to the 
Hebrew. Baron Lahontan writes, that the Indian women of Canada purify themselves after travail—thirty days for 
a male child, and forty for a female; that during the said time, they live apart from their husband; that the 
unmarried brother of the deceased husband marries the widow six months after his decease; and that the 
outstanding parties for war address the great spirit every day till they set off, with sacrifices, songs and feasting. 
We are also told, that the men in Mexico sat down, and the women stood, when they made water, which is an 
universal custom among our North American Indians. Their primitive modesty, and indulgence to their women, 
seem to have introduced this singular custom, after the manner of the ancient Mauritanians, on account of their 
scantiness of clothing, as I formerly observed. Lerius tells us, that the Indians of Brazil wash themselves ten times 
a day; and that the husbands have no matrimonial intercourse with their wives till their children are either weaned 
or grown pretty hardy ; which is similar to the custom of these northern Indians, and that of the Israelites, as 
Hos.i.8. He says, if a Peruvian child was weaned before its time, it was called ainsco, ‘a bastard’; and that if 
a Brazilian wounds another, he is wounded in the same part of the body with equal punishment; limb for limb, or 
life for life, according to the Mosaic law; which, within our own memory, these Indian nations observed so eagerly, 
that if a boy shooting at birds, accidentally wounded another, though out of sight, with his arrow ever so slightly, 

* Vid. Ceuto ad Solin. Benz. and Hist. Peruv. 

5C 

374 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

he, or any of his family, wounded him after the very same manner ; which is a very striking analogy with the Jewish 
retaliation. He likewise tells us, that their sachems, or emperors, were the heads of their church; and according 
to Laet, Descript. America, the Peruvians had one temple consecrated to the Creator of the world; besides four 
other religious places, in resemblance of the Jewish synagogues. And Malvenda says, the American idols were 
mitred, as Aaron was: he likewise affirms, as dcth Acosta, that the natives observed a year of jubilee, according to 
the usage of the Israelites. Benzo says, that the men and women incline very much to dancing; and the women 
often by themselves, according to the manner of the Hebrew nation; as in 1 Sam. xxi. 11; especially after gaining a 
victory over the enemy, as in Judg. xi. 34. xxi. 21, 23. and 1 Sam. xviii. 6, 7. Acosta tells us, that though adultery 
is deemed by them a capital crime, yet they at the same time set little value by virginity, and it seems to have been 
a bewailable condition in Judea. He likewise says, they wash their new-born infants, in resemblance of the Mosaic 
law; as Ezek. xvi. 9. And the Spaniards say, that the priests of Mexico were anointed from head to foot; that 
they constantly wore their hair, till they were superannuated ; and that the husband did not lie with his wife for 
two years after she was delivered. Our northern Indians imitate the first custom; though in: the second they 
resemble that of the heathen by polling or trimming their hair; and with regard to the third, they always sleep apart 
from their wives for the greater part of a year after delivery. . 

By the Spanish authorities, the Peruvians and Mexicans were polygamists, but they had one principal wife to 
whom they were married with certain solemnities; and murder, adultery, theft and incest were punished with death. 
But there was an exception in some places with regard to incestuous intercourses; which is entirely consonant 
to the usage of the northern Indians. For as to incest, the Cheerake marry both mother and daughter, or two 
sisters ; but they all observe the prohibited laws of consanguinity in the strictest manner. They tell us, that when 
the priests offered sacrifice, they abstained from women and strong drink, and fasted several days before any great 
festival; that all of them buried their dead in their houses, or in high places; that when they were forced to bury 
in any of the Spanish churchyards, they frequently stole the corpse, and interred it either in one of their own 
houses or in the mountains ; and that Juan de la Torre took five hundred thousand pezoes out of one tomb. Here 
is along train of Israclitish customs; and if we include the whole, they exhibit a very strong analogy between all 
the essential traditions, rites, customs, &c., of the South and North American Indians ; though the Spaniards mix an 
innumerable heap of absurd chimeras and romantic dreams with the plain material truths I have extracted. I lately 
perused the first volume of the History of North America, from the discovery thereof by Sylvanus Americanus, 
printed in New Jersey, anno 1761, from, I believe, the Philadelphia monthly paper, and was not a little surprised to 
find, in such a useful collection, the conjectural though perhaps well-intended accounts of the first adventurers and 
settlers in North America, concerning the natives; and which are laid as the only basis for inquisitive writers to 
trace their origin, instead of later and more substantial observations. ‘Though several of those early writers were 
undoubtedly sagacious, learned and candid, yet under the circumstances in which they wrote, it was impossible for 
them to convey to us any true knowledge of the Indians, more than what they gained by their senses, which must be 
superficial and liable to many errors. ‘Their conjectural accounts ought to have been long since examined by some 
of that learned body, or they should not have given a sanction to them. However, they are less faulty than the 
Spanish accounts. 

I presume enough hath been said to point out the similarity between the rites and customs of the native American 
Indians and those of the Israelites ; and that the Indian system is derived from the moral, ceremonial and judicial 
laws of the Hebrews, though now but a faint copy of the divine original. Their religious rites, martial customs, 
dress, music, dances and domestic forms of life, seem clearly to evince also, that they came to America in early 
times, before sects had sprung up among the Jews, which was soon after their prophets ceased, and before arts and 
sciences had arrived to any perfection; otherwise, it is likely they would haye retained some knowledge of them, 
at least where they first settled, it being in a favourable climate, and consequently they were in a more compact body 
than on this northern part of the American continent. he South American natives wanted nothing that could 
render life easy and agreeable ; and they had nothing superfluous except gold and silver. When we consider the 
simplicity of the people, and the skill they had in collecting a prodigious quantity of treasures, it seems as if they 
gained that skill from their countrymen, and the Tyrians, who in the reign of Solomon exceedingly enriched them- 
selves in a few voyages. The conjecture that the aborigines wandered here from captivity, by the north-east parts 
of Asia, over Kamschatska, to have their liberty and religion, is not so improbable as that of their being driven by 

ee 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 375 

stress of weather into the bay of Mexico from the east. Though a single argument of the general subject may 
prove but little, disjoined from the rest, yet, according ‘to the true laws of history and the best rules for tracing 
antiquities, the conclusion is to be drawn from clear corresponding circumstances united: the force of one branch 
of the subject ought to be connected with the others, and then judge by the whole. Such readers as may dissent 
from my opinion of the Indian American origin and descent, ought to inform us how the natives came here, and by 
what means they formed the long chain of rites, customs, &c., so similar to the usage of the Hebrew nation, and in 
general dissimilar to the modes, &c., of the Pagan world. 

Ancient writers do not agree upon any certain place where the Ophir of Solomon lay ; 1t must certainly be a 
great distance from Joppa, for it was a three years’ voyage. After the death of Solomon, both the Israelites and 
Tyrians seem to have utterly discontinued their trading voyages to that part of the world. Eusebius and Eupolemus 
say, that David sent to Urphe, an island in the Red Sea, and brought much gold into Judea; and Ortelius reckons 
this to have been Ophir; though, agreeably to the opinion of the greater part of the modern literati, he also con- 
jectures Cephala, or Sophala, to have been the Ophir of Solomon. Junius imagines it was in Aurea Chersonesus ; 
Tremellius and Niger are of the same opinion. But Vatablus reckons it was Hispaniola, discovered and named so 
by Columbus ; yet Postellus, Phil. Mornay, Arias Montanus, and Goropius, are of opinion that Peru is the ancient 
Ophir; so widely different are their conjectures. Ancient history is quite silent concerning America; which 
indicates that it has been time immemorial rent asunder from the African continent, according to Plato’s Timeus. 
The north-east parts of Asia also were undiscovered till of late. Many geographers have stretched Asia and 
America so far as to join them together; and others have divided those two quarters of the globe at a great distance 
from each other. But the Russians, after several dangerous attempts, have clearly convinced the world, that they 
are now divided, and yet have a near communication together by a narrow strait in which several islands are 
situated ; through which there is an easy passage from the north-east of Asia to the north-west of America by the 
way of Kamschatska ; which probably joined to the north-west point of America. By this passage, supposing the 
main continents were separated, it was very practicable for the inhabitants to go to this extensive new world; and 
afterwards to have proceeded in quest of suitable climates, according to the law of nature, that directs every creature 
to such climes as are most convenient and agreeable. 

Having endeavoured to ascertain the origin and descent of the North American Indians, and produced a variety 
of arguments that incline my own opinion in favour of their heing of Jewish extraction, which at the same time 
furnish the public with a more complete Indian System of religious rites, civil and martial customs, language, 
&c, &c., than hath ever been exhibited, neither disfigured by fable nor prejudice, I shall proceed to givee a general 
historical description of those Indian nations among whom I have chiefly resided. 

NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS 

TO 

ADAIRS HISTORY OF THE NORTH-AMERICAN INDIANS. 

Note 1, page 286, line 45. 
THE following illustrations of Adair’s History of the North-American Indians are chiefly extracted from the inedited works 
of French and Spanish authors, and afford the most satisfactory proof of Adair’s veracity in the minutest particulars. A general 
idea of the accuracy of his statements may likewse be formed from the perusal of the following Letter, addressed by Dr. Beatty 
to the Rev. John Erskine, and inserted by the former in his Journal of a Two Months’ Tour amongst the Indian Tribes 
bordering on Pennsylvania. The result of Dr. Beatty’s observations amongst the more northern Indian tribes agreeing so 
exactly with those of Adair amongst the southern tribes of the two Carolinas and Georgia, gives a character of authenticity to 

his history which no one hereafter will venture to dispute. 
“‘ With this you will receive the journal I promised to send to you of a mission to the Indians living about four hundred and 

376 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

fifty miles west of Philadelphia; previous to which you will see some account of our frontier inhabitants, that, perhaps, may not 
be disagreeable after so, desolating a war. However, this you can pass by if you please, with such other things therein as you 
will find foreign to the principal object in view, and only taken notice of for our own satisfaction or amusement. As the conversion 
of these poor benighted heathens has been long, I am persuaded, a matter which you earnestly desired and prayed to God for, 
so any prospect of it must afford you proportional satisfaction, and be still a further encouragement to pray and hope that the 
time to favour them is not far off, when those heathens shall be given to the Son of God for his inheritance, and the utmost parts 
of the earth, even of America, for his possession. May God fulfill his promises and our joys! I have before hinted to you, that 
since I had the pleasure of seeing you last, I had taken pains to search into the usages and customs of the Indians, in order to 
see what ground there was for supposing them to be part of the Ten Tribes; and I must own, to my no small surprise, that a 
number of their customs appear so much to resemble those of the Jews, that it is a great question with me, whether we can expect 
to find among the Ten Tribes (wherever they are) at this day, all things considered, more of the footsteps of their ancestors than 
among the different Indian Tribes. The conduct of the Indian women, in certain circumstances, seems to be in a manner per- 
fectly agreeable to the law of Moses. A young woman, at the first appearance of the catamenia, immediately separates from 
others, makes up a hut for herself, at some distance from the town or house she lived in, and remains there during the whole 
of her disorder, that is, seven days. The person who brings her victuals is very careful not to touch her; and so cautious is she 
herself of touching her own food with her hands, that she makes use of a sharpened stick, instead of a fork, with which to take 
up her venison, and a small ladle or spoon for other food. When the seven days are ended, she bathes herself in water, (usually 
in some neighbouring brook or river,) washes all her clothes, and cleanses the vessels she made use of during her menses. Such 
as are made of wood she scalds and cleanses with lye made of wood ashes, and such as are made of earth or iron she purifies by 
putting them into the fire: she then returns to her father’s house or the family she left, and is, after this, looked upon fit for 
marriage, and not before. A woman, when delivered of a child, is separated likewise for a time. I have been at a place in New 
Jersey more than once, called, in the Indian language, Crosweek-sung, that is, the house of separation, which took its name, no 
doubt, from its being a noted place for that purpose. Near this was formerly an Indian town. The Indians observe the feast of 
first-fruits ; and, before they make use of any of their corn or fruits of the ground, twelve of their old men meet, when a deer and 
some of the new corn are provided; the venison is divided into twelve parts, according to the number of the men; and the corn, 
beaten in a mortar, prepared for use by boiling, or baking it into cakes under the ashes, is divided into the same number of parts 
with the venison; then these men (if I forget not) hold up the venison and corn, and pray, as they term it, with their faces to the 
east, acknowledging, I suppose, the goodness and bounty of heaven to them; and, perhaps, in this prayer seek to God in some 
manner for a blessing on their first-fruits. ‘The venison and corn prepared are then eaten by those present; after this they make 
use of their corn and other fruits of the earth freely. Another public feast they have in the evening, which looks somewhat like 
the Passover, when a great quantity of venison is provided, with other things, dressed in their usual way, and proportions thereof 
distributed to all the guests, of which they eat freely that evening; but that which is left is thrown into the fire and burned, as 
none of it must remain till the sun rise the next day, nor must a bone of the venison be broken. Once in the year some of the 
tribes of Indians choose from among themselves twelve men, who provide twelve deer, and each of them cuts a small pole, from which 
they strip the bark, and make a tent, by sticking one end of the poles to the ground, bending the tops over one another, and 
covering the tent with their blankets. ‘Then the twelve men choose each of them a stone, which they make hot in the fire, and 
place them together, I suppose, in some form of an altar, within the tent, and burn the fat of the inwards of the deer thereon. 
At the time they are offering, the twelve men in the tent cry to the Indians without, We pray, or praise! who answer, We 
hear! Then the men in the tent cry ‘Ho—ah!’ very loud and long, which appear to be somewhat like in sound to Hallelujah. 
After the fat is thus offered, some tribes burn tobacco, cut fine, upon the same stones. Some nations or tribes choose only ten 
men, who provide ten deer, ten poles, and ten stones, &c. Their customs of consulting their Pow-waas (a kind of prophets, who 
pretend to have converse with spirits,) upon any extraordinary occasions, either of great or uncommon sickness or mortality, &c., 
seems to be in imitation of the Jews of old inquiring of the prophet. There is one tribe of Indians, called Nanticooks, that, on 
their removal from their old to new habitations, carry the bones of their ancestors and deceased relations with them. I am well 
assured that some of the Indians wl not eat the hollow of the thigh of the deer, but cut off that part and throw it away. It isa 
great fashion with them to wear bracelets of wampum (a kind of bead, made of a black sea shell, which they have instead of 
money,) on their arms, and I have frequently seen a bead hanging to the bridge of their nose ; and almost all wear a kind of mock 
jewels in their ears, composed of such things as they like: they make great use of bears’ oil, with which they anoint their heads and 
bodies. They have an avenger of blood among them, who is the man nearest related to the murdered, who pursues the homicide, 
and takes his life wherever he finds him. No people in the world, perhaps, have a higher sense of liberty than the Indians, and, 
consequently, are more jealous of it, many of them preferring death to either captivity or slavery. ‘They have a great disposition 
for war, and. are far from being destitute of courage, however they may be looked upon by some to be dastardly, because their 
manner of fighting in the woods and maxims of war are so different from ours, and indeed most other nations; yet, whoever 
truly considers their situation and circumstances, must own their art of war is best calculated for them. Britain now, as well as 
America, knows by experience that they are far from being contemptible enemies, when one hundred of them have courage 
enough to attack, and, perhaps, are a match for a thousand British troops in the wilderness, unacquainted with their manner of 
fighting. None among them are of much account or admitted to their war-dances that have not been at war; and according to 

their behaviour and warlike exploits they are esteemed and promoted in their way. ‘The testimonies they give of their bravery 

are the scalps and prisoners of their enemies, which they bring home. Were not the Jews of old remarkable for their courage 

and high sense of liberty? And was it not customary, in the days of Saul and David, to bring home testimonies of the number © 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. O17 

they had slain in battle, not very dissimilar from the scalps of the Indians. A Christian Indian informed me, that an old uncle 
of his, who died about forty years since, related to him several customs and traditions of the Indians in former times, and, 
among others, that circumcision was practised long ago by them; but that their young men at length making a mock of it, 
brought it into disrepute, and so it came to be disused. The same person likewise told me, that the Indians had a tradition 
that once the water overflowed all the land and drowned all the people then living, except a few who made a great canoe, (which 
as a hind of boat, made of a large tree hollowed out, and commonly used by them,) and were saved in it. Another tradition he 
heard was, that a long time ago the people went to build a high place to reach up a great way, and that while they were building 
et they lost their language and could not understand one another, that while one, perhaps, called for a stick, another brought him 
a stone, &c., and that from that time they (the Indians) began to speak different languages. There seems to be a tradition 
among some of the Indians respecting the Bible, and the way how they came into America. A sober intelligent Indian inquired 
of an English trader, when in one of the Indian towns, whether the English had not a book (meaning the Bible) among them; 
and being informed that they had, the Indian told the Englishman, that that book was once, or long ago, theirs; and that so long 
as they kept it and acted according to it their God was kind to them and they prospered ; but that the white people (which is a 
general name they call other nations by that are white,) at length bought it of the Indians, whereby they learned a great many 
things and prospered, while the Indians, on the other hand, began to decline from the time they sold it; and that their God, 
being very angry with them for parting with this book, left them, and then other nations began to use them very ill, so that they 

were exposed to many hardships, and suffered many things at their hands; but, however, that their God at length taking 
_ pity on them, brought or directed them to this country of America; that, on their way to it, they came to a great water ; 
that one of the Indians who went before them tried the depth of it with a long pole or reed which he had in his hand, and found 
it too deep for them to wade. Upon their being nonplused, and not knowing what way to get over it, their God made a bridge 
over the water in one night, by which they passed over safe, and that next morning, after they were all over, God took away the 
bridge. ‘The same Indian represented the future state of good and bad men, to the trader, in this manner: that all the Indians, 
who were good, when they died, went in one or two days to a fine pleasant place, where there was prepared everything that was 
good to eat and drink and to give sweet repose or rest, and that when they awaked from sleep they found another different 
course, consisting of a great variety of things most pleasant and agreeable to the taste, and that in this pleasurable manner they 
spent their beings; but that such as were bad, i.e. did bad things, when they died, went in one or two days to a very bad place, 
which he represented as the most disagreeable, the very reverse of the other, where they were as miserable as the others were 
happy, having nothing to eat or drink, though very hungry, without any enjoyment of rest by sleep. In these and other parti- 
culars, dear Sir, I believe you will observe, with me, a strong resemblance between the ancient Jews and Indians, to which I 
might have added some peculiarities of less note, but I am unwilling to tire your patience. Permit me only to add, that all the 
customs and traditions above are not to be found among every tribe of Indians; nor, perhaps, is the same usage or custom ob- 
served. by every Indian of the same tribe.” 

Note 2, page 293, line 48. 

The manners of the 'Taobayaces (a civilized Indian tribe dwelling on the shores of the Rio Colorado, or Red River,) are so 
strikingly analogous to those of the Indian nations whose history has been written by Adair, that no one can entertain a doubt of - 
the fidelity of his description. ‘The belief of the Taobayaces in the existence of a God, and in his government of the universe— 
their invocation of his name—their offerings to him of their first-fruits, and the first beast killed in the chase—together with their 
belief in the immortality of the soul, and in a future state of rewards and punishments, are all separately and distinctly noticed 
by Don Jose Cortes in the following passage of the Third Part of his inedited ‘Memorias sobre las Provincias del Norte de 
la Nueva Espaia’: 

“‘ De las naciones que vulgarmente Ilaman del Norte, la de los Taobayaces es la mas civilizada: estan domiciliados en dos 
pueblos situados en las orillas del Rio Colorado de Nachitochez, el uno en frente del otro y como 170 leguas al N.E. de los Taua- 
canas: dichos dos pueblos tendran de 170 4 180 casas, y cada una con correspondiente numero de separaciones; el de hahitantes 
es de cerca de 2000, el de los hombres de armas.6 de guerra pasa de 600: su vestuario se compone de camisas, botas y calzados, 
todo de pieles; y de las mismas hacen sus esteras, escudos, equipages de caballos, y tiendas de campatia. Para abastecerse de 
granos y otros frutos toman providencias muy eficaces, y cuidan de su conservacion, guardando cada cabeza de familia en su casa 
20 4 30 fanegas de maiz en sacas de cueros de toro, que hacen con este fin, é igualmente hacen prevencion de frijol y calabazas, 
que conservan para todo el afio con mucha curiosidad; y ademas de estos acopios que les asegura su subsistencia con un genero 
de comodidad que no disfrutan las otras naciones salvages, cosechan melones, sandias y tabaco con la mayor abundancia. A las 
inmediaciones de los referidos lugares hay muchos ojos y pereiies manantiales de aqua potable, que sobra para regar y fertilizar los 
dilatados prados en que hacen sus sementeras; la del Rio es salobre; pero su cercania les proporciona con la mayor comodidad 
la pesca de esquisitos y gustosos pescados, y con la misma matan los sibolos, y demas especies que cazan, sin mas cuidado que 
dejarlos llegar 4 beber. A la ventajosa situacion que ocupa esta nacion, se le agrega tener 4 la mano quanta lefia y madera nece- 
sita de un monte llamado el Grande, que desde la derecha de los Tuacanas sigue muy inmediato 4 los Taobayaces, sin que bar- 
ranco ni quiebra alguna disminuya el admirable golpe de vista que causa la espesura de sus frondosos alamos, fresnos, olmos y 
nogales, continuado por mas de ochenta leguas de largo y de una 4 dos de ancho. Finalmente, para que nada les falte, tienen en 
medio del rio un banco de excellente sal, que aunque extraigan quanta quieran, se buelve 4 cubrir con la mayor prontitud el 
socabon de donde la sacan. La creencia de los Taobayaces esta fundada en reconocer & un Criador, que reside en el cielo, 
desde donde lo dirije todo: le ofrecen las primicias de sus frutos y de la caza; le invocan para el suceso de sus empresas, y 

5D 5 

378 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

observan una infinidad de ritos muy supersticiosos. De este sistema religionario, que es mas racional que el que se advierte en 

las demas naciones de Indios, dimanan costumbres mas arregladas, como son la observancia de la fee prometida, veneracion & los 

ancianos, humanidad con los enfermos, y generosidad con los extrangeros. Véven persuadidos de la realidad de una vida eterna, 
donde seran remunerados los buenos, cuya primer clase se compone de los guerreros, y los malos castigados a vivir para stempre 
entre zarzas y penaxcos rodeados de tigres y animales ponzonosos ; pero en medio de estas buenas calidades con que se distinguen, 
tienen otras muy malas: son crueles con sus cautivos; tienen ayuntamientos nefandos y otras abominables inclinaciones. Su 
gobierno esta fundado en una democrasia mas regular que la de los Tancaqties: sus costumbres y exercicios son la caza y la guerra, 
que constantemente sostienen con dos, 6 tres naciones, y en ella se hacen famosos, llegando 4 ser capitanes por sus bizarras acciones, 
y sin que tenga parte otro respeto aunque hijos del mas acreditado, y 4 esto se agrega, que 4 la vanidad de sus hazafias les lisonjea 
la segura felicidad de la otra vida. La suerte de las mugeres es la misma que en las demas naciones de Indios: curten, cozen, y 
pintan las pieles: cercan las labores, cuidan los sembrados; recogen las semillas; cortan y acarrcan la lefia, hacen de comer; 
crian los hijos; y no para su continuo desvelo en quanto mira al descanso y satisfaccion de sus maridos.” 

Note 3, page 305, line 4, 

“To shake hands with the old beloved speech” appears so singular a phrase, and is of such frequent occurrence in the speeches 
of the Indians, that it cannot be doubted that it is allied to their national traditions and primitive customs. The strict meaning of 
this Indian form of speech is simply to conform to the old national usages, and to act agreeably to the traditions of their ancestors; 
and when it is recollected that the Hebrew language was that in which Moses promulgated the laws of God to the Jews and the 
Deity communicated with him on Mount Sinai, its indirect allusion to the law of Moses will be obvious. It is further extremely de- 
serving of remark that the Jews were accustomed in ancient times to ratify solemn treaties of peace by the act of shaking hands with 
their enemies. This custom is particularly mentioned in the twelfth verse of the twelfth chapter of the second book of Maccabees, 
where Judas Maccabeus is declared in the following terms to have concluded a peace with the Arabian Nomades : “* Whereupon 
there was a very sore battle ; but Judas’s side, by the help of God, got the victory, so that the Nomades of Arabia being overcome 
besought Judas for peace, promising both to give him cattle and to pleasure him otherwise. Then Judas, thinking indeed that 
they would be profitable in many things, granted them peace; whereupon they shook hands, and so they departed to their tents.” 
It is again mentioned in the twenty-second verse of the thirteenth chapter of the same book of Maccabees as a sign of the ratifica- 
tion of a truce concluded between the Jewish garrison of Bethsura and king Antiochus Eupator, who, with a great army, had in- 
vaded Judea, and was striving to get possession of Jerusalem. ‘“ ‘The king treated with them in Bethsura the second time, gave 
his hand, took theirs, departed, fought with Judas, was overcome.” Allusion to the same usage occurs likewise in the earlier books 

of the Old Testament. 

Note 4, page 306, line 31. 

The following character of the Apache Indians is taken from Don Jose Cortes’ ‘ Memorias sobre las Provincias del Norte de 
Nueva Espaiia.’ We insert it here because it shows how accurately Adair has portrayed the character of the more eastern tribes. 

“‘ De nada hace vanidad el Apache sino de ser valiente, y llega su entusiasmo en esta parte 4 tal punto, que se tiene 4 menos el 
hombre de quien no se sabe que haya hecho alguna hazafa en la guerra, ti otra accion de valor que le acredite; siendo costumbre 
entre las mas de las parcialidades, y principalmente en la Mimbrefia y Gilefia, anteponer el nombre de ‘'Tasquie’ al que se ha 
dado 4 conocer por su arrojo y bizarria, cuya significacion es la de la citada voz.” 

‘¢ El idioma que hablan todas las naciones del nombre Apache es uno mismo ; solo varia alguna en el acento, y en una, t otra voz 
provincial, sin que esta diferencia influya cosa alguna para que dejen de entender reciprocamente, aunque los terrenos en que hayan 
nacido sean muy distantes. La pronunciacion de esta lingua es muy violenta; pero no és tan dificil como indica su primera im- 
presion, y acostumbrado el oido se halla cierta cadencia en sus palabras: se advierte que es escasa de expresiones y voces; y esto 
origina una repeticion molesta que hace la conversacion sumamente difusa, y acompanada de ademanes; Hamando mas la atencion 
el golpeo, que 4 un tiempo concurre en la lengua y garganta, cuyo esfuerzo aumentan para hacerse mas inteligibles. Es digno de 
observar en estas naciones un temperamento muy bilioso, que les influye un caracter astuto, desconfiado, atrevido, sobervio, y 
zeloso de su libre independencia. Su estatura varia en cada parcialidad, siendo los mas bien apersonados aquellos que nacen y 
habitan terrenos mas septentrionales: todos son de color moreno; pero guarda la diferencia de ser mas claros los naturales de las 
indicadas situaciones mas al norte: son de buena disposicion y muy sueltos, de ojos vivos, cabello largo, ninguna barba, cutis muy 
suave, y pintada la astucia y la sagacidad en su semblante. Son tan agiles y ligeros, que disputan el aguante 4 los caballos, levan- 
doles ventaja en los terrenos fragosos y montuosos, cuya natural disposicion tienen muy exercitada con el continuo movimiento en 
que viven, trasladando sus rancherias de uno 4 otro punto con el fin de proporcionar nueva caza, y los frutos indispensables para 
su subsistencia; trayendoles tambien en la misma actividad la vigilancia y cuidado con que miran por su salud, lo qual les estimula 
4 mudar sus situaciones con mucha freqtiencia para respirar nuevos aires, y para que se purifique el lugar que evacuaron. Llega 
A tal extremo el zelo por la conservacion de sus rancherias, que no tan solamente las mudan del lugar que ocupan siempre que 
muere uno, sino que abandonan 4 los enfermos de gravedad, quando juzgan que pueden infestarse.” 

Note 5, page 307, line 50. 
The irrational dread which the Mexicans and Peruvians entertained of eclipses of the sun and the appearance of comets, 
which latter pheenomena, Tanner informs us, the Ojibbeway Indians named in their dialect ‘“‘ Wa-ween-e-zis-e-mah-guk Ish-koo-da”, 
i.e. fire that has hair, would seem to have proceeded from an expectation they entertained that the end of the world was rapidly 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 379 

approaching, and would be ushered in by such signs, preserving, perhaps, a traditional recollection of the prediction of Joel, 
“The sun shall be turned into darkness and the moon into blood before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come.” That it 
was the firm belief of the Jews that a day of total darkness, caused by an eclipse of the sun, would precede the end of the world, 
is evident, as well from the prophecy of Joel as from other passages of Scripture ;. and this leads us to observe that some of the 
ceremonies which the Mexicans celebrated at the commencement of their year of jubilee,—which occurred once in fifty-two years, 
when they watched with anxiety the appearance of the stars in a certain place of the heavens, and on their becoming visible, joy? 
fully exclaimed that the world would continue another age, and that the light of the sun would not then be extinguished,—would ap- 
pear to have been derived from the Jews. That the Peruvians agreed with the Mexicans in believing that the end of the world would 
be preceded by an eclipse of thé sun and a day of darkness, when the stars would cease to give their light and the moon to shine, 
and the powers of heaven would be shaken, the general confusion being considerably heightened by the tzitzimis, or spirits of 
darkness, descending on earth in a visible form to destroy the fair work of creation, is obscurely hinted at by Gomara in the 
following passage of the 68th page of his ‘ Historia de las Indias,’ who assigns that as a reason for the Peruvians uttering loud cries 
when they beheld an eclipse of the sun: “Tambien creen la fin del mundo: empero que precedera primero grandissima seca, y 
se perderan el sol y luna que adoran. Y por aquesto dan grandes alaridos y lloran quando ay eclipses, mayormente del sol, 
temiendo que se van 4 perder, el y ellos y todo el mundo.” ‘ They likewise believe in the end of the world, but that first there 
will be a great drought, and that the sun and the moon, which they adore, will disappear. This is the reason why they utter loud 
cries and lamentations when eclipses occur, especially of the sun, fearing that both it, themselves, and the whole world are going 
to be destroyed.” That the like belief and the same superstitious fear of the end of the world and of eclipses should have been 
widely diffused through the province of Guatemala is not so surprising, when we recollect that the national traditions recorded 
that the Tultecas, who first established their empire in that province of New Spain, where they founded many great cities, the 
ruins of which still remain, were of Jewish origin. Las Casas has accordingly noticed the opinions of the ancient inhabitants of 
Guatemala on this and some other curious subjects in the following passage of the two hundred and thirty-fifth chapter of his 
inedited ‘ Historia Apologetica’, for a copy of which very valuable work, and many other original manuscripts relating to the history 
and antiquities of America, we are indebted to the gracious liberality of His late Majesty Ferdinand the Seventh, who did not 
choose that Spain should possess scientific treasures which it could be the desire of a monarch to withhold from the rest of 
Europe. The above-mentioned distinguished prelate thus records the ancient traditions of Guatemala: ‘Tenian opinion y 
aun creencia que avia en la otra vida infierno, y que avia tormentos en él: llamavanle el lugar de los muertos, y con razon cada 
provincia en su lenguage, y en el de Guatimala, Chixibalba, en el de Mexico, Myctla. Decian ser alli atormentados los hom- 
bres, y que eran comidos de muchos generos de animales 6 de sabandijas, que padecian fuego y grandes calores, y bebian podre, 
y que avia desto muy mucho. Affirmavan que avia boca de infierno, y que estaba en un pueblo de la Verapaz llamado Coban, 
y que la avia tapado aquel diablo llamado Exbalanquen, que arriba en el capitulo deximos aver intro ducido sacrificar hombres.” 
—Creian que avia espiritus 6 angeles buenos y malos, aunque no por los nombres que nosotros los tenemos. Esto davan 4 
entender por esta manera, que quando instruian los hijos les decian que mirasen como vivian, que consultasen al que los 
guiaba, y que hiciesen lo que les aconsejaba, y que no diesen credito al que los seguia, porque era el pecado 6 desdicha, 6 mal 
acontecimiento. Y quando algun infortunio les acaecia, como irseles la muger, 6 el marido 4 ella, 6 despefiarseles algun hijo, 6 
quemarsele la casa t otra adversidad grave, decian que habian encontrado el pecado. Avia entre ellos noticia del diluvio, y de- 
la fin del mundo, y Ilamanle ‘ Butic’, que es nombre que significa diluvio de muchas aguas, y quiere decir juicio. Y asi 
creen que esta por venir otro Butic, que es otro diluvio y juicio, no de agua sino de fuego: el qual dicen que ha de ser al fin del 
mundo, en el qual han derretir todas las criaturas, en especial las que sirven al hombre, como son las piedras donde muelen su 
mahiz 6 trigo, las ollas, los cantaros, dando 4 entender que se han de volver contra el hombre, y gue se eclipsara la luna y el 
sol, diciendo que seran comidos, que es su manera de hablar, porque quando hay eclipse, dicen que es comida la luna 6 el sol. 
Finalmente tienen que el mundo ha de aver fin, y que las animas son immortales ; pero de premio y de pena no tractan sino 
alli acaban.” From the concluding sentence of this passage we are obliged to assume either that Las Casas was ignorant of 
some of the religious tenets of the Indians of Guatemala, or that their creed differed essentially from that of the Mexicans, 
who firmly believed in a future state of rewards and punishments; or, lastly, that he was unwilling to concede that the Indians 
could have coincided with Christians in such an essential article of their religion, and yet have profaned the divine altars with the 
unceasing immolation of human victims, whose flesh, shocking to relate, they considered holy food, and accordingly devoured at 
their religious banquets. Let the reader who can scarcely credit such contradictions only recur to the history of the Jews in 
the Old Testament, and peruse some chapters of the prophetical books, and nil admirari will serve him in future as a safe and 
unerring rule of criticism. We shall close the observations contained in this note with the following extract from the 133rd 
chapter of Antonio Tello’s inedited History of the Provinces of Xalisco and New Mexico, where the fear which the Indians of 
the province of Tiguex likewise entertained of eclipses is thus incidentally recorded, and it fully confirms what Adair says of the 
Indians of the Mississippi being equally superstitious about them: “ En los casamientos hay costumbre que quando un mozo dé 
en servir 4 alguna moza, vd con ella G@ acarrear agua, y guardandola y acompafiandola, carga el cantaro, y si son para en uno 
los casan los deudos, y no tiene ningun Indio mas de una muger: vieron los Espafioles estando en esta tierra que haviendo 
muerto un Indio armaron una gran balsa de lefia, y que pusieron el cuerpo muerto encima de ella cubierto con sola una mantilla, 
y que luego vinieron todos los del pueblo, hombres y mugeres, cada uno trajé de la comida ce ellos usan como pinole, calabazas, 
frixoles, atole, maiz tostado, y todo lo pusieron sobre la balsa de lefia; estando todo muy bien concertado pegaron fuego 4 la 
balsa por todas partes, con que cuerpo y comida quedaba hecho ceniza, y al tiempo de pegar fuego alzaron todos una gran voz: 
no se vieron en todos estos caminos y partes templos, i idolos algunos. Entiendese que adoraban al sol y 4 la luna, porque 

380 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

una noche que eclips6 la luna, alzaron todos mucha griteria. Tin los valles de Corazones, Sonora y por aquellas partes y 
caminos se hallaron mozos en trage de mugeres, alcoholados los ojos, y un Espafiol asié uno de ellos, diciendo lo havia de quemar, 
y rifié 4 Jas mugeres porque no lo azotaban, pero ellas no hicieron nada, antes rogaron por el. En Tzibola, ni en Tiguex, no se 
vid ni se hallé cosa alguna de las que se han dicho.” We shall observe on this latter passage, that it corroborates in several 
essential particulars the testimony of Adair in other parts of his work, especially his assertion in the thirteenth argument, that 
the Muskohge Indians formerly reckoned it adultery if a man took a pitcher of water off a married woman's head and drank 
of it; since if they, in commemoration of Rebekah going to the well and drawing a pitcher of water for the servant of Abraham, 
by whom she was affianced to Isaac, agreeably to the terms of his adjuration of the Deity in the fourteenth verse of the twenty- 
fourth chapter of Genesis, had instituted a marriage ceremony similar to that in use amongst the Indians of Tiguex, a man taking a 
pitcher of water from a married woman’s head and drinking of it, might seem an attempt to seduce her from the path of virtue, and 
her acquiescence, the laws and usages of the country being well known to both parties, have been considered legal evidence of her 
guilt. The terms of the adjuration above alluded to are the following, and they might have suggested a form of marriage to the 
Indians of Tiguex, and likewise to the Muskohges: ‘‘ And he said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, I pray thee send me 
good speed this day, and show kindness unto my master Abraham. Behold, I stand here by the well of water, and the daughters 
of the men of the city come out to draw water. And let it come to pass that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy 
pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink, and she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also, let the same be she that thou 
hast appointed for thy servant Isaac, and thereby shall I know that thou hast shewed kindness unto my master.” It deserves to be 
remarked, that amongst some other Indian tribes the marriage ceremony was performed by putting a pair of ear-rings in the ears 
of the bride, which would likewise seem to allude to the marriage of Isaac with Rebekah. 

Note 6, page 314, line 1. 

The language of signs, which Adair describes as having been carried to such systematic perfection amongst the Indians of the 
Mississippi as to enable them “ intelligibly to converse together and contract engagements without any interpreter,” is mentioned 
by various Spanish authors, and first, in order of time, by Francisco Vazquez de Coronado, in the following passage of his inedited 
letter to Charles the Fifth, descriptive of his journey to Cibola: ‘‘ Y aunque, como 4 Vuestra Magestad escribi, por ser relacion 
de Indios, y mas por sefias, no les di credito hasta que por mis ojos lo viese; pareciendome la relacion muy grande, y que impor- 
taba al servicio de Vuestra Majestad que se viese, me determiné con la gente que aqui tengo de irla 4 ver.” Pedro de Castafieda, 
who, twenty years afterwards, composed his ‘ Relacion de la Jornada de Cibola,’ a copy of which authentic narrative is still pre- 
served in the Spanish archives, makes the following more express mention of the Indian language of signs, in the seventh chapter 
of the second part of that treatise: “‘ Estas gentes que los Ilaman Querechos y 'Teyas dan relacion de grandes poblados y segun 
lo que de estas gentes se vid y de otros que ellos daban noticia que habia por otras partes, ella es harto mas gente que no la de los 
poblados, mas dispuesta, y mayores hombres de guerra, y mas temidos. Andan como Alarabes con sus tiendas y harrias de perros 
aparejados con lomillos y enjalmas y cincha: cuando se les tuerce la carga ahuyan llamando quien los aderece: comen esta gente 
la carne cruda y beben la sangre: no comen carne humana: es gente amorosa y no cruel: tienen fiel amistad : son muy entendidos por 
senas: secan la carne 4 el sol cortandola delgada como una hoja, y seca la muelen como harina para guardar y hacer mazamorras 
para comer, que con un puiio que hechan en una olla se hinche porque crece mucho, guisanlo con manteca que siempre procuran 
traer: cuando matan la vaca vacian una gran tripa y hinchenla de sangre y hechanla 4 el cuello para beber cuando tienen sed.” 
We may here remark that the Journey to Cibola was composed by Pedro de Castafieda about the year 1560, but a much later 
Spanish historian, Juan Morfi, unequivocally corroborates the testimony of Adair in the following passage of the second book of 
his inedited ‘ Memorias para la Historia de Texas’: ‘Todas estas naciones tienen particularidades, en que se distinguen unas 
de otras: 12. En el idioma, que es en todas diverso. 2%, En el acento, unas hablan de un tono languido y lastimoso como men- 
digos, otros de un aire altivo y dominante, y algunos naturalmente y sin afectacion: pero todos convienen en una especie de 
idioma mudo, que son las senas, en que son diestrissimos, y se estan dias enteros en conversacion, explicando y entendiendose 
perfectamente sus pensamientos, sin necesitar la palabra. 3%. Ein Jas raias con que se pintan; pues unas naciones las hacen de 
un modo, y otras de otro. 4 En el corte del cabello, unas naciones tienen cerquillo como los frayles; otros se rapan toda la 
cabeza dejando en la coronilla una trenza del largo natural 4 la Tartara, que cuidan y estiman mucho ; otros nada le cortan. 
Ultimamente en las orejas y narices ; porque algunas se agujeran las ternillas de aquellas, otras la de estas, y otras ambas.” To 
the foregoing testimonies of Castafieda and Morfi may be added that of Dr. Boudinot, who thus describes, in his ‘Star in the 
West,’ the facility with which two Indians belonging to far distant nations can converse together by means of signs: ‘ It is 
worthy of remembrance that two Indians, who belong to far distant nations, without the knowledge of each other’s language 
except from the general idiom, will intelligibly converse together and contract engagements without any interpreter, in such a 
surprising manner as is scarcely credible. In like manner we read of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob travelling from country to 
country, from Chaldea into Palestine, when inhabited by various differing nations, thence into Egypt and back again, making 
engagements and treating with citizens wherever they went. But we never read of any difficulty of being understood or their 
using an interpreter.” It would appear from the concluding sentence of this paragraph that Dr. Boudinot imagined that the 
Jews might have instituted a language of signs amongst the Indians for the purposes of trade and friendly communication with 
their various tribes; and we certainly read in Montecinio’s ‘ Relation,’ inserted in the 286th page of the sixth volume of this work, 
that the Jews of Carthagena made use of a language of signs, and conversed with Montecinio by means of an interpreter. Men- 
tion having been made in a preceding passage of this note of its being customary with the Indians to distinguish their several 
tribes by the different mode of cutting and wearing their hair, we may here observe that Morfi, in enumerating the several Indian 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 381 

fashions, has omitted to notice the custom of wearing a bandage or fillet round the head, which was very general amongst the 
Indians, extending even from the confines of Peru and the kingdom of New Granada to Canada, and which induced some Spanish 
authors to suppose that this bandage was neither more nor less than the ancient phylactery which God commanded the Jews to 
wear throughout their generations, and which, with the law of fringes on garments and battlements on houses, probably passed 
with the first Hebrew colonies to the New World. That such a custom existed amongst the Mozcas, or Indians of Bogota, will 
appear by reference to the note subjoined to the 518th page of the sixth volume of this work, and Gomara mentions it in the 
following passage of the sixty-eighth page of his ‘ Historia de las Indias,’ in the chapter entitled, ‘‘ Calidades y Costumbres 
del Cuzco”: ‘Los ombres andan en cabello, mas vendanse las cabegas: visten camisas de lana y paficos. Las mugeres traen 
sotanas sin mangas, que faxan mucho con cintas largas, y mantellinas sobre los ombros prendidas con gordos alfileres de 
plata 6 cobre, que tienen las cabecas anchas y agudas, con que cortan muchas cosas.” ‘Phe men wear their hair long, with a 
bandage round the head; they clothe themselves in woollen vests and smallclothes; the women wear petticoats without sleeves, 
which they tighten at the waist with broad girdles, and small mantles over the shoulders, fastened with thick silver or copper 
pins, with broad and sharp heads, with which they cut many things.” 

Note 7, page 314, line 8. 

The assertion of Adair that all the Indians, particularly the Muskohge, have a sanctum sanctorum, or most holy place, in the man- 
ner of the ancient Jews, is fully corroborated in the following passage of an inedited letter of M. de Buisson, descriptive of a temple 
of the Natchez, who were a powerful Indian tribe dwelling on the banks of the Mississippi: “ Je parle souvent des Tonicas et des 
Taensas et de ceux qui sont sur le bord du Misissipi en descendant a la mer, car dans la profondeur des terres les sauvages y sont 
en grand nombre: ils ont des temples assez beaux, dont les murailles sont de nattes. Celuy de Taensas a des murailles epaisses 
de sept A huit pieds a cause de la grande quantité de nattes, qui sont les unes sur les autres: ils ont pour une de leurs divinités 
Autamque. J’ai peu voir le serpent: ils n’oseroient rien accepter ou s'approprier dun peu considerable sans Vavoir auparavant porté 
a leur temple. Worsqu’ils recoivent quelque chose, c’est avec une espéce de veneration qwils se tournent vers ce temple. Ils ne 
paroissent pas dereglés dans leurs moeurs a cause des grandes chaleurs. Les hommes y sont nuds et les filles et femmes n’y sont 
guere bien couvertes, et méme les petites filles jusqu’a Tage de douze ans y vont toutes nues. Ils sont si doux et ont tant de 
deference por ce que nous leur disons, que je me persuade lors que je scaurai un peu la langue, qu'il ne me sera pas bien difficile 
de reformer cet abus, qui parmi eux ne leur fait aucune impression, y etant accoutumés des l’enfance. Ils ont encore un autre abus: 
lorsque leurs chefs sont morts, selon qu’il a été plus estimé, plus aussi il a des personnes qui d’elles mémes s’offrent 4 mourir avec 
luy ; et l'année derniére que le chef de Taensas mourut, il eut douze personnes qui s’offrirent 4 mourir, et 4 qui on cassa la téte. 
Il ny a jamais Whiver chez eux; ils n’y connoissent point la neige, quils n’ont jamais veule ; Vherbe y est toujours. 

« Le 21 nous arrivames aux Taensas, il y a une lieue par terre et deux par eau: ils sont sur la bord d’un lac a trois lieues de 
Misissipi. Ce sont des gens fort humains et dociles; il n'y avoit pas long temps que leur chef etoit mort quand nous y arrivames. 
‘Cest leur coutume de faire mourir.. .. . pour ce sujet ils nous dirent qu’ils en avoient tués 13 a la mort de celuy qui etoit mort 
le dernier: ils mettent pour cet effet d’une racine bruler dans le feu, et quand elle est consumée, ils le tuent 4 coups de casse téte. 
Les Natchez qui sont 4 12 lieues plus bas en font mourir trente a la mort de leur chef: il faut avouer quiils sont bien sots de se 
fair tuer ainsi; c'est cependant ce quils estiment a grande estime et generosité: ils ont un temple bien grand, il y a trois collones. 
qui sont bien faites des serpens et d'autres semblables superstitions. Le temple est enclos d’une cloture faite en fagon d’une 
muraille; elle est presque garnie de tétes de morts: ils ne nous vouloient pas nous laisser entrer dedans, dijant que ceux qui 
y entroient mouroient. Nous y entrames moitié par force, moitié de bonne volonté.” From the allusion in the foregoing passage 
to the religious rites of the Natchez, and to its being customary with that tribe to adorn their temples with figures of serpents, 
and to hang up the skulls of their enemies before their portals, it would appear that some of their rites bore much resemblance 
to those of the Mexicans. That the Jews occasionally exhibited as trophies the heads of their enemies before the temple is 
evident from the thirty-third verse of the fifteenth chapter of the second book of Maccabees and from other passages of Scripture ; 
and that they likewise scalped their enemies we are warranted in inferring from the following passage of the seventh chapter of the 
second book of Maccabees, retaliation being strictly enjoined by Moses to the Jews: ‘‘ So when the first was dead after this man- 
ner, they brought the second to make him a mocking stock, and when they had pulled off the shin of es head with the hair, they 
asked him, Wilt thou eat before thou be punished throughout every member of thy body?” It is impossible to peruse the second 
book of Maccabees without feeling thoroughly convinced that the manners of the Jews at that comparatively late period of their 
history bore a strong resemblance to those of the Indians, both in their mode of carrying on war and their savage treatment of the 
prisoners who fell into their hands, whom it is evident, from the thirty-third verse of the eighth chapter O the second book of Macca- 
bees, they sometimes, like the Indians, devoted to the fiery torture. So plain an historical fact stands me need of farfetched and 
remote proofs, since why is Callisthenes, in the passage cited, said to have been burned at the feast which the Jews celebrated for 
their victory, unless he had been reserved, in the Indian fashion, for that particular occasion : “ Furthermore, at such time as they 
kept the feast for the victory in their country, they burnt Cailisthenes, that had set fize upon the holy gates; who had fled into a little 
house, and so he received a reward meet for his wickedness.” Other burnings of PESOReS and other inhuman massacres committed 
by the Jews are recorded in the thirty-sixth verse of the tenth chapter and the sixteenth verse @! the brelith chapter of the same 
book of Maccabees and almost in a tone of triumph by the Jewish historian. If such GOL! adialts CR OTATOR it is true, that some 
apology may be offered for them by saying that Antiochus was a cruel prince, ee did everything in his power to root out Judaism 
from his dominions; but why, it may at the same time be: demanded, was Antiochus such a cruel enemy of the Jews? Tt was not, 
surely, because he believed their religion to be true, or that the profession of it would conduce to the interests of his subjects. 

5 i 

382 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

Note 8, page 316, line 23. 

Adair’s account of the Indians putting to death their prophets who either prophesied falsely of rain, or failed to realize their 
promises of it to the people, receives strong corroboration from the following passage of Don Jose Cortes’ inedited ‘Memorias 
sobre las Provincias del Norte de Nueva Espaiia’; and the custom itself was strictly in accordance with the Mosaic ordinance, 
which required that a false prophet should atone for his presumption by being put to death. The ingenious test which Moses 
devised for distinguishing a false from a true prophet forms a supplementary clause to the following law of the eighteenth chapter 
of Deuteronomy, and is well worthy of attention: ‘‘ The prophet which shall presume to speak a word in my name which I have 
not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the name of other gods, even that prophet shall die; and if thou say in thine 
heart, How shall we know the word which the Lord hath not spoken? when a prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, ¢f the 
thing follow not, nor come to pass, THAT is the thing which the Lord hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it presump- 
tuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him.” 

* Con estas ideas, que siguen de padre 4 hijo, se embeben en supersticiosos juicios, y es comun el que atribuyan 4 algun Indio 
declamador, adusto y misterioso, la gracia de adivinar; y el elegido recibe la buena fee de sus consagrantes, llenandose en si 
mismo de mas poder que el que los otros le suponen, se vee colocado en un concepto que le distingue, y que le produce utilidad : 
exerce su oficio dando salidas ambiguas 4 las consultas que le hacen; y 4 fuerza de esta practica llega el mismo 4 persuadirse mas 
y mas; yen los otros se aviva la creencia de su predilecto oraculo, Es anexo 4 su exercicio el de la medicina; y con laaplicacion 
de ciertas hierbas-acompafian muchas ceremonias y cantos tristes, siendo este el metodo comun que observan en sus curaciones ; 
pero tambien quando tienen la disgracia de que alguno de los Indios de mas suposicion, 6 de los mas bien emparentados se les 
muere, se levanta y corre la voz de que la muerte no ha sido natural, sino que fue hechizado, y entonces aseguran al divino poco 
antes tan venerado, y él, por no disminuir la creencia de su gracia y habilidad, dice y confiesa, que es cierto hechizo al enfermo 
para quitarle la vida, y seguidamente figura é inventa el modo como lo hizo, que nunca pasa de haberle comunicado su saliva, 
inficionando la sangre, & otro medio invisible y despreciable, con cuya declaracion basta para que le aten 4 un arbol, y que quede 
levantado de la tierra lo suficiente 4 que una hoguera que encienden debajo, lo queme lentamente; pero sin estos contratiempos 
consiguen siempre sus adivinos un grado muy elevado de estimacion, son solicitados de tierras y rancherias distantes, y muy bien 
pagados para que oficien sus dos explicados ministerios.” 

Note 9, page 317, line 12. 

The following account of a mode of divination practised by the Tultecas, which is extremely analogous to that designated in 
Scripture, inquiring of the Lord by Urim and Thummim, is taken from the fifth chapter of the fifteenth book of the first part of 
Juan de Fuente’s inedited History of Guatemala. We may here remark that it was at a later period of his life, and after he had 
obtained access to the public archives, that he discovered that a colony of Jews had, ages before the arrival of the Spaniards in 
the New World, established a flourishing monarchy in that portion of the American continent. ‘ Corre por medio de esta situa- 
cion de la parte del norte 4 la del sur una zanja de estado y medio de hondo, y sus pretiles se levantan de cal y piedra por mas de 
medio estado de alto, y este foso hacia division de la gran poblacion dejando la habitacion de los principales y nobles 4 la parte 
oriental, y la de los plebeyos 6 maceguales (como ellos dicen) 4 la parte del occidente. Corren de mas de la calle mayor y prin- 
cipal que v4 desde la puerta de la ciudad 4 la plaza mayor del adoratorio que esté junto al palacio otras calles de oriente 4 
poniente norte sur, saliendo todas como ramas de la calle mayor, con muchas viviendas continuadas que forman las calles, con 
las habitaciones bien ordenadas y repartidas, mostrando haberse edificado y erijido con mucha arte y esmero grande de policia y 
gran poder de los Seiiores 'Tultecas de aquellos tiempos, que dominaban y regian como propio sefiorio esta parte de Cachiquel. 
De la referida zanja sale una calle bien ancha y desenfadada, junto 4 la calle real 6 mayor, que entra de la puerta al templo, y va 
esta hacia el oeste, cuya longitud casi es de un quarto de legua, y va 4 parar 4 un cerrillo predominante 4 la poblacion que tiene 
en la cumbre y eminencia que hace parte de Ilanura un edificio redondo 4 Ja manera de un brocal de pozo, que se levanta en torno 
cosa de un estado perfecto. Admirase tambien todo su pavimento betunado del mismo genero de la poblacion: levanta en medio 
de un xocalo 6 peana lustrosa como un vidrio, y que no se rastrea ni conoce que materia sea, bien que el deseo de investigarlo 
exita. Este brocal era tribunal 6 consistorio de estos Indios Cachiqueles, donde no solo se daba audiencia publica, pero se ejecu- 
taban las sentencias de aquellos jueces, los quales sentados 4 la redonda del pretil oian en justicia en lo civil y criminal; pero des- 
pues de haberse pronunciado Ja sentencia, que alli era como en vista, restaba otra diligencia para su confirmacion 6 revocacion, 
que era salir de alli tres mensajeros de aquellos mismos jueces, que eran como diputados, y estos se encaminaban 4 una barranca 
profunda que est4 hacia la parte del norte del palacio, donde en lugar muy decente y adornado estaba en una como hermita 6 
adoratorio un oraculo del demonio, que era una piedra negra y trasparente como el vidrio, pero de mejor y mas preciosa materia 
que la piedra chay, en cuya diafanidad les representaba el demoniod los diputados la resolucion que se devia tomar; y si era 
confirmando la sentencia, luego se ejecutaba alli en aquel tribunal sobre aquella peana, donde tambien se le habia dado tormento 
al reo, y si en contrario se representaba 6 no se figuraba en lo diafano de la piedra alguna cosa, quedaba libre, y este oraculo era 
tambien consultado en todos los movimientos militares que se ofrecian, executandose 6 no la guerra segun el aspecto 6 representa- 
cion del oraculo, de que hoy dan razon Espanoles y Indios; pero como en aquellos tiempos primitivos de nuestras fundaciones 
llegasen estas noticias al reverendo obispo Don Francisco Marroguin de clara memoria, mand cortarla curiosamente & esquadra, 
la consagré y aplicé para ara, que hoy sirve en el altar mayor del Convento de San Francisco de Tecpangoatemala, y es presea de 
singular hermosura y valor. Tiene de largo esta piedra media vara cumplida.” Reference to the 107th page of the Notes 
forming the Appendix to the present volume, will show that the people ef Guatemala had a tradition that their kings were 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 383 

descended from the Jews; it would not, therefore, be surprising if those princes of Hebrew descent should have revived, not only 
the laws of Moses amongst the Indians, but the ancient mode of inquiring of the Lord by Urim and Thummim, to which even 
the proper name Tezcatlipoca, which signifies “he who appeared in the smoke of the mirror’, may bear some allusion. We may 
further observe in reference to the phrase “‘ Ahzib Kiche”, which occurs in the course of the above-mentioned note, that Achzib 
would appear from the fourteenth verse of the first chapter of Micah, to have been the name of some powerful Jewish families 
in the days of that prophet, although its real signification in Hebrew is ‘a lie’: “* Therefore shalt thou give presents to More- 
sheth-gath: the houses of Achzib shall be a lie to the kings of Israel.” Having assigned another and a preferable etymology to 
the proper name Tezcatlipoca in the 249th page of the sixth volume of this work, we shall here observe in support of the latter 
derivation, that the Mexicans called the festival of Toxcatl, which they celebrated, in the third month of their calendar, in 
honour of Tezcatlipoca, by the other name of ‘ T'epopuchihuiliztli’, or < the festival of the smoking mountain’, which would seem 
to refer to Mount Sinai. Another epithet of the same supreme being, the scriptural application of which we have omitted to 
explain in the 174th page of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present volume, was Titlacaoa, which signifies, according to 
Torquemada, ‘ We are thy servants,’ and might probably have originated in the Levites’ confession of faith, in the thirty-sixth 
verse of the ninth chapter of Nehemiah: “ Behold, we are servants this day; and for the land that thou gavest unto our fathers 
to eat the fruit thereof, and the good thereof, behold, we are servants én it.” 

Note 10, page 320, line 15. 

The following account of the Chikasah and some other Indian tribes is taken from the inedited letters of M. de Buisson, a 
French missionary, who visited the Mississippi soon after the foundation of the state of Louisiana, nearly at the close of the 
seventeenth century; it is serted here because it throws some light on the manners of the Indians described by Adair, at a 
period when their intercourse with Europeans had scarcely commenced : ‘ Le 24 nous cabanames de bonne heure a fin que nos 
gens se preparassent a la grande feste de noél: nous fimes une petite chapelle; nous chantames une grande messe de minuit, ou 
nos gens et tous nos Fran¢ois firent leurs devotions. Le jour de noél se passa a dire nos messes, que nos gens entendirent toutes, 
et T'apres midy nous chantames les vespres. Nous fumes fort etonnés de voir la terre trembler sur une heure apres midy, et 
quoyque ce tremblement ne dura pas, il fut assez fort pour que tous s’en apercussent facilement. Le lendemain nous partimes un 
peu tarde parceque nous fumes obligés d’attendre un petit sauvage que M. de Fonty avoit, et qui le jour precedent etant allé dans 
le bois pour y chercher des fruits s’etoit egaré: nous crumes qu'il pouvoit avoir été pris par quelques guerriers Chikachas, ce qui 
nous obligea de veiller et de faire garde toute la nuit, mais nous fumes bien rejouis quand le lendemain nous le yimes revenir : 
nous partimes et nous allames coucher proche du lieu ot étoient autrefois le Kappa, une nation des Akanscas. Le jour de Saint 
Jean, apres avoir fait environ cing lieues, nous vimes des canots de bois, et un sauvage sur le bord de l'eau: comme nous étions 
proche et que nous avions peur qu’en nous voyant il prise la fuite, un de nos hommes prit le calumet et chanta: il fut entendu 
du village qui etoit tout proche; une partie s’enfuit, les autres aporterent le calumet et vinrent nous recevoir sur le bord de l’eau. 
ls nous frotoient en nous abordant, et en suite se frotoient eux-mémes, marque d’estime parmi les sauvages. Ils nous prirent sur 
les epaules, et nous porterent dans la cabane d’un chef. II y avoit une cote de terre grasse 4 monter, celuy qui me portoit suc- 
comboit sous le fardeau. J’avois peur qu'il ne me laissat tomber, de sorte que je descendis malgre luy et montai la cote, mais 
aussytot que je fus monté, il fallut absolument que je me mis sur son dos pour me porter jusques 4 la cabane. Quelque temps 
apres, ils nous vinrent chanter le calumet pour nous, et le lendemain au soir ils nous porterent dans une autre cabane, ou nous 
ayant fait asseoir M. de Fonty et nous aussy sur des peaux d’ours, et quatre chefs ayant pris chacun un calumet qu'ils avoient 
mis devant nous, les autres se mirent a chanter en frappant sur des especes de tambours faits de pots de terre, sur les quels ils 
mettent une peau; ils tiennent a leurs mains une gourde ot il y a dedans des grains qui font du bruit, et leurs chants s’accor- 
dants au son de ses tambours et au son de ses gourdes, cela fait une musique qui n’est pas des plus agreables, pendant qu’un 
sauvage qui etoit derriere nous hercoit : nous fumes bientot degoutés de cette ceremonie, qu'ils font 4 tous les etrangers qu’ils 
considerent, et qu'il faut soufrir si on ne veut passer pour avoir le caur malfait et quelques mauvais desseins: nous mimes de nos 
gens a notre place apres y avoir un peu demeurés, ils eurent le plaisir d’etre bercés toute la nuit. Le lendemain ils nous firent 
present d’un petit esclave et de quelques peaux, que nous payames par un autre present de couteaux et autres choses quils 
estiment beaucoup. Nous etions bien consolés de nous voir dans les lieux de nos missions, mais nous eumes une sensible 
affliccion en voyant cette nation des Akanscas autrefois si nombreuse entierement detruite et par la guerre et par la maladie : il 
n’y avoit pas encore un moi qu’ils etoient gueris de la picote, qui en avoit emporté la plus grand partie; on ne ovo dans ce 
village que fosses; ils etoient la deux ensemble, et nous jugions qu'il n’y avoit pas cent hombrese tous les enfans pigient Hues et 
une grande partie des femmes. Les sauvages paroissent d’un tres bon naturel; nous etions 4 tout moment appellés en festin: ils 
ont une fidelité extraordinaire; ils transporterent tout ce que nous avions dans une cabane, et cela y demeura deux jours sans 
qu’on y prit, et pour nous mémes ‘il n’y eut rien de perdu; un de nos gens ayant oublié son couteau poe une cabane, un sauvage 
Je vint aussytot rapporter. La poligamie n’est pas commune parmi eux: nous vimes pourtant OnE le vallage de Kappa un ue ces 
malheureux qui s’habillant des leur jeunesse en fille, servent au plus honteux de vices, mais cet infame n’etoit point de leur nation ; 
il etoit Illinois, parmi lesquels cela est tout commun. Les sauvages ont abondament bled, féves et noicilles pour la chasse: etant 
accablés de maladie et craignant continuellement leurs ennemis, nous n’en vimes point dans leur village: ils se cabanent comme 
les Hurons, se servant de grands pots de terre au lieu de chaudiéres, et de cruches fort bien faites pour mettre leur eau. Je n’ay 
point vu encore de sauvages si bien faits: ils sont tous nuds, excepté quand ils sortent ils prennent une peau de boeuf sur eux: les 
femmes et les filles y sont comme aux Illinois 4 demi nities; elles ont une peau qui leur pend depuis la ceinture et leur va 
jusqu’aux genoux; quelques-unes ont une petite peau de chevreuil en bendolliere. Nous demeurames dans ce village deux 

384 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

jours et demi, et apres y avoir planté une croix, que nous leur dimes étre le signe de nétre union, nous partimes le trentiéme de 
Noviembre pour aller 4 leur autre village, qui est eloigné de celuy la environ de neuf lieues. Ce nous fut une peine tres sensible 
de nous separer de M. de Fonty, qui ne put venir avec nous pour quelques raisons; il auroit bien souhaité nous accompagner 
dans les autres nations ot nous allions, mais les affaires le rapelloient aux Illinois: c’est Thomme qui connoit le mieux ce pays; il 
a été deux fois a la mer, il a été deux fois dans la profondeur des terres jusqu’aux nations les plus eloignées: il est aimé et craint 
partout. Si l’on faisoit la decouverte de ces pays, je ne pense pas qu’on la peut mieux confier 4 un homme plus experimenté que 
luy. Je ne doute pas, Monseigneur, que votre grandeur ne se fasse un plaisir de reconnoitre les obligations que nous luy avons. 
Nous couchames a l’embouchure de la riviere des Akanscas, qui est belle, eloignée d’environ 250 lieues de celle des Illinois. 
Le lendemain nous arrivames de bonne heure au village, les sauvages vinrent au devant de nous avec le calumet; ils nous con- 
duisirent au village avec les mémes ceremonies qu’au premier: nous y passames deux jours; ce village me paroit un peu plus 
nombreux que le premier; il y avoit plus d’enfans. Nous leur dimes que nous allions plus bas chez leurs voisins et amis, qu’ils 
nous verroient souvent, qwils feroient bien de s’assembler tous ensemble, qu’ils pouroient facilement resister 4 leurs ennemis. 
Ils s’accorderent 4 tout, et nous promirent de tacher a faire venir avec eux les Ozagas, qui etoient sortis de la riviere des 
Misouris et etoient dans le haut de leur riviere. Nous partimes le 2 de Janvier et fumes cabanés 4 l’embouchure de la riviere, 
ou les Frangois qui s’en retournoient ne nous voulurent donner qu’un jour pour ecrire. Je croyois avoir plus de temps pour le 
faire, esperant remonter des Akanscas aux Illinois, mais comme nous allons bien plus bas, j’ai peur que les lettres que nous 
escrivons dans la suite ne soient pas tenues cette année, les occasions etant parties avant que nous arrivions aux Illinois. C’est 
pourquoi je prie votre grandeur de m’escuser si celle ci est un peu mal digerée.” 

Note 11, page 321, line 30. 

The great respect which the Indians felt for their prophets and beloved old women, who had many duties to perform at their 
religious festivals, was quite in accordance with the manners of the ancient Jews, who did not believe that the spirit of divination, 
whether proceeding from God or evil spirits, fell exclusively to the share of men. We accordingly read, in the fourteenth verse 
of the sixth chapter of the book of Nehemiah, of the prophetess Noadiah, who stirred up strife amongst the Jews who returned 
from Babylon ; and, in an earlier book of the Old Testament, of the prophetess Huldah, who flourished in the reign of Josiah king 
of Judah. The high reputeof the latter prophetess makes it only more to be regretted that time should have preserved none of her 
prophetical writings, whilst the extraordinary veneration in which she was held by her countrymen, who regarded her in the light 
of an oracle of God, is apparent from what took place when the copy of the law was found in the temple by the high priest 
Hilkiah, on which occasion both the king and his counsellors unanimously resolved to send to her to know the will of God, who, 
‘promptly yielding to their entreaties, pronounced a malediction in the name of the Lord against Jerusalem and its sinful inhabi- 
tants. The fact of the whole Jewish nation sending to inquire of the prophetess Huldah concerning the words of the book of the 
law is thus recorded in the twenty-second chapter of the second book of Kings, where it deserves to be remarked, that a college 
for religious women, such as the Mexicans and Peruvians considered a necessary appendage to their temples, is also inci- 
dentally mentioned : 

** And Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan the scribe, Ihave found the book of the law in the house of the Lord. And 
Hilkiah gave the book to Shaphan, and he read it. And Shaphan the scribe came to the king, and brought the king word again, 
and said, Thy servants have gathered the money that was found in the house, and have delivered it into the hand of them that do 
the work, that have the oversight of the house of the Lord. -And Shaphan the scribe showed the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest 
hath delivered me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king. And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of — 
the book of the law, that he rent his clothes. And the king commanded Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and 
Achbor the son of Michaiah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asahiah a servant of the king’s, saying, Go ye, inquire of the Lord 
for me, and for the people, and for all Judah, concerning the words of this book that is found: for great is the wrath of the Lord 

that is kindled against us, because our fathers have not hearkened unto the words of this book, to do according unto all that 
which is written concerning us.. So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asahiah, went unto Huldah 
the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem 
in the college;) and they communed with her. And she said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Tell the man that 
sent you tome, Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, even all the 
words of the book which the king of Judah hath read: because they have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, 
that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands; therefore my wrath shall be kindled against this place, 
and shall not be quenched. But to the king of Judah which sent you to inquire of the Lord, thus shall ye say to him, Thus saith 
the Lord God of Israel, as touching the words which thou hast heard ; Because thine heart was tender, and thou hast humbled 
thyself before the Lord, when thou heardest what I spake against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, that they should 
become a desolation and a curse, and hast rent thy clothes, and wept before me; I also have heard thee, saith the Lord. Behold 
therefore, I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered into thy grave in peace; and thine eyes shall not see all 
the evil which I will bring upon this place. And they brought the king word again.” 

Note 12, page 321, line 39. 

The Indian invocation either of all or some of the syllables of Jehovah, or Yohewah, in their festivals and religious dances, is so 
a remarkable fact that it will be satisfactory to find that it does not rest on the single testimony of Adair, but is confirmed by the 
accounts of writers of other nations, both French and Spanish, and particularly by the original religious songs of the Indians, 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 385 

which the learned editor of Major Long’s ‘ Expedition to the Rocky Mountains’ has inserted in the ‘ Narrative of Tanner’s Cap- 
tivity among the Indians,’ a work lately published at New York, many of the stanzas of which terminate with the syllables 
Yah-we-he-ya, Whe-he-ya, Hah-he-whe-ya, evidently invocations of the Great Spirit, and clearly enunciative of the Divine name. 
Don Jose Cortes likewise, describing in his inedited Memoirs the manners and customs of the Apache Indians, who inhabit with other 
tribes the vast and almost unexplored territory lying between the Gulf of California and the Mississippi, thus notices this frequent 
recurrence of the syllable Ho in the songs which they used in their religious dances: “En una rancheria sola 6 en la junta de 
otras son sus favoritas diversiones los bayles: no tienen mas musica que sus voces, y una olla, 6 calabacino, que cubren con una 
piel muy tirante, y se toca con un palo, 4 cuyo compas y el de las voces con que acompafian hombres y mugeres, saltando todos 4 
un tiempo, formados en diferentes ruedas, y colocados los de uno y otro sexo simetricamente. Despues de empezada la danza 
se repete con frequencia un intermedio, entrando en el circulo dos 6 tres de los mas expeditos y agiles, que executan una especie 
de bayle Inglés de mucha violencia, y de muy dificultosas contorsiones. Si el bayle se ha preparado para salir 4 una funcion 
de guerra, 6 en celebridad de alguna accion feliz se concluye con las armas en la mano: se mezclan alaridos y tiros, y sin perder 
la cadencia del H6, Hé, publican las hazafias que han hecho, 6 que intentan executar. Tambien hay bayles que disponen los 
adivinos quando han de exercer su ministerio: los actores se cubren la cabeza con una especie de mascara de gamuza, que suelen 
adornar con pinturas, y principia la danza en la forma que se ha dicho.” To the foregoing testimony of Cortes we may add that 
of Marc Lescarbot in the following passage of the fifth chapter of the sixth book of his ‘ Histoire de la Nouvelle France,’ from 
which it would appear that the Indians of Canada made as frequent use of the syllables of the Divine name in their religious songs 
and dances as the more southern tribes of East and West Florida, and there must undoubtedly have been a reason for this agree- 
ment amongst savage tribes in a purely arbitrary religious rite: ‘Cela fait, il se met 4 chanter quelque chose (a mon avis) a la 
louange du diable, qui leur a indiqué de la chasse: et les autres sauvages qui sont 1a repondent, faisans quelque accord de musique 
entre eux. Puis ilz dansent 4 leur mode, comme nous dirons ci-aprés, avec chansons que je n’entend point, ni ceux des nétres 
qui entendoient le mieux leur Jangue. Mais un jour m’allant promener en noz prairies le long de la riviere, je m’approchay de la 
cabanne de Membertou, et mis sur mes tablettes une parcelle de ce que j’entendis, qui y est encore écrit en ces termes, ‘ Haloet 
ho ho he hé ha ha haloet ho ho hé,’ ce qu’ilz repeterent par plusieurs fois. Le chant est sur mes dites tablettes en ces notes, 
Re fa sol sol re sol sol fa fa re re sol sol fa fa. Une chanson finie ilz firent tous une grande exclamation, disans ‘ Hé é € é.’ Puis 
recommencerent une autre chanson, disans: Egrigna hau egrigna hé he hu hu ho ho ho egrigna hau hau hau. Le chant de ceci 
étoit, Fa fa fa sol sol fa fa re re sol sol fa fa fa re fa fa sol sol fa. Ayans fait l’exclamation accoutumée, ils en commencerent une 
autre, qui chantoit: Tameja alleluya tameja douveni hau hau hé hé. Le chant en étoit, Sol sol sol fa fa re re re fa fa sol fa so! fa 
fa re re. J’écoutay attentivement ce mot alleluya repeté par plusieurs fois, et ne sceu jamais comprendre autre chose. Ce 
qui me fait penser que ces chansons sont a la louange du diable, si toutefois ce mot signifie envers eux ce qu'il signifie en 
Hebreu, qui est ‘louez le Seigneur.’ Toutes les autres nations de ce pais la en font de méme: mais personne n’a particularisé 
leurs chansons sinon Jean de Leri, lequel dit que les Bresiliens en leurs sabats font aussi de bons accords. Et se trouvant un jour 
en telle féte, il rapporte qu’ilz disoient Hé hé hé hé hé hé hé hé hé hé, avec cette note, Fa fa sol fa fa sol sol sol sol sol. Tt 
cela fait, s’écrioient d’une facon et hurlement epouvantable l’espace d’un quart d’heure, et sautoient les femmes en l’air avec 
violence jusques 4 en ecumer par la bouche. Puis recommencerent la musique, disans: Heu heuraure heura heuraure heura 
heura ouech. La note est, Fa mi re sol sol sol fa mire mire miut re. Cet auteur dit qu’en cette chanson ils avoient regretté 
leurs peres decedez, lesquels étoient si vaillans, et toutefois qu’ilz s’étoient consolés en ce qu’aprés leur mort ilz s’asseuroient de 
les aller trouver derriere les hautes montagnes, ou ilz danseroient et se rejouiroient avec eux. Semblablement qu’a toute outrance 
ils avoient menacé les Ouetacas leurs ennemis d’étre bientot pris et mangez par eux, ainsi que leur avoient promis leurs Caraibes : 
et quils avoient aussi fait mention du deluge, dont nous avons parlé au chapitre precedent. Je laisse 4 ceux qui écrivent de la 
demonomanie 4 philosopher 1a dessus. Mais il faut dire de plus que tandis que noz sauvages chantent ainsi, il y en a d’autres 
qui ne font autre chose que dire Hé, ou Hei, (comme une homme qui fend du bois,) avec un mouvement de bras: et dansent en 
rond sans se tenir l’un l'autre, ni bouger d’une place, frappans des piez contre terre, qui est la forme de leurs danses, semblables a 
celles que le dit de Leri rapporte de ceux du Bresil, qui sont a plus de quinze cens lieués de la. Apres quoy les ndtres font un 
feu, et sautent par dessus comme les anciens Cananeens, Hammonites, et quelquefois les Israélites ; mais ilz ne sont si detestables, 
car ilz ne sacrifient point leurs enfans au diable par le feu.” 

It deserves to be remarked that the Brazilians, whose manners, notwithstanding the distance of their respective territories, bore 
a strong resemblance to those of the North American Indians, are declared by the Portuguese writer, Emanuel de Moraés, 
a fragment of whose inedited history of Brazil has been preserved by Laet in his Notes to Grotius’s treatise De Origine Gentium 
Americanarum, to have presented an exact counterpart of the manners of the Jews, except in their not practising the rite of 
circumcision; and, like the Mexicans, they had a tradition of the children of Israel passing through the Red Sea, and the vain 
attempt of Pharaoh to stay the fugitives. There would be nothing, therefore, surprising in their invoking, like the northern 
tribes of Indians, the Divine name in their solemn dances. We shall proceed to quote the words of Emanuel de Moraés in his 
history of Brazil above alluded to: ‘ Ego vero libenter credo Americanos oriundos non ab uno populo, nec una in parte, sed 
a Carthaginensibus et ab Judeis, idque temporis longo tractu diversis in locis. A Carthaginensibus, quia proditum est novas 
invenisse et remotissimas regiones omni ameenitate et fertilitate insignes: sed quia cunctos inflammarat felicissimi soli nuntium, 
legibus cautum ne quis illuc iterum navigaret, ne Carthago bellorum tumultibus afflicta desereretur: cumque hance ob causam 
cessaret navigatio, cessavit et contractus, et ggns illa facta est agrestis, divisaque in varias familias, huc illucque discurrens, sine 
aliquo communi principe varias regiones occupavit, et unaqueeque propria sibi finxit vocabula. A Judzis verd, quia Brasilienses 
Judaicos mores exceptd circumeisione induerunt. Primo Judzis non licebat quascunque sibi jungere uxores, sed ex cert et 
determinata tribu, ut habetur capite ultimo Numerorum, v. 7, et deinceps, ubi heec leguntur: ‘Omnes enim viri uxores ducent de 

5F 

386 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

tribu et cognatione sua, et cunctze foemine de eAdem tribu maritos accipient, ut heereditas permaneat in familiis, nec sibi misceantur 
tribus.’ Brasilianis quoque fuit solemne antequam ad castra Christi transirent, consanguineas suas ducere, sororum filias primum, 
harum defectu alias. Secundd, Judei patris nomine condecorabant non tantum parentes suos, sed eorum quoque fratres et 
reliquos ascendentes ad multas generationes: sic angelus Josephum interpellavit dicens, ‘Joseph, fili David, noli timere;’ non 
quod David Josephi esset pater, a quo longissimé serie distabat, sed quia ex majoribus ejus erat. Ita Brasiliani more Judaico 
vocant patres suos quoque patruos, et amitas similiter matres. Tertid, Judei lachrimas magni faciebant, integro mense suorum 
funera flentes, ut videre est in obitu Moysis, de quo dicitur Deuteron. cap. xxxiv. ver. 8.: ‘ Fleveruntque eum filii Israel in campes- 
tribus Moab triginta diebus.’ Et 1. 1. Mach. legimus de inclyto illo Machabeo, ‘ Et planxerunt eum omnis Israel planctu magno:’ 
alios in re clarissim4 facio missos. Brasiliani quoque lachrimas maximi faciunt, easque habent in potestate: suos integro mense 
ad minimum plorant, sine ull imtermissione aliquando, ita ut contingat multis in fletu perire: Et quod mirandum est, carorum 
adventu cireumdatis collo brachiis, ut szepissime vidimus, cum effus4 comploratione excipiunt. Quartd, Judei dum eorum res 
vigebat, longis vestimentis delectabantur; sic Jacob dilecto suo Josepho tunicam fecerat talarem: eAdem -utebantur tempore Christi 
domini nostri Scribee et Phariszi, evangelio id attestante. Quinimd, et consuetudo pictorum obtinuit jam Judzorum effigies vesti- 
mentis ad pedes usque demissis nobis proponere. Majores suos in hoc quoque Brasilii imitantur egregié; longa vestis cordi illis 
est, et foeminze omnes que vestitum jam portare didicerunt, und talari tantum tunica utuntur: et si senem Brasilium rogaveris, 
quo vestimentorum genere maxime capiatur? statim respondebit, pallio longo. His et aliis rationibus permoti hanc sententiam 
sumus amplexi, eandemque tenent multi viri docti «xn Brasilid degentes, quamvis nonnulli repugnent arundineis innixi funda- 
mentis. Ipsorumque Americanorum multi ab antiquissima traditione edocti majores suos agnoscunt Judeos, illos divinitus e mari 
servatos fuisse affirmantes. Nec nos multum movet eorum sententia, qui non de Mari Rubro hee intelligunt, sed ad memoriam 
universalis diluvii referunt, cujus apud illas nationes vestigia reperiuntur, quamvis obscura et admodum confusa: quia éll@ distin- 
gunt diluvium a Mart Rubro, asserentes majores suos fastigia arborum ascendisse altissimarum, et ibi Noemici diluvii evasisse 
periculum, quod non divinitus factum dicunt, sicuti de Mari Rubro affirmant.” 

Note 13, page 322, line 39. 

The apparent indifference of the Indians to their near relatives, of which Adair gives a striking instance in his eighth Argu- 
ment, would appear to have originated in the extreme distrust entertained by members of the same tribe of each other, which 
naturally would have led them to display a studied carelessness of manner in their mutual intercourse, which, growing into a habit, 
might, in the estimation of Europeans, be considered an indication of a total want of natural affection, where great real love 
between members of the same family might exist. The extreme fortitude with which the Indians on many occasions suffer imtense 
bodily suffering, betraying no visible emotion in their countenances, and in many instances evincing the greatest indifference in 
their manner, might in the same way be adduced as a proof of their insensibility to pain; but their courage in war, their eagerness 
to avenge the blood of their relations and friends, their solemn mournings for the dead, and their respect for their tombs, all lead 
to the conclusion that the Indians are as capable of sentiments of affection towards each other as any other race of mankind. 
The surprising distrust manifested by the Apache Indians towards each other, originating, it is to be presumed, in the Indian 
mode of life, which is predatory and erratic in the highest extreme, is noticed by Don Jose Cortes in the following passage of the 
concluding section of the Second Part of his ‘Memorias sobre las Provincias del Norte de Nueva Espafia’: ‘ Finalmente, en 
quantas marchas emprenden, sean reunidos 6 separados, obra y se manifiesta la indecible desconfianza que los caracteriza; y 
aunque encuentren 4 sus parientes guardan las mayores precauciones, que son mas 6 menos segun el tiempo que ha pasado sin 
haverse visto; y no se aproximardn & un hermano sin las armas en la mano: siempre estan en cautela contra un atendado, 6 
siempre prontos 4 cometerle. Jamas se saludan ni se despiden, y la accion mas urbana de su sociedad consiste en mirarse y 
considerarse un rato reciprocamente antes de tomar la palabra para qualquier asunto.” 

Note 14, page 334, line 28. 

The following passage of the two hundred and twenty-eighth chapter of the ‘ Historia Apologetica’ of Las Casas, which treats of 
the funeral rites of the kings of Mechuacan, strongly corroborates what Adair says of the Indians resembling the Jews in their ex- 
treme fear of contracting pollution from the touch of a dead body: “ Luego todos los que avian tocado al rey muerto 6 4 los otros 
muertos se iban 4 bafiar, porque no se les pegase alguna enfermedad, los quales lavados volvian todos los sefiores y otra mucha 
gente al patio del rey muerto.” ‘‘ Afterwards all who had touched the deceased king or any of the other dead bodies went to 
bathe themselves, that no infirmity might befall them; and having bathed, all the lords, accompanied by a great crowd of 
people, returned to the court of the deceased king.” It deserves to be remarked that the other dead bodies mentioned with that 
of the king were those of the persons who were sacrificed at his funeral in order to serve him as attendants in the other world. 

Note 15, page 336, line 8. 

Adair’s account of the funeral rites of the Choktah Indians, and their extreme fear of contracting pollution from the dead, 
(the probable cause of their inhumanity towards the dying,) is singularly confirmed by Don Jose Cortes, in the following passage 
of the Second Part of his inedited ‘ Memorias sobre las Provincias del Norte de Nueva Espatia,’ who thus describes the funeral rites 
of an Apache chieftain, of which he himself was eye-witness in the year 1797: ‘‘ Quando acontece la muerte natural 6 violenta del 
Apache, bien sea padre de familia, muger, hijo, 6 pariente, manifiestan entonces los mas allegados su sentimiento, cortandose el 
pelo, y dando otras varias muestras de dolor: se matan los caballos del difunto, y toda su ropa y muebles se deposttan en una 
hoguera, 4 donde uno 4 otro lleva tambien parte de su equipage para dar 4 conocer el mayor pesar que ha tomado. El viudo suele 

x 

we 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 387 

contenerse en parte de estos estremos por las otras mugeres, que acometidas de los zelos le indican que estimaba mas 4 la muerta 
que a las presentes; y por estos principios naturales le persuaden, le disminuyen su angustia, y le repiten con mucha frecuencia 
un testo, que traducido quiere decir: ‘ Los muertos nunca se nombran.’ Por lo general el cadaver es conducido 4 un barranco 6 
sepultura hecha 4 mano, alli lo arrojan, lo cubren con piedras, gritan con desconcertadas voces, y miran aquel parage con perpetuo 
horror; y el mismo conservan 4 aquel en donde fallecid, del qual levantan inmediatamente su rancheria, sin que jamas la vuelyan 
4 situar en el, ni en sus inmediaciones. En el mes de Octubre y parte de Noviembre del aiio pasado de 1797, estube con comision 
en el presidio de Janos, que es el mas avanzado en la parte de frontera que cubre 4 la Nueva Bizcaya, en donde se hallan esta- 
blecidas varias rancherias de Indios Apaches, 4 quienes se ha dado la paz: vivi aquellos dias trasportado a la observacion de 
unos hombres que tanta materia me daban para discurrir sobre sus barbaras costumbres, genero de vida, y entusiasmos; y 
haviendo presenciado la muerte y funeral de un Indio con mayores circunstancias y demostraciones de dolor que las que comun- 
mente usan, referire el caso como propio de este lugar. Un Indio que al parecer seria de 30 4 35 aiios, padecié una enfermedad 
que por su graduacion y sintomas conocieron los asistentes que era mortal, y ya 4 lo ultimo de su postracion, 6 considerandole 
cercano 4 la muerte, le sacaron de su jacal, le tendieron sobre muchas matas de alamo, y le cubrieron con otras tantas, dejandole 
solamente los ojos descubiertos. Todos los de su rancheria concurrieron trayendo sus flechas, y las pusieron rodeando el cuerpo 
del moribundo, y lo mismo hicieron con las lanzas, clavandolas en la tierra no lejos del objeto de su sentimiento. En este estado 
aparecié una muger, que despues supe era suegra al espirante, trahia en la mano un lefio encendido, fijando la vista en los ojos 
de su yerno; y luego que advirtio cerré uno de ellos, se did por acabada la vida del gentil, y prendid fuego é.la lena que le servia 
de cama y le cubria. Otras mugeres que tambien estaban prevenidas de lefios encendidos, dieron fuego al mismo tiempo 4 
quantos jacales habia en aquella rancheria, menos al del muerto, que lo Ilevaron para que ardiera juntamente con él, como asi- 
mismo su armamento, silla de montar, el pelo de su muger, enaguas y demas gamuzas con que se vestia. Dejaron pasar el tiempo 
necesario paraque las lamas hiciesen todo el estrago, y los huesos que hallaron entre las cenizas fueron 4 ser enterrados 4 un 
pequefio y oculto cerro, distante como dos millas del punto en que se representé la horrorosa escena, y en aquel mismo instante 
se mudaron 4 otra situacion desde no viesen la anterior: mataron seguidamente tres cavallos, que eran los ultimos bienes que 
quedaban del difunto, y al dia siguiente se tiraron boca abajo en el arenal del rio, en cuya disposicion se mantuvieron sin comer 
ni hablar hasta et tercer dia, en que todos se levantaron alegres como estaban antes del funesto suceso. Quise indagar la causa 
de estas raras demostraciones de que no habia noticia, pero no hubo quien supiese dar la menor idea de ellas, y 4 los mas ancianos 
y acostumbrados 4 tratar con los Indios causaron tanta admiracion como al que los hubiera empezado 4 conocer en el espectaculo 
de la barbara funcion de su funeral.” 

To the foregoing testimony of Don Jose Cortes it may he satisfactory to add that of Dr. Boudinot, whose account, in the 183rd 
page of his ‘Star in the West,’ of the manner in which the Indians on some occasions manifest their grief for the death of their near 
relations, deserves to be compared with the following description of a solemn Jewish mourning, in the twelfth verse of the thirteenth 
chapter of the Second Book of Maccabees: ‘‘So when they had all done this together, and besought the merciful Lord with 
weeping and fasting, and lying flat upon the ground three days long, Judas, having exhorted them, commanded they should be in 
a readiness.” The account of Dr. Boudinot is as follows: “A very worthy clergyman, with whom.-the writer was well acquainted, 
and who had long preached to the Indians, informed him that many years ago, having preached in the morning to a considerable 
number of them, in the recess between the morning and afternoon services news was suddenly brought that the son of an Indian 
woman, one of the congregation then present, had fallen into a mill-dam, and was drowned. Immediately the disconsolate mother 
retired to some distance in deep distress, and sat down on the ground. Her female friends soon followed her, and placed them- 
selves in like manner around her in a circle, at a small distance. ‘They continued a considerable time in profound and melancholy 
silence, except now and then uttering a deep groan. All at once, the mother, putting her hand on her mouth, fell with her face 
flat on the ground, her hand continuing on her mouth. 'This was followed in like manner by all the rest, when all cried out with 
the most melancholy and dismal yellings and groanings. Thus they continued, with their hands on their mouths, and their mouths 
in the dust, a considerable time. The men also retired to a distance from them, and went through the same ceremony, making the 
most dismal groanings and yellings. Need any reader be reminded of the Jewish customs on occasions of deep humiliation? as 
in Job xxi. 5. ‘ Mark me, and be astonished, and lay your hand on your mouth;’ xxix. 9. ‘ The princes refrained talking, and 
laid their hands on their mouths; xl. 4. ‘ Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I willlay my hand on my mouth.’ 
Micah vii. 16. ‘ The nations shall see and be confounded, they shall lay their hands on their mouths.’ Lament. iii. 9. ‘ He 
putteth his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope.’ Prov. xxx. 32. ‘ If thou hast thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy 
mouth.” Having already observed, in the 39th and 88th pages of the Notes forming the Appendix to the present volume, that 
it was a Hebrew custom to lay the hand on the mouth as a mark of reverence and awe, and that it was usual with the Jews to 
lie flat upon the ground when suffering extreme affliction, we may here refer to the seventeenth page of the same Notes for some 
other ceremonies of Jewish mourning ; amongst which may be mentioned the women mourning apart from, the men, in the TaOeE 
related by Dr. Boudinot, whose testimony is further confirmed by that of Louis Hennepin, in the following passage of the thirty- 
ninth chapter of the ‘ Continuation of his Discovery of Several Countries in America’: A A savage woman being at the point of 
departure, she cried, I will not be baptized, for the savages who die Christians are burnt in the country of souls by the Europeans; 
ahd certain savages said one day that we baptized them to make them slaves in the other world. I have been asked by others, 
if there was good game for hunting in that country whither I would have their dying infants to go after being baptized,; and when 
J made answer that they live there without eating or drinking, because they are fully satiated with the contemplation of the Great 
Master of life, We will not go thither, said they, because we must not eat; and when I have added that there would be no oceasion 
for food there, they clapt their hands to their mouths, as a sign of admiration, and said, Thou art a great liar; is there anything can 

388 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

live without eating?” Reserving for another occasion some arguments in proof of the belief of the Indians in the resurrection of 
the body,—in conjunction, however, with the absurd expectation of a future state of terrestrial felicity,—being founded in Hebrew 
traditions, and the promises held out to the Jews in the Old Testament of the restoration of their forefathers to the land of Canaan, 
_ the foundation of the city of New Jerusalem, and the reunion of their several tribes under King David, we may here observe, in 
reference to an Indian custom noticed by Adair in the 358th page of the present volume, that the twelve short sticks tied together 
in the form of a quadrangle, which Adair says it was customary for the Indians to carry before them when celebrating the obse- 
quies of any of their tribe whe had been killed in war would seem to have been typical of the final reunion of the twelve tribes 
of Israel, and to refer to the language of Ezekiel in the following passage of the thirty-seventh chapter of his Prophecies, which 
chapter is very remarkable from its scene being laid in a valley filled with the bones of the whole house of Israel, over which 
Ezekiel is commanded by God to prophesy and to declare to the Jews the final resurrection of Israel and their return to the land 
of Canaan: ‘‘ The word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Moreover, thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, 
For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of 
Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions: and join them one to another into one stick; and they shall become one 
in thine hand. And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee, saying, Wilt thou not show us what.thou meanest by 
these? say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and 
the tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall 
be one in mine hand. And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand before their eyes. And say unto them, Thus 
saith the Lord God, Behold, I will take the children of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather 
them on every side, and bring them into their own land: and I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of 
Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be no more éwo nations, neither shall they be divided into two king- 
doms any more at all: neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with 
any of their transgressions: but I will save them out of all their dwelling-places, wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them : 
so shall they be my people, and I will be their God. And David my servant shall be king over them, and they all shall have one 
shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgements, and observe my statutes, and do them. And they shall dwell in the land 
that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell therein, even they, and their 
_ children, and their children’s children roR EVER: and my servant David shall be their prince for ever. Moreover, I will 
make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them: and I will place them, and multiply them, 
and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore. My tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, I will be their God, 
and they shall be my people. And the heathen shall know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, wHzN my sanctuary shall be in 
the midst of them for evermore.” 

In reasoning on the probability of the Indians being descended from the Jews, from a striking resemblance in their mourning 
ceremonies and funeral rites, the reflection naturally presents itself to the mind, that as all mankind are subject to the same 
feelings of grief for the loss of those dear to them, so the mode of expressing those feelings is amongst all nations nearly the 
same, except where custom has produced a change. When, therefore, we find that the Indians and Jews differed from all other 
nations in their manner of mourning for the dead, and agreed with each other in many arbitrary rites, such as in burning a 
portion of their household goods, in anointing their bodies with oil, in burning them amidst the loud lamentations of women hired 
as mourners, in celebrating funeral feasts, in depositing great wealth in their tombs, in mourning for a stated period of time after 
their decease, in gathering their bones to those of their fathers, and, lastly, in employing the same personal demonstrations of 
grief, such as falling flat upon their faces on the ground, and lying in that position sometimes for three days, placing their hands 
upon their mouths, humiliating themselves in the dust, blackening their faces with ashes of charcoal, lying in ashes, uttering the 
ejaculation, Ah, brother! and amongst other Indian tribes, rending the garments, cutting the flesh, and shaving off the hair, both 
which latter customs, though strictly forbidden to the Jews in the nineteenth and twenty-first chapters of Leviticus and in the 
first verse of the fourteenth chapter of Deuteronomy, were commonly practised by their posterity from the age of Moses to that 
of the Babylonian captivity, as is evident from the denunciation of the prophet Micah in the sixteenth verse of the first chapter of 
his Prophecies: “‘ Make thee bald, and poll thee for thy delicate children; enlarge thy baldness as the eagle; for they are gone 
into captivity from thee”; and further appears from the allusion to the cutting of the flesh as an act of religious austerity in the 
following passage of the thirteenth chapter of Zechariah: ‘In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David 
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness. And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord of 
Hosts, that I will cut off the names of the idols out of the land, and they shall no more be remembered: and also I will cause 
the prophets and the unclean spirit to pass out of the land. And it shall come to pass, that when any shall yet prophesy, then 
his father and his mother that begat him shall say unto him, Thou shalt not live; for thou speakest les in the name of the 
Lord: and his father and his mother that begat him shall thrust him through when he prophesieth. And it shall come to pass 
in that day, that the prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision, when he hath prophesied: neither shall they wear 
a rough garment to deceive: but he shall say, I am no prophet, I am an husbandman; for man taught me to keep cattle 
from my youth. _ And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? ‘Then he shall answer, Those with which 
Iwas wounded én the house of my friends.” It is hence evident that the Jewish prophets were accustomed. to draw blood from 
their hands and various parts of their bodies in the manner represented in the Mexican paintings; or, to use a phrase familiar to 
the Spanish historians of the sixteerith century, sacrificed themselves after the same idolatrous fashion to Jehovah as the 
Mexican priests did to Tezcatlipoca, since the question put to the prophet in the passage of Scripture here referred to was of 
a captious nature, and intended to draw him into a confession that he was a prophet, by leaving him no other means of accounting 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 389 

for the wounds which were visible in his hands. We may remark, in concluding this note, that the Indian custom of burying their 
chieftains with their warlike habiliments is noticed by Ezekiel in the following passage of the thirty-second chapter of his 
Prophecies: “ And they shall not lie with the mighty that are fallen of the uncircumcised, which are gone down to hell with their 
weapons of war: and they have laid their swords under their heads, but their iniquities shall be upon their bones, though they 
were the terror of the mighty in the land of the living.” It is impossible on reading the above-mentioned chapter of Ezekiel, and 
comparing the tone of the prophet’s lamentation for Pharaoh and the kings who are there represented as descending with him to 
the regions of the dead, with the lamentation of the Mexican high priest, in the fifth chapter of the sixth book of Sahagun’s H istory 
of New Spain, for the deceased Mexican kings, who had gone down to hell with their weapons of war,—to refrain from thinking 
that the sentiments of the Jews and the Mexicans respecting the place which their deceased kings and warriors, who had been 
“mighty in the land of the living”, but who “had gone down to the pit”, occupied in Hades, nearly agreed with each other. We 
may here remark that the generality of the Jewish kings are declared in Scripture to have been so extremely wicked, that it is 
unreasonable to suppose that their most loyal subjects, their living contemporaries, or their warmest panegyrists amongst the 
rabbis of later ages would have assigned to them a place in heaven; but it does furnish matter for serious reflection that there is 
not the most obscure hint in any of the books of the Old Testament that the virtue of king David, the piety of Hezekiah, or the 
religious zeal of Josiah met with the reward of celestial felicity. Tacitus, indeed, remarks, in the fifth book of his History, which 
contains a curious account of the religious rites and usages of the Jews, that they believed that the souls of those who died in 
war or under the infliction of punishment were immortal; but he does not state that, like the Mexicans, they imagined that the 
souls of warriors went to the house of the sun, and there enjoyed heavenly felicity. The following are the words of the great 
Roman historian: ‘‘ Hi ritus quoquo modo inducti, antiquitate defenduntur: cetera instituta sinistra foed4 pravitate valuere. 
Nam pessimus quisque spretis religionibus patriis, tributa et stipes illuc gerebant; unde aucte Judeorum res. Et quia apud 
ipsos fides obstinata, misericordia in promptu, sed adversus omnes alios hostile odium, separati epulis, discreti cubilibus, projec- 
tissima ad libidinem gens alienarum concubitu abstinent; inter se nihil illicitum: circumcidere genitalia instituere, ut diversitate 
noscantur; transgressi in morem eorum idem usurpant: nec quicquam prius imbuuntur, quam contemnere deos, exuere patriam, 
parentes, liberos, fratres, vilia habere. Augenda tamen multitudini consulitur. Nam et necare quenquam ex agnatis, nefas: 
animasque prelio aut supplicits peremptorum eternas putant. Hine generandi amor et moriendi contemtus. Corpora condere, 
quam cremare, e more Aigyptio: eademque cura, et de infernis persuasio: ccelestium contra. fEgyptii pleraque animalia 
effigiesque compositas venerantur ; Judzi mente sol unumque numen intelligunt.” 

Note 16, page 337, line 18. 

The diseases to which the Indians of the northern provinces of New Spain are chiefly subject are stated by Morfi to be the 
following: ‘‘ Los males que con mas frequencia padecen y destruien gran numero de todas edades y sexos, son las viruelas, 
sarampion, fievres, y bubas 6 nanaguates, que los ponen horribles y asquerosos; en una palabra, todas aquellas enfermedades que 
tienen su origen de algun vicio en la masa sanguinaria, y que acaso les provienen del exceso con que los mas se dan 4 los licores 
fuertes, y todos 4 la manteca de oso, bebiendola como si fuese agua, por estar como el azeite siempre liquida, y 4 que especial- 
mente se atribuien las desinterias de sangre que los acaban.” It will immediately be perceived that consumption is not included 
in this list of diseases; and Adair remarks, in the 314th page of his ‘ Account of the Choktah Nation,’ that he never knew but 
one instance of an Indian dying of consumption, which, in the case alluded to, he attributes to the violent exercise of running a 
whole day under the burning rays of the sun, without being allowed by the enemy to take any rest, when his blood was in an 
overheated and excited state. 

Note 17, p. 338, line 22. 

Adair’s account of the aversion which the southern tribes of the North American Indians entertained for the flesh of swine 
receives some corroboration, not only from the fact of their calling the opossum by the same name as the hog, but from the fol- 
lowing passage of Cotton Mather’s Life of the celebrated North American Missionary John Eliot, who has thus recorded the 
dislike of the more northern tribes of New England to that animal: “‘I confess there was one, I cannot call it so much guess, as 
wish wherein he was willing a little to indulge himself, and that was, that our Indians are the posterity of the dispersed and 
rejected Israelites, concerning whom our God has promised that they shall yet be saved by the deliverer coming to turn away 
ungodliness from them. He saw the Indians using many parables in their discourses, much given to anointing of their heads, 
much delighted in dancing, especially after victories, computing their time by nights and months, giving dowries for wives, and. 
causing their women to dwell by themselves at certain seasons for secret causes, and accustoming themselves to grievous mourn- 
ings and yellings- for the dead, all which were usual things among the Israelites. They have, too, a great unkindness for our 
swine ; but I suppose that is because our hogs devour the clams, which are a dainty with them. He also saw some learned men 
looking for the lost Israelites among the Indians in America, and counting that they had thorough good reasons for doing so. 
And a few small arguments, or indeed, but conjectures, meeting with a favourable disposition in the hearer will carry some con- 
viction with them, especially if a report of a Menasseh Ben Israel be to back them. He saw likewise the judgements threatened 
unto the Israelites of old strongly fulfilled upon our Indians, particularly that, ‘Ye shall eat the flesh of your sons,’ which is done 
with exquisite cruelties upon the prisoners that they take from one another in their battles. Moreover, it is a prophecy in 
Deuteronomy, xxviii. 68.: ‘The Lord shall bring thee into Egypt again with ships, by the way whereof I spake unto thee, Thou 
shalt see it no more again: and there shall ye be sold unto your enemies, and no man shall buy you.’ This did our Eliot imagine 
accomplished when the captives taken by us in our late wars upon them were sent to be sold-in the coasts lying not very remote. 

5G 

390 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

from Egypt, on the Mediterranean sea, and scarce any chapmen would offer to take them off. Being upon such as these accounts 
not unwilling, if it were possible, to have the Indians found Israelites, they were, you may be sure, not a whit the less beloved for 
their supposed fathers’ sake, and the fatigues of his travels went on the more cheerfully, or at least the more hopefully, because 
of such possibilities.” 

Note 18, page 338, line 34. 

The origin of cannibalism amongst the Indians of the New World, the extent to which it prevailed, and even the reality of its 
existence in America, have furnished writers who had not the means of arriving at any-certain conclusion on the subject with 
much grave matter of discussion. We have already expressed it as our decided opinion that this revolting custom passed with 
the first Jewish colonies from its mother country, Palestine, to the American continent, and our reasons for arriving at such a 
conclusion will be found in the 308th page of the sixth volume of this work; in support and corroboration of which previously 
expressed opinion we shall quote the following passage from the hundred and seventy-eighth chapter of the ‘ Historia Apologetica’ 
of Las Casas, which particularly treats of the cannibalism of the Mexicans and the neighbouring state of Guatemala: “ Llegada la 
hora del sacrificio, iba el supremo sefior y los otros sefores con él al aposento donde estaban los esclavos que habian de ser sa- 
crificados, y tomaba por los cabellos el esclavo ; y si eran mas de uno, cada uno de los otros seflores toma el suyo y llevaban los 
delante; y el sefior supremo iba diciendo 4 voces altas, y los otros sefiores le ayudaban: ‘ Sefior Dios, acuerdate de nosotros que 
somos ¢wyos, danos salud, danos hijos y prosperidad para que tu pueblo se acreciente y te sirva, danos agua y buenos temporales 
para nos mantener y que vivamos. Oye nuestras peticiones, recibe nuestras plegarias, ayudanos contra nuestros enemigos, 
danos holganza y descanso.’ Todas estas palabras y peticiones iban haciendo todo el pueblo que lo entendia jdelante. Llegado 
4 el altar del sacrificio, estaba el sacerdote carnicero aparejado, y el sefior le ponia la victima en las manos. El] con sus ministros 
le sacaban con un cuchillo el corazon y lo ofrecian al idolo, y el sacerdote con tres dedos tomaba de aquella sangre y rociaba al 
idolo y luego al sol, haciendo muchas ceremonias que se dejan por no alargar: y de alli andaba por cada uno de los altares, 
haciendo lo mismo 4 cada idolo, porque cada uno tenia su altar dedicado; y el sol tenia el suyo, y la luna el suyo, y el levante, y 
el poniente, y la parte del septentrion, y la del austro. Ponian las cabezas de los sacrificados en unos palos sobre un cierto 
altar para esto solamente dedicado, donde las tenian por algun tiempo, el qual pasado las enterraban. Decian que por ciertas 
razones: una primera y principal, porque el idolo, 6 el dios que representaba, se acordase del sacrificio que se le habia hecho 
por servirle para que les hiciese bien y les apartase de todo mal; otra, porque los que lo viesen, considerasen que aquellos por el 
bien comun de ellos fueron sacrificados; otra, porque el rey 6 sefior que sucediese, lo viese y antes 4 aquella religion aftadiese 
que quitase ; la otra, porque los enemigos que lo oyesen tubiesen temor de les ofender, porque sino fuesen ciertos que asi 
habian de ser sacrificados. La carne de mas de los sacrificados la cocian y aderezaban, y la comian como cosa santisima 4G los 
dioses consagrada, y era felice el que de ella alcanzaba un bocado. Las manos y los pies y otras partes delicadas presentabanse 
al gran sacerdote y al rey como cosa mas sabrosa y estimada. Toda la demas se distribuia por los otros sacerdotes y ministros 
del altar, porque & los del pueblo ninguna cosa alcanzaba. Y de aquesto, que por religion y no por otra razon hacian, creen 
algunos que tubo en estas tierras origen el comer carne humana.” ‘The hour of the sacrifice having arrived, the supreme lord ac- 
companied by the other lords went to the apartment in which were the captives who were destined for sacrifice, and laid hold of the 
slave by the hair of the head ; and if there were more than one, each of the other lords took one and carried him before them. 
The supreme lord ejaculated aloud as he went along, the other lords joining in the supplication: ‘ Lord God, remember us who are 
thy people, grant us health, bestow upon us children and prosperity in order that thy people may be multiplied and may serve 
thee, give us rain and good seasons that we may have provisions and live. Hear our petitions, accept our supplications, assist us 
against our enemies, and grant us tranquillity and repose.’ They prayed in these very words, walking in procession in the presence 
of all the people who heard them. Having arrived at the altar of sacrifice, the priest, who officiated as butcher on the occasion, 
had everything prepared, and the king delivered the victim into his hands, when he, with those who acted as his assistants, cut out 
his heart with a knife and offered it to the idol; the priest dipped three of his fingers into the blood and sprinkled it on the idol, 
and afterwards towards the sun, performing many ceremonies, which for the sake of brevity we omit; and then he proceeded to 
each of the altars, performing the same ceremony before each idol, for each had its peculiar altar dedicated to it; and the sun had 
its separate altar, as also the moon, and the east, west, north, and south. ‘They placed the heads of the sacrificed victims upon 
laths over an altar solely dedicated for that purpose, where they kept them for some time, at the expiration of which they buried 
them. They alleged certain reasons for so doing, of which the first and principal was, that the idol, or god whom it repre- 
sented, might remember the sacrifice which had been performed to serve him, and so do good to them and remove them from all 
evil; another was, that those who beheld them might reflect that those victims had been sacrificed for the common good of all ; 
another, that the king or prince who succeeded him might see them, and feel inclined rather to add to than take from the pro- 
perty of the church; another, that their enemies who heard of them might fear to offend them, as in that case they might feel 
sure that they would be sacrificed in the same manner. They dressed and served up at a banquet the flesh of those whom they 
sacrificed, and ate it as a most holy thing consecrated to the gods, and happy was he to whose share a single mouthful fell. The 
hands and feet and other delicate parts were presented to the high priest and the king, as the best and most savoury portion: 
all the rest was distributed amongst the other priests and ministers of the altar, for none fell to the share of the laity. And from 
the circumstance, that from religion, and no other cause, they so acted, some persons believe that eating human flesh origi- 
nated in these countries.” In the absence of all other evidence, the testimony of Las Casas would be quite sufficient to prove 
that Adair was in error in supposing that the South American Indians had been falsely accused of cannibalism by the Spanish 
monks of the sixteenth century, who were a class of men quite incapable of thus wantonly calumniating the character of any 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 391 

portion of their fellow-creatures. The conclusion at which he arrived was founded upon his own observations amongst. the 
North American Indians, amongst whom traces of cannibalism did not, as far as he could ascertain, exist, and would, therefore, 
appear never to have been practised amongst the Indians inhabiting the lower territory of the Mississippi. And here we may 
adduce the testimony of Las Casas to confirm, and not to confute, the above statement of Adair, who, in the following passage of 
the two hundred and fourth chapter of his ‘ Historia Apologetica,’ expressly declares, on the authority of Cabeza de Vaca, that the 
Indians of Florida and the southern territory of the Mississippi held cannibalism in extreme abhorrence: “ Las partes de tierra 
firme donde se ha dicho por nuestros Espafioles que comian carne humana, son en algunos lugares, no en muchos, de hacia y 
encima de la costa de Paria, y en la tierra de Brasil, que es la costa adelante hacia el levante, y en las provincias de Popayan, y 
otras por alli. Tambien por la provincia de Guatemala, la gente que lamavan los Achies que por las sierras habitayvan. En la 
Nueva Espana no la comian tan de proposito, segun tengo entendido ; sino la de los que sacrificavan como cosa sagrada, mas por 
religion que por otra causa. En muchas é infinitas partes, era les cosa horrible y abominable. Como en las gentes de la Florida, 
que Ilegando los Espafioles que fueron en el desastrado € infeliz viaje y conquista, segun ellos Haman, de Pamphilo de Narvaez, 4 
tanto extremo de hambre que se comieron unos 4 otros, viendolos los Indios, de tal manera se escandalizaron, que si lo vieran al 
principio como lo vieron al cabo, sin duda los mataran, y fueron para otros muchos dellos que avia por alli vivos, mucho dafio. 
Asi lo dice Cabeza de Vaca, que fue uno de ellos, en su triste Itinerario, puesto que no supe si él comié tambien de la carne 
humana, y dicen que muchos se comieron unos 4 otros hasta que uno solo quedava, y como era solo, no aviendo quien lo comiese 
escapava: quando alguno se moria, el otro 6 los otros lo hacian tasajos, con lo que se sustentavan.” It is related, as matter. of 
history, of the ancient Scythians, that they sometimes, to gratify revenge or to inspire themselves with greater valour against the 
enemy, drank thei blood on the field of battle; and amongst some other barbarians, to drink each other’s blood was considered 
a pledge of eternal friendship, which death only could dissolve: but the custom of eating of the flesh of human sacrifices, scrupu- 
lously refraining at the same time from the blood, was not of Scythian or Tartarian origin, but sayours strongly of the Levitical 
enactment, which required that the flesh of sacrifices of atonement should be eaten by the priests because it was holy to the Lord, 
and in order to perfect the sacrifice, and that no portion of it should be eaten by the /aity. The Scythian custom above alluded 
to may be viewed in the light of a martial usage, and was quite opposed to the Jewish rite: it is alluded to by Gray in the fol- 
lowing lines of one of his elegies : 

Sculs who in Odin’s gloomy hall 

The horrid human goblet quaffed, 

Who triumphed at the sister’s call, 

And midst life’s parting anguish laughed. 

The Mexican custom of eating the flesh and abstaining from the blood of sacrificed victims is thus incidentally noticed by 
Gomara in the hundred and thirty-fifth page of his ‘ Historia de la Conquista de Mexico’: ‘Tal qual veis era la religion Mexicana. 
Nunca uvo, 4 lo que parece, gente mas, ni aun tan idolatra como esta, tan mataombres, tan comeombres. No les faltaba para 
Ilegar 4 la cumbre de crueldad sino bever sangre humana, y no se sabe que la beviesen.” ‘The religion of the Mexicans was 
such as you see it. Never did there exist, as it would appear, a nation more or even so idolatrous as this,—such slayers of men, 
such cannibals. It was only necessary for them, in order to reach the very summit of cruelty, to drink human blood ; we are not 
informed that they drank it.” 

Note 19, page 339, line 16. 
M’Kenzie says, that the Dog-ribbed Indians appeared to him to be all circumcised; and Dr. Boudinot adduces the authority 

of several highly respectable writers to prove that circumcision was a rite which had been in ancient times practised among 
several of the North American Indian tribes, but which had long fallen into disuse. (See his ‘Star in the West,’ cap. iv. p. 113.) 

Note 20, page 342, line 8. 

The following passage occurs in an anonymous manuscript preserved in the library of the Escurial, which serves in some 
measure to corroborate the account of Adair: “ La pintura de atrds es una costumbre que tenian los Yopes, que es una nacion de 
estas tierras; y es que cuando alguna muger casada era tomada en adulterio, el marido de ella llevaba al adultero y 4 su muger ante 
el sefior del pueblo; y delante del sefior y de todos cuantos presentes estaban, por mandado del sefior, el cornudo quitaba con los 
dientes las narizes 4 su muger y al adultero, y con esto eran libres; y si segunda vez adulteraban, aunque fuese con diferentes 
personas, Jos apedreaban, y morian mala muerte @ pedradas, de manera que el desnarijar era aviso 6 primilla.” 

Note 21, page 344, line 9. 

The rite of circumcision might have suggested the idea of scalping to the Jews, who sometimes circumcised their slain enemies, 
a fact which we learn from the twenty-seventh verse of the eighteenth chapter of the first book of Samuel, 

Note 22, page 346, line 3. 

This phrase was probably derived by the Indians from the tenth verse of the fourth chapter of Genesis, where God addressing 
Cain says, “‘ The voice of thy brother’s blood crieth unto me from the ground.” It occurs likewise in the third verse of the eighth 
chapter of the second book of Maccabees. 

Note 23, page 348, line 21. 

Adair considers it a very strong argument in favour of the Hebrew origin of many of the rites and ceremonies of the Indians 

392 hae ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

that they had an avenger of blood to pursue murderers, and cities of refuge to which the man-slayer might flee and escape with 
impunity the penalty due to his guilt. It deserves to be remarked that amongst the Jews the avenger of blood was the next of’ 
kin or the son of the murdered person. ‘This is evident from the discourse of the widow of Tekoah to David in the seventh rere 
of the fourteenth chapter of the second book of Samuel, and the artifice she made use of, at the persuasion of Joab, to induce the 
king to relax the rigour of the law in fayour of his own son Absalom, who had caused his ‘brother Amnon to be treacherously 
murdered at a banquet to which he had invited him, by inducing him, touched with compassion at her piteous tale, previously to 
relax it in favour of her son; and hence it appears that the avenger of blood amongst the ancient Jews was not a public officer of jus- 
tice, as might be inferred from the perusal of the Pentateuch, but in every instance the near relative of the slain, as is also customary 
amongst the Indians, whose wars are perpetuated and the enmities of hostile tribes rendered implacable by the necessity they 
consider themselves under of revenging the crying blood of their kindred. A fullillustration of the opinions of the North American 
Indians on this subject will be found in the following account of an Indian homicide himself calling upon the next of kin to take re- 
venge on himas the murderer of one of their relations ; it occurs in the one hundred and seventy-fifth page of Tanner’s ‘ Narrative of 
his Captivity and Thirty Years’ Residence among the Indians’: “ I was not deterred by this information from continuing my journey ; 
on the contrary, I hastened on, and arrived in time to witness the interment of the young man my brother had-killed. Wa-me- 
gon-a-biew took off all his clothes except his breech-cloth, and sitting down naked at the head of the grave, drew his knife, and 
offered the handle to the nearest male relative of the deceased: ‘ My friend,’ said he, ‘I have killed your brother; you see I have 
made a grave wide enough for both of us, and I am now ready and willing to sleep with him.’ The first and second, and eventually 
all the friends of the murdered young man refused the knife, which Wa-me-gon-a-biew offered them in succession. 'The relations 
of Wa-me-gon-a-biew were powerful, and it was fear of them which now saved his life. ‘The offence of the young man whom he 
killed had been the calling him ‘cut nose’. Finding that none of the male relations of the deceased were willing to undertake 
publicly the punishment of his murder, Wa-me-gon-a-biew said to them, ‘ Trouble me no more now or hereafter about this 
business; I shall do again as I have now done if any of you venture to give me similar provocation.’” As it is an undoubted fact 
that the right of sanctuary, which in the dark ages sometimes screened the most atrocious murderers from justice, was an imitation 
of the ancient Hebrew cities of refuge, so a more complete corroboration of Adair’s account of the Indian cities of refuge could not 
be afforded than is contained in the following passage of the hundred and forty-first chapter of the ‘ Historia Apologetica’ of Las 
Casas, who thus vouches on his own authority for the right of sanctuary existing amongst the Mexicans as a privilege of their 
temples: ‘‘ Esta es una cosa entre otras en ellos dignisima de notar, que tambien pone el filosofo, conviene 4 saber, que tanta 
reverencia tubiesen y guardasen 4 sus dioses y 4 sus templos, que qualquiera que 4 ellos se retrujese por grave delito que hubiese 
cometida, era tan libre de la justicia que de él no lo podian sacar. Esto se trat6 en mi presencia por todos los obispos de la Nueva 
Espaiia en la ciudad de Mexico, donde se congregaron. Y fue afirmado que quantos delinquentes 4 los templos se retraian en 
tiempo de su infidelidad, por malhechores que fuesen, gozaban de tanta inmunidad que no tocaba en ellos la justicia, y sobre 
aquesta loable costumbre aunque gentilica, fundandose los obispos, hicieron cierta suplicacion entre otras al Emperador Carlos 
Nuestro Sefior, que mandase inviolablemente guardar los privilegios é inmunidades de las iglesias y personas eclesiasticas, alegando 
que los Indios idolatras tenian en tanta veneracion sus dioses y sus templos, que ninguno que a ellos se retrujese podia ser por 
fuerza sacado ni molestado, ni de otra manera aflijido.” It deserves to be remarked, that besides the asylum which the Mexican 
temples afforded to certain classes of criminals, there were particular places appointed as places of refuge to which slaves might 
flee, and the Mexican laws contained several provisions to protect such fugitives, and punished any illegal detention in their flight. 
This latter custom seems likewise to have had in view the cities of refuge of the Jews, who were commanded by Moses not to 

deliver up to their masters slaves who sought an asylum in the land of Canaan. 

Note 24, page 349, line 19. 

Adair’s account of the Indian method of recruiting for volunteers at the commencement of a war, and of the fastings and ablutions 
of the Indians preparatory to their marching in order to ensure success against the enemy, receives some confirmation from the 
following passage of the third part of Don Jose Cortes’ ‘ Memorias sobre las Provincias del Notre de Nueva Espafia,’ who thus 
describes some of their martial usages: ‘‘ El] capitan nunca es responsable 4 las resultas de la expedicion que se intenta; ni con- 
mueve 4 los que se les presentan para seguirle de otro modo que con conyersaciones muy estudiadas, en que procura dar la mayor 
fuerza 4 su razon. Si se determina salir 4 campafia, precede el ayuno del caudillo; y si es 4 cazar, 6 4 algun viaje particular, un 
convite general: en el concurso y en la asociacion se habla de la fama, y de las buenas circunstancias de uno ti otro; y de esta 
manera persuaden 4 la imitacion y 4 que sigan la voz del que manda. Asi es como se alistan 6 se despiden, sin que quede 
gratitud 6 sentimiento, y sin que halla desmerito ni notas; y este uso de su rara constitucion no causa la menor alteracion 
en la buena armonia en que viven estos Indios.” Their use of ablutions on such occasions is more particularly noticed by Juan 
Morfi in the second book of his ‘ History of the Province of Texas; whilst their strict observance of the law of purity when 
on their military expeditions, is particularly described by Tanner in the eighth chapter of the first part of his ‘ Narrative of a 
Thirty Years’ Residence among the Indians.’ The work of Morfi being inedited, we shall here quote the exact words of 
that author: ‘“ Escogen sitios ventajosos para acamparse, ponen centinelas, se exortan tarde y mafiana 4 la vigilancia, y 4 que el 
suefio sea corto y ligero: se levantan al alba, se banan habiendo proporcion, y jamas se aportan mucho del grueso de la tropa. 
. Estas cautelas que nunca se omiten, los ponen 4 cubierto de las sorpresas y les facilitan los atagues con ventaja.” It deserves to 
be remarked that the law of purity was strictly enforced in the Hebrew camp, not only on the general grounds of expediency, but 
for the particular reason assigned in the fourteenth verse of the twenty-third chapter of Deuteronomy: “The Lord thy God 
walketh in the midst of thy camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee; therefore shall thy camp be holy : 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 393 

that he see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee.” The strong assurance here held out to the Jews of the Divine 
presence in their camp would have been likely to cause them scrupulously to comply with the conditions of the law of purity, to 
which this promise was more particularly annexed ; and to introduce the same custom amongst the Indians, Gumilla accordingly 
informs us, in the following passage of the eleventh chapter of the first part of his ‘ Orinoco Ilustrado’, that it existed amongst the 
Indian tribes of the Oronoco, and he there professes to consider it, in conjunction with the rite of circumcision, an argument of 
their Jewish descent. The words of that author are as follow: “El postre de su comida es ir todos 4 bafiarse y lavarse otra vez 
al rio: de alli cada padre de familias toma su haxadon, 6 cosa semejante, y con todos los de su casa toma rumbo 4 parte, y cava 
tantos hoyos quantas son las cabezas de su cargo, y despues que han hecho su forzosa diligencia, cada uno tapa con gran cuidado 
su hoyo: esta es diligencia diaria, y slempre poco antes 6 poco despues de ponerse el sol; y aunque debiera haverla omitido, no lo 
quise hacer, porque es ceremonia Judayca, y he dado palabra de ir apuntando las que fueren ocurriendo, y de los Judios, creo yo, que 
tomaron tambien los Turcos este uso quando marchan, 6 se aquartelan en tiendas de compaiia, lo qual hacen con puntualidad.” 
We may further remark, that a somewhat similar custom, founded to all appearance on the same Hebrew law of purity, existed 
amongst the Indians of Tiguex, a province situated considerably to the north of Mexico ; it is incidentally alluded to in the following 
passage of the fourth chapter of the second part of Pedro de Castafieda’s inedited ‘Relacion de la Jornada de Cibola’: “Los pueblos 
son limpios de inmundicias, porque salen fuera 4 estercolar y desaguan en vasijas de barro, y las sacan 4 vaciar Suera del pueblo. 
Tienen bien repartidas las casas en grande limpieza, donde guisan de comer y donde muelen la harina, que es un repartado 6 
retrete donde tienen un farnal con tres piedras asentado con argamasa, donde entran tres mugeres cada una con su piedra, que la 
una frangolla y la otra muele y la otra remuele: antes que entren dentro 4 la puerta se descalzan los zapatos y cogen el cabello 
y sacuden la ropa y cubren la cabeza: mientras que muelen esta un hombre sentado 4 la puerta tafiendo con una gaita, al tono 
traen las piedras y cantan 4 tres voces... .” 
Note 25, page 349, line 33. 

The following passage of the thirty-second chapter of Exodus will illustrate the meaning of the Indian sanctification which 
all underwent preparatory to a war of extermination against their enemies, although in the example cited the Jews sanctified 
themselves upon the bodies, or in other words imbrued their hands in the blood, of their nearest kinsmen: ‘Then Moses 
stood in the gate of the camp, and said, Who is on the Lord’s side? let him come unto me. And all the sons of Lev 
gathered themselves together unto him. And he said unto them, Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put every man his sword by 
his side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, 
and every man his neighbour. And the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses: and there fell of the people that 
day about three thousand men. For Moses had said, Consecrate yourselves to day to the Lord, even every man wpon his son, and 
upon has brother; that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day.” 

Note 26, page 352, line 44. 

This was analogous to the Mexican custom of fastening the skulls of their prisoners whom they sacrificed in the temple, on laths 
of fir fixed to posts, and forming the building which they named Tzonpantili. 

Note 27, page 355, line 7. 

Science of every kind was an abomination to the Jews, whose whole system was founded on fraud and imposture. 

Note 28, page 355, line 19. 

A gourd or calabash set with gems was a mark of sacerdotal dignity amongst the Mexicans and the people of Michuacan. 

‘Note 29, page 355, line 30. 

The Mexicans felt a sort of superstitious regard for the eagle, whose effigy they frequently emblazoned on their shields. 

Note 30, page 356, line 3. 

The Mexicans burned incense on the altars of Mictlantecutli, the god of hell, as a deprecatory offering. 

Note 31, page 357, line 11. 

The Mexicans entertained similar superstitious notions respecting the power possessed by witches and enchanters to assume 
various animal forms. See page 121 of the sixth volume of this Work. 

Note 32, page 358, line 5. 

The existence of the same custom amongst the Jews may be inferred from the following passage of the thirty-ninth chapter of 
Ezekiel, since it is to be presumed that the language of the prophet was agreeable to the usages of the Jews with respect. to burials : 
“¢ And they shall sever out men of continual employment, passing through the land to bury with the passengers those that remain 
upon the face of the earth, to cleanse it: after the end of seven months shall they search. And the passengers that pass through 
the land, when any seeth a man’s bone, then shall he set up a sign by it, till the buriers have buried it in the valley of Hamon- 
gog.” The reason for the Jews being desired to wait seven months before they commenced their search for the bones of the dead, 
-was probably that the flesh might in the mean time consume away. It deserves to be remarked that it was about their bones 
rather than their flesh that the Hebrew patriarchs expressed solicitude. 

DEL 

394 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

Note 33, p. 358, line 48. 

Reference to the sixty-seventh page of the Notes forming the supplement to the present volume, will show that the Mexicans 
made use of the phrase ‘to gather’ exactly in the same sense. 

Note 34, page 359, line 1. 

The following observation by Selden occurs in the preface which he has prefixed to the first edition of his treatise ‘De Diis 
Syris’, from which it would appear that he believed that this custom was common to the Jews and the Gentiles: ‘“‘ Frustra miretur 
Dorcada in Actorum cap. ix. comm. 37., lotam fuisse, is qui abluendi mortui ritum in gentium monimentis traditum nesciat.” 

Note 35, page 362, line 22. 

Adair’s account of its being an Indian custom for brothers to marry brothers’ widows is corroborated by Juan Morfi in the fol- 
lowing passage of the second book of his inedited ‘ Memorias para la Historia de Texas’: ‘‘'Todos generalmente usan la poligamia, 
sin otro limite que su antojo; porque como todo lo trabajan las mugeres, lejos de serles gravosa la multitud, les atrahe mucho 
descanso y comodidad. Se heredan las mugeres de los hermanos tengan 6 no hijos: la afinidad no es un impedimento, pero lo es 
mui grande para el matrimonio e/ de consanguinidad, que evitan escrupulosamente. Miran 4 las esposas como instrumentos simples 
de placer, 4 quienes no deben la menor atencion: asi truecan una por otra con la major facilidad, dando 6 pidiendo ribete con 
respecto 4 la utilidad que en ella reconocen, como si fuese una bestia las prestan, las alquilan, 6 venden por un cavallo, un fusil, 6 
por alguna bugeria que les agrade: aunque los hombres son lascivos, ellas son honestas y recatadas.” 

Note 36, page 362, line 39. 

The custom of brothers marrying brothers’ widows, ‘ quasi ad sustinendum semen fratris,’ seems naturally to have led to a very 
corrupt state of morals among the Jews, and at a later period of Jewish history to have caused incestuous marriages of every de- 
scription among them. It is not therefore at all surprising, the same custom existing amongst the Indians, that it should have 
led in progress of time to the same abuses. Las Casas accordingly informs us, in the two hundred and eighteenth chapter of his 
‘Historia Apologetica,’ that in some of the provinces of New Spain, remote from Mexico, it was customary for the son on 
whom the succession devolved to take his father’s wives, provided they had no children. The words of that distinguished prelate 
are as follow: ‘‘ En las provincias que mas se usaba, era desta manera, que el hijo sucesor en el estado, aquellas mugeres del 
padre tomava en quien no habia habido hijo ni hija alguna, y tomavanlas ‘quasi ad sustinendum semen patris’. Y puesto que esta 
costumbre se usaba, no era tenida por buena ni licita, sino por mala y reprobada, y quanto mas la provincia se acercava 4 las 
ciudades de Mexico y Tezcuco, mas se vituperaba, y por esto en su lengua se llamava ¢otezawh, como quien dixese, pecado 6 cosa 
de admiracion, y los hijos de aquel tal ayuntamiento se llamavan tezauhpilcintli, conviene saber, ‘hijos hechos en pecado,’ y por 
tanto espurios y bastardos: y tambien mostravase este defecto, porque aquellas viles mugeres se tomavan como mancebas, y no 
por mugeres principales.” A custom similar to that which Adair mentions as existing amongst the ‘‘ corrupt Cheerakes” is said 
by Las Casas to have existed amongst the Indians of Mechuacan, though unknown in Mexico and Tezcuco: ‘‘ Casarse con 
suegra en el reyno de Mexico y de Tezcuco, no se ha hallado quien lo huviese atentado, porque siempre se ha tenido por malo y 
reprobado. En el de Mechuacan, que era reyno por si, y que se comprende dentro de lo que llamamos Nueva Espafia, segun fue 
fama, huvo costumbre de tomar la suegra por muger. Tambien si alguno casava con alguna muger mayor de dias, y aquella 
tenia hija de otro marido, por contentar al que al presente tenia, porque por vieja no la dexase, le dava tambien su propia hija, 
y ast tenia madre y hija por mugeres en un tiempo ambas. Pero esto no se tenia en todos aquellos reynos por buena costumbre, 
sino por abuso abominable introducido por sefiores y personas muy principales, que no tenian superior que les fuese 4 la mano.” 

Note 37, page 363, line 11. 
“One is not,” is the phrase by which Joseph’s brethren alluded to his supposed death, in the thirty-second verse of the forty- 
second chapter of Genesis. 
Note 38, page 363, line 14. 

The words ‘as a son’ should have been inserted after ‘ counting,’ to make the author’s meaning fully apparent. 

Note 39, page 357, line 29. 

The laws of the Pentateuch are prolix and minute wsque ad fastidium on many immaterial points; yet, strange as the omission 
must necessarily appear, the important subject of wills and bequests is passed over in complete silence, nor did the Hebrew 
legislator frame a single statute to secure to the widow and the orphan the possession of their just and natural rights. If indeed 
the Jews had been ignorant of the art of writing when they quitted Egypt, a reason for the omission would be apparent; but this 
not having been the case, at least in regard to the tribe of Levi, the fact is inexplicable, and warrants the conjecture that the Peru- 
vian custom of burying the entire wealth of the deceased with him in the same grave, might have originated in a fanatical 
misinterpretation of the silence of Moses in the Pentateuch on the important subject of wills and of what should become of the 
personal property of persons deceased. So simple a fact as that of a powerful Hebrew family engaging in a quarrel, shortly after 
the arrival of the Jews in America, about the succession to this kind of property, and thereby hazarding the peace of their infant 
colony, might have led to a fanatical interpretation of the Mosaic law, adapted in the first instance solely to a particular emergency, 
but which, constituting a precedent, became in later ages a general custom amongst the Indians. A belief in the doctrine of the 
resurrection would scarcely have led the greatest miser on earth to direct that all his riches should be consigned with him to the tomb. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 395 

Moses informs us, in the seventh verse of the ninth chapter of Genesis, that when the waters of the deluge had subsided, 
Noah dispatched a raven from the ark, which went forth to and fro, and did not return; and that he afterwards sent forth a dove, 
which returned ; and hence perhaps the origin of the Mexican proverb ‘mensagero del cuervo’, which Sahagun affirms, in the 
175th page of the seventh volume of this work, the Mexicans applied to a messenger who, being sent on an errand, did not return 
with an answer. 

Note 40, page 366, line 48. 

The Jews emphatically sal Jehovah the God of War. 

Note 41, page 368, line 42. 

This criticism, proceeding from the mouth of a person wholly ignorant of the Spanish language and literature, as was the case 
with Adair, cannot of course carry with it any weight. We may be permitted, however, to observe, that if that author had known 
that many of the early Spanish monks and friars advocated his theory of the Indians being descended from the Jews, it is 
probable he would have spoken more respectfully of an order of men who coincided with him in opinion on so important a subject. 

Note 42, page 369, line 9. 

The Mexicans named Tezcatlipoca Yao, which approaches nearer than Jehovah to the pronunciation of the ineffable name. 

Note 43, page 369, line 13. 

Well may we ask, on the perusal of this passage, what translation of Roman could Adair have consulted in which it was possible 
for him to find so great an absurdity as is here stated on the authority of that writer. As for the error itself, it is of so palpable a 
nature, that a little reflection must convince the reader that whatever translation it might have been, this blunder was pur- 
posely introduced for the sake of vilifying the narrative of a Roman Catholic historian. 

Note 44, page 370, line 15. 
The word ‘not’ is evidently inserted here by mistake, since ‘did eat’ is undoubtedly the right reading of this passage. 

Note 45, page 370, line 27. 

The Indians of Florida are said to have sacrificed their first-born male children as devoted victims to their supreme deity, 
on such occasions typified by the king. Whether this horrid custom might not have originated in a perversion of the ordinance con- 
tained in the second verse of the thirteenth chapter of Exodus, and in a notion of mistaken piety similar to that which led 
Jephtha to sacrifice his on/y daughter as a burnt offering to Jehovah, we shall not in this place inquire. 

Note 46, page 371, line 6. 

The Jews were great astrologers, and were originally a shepherd people ; it is not therefore surprising that the Indians should 
have had a star which protected flocks. 
Note 47, page 371, line 8. 

Adair shows himself in this place surprisingly ignorant of the nature of the llama, to which species of animal the Spaniards gave 
the appellation of oveja, or sheep. The Peruvians were accustomed to transgress the enactment contained in the nineteenth 
verse of the nineteenth chapter of Leviticus, by wearing cotton garments with figures of zdols embroidered on them with wool of 
the Ilama, as the Mexicans were also with ‘ tochimitl’, or the soft down of the rabbit spun into threads; and, on the supposition 
that the Jews were in ancient times addicted to the same species of idolatry, we should have an intelligible reason for the Mosaic 
ordinance: ‘“ Neither shall a garment mingled of linen and woollen come upon thee.” 

Note 48, page 371, line 28. 

The divine oracles and the Koran bear a much nearer resemblance to each other than is generally supposed ; nor would the 
Koran ever have existed if it had not been for those oracles, which suggested the idea of it to Mahomet and his disciples. 

Note 49, page 372, line 30. 

The Jews resembled the Indians in the predilection which they manifested for dresses of showy colours, and in their love for gold 
and silver ornaments and jewels, the latter of which they were accustomed to wear not only in their ears and their noses, but also 
in their cheeks. This fact we learn from the tenth verse of the first chapter of the Song of Solomon: “Thy cheeks are comely 
with rows of jewels, thy neck with chains of gold.” 

Note 50, page 372, line 46. 

Ulloa published his ‘ Noticias Americanas’ in the year 1772, in one small volume. He can therefore be considered only as a 
recent writer, of no great authority on any question connected with the more ancient history of the Indians. It would appear that 
Dr. Robertson formed his very low estimate of the moral and intellectual character of the Indians from the perusal of Ulloa’s nar- 
rative, since he instances, in the Notes and Illustrations to the second volume of his History of America, the nae fact stated by that 
author, of the Indians counting the threads one by one when they wove; and the consequent slow process of their manufactures. 

a 

396 _ ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

Note 51, page 373, line 33. 

The celebrated Penn, the founder of Pennsylvania, entertained the same belief; and he even goes so far as to say that the children 
of the Indians reminded him of the Jewish children whom he had seen in that quarter of London designated Old Jewry. 

Note 52, page 373, line 35. 
See page 205 of the sixth volume of this Work, where the same subject is treated of. 

Note 53, page 373, line 38. 

Las Casas informs us that this custom prevailed amongst the Indians of New Spain; and other authors declare that it was 

common in Peru. 
Note 54, page 378, line 40. 

Gomara mentions the existence of the same custom amongst the Indians of South America, and Herodotus says that it was 
usual amongst the ancient Egyptians. 

Note 55, page 373, line 44. 

The passage in Hosea which justifies this inference is the following: ‘‘ Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she conceived, 
and bare a son.” It may be proper to remark, that the woman here alluded to was Gomer, the daughter of Diblaim, who, notwith- 
standing the infamy of her character, was commanded by God to become the wife of the prophet Hosea, who is himself acquitted 
of the crime of adultery, because he only acted in obedience to God’s commands, having had, like Abraham, his faith put to an 
extraordinary trial. The words of the divine command were as follow: ‘And the Lord said to Hosea, Go, take unto thee a 
wife of whoredoms and children of whoredoms: for the land hath committed great whoredom, departing from the Lord. So he 
went and took Gomer, the daughter of Diblaim, which conceived, and bare him a son.” 

Note 56, page 374, line 6. 
This author’s right name is Benzoni: his work, written in Italian, was published in a small octavo volume at Venice in the year 
1572. Although possessing little interest, it is still held in some estimation, from the author having been in Peru and having visited 
the scenes which he describes. 

Note 57, page 374, line 12. 

Pedro Simon observes that it was customary amongst some of the Indian tribes, for the men, after the confinement of their wives, 
to feign themselves sick, and to receive visitors reclinmg on a bed. To this custom Dr. Diego Rocha alludes in the following 
passage of his treatise concerning the origin of the Indians of Peru and Mexico, where he affirms that the same usage existed in 
ancient times in some of the provinces of Spain: ‘La undecima proposicion de que las primitivas Espafiolas en pariendo se iban 
a lavar al rio, i lavaban la criatura, i como aftade Celio Rodigino, lib. 18. cap. 22., desde aquellas palabras ‘ mulieribus,’ que los 
varones despues del parto de las mugeres se echaban, t las paridas les administraban.” (‘'Tratado Unico y Singular del Origen de 
los Yndios Occidentales del Peru, Mexico, Santa Fé y Chile,’ cap. 2. sec. 17.) 

Note 58, page 374, line 26. 

The judgement which Adair pronounces on the Spanish historians of America proves his ignorance of their writings, and conse- 
quently when his relation of facts agrees with theirs, confirms his veracity. 

Note 59, page 374, line 34. 

The author assumes here that the Indian history presented a blank page when America was first discovered by the Spaniards; 
and reasoning on this false assumption, he necessarily arrives at an improbable conclusion. 

Note 60, page 375, line 1. 

It is only necessary to remark, in order to prove that Adair deceived himself in the opinion which he here expresses, that the 
coast of Brazil was actually discovered by the Portuguese when on a voyage to the East Indies, and by such an accident as he 
describes. 

Note 61, page 375, line 10. 

It is but reasonable to suppose that the revolt of Jeroboam, and the prolonged civil wars of the Jews, were attended with conse- 
quences ruinous for a considerable length of time to their commerce; but there are no grounds for concluding that the Tyrians 
abandoned at the same period their trading voyages to any part of the globe which they had previously visited, nor can such an 
inference be deduced from the sé/ence of Scripture respecting them. 

Note 62, page 375, line 14. 
Some Spanish authors mention the curious fact of the hulk of a ship having been discovered by some labourers in the alluvial 
soil of a mine situated on the sea-coast of Paria; whilst others speak of caves filled with decayed logs of indigo, evidently intended 
for exportation, and of great and ancient excavations still existing in the island of St. Domingo. 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 397 

Note 63, page 375, line 15. 

This opinion is founded in part on a fanciful resemblance between the proper names Ophir and Peru: its futility, however, is 
demonstrated by Garcilasso de la Vega, who informs us that the Peruvians did not call their country Peru, but that that appellation 
was of Spanish origin. 

Note 64, page 375, line 25. 

This remark would be true of instinct ; but man has no inward monitor to direct him, like the swallow, to seek distant and more 
congenial shores. 

Note 65, page 350, line 6. 

Adair’s description, in his sixteenth Argument, of the Indian mode of sanctifying themselves for war, of their fastings and puri- 
fications, of their separating themselves from their wives during their campaigns, of their carrying with them a holy ark in which 
they reposed the utmost confidence of victory, and which they deemed so sacred that they never permitted it to rest on the ground, 
and even punished its supposed profanation with death*, is so extraordinary, and at the same time so convincing a proof of the 
Hebrew descent of the Indian tribes, or at least of the Hebrew origin of many of their rites and ceremonies, that it is extremely 
satisfactory to have it in our power to adduce such proofs of this striking analogy in the religious rites of the Indians and the 
Jews as we cannot but think will satisfactorily settle the long-agitated question of the Hebrew origin of a portion, at least, of the 
Indian tribes of both continents of America. These proofs will be found in the accompanying plate, which contains an accurate 
engraving + of a drawing copied from a highly authentic and valuable history of the kingdom of Michuacan, still preserved in the 
library of the Escurial, and which was composed soon after the conquest by a celebrated Spanish missionary, Torribio de Bena- 
vente, at the express request of Don Antonio de Mendoza, the first viceroy of Mexico. The subject of the plate, as appears from 
the Spanish explanation added to the figures, is the attendance of the different religious orders of the state in the camp of the king 
of Michuacan, each distinguished from the other by some peculiar badge denoting the duties which they were required to perform 
in time of war; whether, for example, to bear in their arms the holy ark, to carry the sacred utensils, to blow the trumpets, to 
burn incense, to strew branches on the ground, or, lastly, to tear out the hearts of the prisoners destined for sacrifice. In the 

* The anecdote related by Adair, in the note subjoined to the three hundred and fiftieth page of the present volume, of the Indian sentinel who 
was about to shoot a gentleman at the Ohio, in the year 1756, for an attempt to pollute the Cheerake ark by viewing its contents, is extremely curious, 
and would lead one to suppose that the Indians might have had a tradition of the narrative contained in the following passage of the sixth chapter 
of the first book of Samuel, which records the destruction of fifty thousand and seventy men, for presuming to look into the Hebrew ark. 
“And the ark of the Lord was in the country of the Philistines seven months. And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners, saying, 
What shall we do to the ark of the Lord? tell us wherewith we shall send it to his place. And they said, If ye send away the ark of the God of 
Israel, send it not empty; but in any wise return him a trespass offering: then ye shall be healed, and it shall be known to you why his hand is 
not removed from you. Then said they, What shall be the trespass offering which we shall return to him? They answered, Five golden emerods, 
and five golden mice, according to the number of the lords of the Philistines: for one plague was on you all, and on your lords. Wherefore ye 
shall make images of your emerods, and images of your mice that mar the land; and ye shall give glory unto the God of Israel: peradventure 
he will lighten his hand from off you, and from off your gods, and from off your land. Wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the Egyptians 
and Pharaoh hardened their hearts? when he had wrought wonderfully among them, did they not let the people go, and they departed? Now 
therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which there hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring their calves home 
from them: and take the ark of the Lord, and lay it upon the cart; and put the jewels of gold, which ye return him for a trespass offering, in a 
coffer by the side thereof; and send it away, that it may go. And see, if it goeth up by the way of his own coast to Beth-shemesh, then he hath 
done us this great evil: but if not, then we shall know that it is not his hand that smote us; it was a chance that happened to us. And the men 
did so; and took two milch kine, and tied them to the cart, and shut up their calves at home: and they laid the ark of the Lord upon the cart, 
and the coffer with the mice of gold and the images of their emerods. And the kine took the straight way to the way of Beth-shemesh, and 
went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left; and the lords of the Philistines went after 
them unto the border of Beth-shemesh. And they of Beth-shemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the valley: and they lifted up their eyes, 
and saw the ark, and rejoiced to see it. And the cart came into the field of Joshua, a Beth-shemite, and stood there, where there was a great 
stone: and they clave the wood of the cart, and offered the kine a burnt offering unto the Lord. And the Levites took down the ark of the Lord, 
and the coffer that was with it, wherein the jewels of gold were, and put them on the great stone: and the men of Beth-shemesh offered burnt 
offerings and sacrificed sacrifices the same day unto the Lord. And when the five lords of the Philistines had seen it, they returned to Ekron 
the same day. And these are the golden emerods which the Philistines returned for a trespass offering unto the Lord; for Ashdod one, for Gaza 
one, for Askelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one; and the golden mice, according to the number of all the cities of the Philistines belonging 
to the five lords, both of fenced cities and of country villages, even unto the great stone of Abel, whereon they set down the ark of the Lord; 
which stone remaineth unto this day in the field of Joshua, the Beth-shemite. And he smote the men of Beth-shemesh, because they had looked 
into the ark of the Lord, even he smote of the people fifty thousand and threescore and ten men: and the people lamented, because the Lord 
had smitten many of the people with a great slaughter. And the men of Beth-shemesh said, Who is able to stand before this holy Lord God? 
and to whom shall he go up from us ?” 

+ This plate has not been engraved with the same scrupulous regard to the outline of the figures and the profile of the countenances as has 
been observed in copying all the original Mexican paintings contained in these volumes, as that was deemed unnecessary, the drawing from which 
it was taken being evidently of Spanish design and execution. 

nel 

398 ON THE DESCENT OF THE 

centre of this historical painting we recognise the Petamuti, or high-priest, attired in a rich vestment, with a gourd set with tur- 
quoise stones suspended from his neck, and a similar ornament inserted in his under lip, which, together with a staff terminating in 
a point like a lance, appears to have constituted the military costume of that religious functionary: near him on either side, and in 
a sitting posture indicative of their respect for the person of their high-priest, are the other inferior orders of the priesthood, some 
burning censers, others, like Nazarites, distinguished from the rest by wearing their hair long and combed back from the head, 
whose peculiar duty it was to sacrifice the prisoners taken in war, and all attired in black surplices; others carrying the holy 
things; and more immediately in front, a little behind the royal standard, the Parariecha, or select religious band, bearing aloft 
the holy ark, on the lid of which there appears to be carved a symbol of the Sheshinah, or divine presence, represented by the 
head of an idol wearing a crown not unlike that described by the interpreter of the Vatican Codex in the two hundred and fifth 
page of the sixth volume of this work, and such as is represented on the head of Quetzalcoatle in the specimens of Mexican sculp- 
ture inserted at the end of the fourth volume of the present work. In the corner of the plate appears another group of priests, 
whose duty it was to remove the slain from the field of battle. We may here remark, in confirmation of an observation in a pre- 
ceding note, that the various orders of the priests are all attired in that particular kind of dress, viz. a long robe reaching to 
the feet, which Emanuel de Moraes says, in the three hundred and eighty-sixth page of the present volume, the Brazilians pre- 
ferred to every other kind of apparel, and which was worn by the Pharisees in the age of Christ. The subject of the second 
engraving in the above plate is the punishment inflicted by the laws of Michuacan on various classes of offences. Agreeably to 
the usage of the Jewish theocracy, the high-priest is represented expounding the laws to the assembled multitude, and pronouncing 
judicial sentences on the guilty, in the presence (as was also customary among the Jews) of the elders of the people. The follow- 
ing is the explanation given by the anonymous author of this history, who, as we have already observed, there is much reason to 
suppose, was the Franciscan monk Torribio de Benavente: ‘‘ Habia una fiesta llamada Yzquataconscuaro, que quiere decir, de 
las flechas, luego el siguiente dia despues de la fiesta, haciase la justicia de los malhechores que habian sido rebeldes 6 desobedi- 
entes, y hechabanlos 4 todos presos en una carcel grande, y habia un carcelero diputado para guardarlos, y eran estos los que 
cuatro veces habian dejado de traer lefia para los fogones cuando el Cazonci embiaba mandamiento general por toda la provincia 
que trugesen lefia, quien la dejaba de traer, le hechaban preso, y eran estos las espias de la guerra, los que no habian ido 4 la 
guerra 6 se volvian de ella sin licencia, los malhechores, los medicos que habian muerto alguno, las malas mugeres, los hechiceros, 
los que se iban de sus pueblos y andaban vagamundos, los que habian dejado perder las sementeras del Cazong¢i, por no desher- 
barlas que eran para las guerras, los que quebraban los magueis, y 4 los pacientes en el vicio contra natura, 4 todos estos he- 
chaban presos en aquella carcel.” 
Note 66, page 336, line 17. 

Mention having been made in a preceding note of the province of Cibola and its seven Cities, we shall here insert a short extract 
from the second part of Pedro de Castafieda’s inedited ‘ Relacion de la Jornada de Cibola,’ which is the more interesting as it serves 
to corroborate the testimony of Adair in many curious and important particulars. ‘“‘ Cibola son siete pueblos: el mayor se dice 
Macaque ; comunmente son de tres y cuatro altos las casas: en Macaque hay casas de cuatro altos y de siete: estas gentes son 
bien entendidas, andan cubiertas sus verguenzas y todas las partes deshonestas con paiios 4 manera de servilletas de mesa con 
rapacejos y una borla en cada esquina, atanlos sobre el guadul: visten pellones de plumas y de pelo de liebres, mantas de 
algodon: las mugeres se visten de mantas que las atan 6 anudan sobre el hombro izquierdo y sacan el brazo derecho por encima, 
cinenselas 4 el cuerpo, trahen capotes de cuero pulidos de buena faycion: cogen el cabello sobre las dos orejas hechos dos ruedas 
que parecen papos de cofia. Esta tierra es un valle entre sierras 4 manera de pefiones; siembran 4 hoyos, no crece el maiz alto, 
de las mazorcas desde el pie tres y cuatro cada cafia gruesas y grandes de 4 ochocientos granos, cosa no vista en estas partes. 
Hay en esta provincia osos en gran cantidad, leones gatos, cervales y nutrias, hay muy finas turquesas, aunque no en la cantidad 
que decian: recojen pifiones para su afio: no tiene un hombre mas de una muger: hay en los pueblos estufas que estan en los 
patios 6 plazas donde se juntan 4 consulta: no hay Sefiores como por la Nueva Espana, rigense por consejo de los mas viejos : 
tienen sus sacerdotes 4 quien llaman Papas, que les predican, estos son viejos, subense en el terrado mas alto del pueblo, y desde alli 
4 manera de pregoneros predican 4 el pueblo por las mafianas cuando sale el sol estando todo el pueblo en silencio asentados por 
los corredores escuchando: dicenles como han de vivir, y creo que les dicen algunos mandamientos que han de guardar, porque 
entre ellos no hay borrachera, ni sodomia, ni sacrificios, ni comen carne humana, ni hurtan, de comun trabajan en el pueblo, las 
estufas son comunes: es sacrilegio que las mugeres entren 4 dormir en las estufas: por senal de paz dan cruz: queman los muertos ; 
hechan con ellos en el fuego los instrumentos que tienen para usar sus oficios. 'Tienen 4 Tusayan entre Norte y Poniente 4 veinte 
leguas; es provincia de siete pueblos, de la misma suerte, trages, ritos y costumbres que los de Cibola: habra en estas dos provincias 
que son catorce pueblos, hasta tres 6 cuatromil hombres, y hay hasta Tiguex cuarenta leguas 6 mas la vuelta del Norte. Hay entre- 

medias el Pefion de Acuco que contamos en la Primera Parte.” 

Note 67, page 380, line 28. 

Further researches in the wide field of American antiquities having led us to the conclusion that the continent of America was 
colonized by Jewish tribes passing from Media through ancient Scythia or Tartary to Kamschatka, as well as by Jews proceeding by 
sea voyages across the Atlantic, we are induced to insert the following extract from the two hundred and ninth chapter of the 
‘Historia Apologetica’ of Las Casas, which contains a long and interesting account of a nation inhabiting the northern provinces 
of Mexico, which bore much resemblance in their habits and erratic mode of life to the Tartars, or, as others supposed, to the 

AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 399 

Bedouin Arabs. It may be proper to remark, that the nation whose customs are here described were the Querechi. “La tercera 
especie 6 genero de gentes que por aquellas amplisimas tierras que amamos de Cibola se hallaron y hay, es los que Iaman 
Querechos. Esta gente no tiene ciudades, ni pueblos algunos, ni est4 quicta 6 estante, sino que anda vagueando aqui hoy, 
y mafana alli, por unos anos que duran mas de trecientas leguas, donde andan millones de vacas monteses muy diferentes 
de las de nuestra Espafia. Son mansas, que andan juntas veinte y treinta y cinquenta mil de ellas, y que desde léjos, como 
la tierra es todo muy Ilana, no parecen sino montes 6 montafias la multitud dellas. Entre estas vacas viven aquellas gentes, 
y por provincia 6 patria. propia tienen todas aquellas trecientas leguas como las vacas. No tienen. casas ni moradas, ni siembran, 
ni cogen alguna manera de pan, ni se les da nada por ello. Tienen consigo tiendas de la hechura de las nuestras, ensebadas 
con el unto de las vacas, y con un betun amarillo que parece cera, donde se meten y guarecen del sol y del agua. Su comida es 
carne cruda y seca al sol de aquellas vacas, y de carneros y venados ; y tambien comen pifiones, quando llegan donde ay pinos ; 
beben sangre como si fuesse agua. La manera como matan en especial las vacas, que son muy dificiles de matar, es esta. Juntanse 
mucha gente de: ellos, y cercan un rebafio de vacas y toros, poniendose por paradas, y aguardanlos que paren juntos, y tiranles 4 
monton muchas flechas, y son tan flecheros y fuertes, que acaece pasar un toro de parte 4 parte. Sintiendose herido el toro 6 vaca, 
luego se aparta del otro ganado, y si es la herida mortal, echa sangre por las narices y luego cae. Matan de esta manera cien toros 
dentro de media hora, y caen vivos 4 vista de otros. 'Traen unos navajones de pedernal enxeridos en palos ; y quando cae el toro, 
abrenle por la hijada, y si esté gordo salele un pedazo de unto y sebo, y cortado comenselo asi caliente como lo cortan. Y si el toro 
estd muy bien gordo, ponenlo patas arriba, y sacadas las tripas y la asadura, y en la sangre que alli se recoge se echan de bruzas, y 
beben hasta que se hartan de ella. Despues sacanle un par de costillas, que van comiendo por el camino, lo demas se dexan 
perdido alli. Pero:no se pierde al cabo, porque proveyé Dios de otros animales por aquella tierra que se mantienen de aquello. 
Estos son unos lobos blancos, muy grandes como asnillos, que andan tras los ganados que aquestas gentes matan y estos son infinitos. 
Histas gentes son muchas, y andan tres y quatro mil juntas, son fortisimas y guerreras, y no es maravilla, pues tambien bestialmente 
comen. Temenlos toda la gente politica, por que los tienen por gente cruel, y que saltean quando pueden, pero comunmente andan 
separados de las ciudades y poblados; porque toda su conversacion y negociacion es con las vacas. Nuestros Christianos toparon 
assentadas dellos mas de mil tiendas de una vez, y como los Indios vieron 4 los nuestros, salieron de sus tiendas, y pararonse 4 
mirarlos, y andava entre ellos un gran murmurio, como gente adivinada y espantada. El capitan hizo poner en hilera los de cavallo, 
y los de los arcabuces delante, hasta ver si los acometian. Pero todos estubieron quedos, y llegando los Christianos 4 obra de un 
tiro de ballesta dellos, hizieron sefial de paz con las manos, y con un cuero de venado, y luego tendieronse en el suelo. Levantados 
vinieron veinte de ellos al capitan, y dieronle los arcos y las flechas en sefial de amistad. El capitan de los nuestros se los torné 4 
dar con gesto muy alegre, halagandolos con meneos y senas, y quanto por ellas se les podia dar 4 entender, diciendoles que no 
tuviesen miedo, porque no les queria ni habia de hacer algun dafio. Ellos van luego 4 sus tiendas, y mandan salir 4 las mugeres y 
hijos y gente con mucha carne y sebo, y unos talegones de carne molida seca, que ellos tienen para beber con agua, de lo qual todo 
mezclado. hacen cierto brevaje. Sacaron asimismo muchos cueros de vaca, muy bien adovados y muy pintados, de muy lindo 
parecer, porque son muy blandos por‘el muy buen adovio. que tienen, y con esto muy blancos del enves. Lo mismo dieron cueros 
de venados muchos, buenos y bien adovados. El capitan se los recibid con alegria, y les did en pago cascabeles y cuentas de diversas 
colores de Castilla, diciendoles, que estubiesen seguros en sus tiendas, que no se les haria mal ninguno. Pero ellos otro dia por la 
mafana, escogieron lo mas seguro sin decir nada, y alzan sus tiendas, y los hombres por una vanda y las mugeres por otra, como que 
van en procession, comenzéron 4 caminar. ‘Tienen unos perros muy lanudos, como grandes lebreles, muy recios, y para mucho 
travajo, porque llevan tres arrobas ; son muy mansos y domesticos que no muerden. A estos Ilevan unas albardillas, y sobre ellas 
ponen sus tiendas con las armaduras de madera dellas: y asi llevan todo su hato y alhajas. Y porque no les coman la carne que 
llevan encima de si, echanles unos bocalejos, como los recueros en nuestra tierra echan 4 sus azemilas. Quando caminan sus amos, 
van detras de ellos con sus cargas 4 cuestas estos perros, sin que nadie los guie ni los lleve. Quando se les cae la carga gimen y 
echanse con ella, y aguardan que se la enderecen. Hacenseles mataduras y cincheras, como se hacen 4 nuestras bestias. Cosa es 
de alegria ver ir juntos dos.y tres mil cargados de ellos. Quando pues los cargaban gemian, y asi por la orden dicha se fueron: y 
los perros detras con sus cargas 4 cuestas, quedando los Christianos admirados y alegres de verlos. No falt6 quien dijo al capitan, 
que seria bueno tomar de aquellos Indios, para que llevasen cargas por sobrellevar sus caballos que las traian; pero el capitan no 
consintié que aquel agravio se les hiciese. sta manera de gente parece & los Scythas que andan de aquella guisa, como arriba 
queda dicho. Difieren que los Scythas traen sus casas y hatos en carros, y estos sobre perros. Si estos beben la sangre de las vacas, 
los Scythas beben la sangre de los hombres.que primero captivan, y no solo de los enemigos, pero tambien de sus familiares y vecinos, 
quando unos con otros rifien, y cortanles las cabezas, y el casco redondo de las orejas arriba, que queda como una taza, limpianlo, 
y quitanle el cuero, y con él despues.con gran veneracion beben. _Y si estos Querechos adovan los cueros de las vacas, y se visten de 
ellos, los Scythas desuellan los hombres y.adovan sus cueros, y hacen vestidos, de que mucho se asean. Todo esto con otras bestiali- 
dades quenta dellos Herodoto en su-4°: Libro. No faltaron en el mundo, ni hoy faltan gentes de la Europa y Asia y Africa, de quien 
podemos referir costumbres bestialisimas, por las quales veriamos ser inferiores 4 estas gentes Querechos; pero acordamos abreviar 
por concluir esta obra quan presto pudieremos. Finalmente aunque estos Querechos tienen costumbres barbaricas, y estan en el 
estado primero segun parece,-que tubieron como est4 probado; las otras gentes, pero traibles son, y atraibles, y aparejadas para 
ser reducidas. 4 vida politica y razonable y Christiana, como las de la Florida y otras qualesquiera, si por la via y modo universal, 
dulce y amorosa, natural y propia 4los hombres, de que ya queda dicho, son atrahidos y reducidos; porque tienen dentro de si 
aquellas mismas naturales simientes y principios 4 todos los hombres comunes, y de que ninguno carece como ya dejimos. Y esto 

4.00 DESCENT OF THE AMERICAN INDIANS FROM THE JEWS. 

mostraron bien aquestos, quando vieron que nuestros Espafioles les hicieron sehales de amor, y no dafio alguno, lanzandose luego en el 
suelo, y ofreciendoles de todo lo que tenian, siendo, como tenian fama, gente brava y cruel y valentisima, y asi lo parecian.””—The 
discovery, thus duly authenticated, of a populous nation in America, whose manners assimilated them to the Scythians, would favour 
the conjecture of those who suppose that America was colonized by a portion of the ten tribes migrating thither from Tartary; since 
it is evident that the Tartars, or Scythians, could hardly have been ignorant of the narrow straits which separate Kurope from Asia, 
by which it is to be presumed the Jews, at an earlier or later period, crossed over to the New World, who probably were accompa- 
nied by some Scythian families, either as slaves or the companions of their migration. Neither was the political state of Asia at the 
distant epoch to which we allude, at all unfavourable to this hypothesis; since Herodotus informs us, in his first book, that the 
Scythians, having made a sudden irruption into Asia more than half a century before the birth of Cyrus, conquered and possessed 
themselves of the empire of the Medes, and, raising the siege of Nineveh, defeated Cyaxares in a pitched battle; and that, esta- 
blishing a permanent dominion in Asia (which lasted, however, only eight-and-twenty years), they overran Asia Minor, and took 
Sardis, the capital of Lydia, and, prosecuting their conquests, invaded Egypt by the route of Palestine, and were only deterred 
from entering that territory by Psammetichus, the Egyptian monarch, presenting their leaders with costly gifts. Itis likely, therefore, 
that when the Scythians conquered Media, they would have liberated those nations who were enslaved in the cities of the Medes, or 
have allowed them at least to effect their own liberation : but Scripture informs us, in the sixth verse of the seventeenth chapter of 
the second book of Kings, that Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, had placed the ten tribes “ in Halah and in Habor, by the river of 
Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes ;” which cities, there is every reason to suppose, were those which Shalmaneser or his pre- 
decessors had conquered from the Medes. If, therefore, these tribes were liberated by the Scythians from bondage in the cities of 
the Medes, or were themselves able at the epoch of a great civil convulsion to effect their escape from their oppressors, it is much 
more probable that they would have sought a new habitation in Scythia, in the country of their deliverers and benefactors, than 
have attempted to return to their native country, Samaria, the cities of which, we are informed in the twenty-fourth verse of the 
same chapter of the second book of Kings, were peopled by the King of Assyria, immediately after their captivity, by colonies from 
Babylon and other parts; and that, disappointed in their expectation of finding a peaceful settlement amongst strangers, with liberty 
to indulge in their old idolatries and proneness for human sacrifices, (since there is no reason for supposing that the captivity of the 
ten tribes effected any amelioration in their morals,) they journeyed onwards through the wilds of Tartary until they reached the 
icy straits of Kamschatka, and so by a long pilgrimage arrived at America. It deserves, however, to be remarked, that the custom 
of dwelling in tents, and dexterity in the use of the bow, were by no means peculiar to the ancient Scythians; since we learn from 
Scripture that a great portion of the Jewish nation in the age of Solomon, and probably for many centuries afterwards, were a tent- 
dwelling people. This plainly appears from the distinction drawn in the seventeenth verse of the twelfth chapter of the first book 
of Kings, between the Jews who dwelt in tents and those who dwelt in cities; the former of whom were the ten tribes who rebelled 
from Rehoboam, and the latter the tribes of Judah, Benjamin, and Levi, who remained faithful to their lawful sovereign. That the 
Jews excelled in very early ages in the use of the bow, having been particularly trained to that mode of warfare by David, is evident 
from the eighteenth verse of the first chapter of the second book of Samuel: ‘“ Also he bade them teach the children of Judah the 
use of the bow: behold, it is written in the hook of Jasher:” whence perhaps we may arrive at the general inference, that the 
reason the Mexicans preferred the bow and arrow to all other kinds of weapons, was because they had been trained in former ages to 
that mode of fighting by the Jews. 

CONTENTS. 

Observations on the colour, shape, temper and dress XIII. Their marriages, divorces, and punish- 
of the Indiansof America . . . . . . page 279 ment ofadultery ... . . page 340 
Observations on the origin and descent of the Indians . 283 XIV. Their several punishments . . . . . 348 
Observations and arguments, in proof of the American XV. Their citiesofrefuge - : . . . . =; 348 
Indians being descended from the Jews. . . . 284 XVI. Their purifications and ceremonies prepa- 
Argument I. Their division into tribes. . . . . . 285 TOY WO WHIP o 0 6 0 oo 0 0 0 HY) 
II. Their worship of Jehovah . . . . . 286 AOVINI, ANagie OTE 5 6 5 co o o o 0 OMe 
III. Their notions ofa theocracy . . . . 292 XVIII. Their manner of curing the sick . . . 355 
IV. Their belief in the ministration of angels. 294 XIX. Their burial of the dead. . . . . . 857 
V. Their language and dialects. . . . . 295 XX. Their mourning for theirdead . . . . 861 
VI. Their manner of counting time. . . . 311 XXI. Their raising seed to a deceased brother. 362 
VII. Their prophets and high-priests . . . 314 XXII. Their choice of names adapted to their 
VII. Their festivals, fasts, and religious rites . 320 circumstances and the times. . . . 863 
IDG AbaerpGhrihy seyoutNGe> 5 6 6 6 0 9 o Oe) XXIII. Their own traditions, the accounts of our 
X. Their ablutions and anointings. . . . 331 English writers, and the testimonies 
XI. Their laws of uncleanness . . . . . 333 which the Spanish and other authors 
XII. Their abstinence from unclean things. . 336 have given, concerning the primitive . 

inhabitants of Peru and Mexico . . 364 

“HERNANDO CORTES. 

—_ 

CARTAS INEDITAS 

DE 

HERNANDO CORTES. 

Cinco Cartas* de Hernando Cortes escritas a S. M. desde 15 de Mayo de 1522 hasta 10 de Octubre 
de 1530, sobre la conqusta de la Nueva Espana y descubrimiento de la Mar del Sur, y las varias 
espediciones que mando hacer para la Especieria. Y al fin un memorial que presente a 8. M. en 
Valladolid a 3 de Febrero de 1544, pidiendo mandase juntar otros Jueces para la determinacion 
del pleyto que tema pentente con el Fiscal sobre la escritura de mercede que S. M. le hizo. 

CARTA PRIMERA. 

My alto y potentisimo Principe, muy Catolico é invictisimo Emperador, Rey y Sefior, con la presente embio 4 
Vuestra Cesarea Magestad larga y particular relacion de las cosas subcedidas en esta Nueva Espafia ; que por orden 
es tercera despues que yo 4 ella vine, y la poblé y conquiste con los trabajos y peligros que por ella y por las otras 
Vuestra Alteza puede mandar ver; la que embio juntamente con los oficiales de V. M., que 4 todo 6 lo mas se han 
hallado presentes. Suplico 4 Vuestra Alteza lo mande recibir é oir benignamente, pues en ella se veran obras no de 
nuestras manos, mas de Dios, con cuyo favor 4 V. M. se han hecho tantos servicios, en estas partes, que por no me 
alargar los dejo de significar, y tambien por ser yo en parte ministro de ellos. Lo que 4 Vuestra Alteza quiero sola- 
mente hacer saber es, que despues que en esta tierra estoy, que ha mas de tres afios, siempre he escrito y avisado 4 
V. M., y 4 los de su Consejo de las Indias, cosas que importaban mucho 4 su servicio, y nunca hasta agora de cosa 
de ellas he habido respuesta. La causa creo ha sido, 6 no ser bien recibidas mis cartas y servicios, 6 la distancia de la 
tierra, 6 la negligencia de las personas que solicitan mis negocios; € lo mismo ha acaecido 4 los demas pobladores é 
conquistadores de esta Nueva Espaiia, que alld tienen sus procuradores. Y viendo esto, y la mucha necesidad que 
hay de informar 4 V. M. de las cosas de acd, agora tornen de nuevo sus procuradores: y porque de ellos y de los 
que tienen mi poder seré Vuestra Alteza muy particularmente avisado, en esta no me alargare mas de suplicar 4 
Vuestra Cesarea Magestad tenga por bien recibirlos, y mandar dar audiencia 4 los unos y 4 los otros, y recibir de 
ellos el servicio y muestra que 4 Vuestra Alteza hacemos de esta su nueva y abundantisima tierra. 

Por la relacion que agora embio, verd V. M. la solicitud y diligencia que yo he puesto en descubrir la Mar del 
Sur, y como, gracias 4 Nuestro Sefior, la he descubierto por tres partes, lo cual puede Vuestra Alteza tener por uno 
de los mas sefialados servicios que en las Indias se han hecho. Y tambien verd como para descubrir y saber todo 

el secreto, que sin duda segun la noticia tenemos se han de saber y hallar maravillosas cosas, he comenzado 4 hacer 

* These letters, now for the first time printed, were discovered not many years ago in the archives of Simancas, but owing to some acci- 
dental causes, have never yet been published: five of them are addressed to the Emperor Charles V. and one to the Bishop of Osma. As 
authentic records of so celebrated an individual as Cortes, they cannot but be considered extremely interesting, although the facts which they 
disclose are less calculated to elucidate the ancient history of America than to explain certain mysterious passages in the Ocean Decads of Peter 
Martyr, and in the last volume of the Bishop of Chiapa’s inedited History of America, little favourable to the character of that conqueror. They 
prove, likewise, beyond all doubt, with what extreme distrust the conduct of Cortes, both at the commencement of his career and even at a later 
period of his life, was viewed by Charles the Fifth and the Council of the Indies, of which Peter Martyr was a most distinguished member. 

404. CARTAS INEDITAS DE HERNANDO CORTES. 

cerca de la costa, bien noventa leguas de estas provincias, navios y bergantines, y porque antes de agora, teniendo 
alguna noticia de la dicha mar, yo avisé 4 los que tienen mi poder, de ciertas cosas que se habian de suplicar 4 V. M. 
para la mejor y mas breve expedicion del dicho descubrimiento ; y despues acd, no solamente yo lo he descubierto la 
dicha mar, pero aun en cierta costa de ella tengo poblados doscientos y cincuenta Espafioles de caballo: y porque 
aquel aviso mio no sé si se habra recibido, porque fue por diversas vias, la persona que agora embio con mi poder 
informaré 4 Vuestra Alteza muy larga y particularmente de esta negociacion. Suplico 4 Vuestra Cesarea Magestad, 
tenga por bien de le mandar oir, porque este negocio es de tanta importancia que es mucha razon que Vuestra 
Alteza le tenga en mas que 4 todo el resto de las Indias, segun relacion de lo que como digo, tenemos relacion. 
Potentisimo Sefior, Dios Nuestro Seftor la vida y muy Real Persona y muy poderoso estado de Vuestra Cesarea 
Magestad conserve y aumente con acrecentamiento de muchos mas reynos y sefiorios, como su corazon desea. Po- 
tentisimo Sefior, de Vuestra Cesarea Magestad muy humilde siervo y vasallo, que los muy reales manos de Vuestra 

Alteza besa, HERNANDO CorTES. De Cuyuacan, 4 los 15 dias de Mayo de 1522 afios. 

CARTA SEGUNDA. 

Sacra Crsarea Carotica Macesrap, porque por lo que tengo escrito 4 V. Magestad, asi del Cabo de Honduras o 
de las Hibueras, como desde la Isla de Cuba, viniendo ya de camino 4 esta Nueva Espafa, estard V. M. informado 
de lo que ha sucedido despues que los Procuradores Diego de Ocampo y Francisco de Montejo fueron despachados, 
agora informaré 4 Vuestra Magestad brevemente de lo que ha pasado despues de mi llegada; y porque el despacho 
postrero que embié despues desde Cuba, fue encaminado por via algo dudosa, ira con la presente lo que entonces 
escribi, suplico humildemente 4 V. M. mande ver lo uno y lo otro. Asimismo embio agora 4 V. M. con la presente 
una Relacion bien larga y particular de todo lo que me sucedio en el camino que hice 4 las Hibueras, y al cabo de 
ella hago saber 4 V. M. muy por estenso lo que ha pasado y se ha hecho en esta Nueva Espafia, despues que yo 
parti de la Isla de Cuba para ella. Y porque podria ser, que por la larga escritura V. M. no lo pudiere todo ver, tocaré 
en esta sucintamente en ello, para que con relacion mas breve V. M sea informado ; como quiera que todavia suplico 
4 V. M. 41o menos que al Presidente y 4 los de su Consejo de las Indias mande bien ver y examinar la dicha Rela- 
cion, para que en vista informen 4 V. M. de lo que en ella digo. 

Yo me hice 4 la vela del Puerto de la Havana de Cuba 4 16 de Mayo, y llegue al Puerto de Sanct Juan desta 
Nueva Espafia 4 24 de Mayo de este afio de 1526. Vineme 4 la villa de Medellin, que esta 4 dos leguas del dicho 
puerto, y supe alli muchas cosas de las que habian pasado en mi ausencia, y de otras bien peligrosas que se trama- 
ban, creyendo que hubiera mas dilacion en mi venida; y no quiero encarecer 4 V. M. el servicio que en la presteza 
de ella hice, posponiendo mil peligros, pues es tan notorio cuantos alborotos y escandalos de entre los Espafioles, y 
malos tratamientos de los naturales, se evitaron con mi llegada, porque como estaban tan recientes los males y dafios 
hechos por Gonzalo de Salazar y Pedro Armildez, y por los que los siguieron, habia tanto desasosiego ; y como 
guiera que el tesorero Alonso de Estrada y el contador Rodrigo de Alborfioz los tenian presos, cada dia habia mil 
movimientos y alborotos, que llevaban muy mal remedio, si Dios no lo remediaba con su mano 6, como lo remedié, 
con mi venida, lo cual se mostré bien en el regocijo y alegria que mostraron en ella, asi los naturales como los 
Espafoles. 

Yo me parti luego para esta ciudad de Temixtitan, y llegado halle ser verdad todo lo que escribi 4 V. M., desde 
la Isla de Cuba, asi acerca de los agravios y afrentas hechas 4 mis deudos y amigos y 4 mi hacienda, como 4 los 
naturales, y pudiera estenderme mas entonces y agora, salvo que por ser la cosa tan publica no quiero repetirla mas. 
Hallé presos 4 Salazar y Armildez y otros, que fueron agresores en todos los daiios pasados, y movieron y levantaron 
la tierra 4 voz de comunidad. Y aunque 4 muchos de ellos Alonso de Estrada y Rodrigo de Alboriioz habian 
sacado de algunos Monasterios, yo los hice bolver y restituir 4 ellos, dado caso que segun la calidad de sus delitos 
no debian gozar de la inmunidad de la Iglesia; pero por ser cosas que demas de tocar 4 los vasallos de V. M., toca- 
ban 4 mi persona, yo holgue que fuesen restituidos, y porque no me acusasen de apasionado, aunque habia muchas 
causas para ello, no quise entender en las culpas de aquellos. ; 

Dende 4 pocos dias que yo llegué 4 esta ciudad, me escribieron de la villa de Medellin como al puerto habian 
llegado ciertos navios, y que en ellos venia el licenciado Luis Ponce de Leon por juez de residencia de V. M., y el 
teniente de aquella villa me escribié que habia ido al navio en que dicho Luis Ponce venia, y que le habia dado una 

CARTAS INEDITAS DE HERNANDO CORTES. ) 405 

carta de V. M., en que le mandaba que hiciese todo lo que el dicho Luis Ponce le mandase de parte de V. M., y que 
el dicho teniente le respondié, que en todo seria obedecido y acatado, y asi lo puso luego por obra. E yo respondi- 
endo 4 la carta que el dicho teniente me escribid, le encargué mucho el buen tratamiento y recibimiento del dicho 
Luis Ponce. El cual dende 4 pocos dias que desembarcé, se partié para esta ciudad de Temixtitan, y desde el camino 
me embié una carta de V. M., por la cual me mandaba que luego como Ilegase el dicho Luis Ponce fuese reci- 
bido conforme 4 su provision, y le fuesen entregadas todas las varas. El cual Ilegado 4 esta ciudad, que fue un dia 
bien de mafiana, no quiso presentar la provision que trahia de V. M., sino ver la ciudad-y platicar conmigo algunas 
cosas de las de estas partes, en lo cual conocié bien la obediencia y fidelidad que yo habia tenido y tenia al servicio 
de V. M. Luego otro dia el dicho Luis Ponce presenté su provision, la cual por mi y por mis oficiales fue obedien- 
tisimamente recibida y cumplida, y incontinenti, en presencia de los oficiales de V. M. y de todo el pueblo, ellos é 
yo le entregamos todas las varas, y comenzé 4 usar su cargo como V. M. le mandaba. 

Aquella misma noche, 6 del trabajo del camino 6 de mudanza de la tierra, el dicho Luis Ponce adolecié de unas 
calenturas de que creimos que no recibiera peligro, y como le fueron algo agravando, determiné de subrogar el poder 
que trahia de V. M. en el licenciado Marcos de Aguilar, que habia venido con él desde la Espafiola d egercer el 
cargo que tiene de Inquisidor de las Indias ; y el dicho licenciado Aguilar acepté el dicho poder, y usé de el hasta 
que el dicho Luis Ponce murid, que fue 4 diez y ocho 6 diez y nueve dias despues que 4 esta ciudad llegé. Y sin 
duda entristecié tanto su muerte 4 todos, como si fueramos sus deudos propios, y se hizo tanto sentimiento como 
sile hubieramos conversado toda la vida, y cierto con harta causa, porque su persona y cordura mostré bien merecer 
aquello y mas. Y entre algunas fortunas contrarias que se me han ofrecido en el descubrimiento, conquista y paci- 
ficacion de estas partes, una de las mas adversas para mi, ha sido la muerte de Luis Ponce, porque asi de la buena 
fama que de su persona habia, como por sus apariencias, mostraba traher muy verdadera intencion para el servicio 
de V. M., y parale hacer relacion de las cosas de estas partes, en especial de mi fidelidad y servicios, que era 4 lo que 
mas principalmente V. M. le embiaba, é yo mas deseo tenia. 

Muerto Luis Ponce, la justicia y regimiento de esta ciudad, juntamente con los Procuradores de las otras villas> 
me requirieron muy afectuosamente que tornase a recibir en mi el cargo de la gobernacion, pues que espiraba con 
la muerte del dicho Ponce el poder que habia dado al licenciado Marcos de Aguilar, y principalmente porque les 
parecia que convenia asi para el sosiego y pacificacion de estas partes; é yo me escusé de ello por cuantas vias pude, 
porque conozca y vea V. M. la codicia que tengo y he tenido de cargos y administraciones de justicia; y asi queddé 
y queda la gobernacion de la justicia civil y criminal por V. M. en el dicho licenciado Aguilar, hasta que otra cosa 
mande proveer, y los cargos de Capitan General de los Indios, y administracion de ellos, queda en mi hasta que 
V. M. sea servido ; y esto acepte porque, como persona mas esperimentada, podre mejor servir en ellos. ; 

Las cosas de estas partes despues de la venida de Luis Ponce, quedan en los terminos que 4 V.M. he dicho. Esta 

la tierra algo fatigada con las alteraciones pasadas, pero con la conservacion y buen tratamiento de los naturales que 
yo siempre procuro, se ird presto restituyendo, placiendo 4 Dios, porque los Indios, aunque no es posible menos 
sino recibir fatiga con nuestra conversacion, como trabajo de los relevar, multiplican y van tanto en crecimiento, que 
parece que hay hoy mas gente de los naturales que cuando al principio yo vine 4 estas partes. Los Religiosos que 
aca han venido y vienen, hacen grandisimo fruto, especialmente en los hijos de los principales. Vase tambien plan- 
tando la fé y religion Cristiana, que V. M.-es muy obligado a dar muchas gracias 4 Dios por ello. 

Mucho ha que hice saber 4 V. M. como habia ciertos navios en la Mar del Sur para descubrir, y aunque aquello 
es cosa muy importante, por otras ocupaciones y cosas que se me han ofrecido, ha cesado hasta agora que los navios 
estan 4 punto. Embio por capitan 4 una persona bien cuerda y esperimentada, que es Diego de Ordas, el cual ha 
estado en esa corte de V. M. por procurador de esta tierra: plegue 4 Dios lo encamine. Creo se hara 4 la vela en 
todo el mes de*;.....0.... 

Juan de Ribera, 4 quien yo embie por mi procurador, y 4 hacer relacion 4 V. M. de las cosas de estas partes, y 4 
que residiese en esa su corte en mis negocios, me dijo, que conociendo la necesidad que V. M. tenia, asi por las 
grandes guerras que por tantas partes se le ofrecian, como por las alteraciones pasadas en esos sus reynos, y 
conociendo asi mismo la voluntad con que yo siempre he servido 4 V. M., se habia ofrecido en mi nombre que yo 
embiaria 4 V. M. cierta suma de oro, é que sobre ello é sobre ciertas mercedes que V. M. me hacia, habia mandado 

® Tgual vacio en el original y en el duplicado. 

5L 

4.06 CARTAS INEDITAS DE HERNANDO CORTES. 

tomar cierto asiento con el dicho Juan de Ribera y con Fray Pedro Melgarejo; y que estando aderezando su viage 
para estas partes, V. M. les mando volver 4 esta corte con el despacho que V. M. le habia dado, el cual por mandado 
de V. M. habian entregado en el Consejo de las Indias; y asi mismo el diche Juan de Ribera me dijo, que V. M. 
despues le habia dicho, que habia mandado proveher a Luis Ponce para saber como yo habia hecho las cosas de 
vuestro servicio, y para que se viese y conociese mi limpieza en cuanto 4 lo del ofrecimiento, que 4 V. M. tenia hecho, 
6 se hizo de mi parte. Ninguna cosa he deseado, ni deseo mas, en este mundo, que ofrecerse caso en que mi volun- 
tad se experimente por todas vias en el servicio de V. M.; y aunque 4 la sazon yo estaba pobre y adeudado, pusiera 
toda mi posibilidad, porque se cumplira lo que de mi parte se habia prometido 4 V. M., y asi lo hiciera agora, sino 
que, como 4 V. M. en la relacion escribo, estoy tan alcanzado y pobre, que todo cuanto he conquistado y ganado 
y servido 4 V. M., no me queda sino mi persona lastimada y herida en diversas partes, y puesta en necesidad ella, y 
todos sus amigos: y si esto no es ansi, veanse las astucias y diligencias que Gonzalo de Salazar hizo por descubrir 
mis riquezas, y los tormentos que did 4 quien tenia cargo de mi casa, y como la ard y cabé por muchos lugares, 
hasta que quedé satisfecha su mala intencion. Y en cuanto 4 saber V. M. como yo he hecho en estas partes las 
cosas de su servicio, y que se vea mi limpieza, si mis obras y servicios no han bastado para ello, bien sé que no ha 
estado el defecto en ellos, sino en mi dicha y en los embidiosos de lo que he servido: y porque en la rélacion larga 
que embio 4 V. M., toco mas largo en esta materia, aqui no diré mas de quedar aparejado y obediente 4 todo 
cuanto V. M. fuere servido mandar, como siempre lo he hecho. 

En lo que toca 4 la hacienda de V. M. no sé que decir, sino que en lo que en mi es, la procuro como haria 4 la 
salvacion de mi anima. Los oficiales haran relacion de ella 4 V.M. Solamente quiero decir, que tengo por difi- 
cultoso haber buen recado en ella, por las muchas y grandes diferencias é intereses que entre ellos ha habido, y hay. 

El cargo de alguacil mayor de esta Nueva Espafia, de que V. M. mandé proveher 4 Diego Hernandez * de Pro 
ao, se le entregé luego como presenté su provision, y comenzé 4 usar de el. Asimismo se le entrego la fortaleza que 
se hace en esta ciudad a Pedro de Salazar, como V. M. lo mandé, y son personas en quien cabe muy bien semejantes 
cargos. Las atarazanas de esta ciudad, donde estan los bergantines, se entregaron 4 Lope de Sainaniego. En este nos 
parecio que V. M. nos agravid, porque no era cargo aquel de que V. M. mandara proveher 4 un mancebo, que servia 
ayer 4 Rodrigo de Albornoz. Suplico 4 V. M. por mi y por los conquistadores de estas partes, cuando semejantes 
cargos mandare proveher, mande primero saber que personas son, y de que calidad, y no parezca que S. M. tiene 
en tan poco esta tierra, que se da lo que pide al primero que llegue; y lo mismo suplicamos 4 V. M. haga respecto 
de los oficios de regimientos, porque aqui se han recibido algunos, que en la Espafiola y en las otras Indias, se 
suplicara de ello. 

Estando escribiendo esta, me vinieron unos Indios, mensageros de una provincia Tecoantepecque, que esta en la 
Mar del Sur, ciento veinte leguas de esta ciudad ; y trajonse dos cartas, una de un Espafiol que yo tengo en aquella 
provincia, y otra de un Guevara capitan, y por ella entendi, como 4 aquella costa habia aportado una nao de la con- 
serva del capitan Loaysa, que V. M. habia mandado despachar de la Corufia para las Islas de Maluco, sin batil y 
con mucha necesidad de mantenimientos. Y viendo que eran vasallos de V.M., luego provehi que fuese una persona 
de bien 4 ver la necesidad del dicho capitan, y le proveyese muy cumplidamente ; y le escribi que si el queria ir en 
compahia en seguimiento de su derrota, que yo tenia tres navios, y 4 punto para ir en busca de la Especieria, y que: 
irian todos juntos, 6 que viese lo que queria hacer, que yo le haria todo buen tratamiento, y le socorreria en todo lo 
que hubiese menester. Y despues, recibi cartas del dicho capitan y del piloto del navio, en que me hacian saber que 
estaban en puerto seguro, y que habian recibido muy buen tratamiento de la persona que yo alli tenia, y las dichas 
cartas embio con la presente 4 V. M. 

Asimismo embio una relacion que un Juan de Areyzaga, Cligoy, natural de Guipuzcoa me dio, del viage que 
el dicho Loaysa hizo despues que salié de la Corufia hasta que embocé y desembocé el Estrecho de Magallaes, porque 
desde que desembocaron, el navio Santiago donde el venia, perdié la flota, é arribé 4 esta costa que yo tengo descu- 
bierta de la Mar del Sur. Creo que olgara V. M. de lo saber, especialmente si el navio en que iba por capitan 
D. Rodrigo de Acufia, y el navio Nunciadaf, que crehen estos que no quisieron seguir 4 Loaysa, no han aportado 
a esos reynos. . 

* Asi parece por los dos originales; en el uno pone asi la abreviatura rr°8, y en el otro ros. Pro aio parece segundo apellido. 
T Por Clerigo. Esta relacion de Areyzaga esta en el Archivo de Indias. 
£ En uno de los originales lo espresa, y en‘el otro lo deja en vacio. 

CARTAS INEDITAS DE HERNANDO CORTES. 407 

De algunas personas que @ estas partes han. venido, especialmente de Juan de Ribera, que residié en la corte de 
V.M., en mis negocios, he sabido como V. M. no solamente no me tenia en servicio el trabajo y gasto.que hacia 
en descubrir y sujetar 4 su servicio algunas tierras y provincias de estas partes, pero que no lo tenia por bueno, y que 
los del consejo de V. M. se lo habian dado 4 entender muchas veces, diciendo que en lo que yo tenia pacifico y sugeto 
4 V. M., habia harto en que entender. La verdad es, que si yo pospusiera lo que debia al servicio de V. M. por seguir 
mi interese, que habia harta disposicion en esta Nueva Espafia, sin entremeterme en descubrimientos y sugeccion de 
tierras ; pero yo he tenido proposito de servir 4 V. M. con mucha fidelidad, de ensancharle su sefiorio, posponiendo 
para ello todo trabajo y costa. Y_en la venida de esta nao, se parece si era cosa provechosa descubrir y pacificar la 
tierra; porque si yo no tubiera pacificadas mas de 300 leguas de costa, 4 ninguna parte pudiera aportar aquella nao 
ni ninguna otra, que no mataran la gente de ella. Suplico 4 V. M. lo mande ver y considerar, y hallard que en todo 
el descubrimiento y pacificacion que he hecho en estas partes, hé servido mucho 4 V. M. 

Invictisimo Cesar, Dios Nuestro Sefior la vida y muy poderoso estado de Vuestra soberana Magestad conserve y 
aumente por muy largos tiempos la vida de, como V. M. desea. De la Ciudad de Temixtitan, 4 11 de Septiembre de 
1526 afios*. De Vuestra Sacra Magestad muy humilde sieryo y vasallo, que los muy reales pies y manos de V. M. 
besa, HErnanpo Cortes. 

CARTA TERCERA. 

Sacra Cesarea Caroxica Macesrap. Por otra mia que va con la presente, hice saber 4 V. M., como despues de la 
muerte de Luis Ponce, la justicia y regimiento de estat......... y los procuradores de otras villas de esta Nueva 
Espafa me habian requerido afectuosamente que tornase 4 recibir en mi el cargo de gobernador, segun parece por 
un requirimiento que sobre ello me hicieron, el cual embio al consejo de V. M. Y porque el dicho Luis Ponce 
habia dado su poder al licenciado Marcos de Aguilar, y principalmente porque V. M. conociese mi obediencia y 
fidelidad, no quise aceptar lo que toda la tierra me requeria, sino que el dicho Marcos de Aguilar quedase por justicia 
de V. M., y porque el dicho Luis Ponce no me habia suspendido el cargo de capitan general, ni la administracion 
de los Indios, mz la encomienda de ellos, yo quedase con aquellos cargos hasta que V. M. mandase proveer otra cosa, 
segun que de todo esto en la carta que escribo 4 V. M. hago mas larga relacion. Y puesto que yo conoci que para 
que la dicha jurisdiccion quedase con Marcos de Aguilar, Alonso de Estrada y Rodrigo de Albornoz habian puesto 
mucha diligencia, y lo procuraban con tanta eficacia como si cosa del mundo no comviniera mas al servicio de V. M., 
y veia claramente que su fin era para traher despues 4 su proposito al dicho Marcos de Aguilar, y con voz de justicia 
hacer algunas cosas en deservicio de V. M. y en perjuicio de la tierra, y otras en perjuicio y disfavor de mi persona, 
y que por evitar estas cosas, que todas se me representaban como si las viera, comvenia mucho que quedara en mi 
el dicho cargo de gobernador. Todo lo quise posponer por mostrar mas clara mi limpieza, y no aceptar el dicho 
cargo de gobernador. 

Despues de haber quedado la gobernacion de la justicia con el dicho Marcos de Aguilar, los dichos Estrada y 
Albornoz hacian tantas juntas y cabildos con él, induciendole 4 algunas maneras de provision, en tal manera escan- 
dalosas que ponian casi toda la tierra en alboroto; y todo lo encaminaban 4 fin de me hacer errar, bien que en lo 
pasado yo habia acertado ; 4 lo cual yo daba lugar y disimulacion, porque me parecia que esto servia mas 4 V. M. 

Como yo siempre he procurado y procuro el buen tratamiento de los naturales de estas partes, habia para ello 
hecho, ciertos dias habia, unas ordenanzas muy provechosas 4 los Indios sobre la manera que habian de tener sobre 
el servicio de los Espafioles, y lo que ellos de su parte habian de hacer para que los dichos naturales fuesen bien 
tratados y relevados, y ellos aprovechados ; las cuales embio 4 V.M. Y como ya he dicho a V.M., el cargo de 
capitan general y administracion de los Indios habia quedado en mi, yo hice pregonar las dichas ordenanzas, porque 
solamente tocaban en el buen tratamiento de los naturales; y como esto vieron los dichos Estrada y Albornoz, 
junta gente armada yvan al dicho Marcos de Aguilar, diciendo que aquello yo no lo podia hacer, y que era usar de 
jurisdiccion, y que estaba suspenso de aquello y de todo lo demas, y que lo remediase y castigase. Y por calum- 
niarme, inducieron al dicho Marcos de Aguilar 4 que luego saliese 4 la plaza de esta ciudad, y diese un pregon que 

* En un original tiene la fecha de 11 de Sept., y el otro de 13 del mismo mes y afio. 
++ Esta copia se ha hecho por el de 11 de Sept., pero en la confrontacion se ha tenido presente el otro, para llenar algunos vacios como puede 

notarse en las notas marginales. 

408 CARTAS INEDITAS DE HERNANDO CORTES. 

todos acudiesen 4 él y 4 sus llamamientos, y obedeciesen sus mandamientos, y no de otra persona; el cual se dio, 
estando yo presente; y respondi que yo seria el primero que acudiria 4 su llamamiento de dia y de noche, y hizo 
pregonar una cedula 6 provision de V. M. que trahia Luis Ponce, en que mandaba 4 todos los vecinos le siguiesen v 
acudiesen 4 él para todo lo que les mandare: lo cual hacian y hicieron por me desfavorecer, y dar 4 entender 4 las 
gentes que V. M. holgaria que yo fuese desfavorecido, y no porque habia necesidad del dicho pregon. Luego otro. 
dia el dicho Marcos de Aguilar, inducido y requerido por los dichos Albornoz y Estrada, me requirid y mandé que 
mostrase por donde usaba el cargo de capitan general, y de la encomienda y deposito de los Indios, y si tenia para 
ello provision de V. M. despues de la muerte de Luis Ponce, y si no, que no usare ni de lo uno ni de lo otro. E! yo, 
por obedecer 4 la justicia que tiene voz de V. M., me desisti de dichos cargos con ciertas protestaciones, segun 
parece por los autos que sobre ello pasaron y embio al consejo de V. M. Pienso que V. M. se ira satisfaciendo de 
mi limpieza, pues no solamente obedeci y cumpli lo que el juez embiado por V. M. me mand6é, pero aun obedezco y 
cumplo todo lo que me manda el juez que no tengo por competente, ni fue ni es nombrado por V. M., ni por su 
consejo; en lo cual padezco hartos disfavores, y no tal tratamiento cual mis servicios merecen, ni creo que V. M. 
lo consentiria si lo viese ; y todo lo causan estos sus oficiales, que por el odio y enemistad que me tienen, trabajan 
continuo de me pagar no en las obras que de mi han recibido, y parece que su ventura les ha traido 4 este Licenciado 
a la mano para conseguir lo que quieren, hasta que V. M. lo mande remediar: pero no podran tanto ellos, ni 
ninguno de ellos, ni seran sus intricaciones tan bastantes que me compelan 4 salir de mi sufrimiento y paciencia. 
Y porque sobre todas las cosas del mundo yo he deseado dar 4 conocer 4 V. M. mi fidelidad y obediencia, y despues 
de la venida de Luis Ponce hasta agora se han ofrecido cosas en que la he mostrado, y lo mostraré mas, man- 
dandome V. M. tomar cuenta y residencia de mis cargos, humildemente suplico 4 V. M. pues esto ces6 con la muerte 
de Luis Ponce, y el licenciado Marcos de Aguilar no me la quiso tomar, que V. M. provea la dicha, como se me 
toma la dicha residencia, porque se acabe de quitar de mi el obstaculo y sospecha que sin merecimiento se me ha 
opuesto. 

- Invictisimo Cesar, Dios Nuestro Sefior la vida y muy poderoso estado de V. M. conserve y aumente por muy 
largos tiempos, como V. M. desea. De la Ciudad de Temixtitan, 4 11 de Septiembre de 1526 afios. De Vuestra 
Sacra Magestad muy humilde siervo y vasallo, que los muy reales pies y manos de V. M. besa, Hernanpo Corres.* 

CARTA QUARTA. 
Carta dirigida al Obispo de Osma por Hernando Cortes, de Coaunavach, a 12 de Enero de 1527. 

REVERENDISIMO Y MUY MAGNIFICO SENoR. Aunque ha poco que escribi 4 S. M. y 4 V. S'™ largo de las cosas de aca, 
la distancia debe causar que en poco tiempo haya siempre que escribir, y asi agora escribo 4 Su Magestad lo que de 
nuevo hay que hacer le saber. Y pues V. S"* lo ha de ver, no quiero repetirlo en esta mas de le suplicar que lo mire 
todo con benevolencia, habiendo respeto 4 lo que yo he servido, y 4 los trabajos que en estas partes me he puesto 
por hacer en servicio de S. M. todo lo que tubiese posibilidad, y certifico 4 V. St" que son tantos que yo no osase 
emprender 4 los escribir de principio fasta el cabo, aunque pensase haber gran galardon ; y pues ya cuando esta llegare, 
habra V. S. visto lo que aca nos habia sucedido, suplico 4 V. S"*, que conociendo que mis servicios lo merecen, me 
sea favorable con S. M. en todo lo que antes y agora le embio 4 suplicar, porque de otra manera no osaria serle 
importuno. 

Ya V. St sabra, como vino de alla despachado con ciertos Frayles Dominicos un fray Tomas Ortiz, é segun yo 
he sabido, y he sido certificado, él trabajé mucho por se venir en el tiempo que S. M. tenia prohibido que no pasase 
ningun navio 4 las Indias, fasta que Luis Ponce de Leon partiese, 4 fin de me avisar y persuadir 4 cosas que despues 
pasaron entre su persona y la mia: € como no pudo poner en el efecto lo que deseaba, vino con el dicho Luis 
Ponce, y entré con él en la ciudad de Temixtitan, y luego me fue 4 hablar, y representaronme lo que habia trabajado 
en que nuestra vista fuere mucho antes; y tras de esto me certificd que Luis Ponce trahia provision de S. M. para 
me prender y degollar, y tomar todos mis bienes; é que lo sabia de muy cierta ciencia como persona que venia de 
Ja corte, y que porque el me deseaba todo bien y acrecentamiento, y le parecia que aquello era muy al reves de lo que 

* De esta carta hay duplicada, pero ambas estan en todo uniformes. 

CARTAS INEDITAS DE HERNANDO CORTES. 4.09 

yO merecia, me aconsejaba que para lo remediar yo no recibiese al dicho Luis Ponce, y esto fue tantas veces y con 
tanta instancia y exortaciones dicho, que bastara mudar y ablandar un corazon de azero: y lo mismo trataba con los 
Padres Franciscos, con quien yo tenia mucha familiaridad, para que me persuadiesen 4 que no recibiese al dicho 
Luis Ponce. 

Y en todo este tiempo, como yo tenia el corazon fiel, nunca hallé en mi respuesta que consonase 4 su proposito, 
como quiera que me hacia dar vuelta 4 mil pensamientos, porque su negociacion era de tal calidad que ansi lo 
requeria; postreramente yo le respondi: que bien podia S. M. hacer conmigo lo que fuese servido con justicia 6 sin 
ella, porque yo habia de obedecer 6 cumplir su mandato sobre todas las cosas; y para efecto de ello dejando los 
obstaculos que el dicho fray Tomas imponia, luego otro dia que entraba en la ciudad de Temixtitan, recibi al dicho 
Luis Ponce como 4 Vuestra Sefioria tengo escrito poco ha, y entonces no le hice relacion de esta cosa, porque me 
parescia que encarescia mi obediencia, y tambien porque yo creia que aquel padre, aunque me tubiese buena voluntad, 
me persuadia 4 su proposito mas con ignorancia que con saber lo que decia, el cual y los otros religiosos que con él 
vinieron, fueron y son de mi tan bien tratados, y hallaron tan buen acogimiento como si fueran mis propios her- 
manos; y en sus enfermedades fueron y son de mi y de los de mi casa tan visitados cuanto 4 mi me es posible. Y 
despues el dicho fray Tomas Ortiz determiné de ir 4 Espaita, como alla Vuestra Sefioria habrd visto, y comunicdlo 
conmigo; € segun me informaron, estando para se embarcar en el puerto, donde quiera que se hallaba, decia y 
publicaba que yo habia muerto 4 Luis Ponce, y otras cosas feas en mi perjuicio, especialmente el que yo habia 
muerto al dicho Luis Ponce, y esto dijolo tan publico, que aunque yo tenia mucha incredulidad de ello, se averigué 
muchas veces haberlo dicho, y aunque ello sea gran falsedad y levantamiento, no pude sino recibir pena de que un 
hombre teniendo aparencias de un buen religioso, osase poner en su pensamiento é lengua tan gran maldad, habiendo 
recibido de mi tan buenas obras, y mostrandome el 4 mi tan buena voluntad, y aunque esto sea cosa que yo la 
debiera dejar por vana y no dar parte 4 nadie, quiselo hacer saber 4 Vuestra Sefioria, y asi por ser aquel frayle de 
su orden, y ser Vuestra Sefioria el mas preeminente en ella, para que le conozca, y no se le fie cosa de que pueda 
venir infamia 4 su religion. Los padres que aca quedan, estan tan fuera de juicio en ver su desverguenza y testi- 
monio falso, que pienso yo que no se acabaria con ellos estar 4 su obediencia. El dicho Luis Ponce fue curado en 
su enfermedad por dos buenos medicos; el uno trajo él consigo, y el otro estaba ya aca. Un padre reverendo 
que aca tiene las veces del obispo, les mandé so pena de excomunion que declarasen el conocimiento que tubieron 
en su enfermedad, é como procedieron en ella, segun Vuestra Sefioria vera por dos testimonios que 4 Vuestra Sefioria 
embio. Quise hacer esta diligencia para con Vuestra Sefioria, aunque la notoria duda de mi inocencia bastaba, 
porque, como digo, no de credito 4 cosa que aquel padre dijere. Tambien embie 4 Vuestra Sefioria cierta declaracion 

tvs 

que unos frayles Franciscos hicieron, cerca de lo que fray Tomas ordenaba y trabajaba para que yo recibiese 

2 

Luis Ponce, porque vea que magnas* del diablo tiene aqueste padre, y con que negociacion lo traia el demonio 
toda prisa. Suplico 4 Vuestra Sefioria lo vea y no reciba importunidad en mi largo escribir. 

Reverendisimo Sefior, Dios Nuestro Sejior la vida y muy magnifica persona y estado de Vuestra Sefioria conserve 
y aumente, como Vuestra Sefioria desea. De Coaunavach 4 12 de Enero de 1527 alos. Hernanpo Corres. 

CARTA QUINTA. 

Sacra CEesarEA Caroxica Macestap. Despues que besé las manos de V. M. en Barcelona, y le di cuenta de las 
cosas que hasta aquella sazon habia sucedido en esta Nueva Espafia, estube algunos dias en Madrid, para que los del 
consejo de las Indias cumpliesen lo que V. M. les embié a mandar, cerca del remedio de estas partes, porque como 
quien mas que 4 nadie le dolia, tenia de ello mas cuidado. Estando entendiendo en esto, llegé una cedula de V. M. 
en que mandaba al arzobispo de Santiago, presidente del consejo real, que entendiese en proveher las HORE ie aca; 
y fue provision divina y como de tan catolico y cristianisimo Principe se espera. Y no en valde tiene Dios el 
cuidado de las cosas de V. M. que hasta aqui ha tenido, pues tanto V. M. tiene de su honra y de dilatar su fe 
catolica, y conservar estas gentes que nuevamente 4 ella se convierten. Y tenga V. M. esto por el mayor premio 
que ante Dios merece, porque en todo el universo no hay cosa donde su Santa Iglesia mas se engrandezca. 

El arzobispo de Santiago se comenzo 4 informar de las cosas de aca para mejor acertar en su provision, y 4 esta 

* Magnas por mafias. 

5M 

410 CARTAS INEDITAS DE. HERNANDO CORTES. 

causa hubo alguna dilacion, y en este tiempo llegaron muchas informaciones de religiosos y de otras personas zelosas 
del ‘servicio de Dios y de V. M., por donde al arzobispo y 4 los del consejo de las Indias les consté los insultos y 
robos y otros dafios, que V. M. sabraé por otra parte que el presidente ¢ oidores que acd estaban hacian; y la 
necesidad que habia de remedio breve; y asi comenzaron a dar mucha prisa en buscarle, y hablaron 4 algunas per-- 
sonas para encomendarles la presidencia de la nueva audiencia que proveyan, y con ninguna se contentan: las causas 
ellos las habran dado 4 V. M. 

Visto que en esto habia alguna dilacion, y como V. M. me mando diese mucha prisa en mi venida, determiné antes 
de me partir de la conclusion de esto, aunque deseando que todos vinieramos juntos, para escusar algun escandalo 
que se me representaba que habia de haber con mi venida. Me detube en Sevilla y en San Lucar muchos dias, y 
aun en Santo Domingo de la Isla Espanola dos meses y medio, creyendo que cada dia me alcanzarian; y como yo 
trahia mucha costa con la mucha gente que truge, no pude detenerme y asi me vine. Verdad es que primero supe . 
como la Emperatriz mi Sefiora, y los del consejo habian ya dado fin en este remedio, y sefialado todos los oydores, 
y por presidente al obispo de Santo Domingo y la Concepcion, y presidente de la Isla Espafiola, que tambien me 
parecié cosa provehida de Dios, segun lo que yo alli conoci de su persona, y vi en las obras que hacia en su oficio, 
y tengo por cierto que Dios no tiene olvidados 4 estos que con tan buena voluntad desean su salyacion, y tan 4 rienda 
suelta se convierten y tan milagrosamente conocen 4 su Criador. 

Yo llegué al puerto de esta Nueva Espaia 4 15 de Julio de este aio, y en la ciudad de Vera Cruz, que es el primer 
pueblo de Espafioles, presenté ante el cabildo de ella la provision de V. M., en que se me manda sea su Capitan 
General en estas partes, y alli fue obedecida con todo acatamiento y pregonada publicamente. Antes de. esto habia 
escrito luego que Ilegué al puerto 4 los oydores de esta audiencia, haciendoles saber mi llegada, y diciendoles que en 
saltando en tierra les haria mas larga relacion de lo que V. M. me mando. 

Alli junto, cinco leguas de la ciudad de Vera Cruz, esta un pueblezuelo pequefio, que se dice la Rinconada, y antes 
le llamaban los Indios Izcalpan, y es uno de los que V. M. me hizo merced, y por virtud de ella tomé la posesion con 
los autos y diligencias necesarios ante escribano publico. Y como los oydores supieron que la provision de V. M. 
habia sido obedecida y cumplida por los del cabildo de aquella ciudad de Vera Cruz, y supieron que habia tomado 
aquella posesion, sintieron mal de ello, porque quisieron hacer con estas provisiones lo que con todas las otras que 
V. M. y la Emperatriz mi Sefiora han embiado, que es no haber cumplido ninguna, en especial lo quisieron mucho 
efectuar en estas, porque demas de la enemistad que 4 mis cosas han mostrado, sigueseles mucho interes por tener 
ellos como tienen todos los mas de estos pueblos mios, y se sirven y aprovechan de ellos, unos puestos en cabeza de 
V. M., otros en si mismos, otros en deudos y criados suyos, y de todos estos depositos no tienen mas del nombre y 
los intereses llevan ellos, como pareceré por los libros de los oficiales de V. M., que se veran cuantos son los inte- 
reses 6 rentas que de los pueblos que para V. M. tienen sefialados, se le han seguido, como ya otra vez hablando 4 
V. M. en esta materia le dige. Y quisieron hacer alguna alteracion 6 bullicio, y embiar 4 prender los que obedecie- 
ron la provision de V. M. y hicieron muestra de juntar gente, y aderezar artilleria y hacer. capitan de ella, y otros 
bullicios de esta calidad muy en deservicio de V. M. y desasosiego de la tierra. Como yo lo supe, hablé al obispo 
de Tascala, y al prior de la orden de Santo Domingo, é al guardian de los Franciscos, y les rogué y dije de parte de 
V.M. que fuesen 4 los oydores, y les dijesen como yo habia sabido aquella novedad, y que ya sabian cuanto desaso- 
siego era para la tierra, y cuanto V. M. se deserviria, y que si hacian aquel apercibimiento de artilleria é junta de 
gente para alguna cosa que conviniese al bien é pacificacion de la tierra, que ya sabian como yo era capitan general, 
y que ellos habian visto la provision que V. M. me dio, y teniendola muchos dias, que me lo hiciesen saber, porque 
luego iria con mi persona y con toda la gente que trahia, y con la que mas fuese menester 4 entender en ello, y que 
si no era para ese efecto, que les rogaba y aun requeria de parte de V. M. que no hiciesen aquel bullicio ni alboroto, 
porque seria muy dafoso, antes les pedia que nos conformasemos en todo para el servicio de V. M. y bien y so- 
siego de la tierra, y otras cosas que me parecio que convenia decirles y amonestarles, para que se cumpliese la volun- 
tad de V. M. pues yo mejor que nadie la sé en este caso. 

Este obispo y religiosos aceptaron mi ruego, y fueron 4 la ciudad de Mexico, donde ellos residen, (y yo me quedé 
en la provincia de Tascala, porque la Emperatriz mi Sefora me embid 4 mandar por una su cedula, que no entrase 
en la dicha ciudad con diez leguas 4 la redonda, 4 causa que entre los dichos presidente é oydores no hubiese algun 
escandalo, y asi obedeci y cumpli,) y hablaron 4 los dichos oydores, é significaron mi voluntad ; y ellos respondieron 
que tambien la suya era de toda conformidad, pero las obras no correspondieron, ni hasta agora han sido conformes 4 

CARTAS INEDITAS DE HERNANDO CORTES. 41) 

esta respuesta, porque no solo no han querido cumplir provision alguna 6 ninguna de las que V. M. me mandé dar, 
ni merced de las que me mandé hacer, antes han tenido y tienen nuevas formas para proseguir en hacerme dafio; por- 
que luego que les consté la merced que V. M. me hizo del valle de Guaxaca, habiendo visto las provisiones originales, 
porque tubiese contradicion, y por dar color 4 su dafiada voluntad, fundaron una villa en el dicho valle y repartieron 
los pueblos del que yo tenia y V. M. me hizo merced, 4 los vecinos de la dicha villa, los cuales son todos hermanos 
parientes allegados 4 los dichos presidente y oydores, é me tomaron todos los otros pueblos que yo tenia en esta 
_ Nueva Espafia sin me dejar ninguno, é los repartieron asimismo por personas de esta calidad, para que hubiese opo- 
sitores, é defendiesen la posesion, pues no era menester mas de oponerse, siendo ellos los jueces, 4 los cuales dieron 
luego que en la tierra entre mandamientos de amparo, y con ellos me requirieron. Por manera que demas de haberme 
quitado toda cuanta hacienda mueble y raiz tenia y dejé en esta Nueva Espafia, me tomaron los dichos pueblos, é me 
han dejado sin tener de donde haya una hanega de pan, ni otra cosa de que me mantenga, y demas de esto (porque los 
naturales de la tierra con el amor que siempre me han tenido, vista mi necesidad, é que yo y los que conmigo trahia nos 
moriamos de hambre, como de hecho se han muerto mas de cien personas de las que en mi compaiiia trage por falta 
de refrigerios y necesidad de provisiones, me venian 4 ver y me provehian de algunas cosas de bastimento) embiaron los 
dichos oydores alguaciles 4 prender 4 los dichos naturales que conmigo estaban, é prendieron é llevaron presos muchos 
de ellos con mucho escandalo y alboroto, 4 fin de que los dichos naturales no me proveyesen, é se les diese 4 entender que 
yo no era parte para nada en la tierra, é para que con estas afrentas é componerme en estrecho de necesidad, yo no pudiese 
hacer sino resistir algo, por dar algun color 4 lo que tan falsamente han propuesto é querido decir, por tener, como 
han tenido, la tierra en tirania, é que no hubiese en ella quien contradicion les hiciese, para no obedecer, como hasta 
aqui no han obedecido-ni cumplido, carta ni provision de V. M., sino como absolutos sefiores de ella han robado asi 
4 los naturales como 4 los nuevos pobladores, y destruidola en tanta manera, que certifico 4 V. M. que si les durara 
en el mismo tiempo, 6 en muy breve tiempo, la pusieran en el termino que 4 la Espafiola y 4 las otras Islas, porque 
ya falta mas de la mitad de la gente de los naturales 4 causa de las vexaciones y malos tratamientos que han recibido, 
que ni han bastado para lo estorvar las ordenanzas que para defensa de esto V. M. mando hacer y embiar : antes las 
han tenido suspensas sin cumplir ninguna de ellas, y ahora despues de yo venido andan en darles limitacion, diciendo 
que no se pueden sufrir ; é para me enemistar con los Espanoles, dicen é publican que yo fui él que las hice, y di 4 
V. M. el aviso de ellas ; y ni tampoco ha bastado la proteccion que V. M.:mandé que tubiese el electo obispo de 
Mexico, porque jamas han querido cumplir ni obedecer las provisiones que para esto trajo: antes porque el dicho 
electo ha trabajado de defender que no sean los naturales tan mal tratados, le han 4 él mal tratado y ofendido, asi.en 
la persona poniendole las manos en él, como en la fama levantandole mil testimonios falsos, siendo como es uno 
de los buenos religiosos y de buena doctrina y ejemplo que pueden ser, y como tal V. M: lo escogid para el cargo : 
mas porque si el dicho electo lo tubiera, ellos do pudieran haber tenido, como tienen, cada cincuenta mil castellanos 
en un afio, sin casi otros tantos que han gastado en pagar muchas deudas que trajeron,y embiar 4 esos reynos, como 
han embiado, en cabeza de otros, mucha suma de oro y joyas, y en banquetas y fiestas con mugeres y otras desho- 
nestidades, que porque hay de estos muchos coronistas, y aun algunas de las coronicas han embiado 4 V. M. y 4 su 
consejo, yo no me entremeto, y tambien porque no quiero ser autor de lo que no he visto. 

Yo ando entreteniendo lo que puedo, porque no hagan dar causa 4 algo de lo que ellos desean por colorar su 
maldad, y.sufriré todo lo posible, aunque certifico 4 V. M. que ya no puedo sufrir, ni son sufrideras las afrentas que 
me han hecho y cada dia me hacen, ni la gran necesidad en que me ponen, por haberme quitado los alimentos, como 
hicieron al electo obispo, desde que no tubieron otra cosa que hacer con él, y sufriré hasta esperar la nueva: au- 
diencia, mas si se tarda, ser4 imposible que no haya de tomar los pueblos que V. M. me hizo merced, pues para ello 
me da autoridad y poder para poder mantenerme, y que no se me acabe de morir de hambre la gente que me queda, 
que enotra cosa no pienso entremeterme, hasta que, como digo, venga la nueva audiencia, porque venidos estos, 
V. M. ser4 mejor informado de ellos, de las cosas que aca han pasado y pasan. 

Tambien Nufio de Guzman, Presidente de esta audiencia, vista la provision que V. M. me mando dar de su Ca- 
pitan General en esta Nueva-Espafia, que la tubo en su poder muchos dias, porque la tomdé 4 la persona con quien 
yo la embié desde Castilla, como tomaba todas las otras cartas que de aquellos reynos 4 esta Nueva-Espajfia venian, 
sin autoridad alguna, ni poder de V. M. hizo mucha gente y ha ido por muchas provincias que yo tenia vistas y an- 
dadas, y algunas muy pacificas, é ha las robado é alborotado, en especial la de Mechoacan, que V. M. sabe cuanto 
tiempo ha que estd en su real servicio. Atormenté al Sefior de ella, y le sacé mucha suma de oro y plata, é porque 

412 CARTAS INEDITAS DE HERNANDO. CORTES. 

no se supiese la cantidad le maté, diciendo que el dicho Sefior tenia cierta gente de guerra para pelear con él, que fue 
muy al contrario de la verdad: y puesto que por cartas de muchas personas de log que estan en su compafia, y por 
informacion de algunos de los que de alla han venido, he sabido el poco fruto que hace en la tierra por donde anda, 
por no haber pasado de las provincias que yo tenia andadas, antes se esta en ellas gastandolas y alborotandolas, y 
conozco (y asi es notorio 4 todos) que de su estada Dios Nuestro Sefior, y V. M. son muy deservidos y la tierra 
muy destruida y alborotada. 

Yo quisiera evitar aquel dafio con ir, 6 embiar mi lugar-teniente para tomara quella gente, y con ella, y con la que 
mas trage, € la que conmigo fuera de buena voluntad, sin los llevar por fuerza como el hizo, para pasar adelante, y 
descubrir y poblar mas tierra y asegurar las que estaban descubiertas, no lo he osado, ni oso hacer, porque no me 
levanten .que doy causa a desasosiego, y helo hecho saber 4 los oydores, y 4 ellos bien les consta todo lo que he 
dicho, pero tambien quieren suspender esta provision como todas las otras, porque les parece que no ternian con- 
migo la compaiiia que con Nufio de Guzman tienen. 

Ya V. M. sabe como al tiempo que yo me parti para estos reynos, dejé en la costa del Sur cuatro navios casi aca- 
bados, para embiar en seguimiento de los que V. M. me mandé que embiase 4 Maluco, y despues se hizo otro, que 
fueron cinco, y estaban 4 punto con todas las cosas necesarias para seguir el dicho viage, de donde tengo por muy 
cierto que V. M. fuera muy servido, asi en socorrer aquellas gentes que se embiaron poblar alguna parte de-aquellas 
islas, como en descubrir otras. _Llegados los dichos oydores, quitaron la persona que yo dejé para entender en los 
dichos navios, é le trajeron preso 4 esta ciudad, é quitaron los pueblos que entendian en la obra de ellos, é la sus- 
pendieron, por manera que todas las xarcias é otras cosas que estaban para los dichos navios, estan casi perdidas, y 
los maestros estubieron cerca de un afio sin hacer nada, y despues condenaron 4 la persona que dejé en cargo de los 
dichos navios en tres mil y tantos castellanos de los salarios que pidieron aquellos maestros del tiempo que estu- 
bieron suspensos, habiendolos ellos suspendido: é para pagarlos se vendié mucha hacienda, por manera que toda la 
obra cesé, y no se si se aprovecharé la que estaba hecha, porque est4 muy dafiada y destruida y robada la xarcia 
como dicho tengo, y los maestros idos por muchas partes, donde demas del interes de V. M., que no es poco, 4 mi 
me destruyeron mas de veinte mil castellanos que tenia gastados en la obra é aparejos de los dichos cinco navios, todo 
4 fin que no pareciese servicio mio; y es verdad que esto he sentido mas que toda la otra hacienda que me han 
destruido, y que pasa de trescientos mil castellanos, por lo que se ha estorbado de servir 4 Dios y 4 V.M. con 
aquella armada, y por lo que yo conoci el deseo que V. M. tiene de saber el secreto de estas partes, y por el que yo 
trato de emplear mi persona en este descubrimiento, plegue 4 Dios que no permita que el demonio dé ya mas estor- 
vos en esta obra, sino que se cumpla la voluntad que V. M. tiene de servirle, y porque en estas partes se predique su 
santo evangelio, que yo aparejado estoy 4 seguir esta jornada hasta morir en ella; y que esta nueva audiencia no 
se tarde, porque venida, tengo mucha esperanza que habra remedio, porque aunque no conozco los oydores, al 
presidente tengo por persona de mucha rectitud 6 conciencia por el tiempo que le conversé en la Isla Espafiola. En 
viniendo haré mas larga relacion 4 V. M. de lo que hubiere. 

Suplico 4 V. M. sea servido mandarme siempre avisar de su voluntad, porque yo acierte, pues es este mi principal 
deseo, y lo mandé asi 4 los del consejo, pues estan mas cerca de hacerlo: y tambien me hagan merced de me mandar 
escribir las nuevas de todo lo acaecido 4 V. M. en esas partes, porque ac& demos gracias 4 Dios, y nos regocijemos 
con sus victorias, que yo espero por la santa intencion de V. M. es por esas partes, y nosotros por estotras hemos 
de atraher al corral mucha parte de las ovejas perdidas*. Sacra Cesarea Catolica Magestad, Dios Nuestro Sefior la 
muy Real Persona de V. M. guarde y conserve en su servicio por muy largos tiempos en acrecentamiento de mayores 
reynos y sefiorios. De la ciudad de Tezcuco de esta Nueva-Espafia 4 10 de Octubre 1530 afios. De Vuestra Sacra 

Catolica Magestad muy humilde criado y vasallo que sus muy reales pies y manos de V. M. besa. El Marques del 
Valle. 

* Cortes seems to hint in the motto which he took for his coat of arms, that the destruction of the city of Mexico was a judgement from the 
Lord upon the Jews for their sins; and in designating the Mexicans ‘ovejas perdidas,’ he might significantly allude to the ‘lost sheep’ of the 
house of Israel. 

CARTAS INEDITAS DE HERNANDO. CORTES. 413 

CARTA SEXTA. 

Sacra Cesarea Carotica Macestap. Pense que haber trabajado en la juventud me aprovechara para que en la 
vejez tubiera descanso, y asi ha cuarenta afios que me he ocupado en no dormir, mal comer, y 4 las veces, ni bien 
ni mal, traer las armas 4 cuestas, poner la persona en peligros, y gastar mi hacienda y edad, todo en servicio de Dios, 
trayendo ovejas d su corral muy remotas de nuestro emisferio, é ignotas y no escritas en muestras escrituras, y acre- 
centando y dilatando el nombre y patrimonio de mi Rey, ganandole y trayendole 4 su yugo y real cetro muchos y 
muy grandes reynos y sefiorios de muchas barbaras naciones y gentes, ganados por mi propia persona y expensas, 
sin ser ayudado de cosa alguna, antes muy estorbado por muchos emulos é embidiosos, que como sanguijuelas han 
‘rebentado de hartos de mi sangre. 

De la parte que 4 Dios cupo de mis trabajos y vigilias asaz estoy satisfecho 6 pagado, porque siendo la obra suya, 
quiso tomarme por medio, y que las gentes me atribuyesen alguna parte, aunque quien conociere de mi, lo que yo, 
vera claro que no sin causa la divina providencia quiso que una obra tan grande se acabase por el mas flaco de 
todos é inutil medio que se puede hallar, porque 4 solo Dios era 6 fuese él atributo. 

De la que 4 mi Rey quedé la remuneracion, siempre estube satisfecho que, ceteris paribus, no fuera menor por ser 
en tiempo de V. M., que nunca estos reynos de Espafia donde yo soy natural, y 4 quien cupo este beneficio, fueron 
poseidos de tan grande y catolico principe, magnanimo y poderoso rey, y asi V. M. la primera vez que le besé las 
manos y entregue los frutos de mis servicios, mostré reconocimiento de ellos, y comenz6 4 mostrar voluntad de me 
hacer gratificacion, honrando mi persona con palabras y obras, que pareciendome 4 mi que no se equiparaban 4 
mis meritos, V. M. sabe que rehusé yo de recibir. 

V. M. me dijo y mandé que los aceptase, porque pareciese que me comenzaba 4 hacer alguna merced, y que no 
las recibiese por pago de mis servicios, porque V. M. se queria haber conmigo como se han los que se muestran 4 
tirar 4 la ballesta, que los primeros tiros dan fuera del terreno, y enmendando dan en él y en el blanco. y fiel, que la 
merced que V. M. me hacia, era dar fuera del terreno, y que iria enmendando hasta dar en el fiel de lo que yo mere- 
cia; y pues que no se me quitaba nada de lo que tenia, ni se me habia de quitar, que recibiese lo que me daba, y asi 
besé Jas manos de V. M. por ello. En volviendo las espaldas, quitéseme lo que tenia todo, y no se me cumplio la 
merced que V. M. me hizo, y demas de estas palabras que V. M. me dijo, y obras que me prometidé, que pues me 
tiene tan buena memoria, no se le habran olvidado, por cartas de V. M. firmadas’ de su real nombre, tengo otras 
muy mayores; y pues mis servicios hechos hasta alli son benemeritos de las obras y promesas que V. M. me hizo, 
y despues aca no Jo han desmerecido, antes nunca he cesado de servir y acrecentar el patrimonio de estos reynos, y 
con mil estorvos, que si no los hubiese tenido, no fuera menos lo acrecentado despues que la merced se me hizo, que 
lo he hecho por que la mereci. 

No sé porque no se me cumple la promesa de las mercedes ofrecidas, y se me quitan las hechas; y si quisieren 
decir que no se me quitan pues poseo algo, cierto es, que nada € inutil son una misma cosa; y lo que tengo es tan 
sin fruto, que me fuera harto mejor no tenerlo, porque hubiera entendido en mis grangerias y no gastado el fruto de 
ellas por defenderme del fiscal de V. M., porque ha sido y es mas dificultoso que ganar la tierra de los enemigos. 
Asi que mi trabajo aproveché para mi contentamiento de haber hecho el deber, y no para conseguir el efecto de él, 
pues no solo no se me siguié reposo a la vejez, mas trabajo hasta la muerte, y plugiese 4 Dios que no pasase ade- 
lante, sino que con la corporal se acabase y no se estendiese 4 la perpetua, porque quien tanto trabajé tiene en de- 
fender el cuerpo, no puede dejar de ofender al anima. 

Suplico 4 V. M. no permita que 4 tan notorios servicios haya tan poco miramiento, y pues es de creer que no es 
4 culpa de V. M. que las gentes lo sepan, porque como esta obra que Dios hizo por mi medio, es tan grande y mara- 
villosa, y se ha estendido la fama de ella por todos los reynos de V. M. y de los otros Reyes Cristianos, y aun por 
algunos infiéles; en estos donde hay noticia del pleyto de entre el fiscal y mi, no se trata de cosa mas; y unos atri- 
buyen 4 la culpa del fiscal, otros 4 culpas mias; y estas no las hallan tan grandes, que si bastasen para por ellas 
negarseme el premio, no bastasen tambien para quitarme la vida, honra y hacienda ; y pues esto no se hace, que no 
debe ser mia la culpa: 4 V. M. ninguna se atribuye, porque si V. M. quisiese quitarme lo que me dio, poder tiene 
para ejecutarlo, pues al que quiere y puede nada es imposible. Decir que se buscan formas para colorar la obra y 

que no se sienta el intento, ni caben ni pueden caber en los Reyes ungidos por Dios tales medios, porque para con él! 
5 N 

Ad 4, CARTAS INEDITAS DE HERNANDO CORTES. 

no hay color que no sea trasparente: para con el mundo no hay para que colorarlo, porque asi lo quiero, asi lo 
mando, es el descargo de lo que los reyes hacen. 

Yo supliqué 4 V. M. en Madrid, fuese servido de aclarar la voluntad que tubo de hacerme merced en pago de mis. 
servicios, y le traje 4 la memoria algunos de ellos: dijome V. M. que mandaria 4 los del consejo que me despacha- 
sen: pensé que se les dejaba mandado lo que habian de hacer, porque V. M. me dijo que no queria que trajere pleyto 
con el fiscal: cuando quise saberlo, dijeronme que me defendiese de la demanda del fiscal, porque habia de ir por 
tela de justicia, y por ella se habia de sentenciar. Sentilo por grave, y escribi 4 V. M. 4 Barcelona, suplicandole que 
pues era servido de entrar en juicio de su siervo, lo fuese en que hubiese jueces sin sospecha, y V. M. mandase que 
con los del consejo de las Indias se juntasen y algunos de los otros, pues todos son criados de V. M., y que juntos 
todos lo determinasen; no fue V. M. servido, que no puedo alcanzar la causa, pues cuantos mas lo viesen, mejor 
alcanzarian lo que se debia hacer. 

Veome viejo y pobre y empefiado en este reyno en mas de veinte mil ducados, sin mas de cien otros que he gas- 
tado de los que trage é me han embiado, que algunos de ellos debo tambien, que los han tomado prestados para 
embiarme, y todos corren cambios, y en cinco afios, poco mas 6 menos que ha que sali de mi casa, no es mucho lo 
que he gastado, pues nunca he salido de la corte con tres hijos que traigo en ella, con letrados, procuradores y solici- 
tadores, que todo fuera mejor empleado que V. M. se sirviria de ello, y de lo que yo mas hubiera adquirido en este 
tiempo. 

He ayudado tambien la ida de Argel*. Pareceme que al coger del fruto de mis trabajos no debia hecharlos en 
vasijas rotas, y dejarlo en juicio de pocos, sino tornar 4 suplicar 4 V. M. sea servido que todos cuantos jueces V. M. 
tiene en sus consejos, conozcan de esta causa, y conforme 4 justicia la sentenciasen. 

Yo he sentido del obispo de Cuenca, que deseo que hubiere para esto otros jueces demas de los que hay, porque 
él y el licenciado Salmeron, nuevo oydor en este consejo de las Indias, son los que me despojaron sin oirme de hecho, 
siendo jueces en la Nueva Espaiia, como lo tengo probado, y con quien yo traigo pleyto sobre el dicho despojo, y les 
pido cantidad de dineros de los intereses y rentas de lo que me despojaron, y esta claro que no han de sentenciar 
contra si: no les he querido recusar en este caso, porque siempre crey que V. M. fuera servido que no llegaria 4 
estos terminos, y no siendo V. M. servido que haya mas jueces que determinen esta causa, serme ha forzado recusar 
al obispo de Cuenca y 4 Salmeron, y pesarme habia en el anima, porque no podra ser sin alguna dilacion, que para 
mi no podia ser cosa mas dafiosa, porque he sesenta afios, y anda en cinco que sali de mi casa, y no tengo mas de un 
hijo varon que me suceda; y aunque tengo la muger moza para poder tener mas, mi edad no sufre esperar mucho: y 
si no tubiese otro, y Dios dispusiese de este sin dejar sucesion, que me habria aprovechado lo adquirido, pues suce- 
diendo hijas se pierde la memoria? Otra y otra vez torno 4 suplicar 4 V. M. sea servido que con los jueces del consejo 
de Indias se junten otros jueces de estos otros consejos ; pues todos son criados de V. M., y les fia la gobernacion 
de sus reynos y su real conciencia, no es inconveniente fiar les que determinen sobre una escritura de merced que 
V. M. hizo 4 un su vasallo de una partiesta de un gran todo con que él servid 4 V. M. sin costar trabajo ni peligro de 
su real persona, ni cuidado de espiritu de proveer como se hiciere, ni costa de dineros para pagar la gente que lo 
hizo; y que tan limpia y lealmente servid, no solo con la tierra que gano, pero con mucha cantidad de oro y plata y 
piedras de los despojos que en ella hubo; y que V. M. mande & los jueces que fuere servido que entiendan en ello, 
que en un cierto tiempo que V. M. les sefiale, lo determinen y sentencien sin que haya esta dilacion, y esta sera para 
mi muy gran merced, porque 4 dilatarse, dejarlo he perder, y volver me he 4 mi casa, porque no tengo ya edad para 
andar por mesones, sino para recogerme 4 aclarar mi cuenta con Dios, pues la tengo larga y poca vida para dar los 
descargos, y sera mejor dejar perder Ja hacienda que el anima. 

Sacra Magestad, Dios Nuestro Sefior guarde la muy Real Persona de V. M. con el acrecentamiento de reynos y 
estado que V. M. desea. De Valladolid 4 3 de Febrero de 1544 afos. De Vuestra Catolica Magestad muy humilde 
siervo y vasallo, que sus muy reales pies y manos besa. Hr Mareuss ex VALue.t 

* The expedition against Algiers, of which Cortes takes occasion here to remind the Emperor, proved signally disastrous to the Spaniards, whose 

fleet was dispersed in a storm at sea. Clavigero remarks, that on that occasion Cortes lost the most precious of the jewels he had brought from 
Mexico, and amongst the number an emerald carved in the HERES of a cup, for which the Venetians had offered an immense price, intending to dis- 

pose of it to the Grand Seignor. 
+ Todas estas Cartas Originales firmadas del mismo Hernando Cortes, y algunas por duplicado, se hallan en el archivo general de Indias de 
Sevilla, entre los primeros legajos rotulados de Patronato Real, entre los papeles trahidos de Simancas. Copiaronse y confrontaronse con proli- 

jidad en Sevilla 4 27 de Mayo de 1798. 

CARTAS INEDITAS DE HERNANDO CORTES. 415 

Memorial dirigido al Emperador por el Marques del Valle. 

Sacra Crsarga Catoxica Maszstap.—El Marques del Valle suplica 4 V.M. se acuerde, que desde el afio de 
cuatro, que pasé 4 las partes de las Indias, ha servido y sirve en las cosas siguientes. 

Primero sirvié 4 V. M. y 4 la corona real de estos reynos en la Isla Espafiola, en las conquistas y pacificacion de 
las provincias de Higue, y del Bauruco, Daygguas, Yntagua, Xuaragua, Aneguayagua, que hasta aquel presente no 
estaban conquistadas. 

Ytem sirvié en la Isla de Cuba, é fué la principal parte de la pacificacion y poblacion de ella, como esté probado 
en los descargos de su residencia. 

Ytem salié desde la Isla de Cuba el afio de diez y ocho, con quince nayios suyos y en ellos quinientos hombres, 
sin algunos negros é Indios de la dicha Isla, contra la voluntad de Diego Velazquez, gobernador que 4 la sazon era 
de la dicha Isla, como asimismo est4 probado en los dichos descargos de su residencia, que por estar bastantemente 
probado alli, no los relata y se remite 4 lo que los testigos dicen, y como no pudo el dicho Diego Velazquez * estor- 
barle la salida por tener el dicho Marques ya mucha gente, defendié tacitamente y en algunas partes expreso que no 
pudiese sacar bastimentos para su armada. E visto por el dicho Marques, una noche tomé toda la carne que estaba 
para abastecer la ciudad de Santiago, de cuyo puerto salidé 6 salté, y la metié sin que nadie lo sintiese en sus navios, 
y sabido por el obligado, vino 4 él aquella noche lorando porque le tomé la carne, diciendo que dicho gobernador y 
regimiento le echarian 4 perder por no proveer la ciudad, y que él no podia tener otra carne dentro de ocho dias, que 
por amor de Dios no le hiciere tanto dafto. El dicho Marques se quité una cadena que tenia al cuello con uno 
abrojo (de oro), é la did al dicho obligado, que se llamaba Hernan Dalonso, é se la did, diciendo: Toma la paga 
de la carne que yo os he tomado, y lo demas que sobrare de lo que la cadena vale, sea para la pena que os llevaren, 
porque yo no puedo hacer otra cosa, porque tengo la gente y navios perdidos por no querer Diego Velasquez dar 
lugar que se me den bastimentos para mi armada, y asi salié del puerto otro dia de mafiana con sus navios y con 
este poco bastimento. 

Salido en la mar, despaché uno de los dichos navios con cantidad de mercaderias (cargase el navio que llevaba) 4 
la Isla de Jamayca, y por capitan de él 4 un Pedro Suarez Gallinato, natural de Sevilla, al cual mandé que fuese 4 la 
dicha Isla, y 4 trueco de dichas mercaderias cargase el navio que llevaba de pan y carne y otros bastimentos, el cual 
lo hizo y truxo mil cargas de pan cazavi, y dos mil tozinos, y muchos favoles y aves y otras cosas. 

El se fué con los otros navios 4 la provincia de Macaca, donde de una hacienda de V. M. compré del mayordomo 
de ella quinientas é tantas cargas de dicho pan y algunos tozinos. 

De alli pasé al puerto de la Trinidad, y de otro mayordomo de V. M. compré otras quinientas cargas pocas mas 6 
menos, y tambien algunos tozinos. 

Alli tuvo noticia que de la provincia de la Havana habia de venir un navio de un Juan Nuitez Sedefio, cargado de 
pan y de tozinos y de otros bastimentos, y envid el dicho Marques un caravelon que se llamaba el Guerho, y en él 
por capitan 4 un Diego de Ordas, y mandole que se metiese entre unas islas por donde habia de pasar el dicho navio, 
y que llegado se llegare 4 él, y que con la ‘mayor mafia que pudiere, sin escandalo, tomase el dicho navio y basti- 
mentos, y al sefior de él y mercaderes metiere en el caravelon que él Ilevaba, y los enviase al puerto de la Trinidad 
donde él quedaba, para pagarles lo que valiese, y asi se hizo, y el dicho Juan Nufiez Sedefio y un fulano de Sandoval 
y otros que traian bastimentos en el dicho navio vinieron, y les pagé cantidad de dos mil y tantos castellanos en que 
fueron tasados los dichos bastimentos en lazadas de oro, que no trueco otra moneda. 

~ De alli se fué 4 la dicha provincia de la Havana, donde tambien hallé puesto estanco para que no le diesen basti- 
mentos, y hallé alli 4 un Christoval de Quesada, que cogia los diezmos por el obispo, y 4 un tesorero de la cruzada, 
que cobraba ciertas bulas, y no le pagaban por no haber dineros en aquella provincia 4:causa de no haber minas, al 
qual le dixo, que recibiese la paga en pan y carne y otros bastimentos, é que él se los pagaria al precio que él los 
tomase de los vecinos, y asi se hizo, y con esto, y con los diezmos, hubo de alli dos mil y quinientas y tantas cargas 
de pan, y cerca de tres mil tozinos, y muchas aves y puercos en pie, y otras legumbres, con que acabé de abastecer 

® Las Casas censures Cortes in the severest terms for the conduct he pursued towards Diego Velasquez; nor does he scruple in the third 
volume of his inedited History of America, to accuse him of grossly misrepresenting facts in his account of that transaction to the Emperor. 

416 CARTAS INEDITAS DE HERNANDO CORTES. 

su armada con harto trabajo y costa, y tardé en esto desde diez y ocho dias del mes de Octubre del afio de diez y 
ocho, hasta diez y ocho del mes de Enero del afio de diez y nueve, que acabé de salir de la dicha Isla de Cuba del 
Cabo Corrientes ; y de su viage se siguid lo que V. M. ha visto, como puede ver por las relaciones que particular- 
mente de cada cosa de lo que le sucedié envid 4 V. M., y se podra informar de algunas particularidades en que su 
persona se mostré en aquellas conquistas, que por escribirlas él, y ser en causa propia, dejo de expresar, que hay 
muchas y algunas de ellas que manifiestan solo su persona en muchas. cosas haber sido parte para hacer dichas con- 
quistas, lo qual asi mismo esté probado en los descargos de su residencia, y hay hoy muchos testigos vivos, y algunos 
en estos reynos y aun en esta corte, que los vieron y saben. 

En la Nueva Espafia sugeté 4 la corona real de V. M. muchas provincias, ciudades, villas y lugares, segun que de 
todo V. M., cree, esta informado. 

Pacificas estas, trabajo de dar orden como los naturales de ellas conservasen sus vidas y haciendas, y conociesen 4 
Dios, y sirviesen 4 V. M., muy al contrario de lo que hasta entonces se habia hecho en aquellas partes, como consta 
por el suceso; pobldla de gente Espanola, 4 mucha costa suya, dando mucha cantidad de dineros 4 unos para que 
fuesen por sus mugeres é hijas, para que se arraygasen en la tierra, é ayudandoles en los casamientos de ellas ; 4 otros 
pagando los fletes y sosteniendolos, é ayudandoles con darles de comer y ropas € caballos é otras cosas. 

Pobldlas de ganados de todas maneras, como se parece en la cantidad que hoy hay de ellos, y asimismo de muchas 
plantas, de que no solamente muchos de los Espafioles que alla hay viven, pero aun los naturales se aprovechan, en 
especial de plantar morales, y llevar simiente de seda y sostenerla diez afos, hasta que hubo muchos que se aplicaron 
A ella viendo el interese. 

Entre las provincias que el dicho Marques conquisté y pobldé en la dicha Nueva Espafia, fueron Guatemala, 
Fonduras y Hueras*, Panuco, Xalisco, 6 la Nueva Galicia; las unas y las otras did V. M. en gobernacion 4 quien 
fué servido: suplica 4 V. M., asi por lo que es obligado al servicio de V. M., como por lo que debe 4 su conciencia 
é importa 4 su honra ¢ interese, se informe como estaban al tiempo que el dicho Marques las goberné, y estan agora, 
y la necesidad que tienen de remedio; y sobre esto descarga su conciencia y encarga la de V. M. sino se informase 
muy particularmente de cada cosa por si; y suplica 4 V. M. no sea la informacion de él, porque no puede dejar, 
diciendo como ha de decir verdad, de tocar 6 en pasion 6 en interese suyo, que aunque de él este libre, no sera juzgado 
por tal, y 4 esta causa V. M. y los de su consejo saben cuanto él se ha escusado dar noticia ni hablar en nada de estas 
cosas, aunque muchas veces ha sido reprehendido de sus confesores, y lo que agora dice no es sin harta pena suya, 
pero constrenido 4 ello. 

Por remuneracion de estos servicios, V. M. estando en la ciudad de Toledo, el afio de veinte y nueve, hizo merced 
al dicho Marques de honrarle y darle este titulo del Valle de Guaxaca, que és en la dicha Nueva Espana, y ciertos 
pueblos que le sefialé en cantidad de veinte y tres mil vasallos en todos sus terminos y jurisdiccion, alto y bajo, y 
mero y mixto imperio, y con todas sus aldeas y sugetos y vasallos, segun que se contiene en la merced que V. M. le 
hizo, y 4 que se refiere. 

Notificada la merced que V. M. le hizo por el comendador mayor de Leon, secretario de V. M., y por el reve- 
rendisimo Cardenal de Sevilla, que 4 la sazon era su confesor, el dicho Marques respondid, que besaba los pies 4 
V.M. por la merced, pero que no la queria recibir, porque no le parecia que correspondia 4 sus servicios, ni se 
equiparaba 4 ellos, que creia que era la causa no tener V. M. noticia de las cosas de aquellas partes, é creyendo que 
era bastante se la hacia, que despues que V. M. estubiese informado y supiese lo que era, V. M. se la haria como 
_sus servicios lo merecian, y asi el dicho Marques lo refirid 4 V. M., y le respondié estas palabras formales, de que 
cree V. M. ternd memoria, pues se le suelen olvidar pocas cosas en especial servicios. 

“Cortes, lo que Yo os doy, no es, ni vos lo recibireis por final paga de vuestros servicios, porque Yo no estoy 
informado de las cosas de alla, y entre tanto quierome ver con vos como los que se muestran 4 jugar 4 la ballesta, 
que los primeros tiros dan fuera del terrero, y de alli enmiendase, hasta dar en él, y en el blanco y en el fiel; infor- 
mado Yo de las cosas de alld, lo haré asi con vos, hasta dar en el fiel de lo que vuestros servicios merecen, y pues 
hasta tanto no se os quita, nise os ha de quitar nada de lo que teneis recibido, lo que agora Yo os doy en patrimonio 
recibidlo, porque parezca que comenzo 4 haceros alguna gracia y merced.” 

El dicho Marques bes6 las manos de V. M. por la merced y la acepté, con lo que V. M. le prometio que no se le 
habia de quitar nada, ni se le quitaria hasta que V. M. satisfaciere 4 sus servicios. 

* Hlicueras is the province here alluded to. 

-CARTAS INEDITAS DE HERNANDO CORTES. 417 

Recibié licencia de V. M. en Barcelona, donde se quexé de los agravios que Nufio de Guzman y los oidores de 
la primera audiencia le hicieron, y V. M., como Catolico Rey y Sefior, lo mandé proveer, y aunque ellos fueron en 
algo punidos, él hasta hoy no est restituido en nada de los dafios y agravios que le hicieron, y aunque estan muy 
notorios y sentenciados por tales y fueron en mucha cantidad. 

Fué 4 la Nueva Espafia y llevé su muger, presenté las provisiones de la merced que V. M. le heen y no solo no 
le cumplieron, ni le han cumplido la dicha merced, pero aun lo que tenia le quitaron, y de lo que le dieron en cum- 
plimiento, le han tornado 4 quitar algunos pedazos. 

Ytem: V.M. le mando por su carta firmada de su real nombre, que enviase tres navios que tenia en la Mar del 
Sur, 4 buscar a las Islas de Maluco 4 los capitanes Garcia de Loaysa y Sebastian Gaboto, que importaba mucho al 

servicio de V. M., y que le haria en esto muy gran servicio en que con toda brevedad los despachase, y que fuesen 
muy bien bastecidos y pertrechados, de manera que por falta de esto no dejasen de hacer 4 lo que iban ; y si hallasen 
algunos de los capitanes en necesidad los pudieren socorrer; y que enviaba 4 mandar 4 sus oficiales y al licenciado 
Luis Ponce, juez de residencia, que le diesen todo lo necesario para la dicha armada, lo qual él pidié; y nunca le 
dieron, y él lo proveyé a su costa; y teniendolo ya 4 punto para despachar los dichos navios, se le quemé una casa 
donde tenia todos los aparejos de ellos, y los bastimentos y rescates que habian de llevar, que le costé segun parece 
por la cuenta, mas de sesenta mil ducados; y visto cuanto V. M. encarecia el servicio que en aquella jornada recibia, 
el dicho Marques los torné 4 proveer y gastar mas de otros sesenta mil ducados en proveerlos de nuevo, segun consta 
por las cuentas que de ello hay; y asi se despaché la dicha armada, y hizo lo que V. M. sabe y és informado. 

Ytem V. M. mandé que enviase navios por aquella costa 4 buscar un estrecho, que V. M. era informado que habia 
que pasaba 4 la Mar del Sur, porque descubriendose seria el mayor servicio que la corona real de Castilla podia reci- 
bir; y aunque V. M. no mandé proveer de cosa alguna para la costa de este descubrimiento, visto lo que V. M. en- 
carecia este servicio, y con el deseo que el dicho Marques siempre ha tenido de emplear su persona y hacienda en 
este efecto, provey6 para ello cinco navios, y por capitan de ellos 4 un Cristoval de Olid, natural de Uveda 6 Baeza, 
donde gasté mas de cincuenta mil ducados, como consta por las cuentas, el cual dicho capitan se alzé con el armada, 
y para recobrarla le costé lo que V. M. ya esta informado. 

Ytem, enyiando el dicho Marques 4 estos reynos por su muger, y para llevarla treinta y tantos mil castellanos i 
oro y plata y otras joyas, fue servido V. M. de lo tomar y servirse de ello, y recibid dos cartas, que hoy el dicho 
Marques tiene firmadas del real nombre de V. M. la una 4 su padre, y la otra 4 él, que ambas asi son de un tenor, en 
que dice V. M. que por tener necesidad y muy cierta la -voluntad del dicho Marques para su servicio, quiso antes 
socorrerse de aquellos dineros suyos que de otra persona, y les mandaba que lo tuviesen por bien, é daba su fé y pa- 
labra real de pagarlos, é demas tener memoria del servicio que en aquello habia recibido, y hacerle por ello merced : 
ni de esto, ni de ninguna cosa de los gastos y espensas que él ha hecho hasta hoy, ha tenido paga ni recompensa, ni 
memoria de que haya recibido en ello. 

Ytem, por proseguir su intento, que ha sido y és siempre servir 4 V. M. y dilatar su nombre y patrimonio real 
por todo el mundo, si él para ello bastase, tomé cierto asiento con V. M. para descubrir 4 su costa por la Mar del 
Sur de la Nueva Espaiia, tierras donde se consiguiese este fin; y en prosecucion de este descubrimiento, hizo cinco 
armadas, en que ha gastado doscientos y quarenta y tantos mil ducados, segun parece por las cuentas, y puesto su 
persona 4 peligro de muerte, y muerto en la demanda dos deudos suyos y otras personas y amigos, y habiendo descu- 
bierto algunas tierras, y prosiguiendo en descubrir otras de que tenia noticia, Don de Mendoza, Viso-Rey de V. M., 
le mandé so pena de cincuenta mil castellanos, y la persona 4 merced de V. M., que no prosiguiere en dicho descu- 
brimiento, y demas desto le tomé y embarazé todos los navios, velas y xarcias, bastimentos y otras cosas que tenia 
para dicho descubrimiento ; y no obstante que por el dicho Marques fué requerido, como consta por los testimonios 
que de ello tengo, que no le impidiese, porque tenia muchos aparejos para enviar 4 un capitan que habia enviado al 
dicho descubrimiento, los quales y los navios que para enviarlos tenia se le perderian, y el capitan y gente que tenia 
all4 padecerian necesidad y algun peligro que por no ser socorridos, nunca lo quiso hacer, donde se le siguié al 
dicho Marques dafio en mucha cantidad, y el capitan que tenia en el dicho descubrimiento, se volvié por no ser so- 
corrido, y el dicho Marques vino 4 estos reynos 4 pedir 4 V. M. remedio de tan gran fuerza y agravio. 

Y¥ por torzedor de que el dicho Marques no viniese 4 quexarse, habiendo suspendido la cuenta de los vasallos de 
que V. M. le hizo merced, le torné 4 hazer muchos mandos al tiempo de su partida, que. ... . cuenta, é ha infor- 
mado 4 V.M. muy al reves de lo que antes, que entre el dicho Virrey y el dicho Marques tubiesen esta pendencia 

50 

418 CARTAS INEDITAS DE HERNANDO CORTES. 

sentia y aun habia escrito; y el dicho Virrey sin autoridad de V.M., sino movido de su interese, envid gente al 
deseubrimiento y conquista del dicho Marques, no lo pudiendo hacer, porque ya que aquello no fuera dentro de los 
limites y demarcacion de la capitulacion € asiento que V. M. con el dicho Marques mandé tomar, ninguna tierra 
nueva, asi de tierra nueva como de algun rebelion, podia hacer, sino el dicho Marques, pues és capitan general de 
V. M. en aquellas partes, y el dicho Don Antonio, gobernador, de donde consta muy claro, que propio interese y no 
servicio de V. M. le motivé hacerle la fuerza y agravio que le hizo, porque claro est4 que es corta la experiencia y 
suficiencia del dicho Marques que la del capitan que el dicho Virrey envié. 

Ytem, venido el dicho Marques 4 estos reynos, como V. M. estaba ausente de ellos, no’ ha tenido remedio, 
ni ha cesado la fuerza, antes el dicho Virrey todavia procede: quiso el dicho Marques ir 4 Flandes, 6 4 Ale- 
mania, donde V. M. estaba, y procuré con toda instancia, asi por las personas que aca lo podian saber; como 
escribiendo 4 otras donde V. M. estaba, si en su ida podia servir en algo, 6 si le seria penoso 4 V. M., y de todas 
partes fue avisado que estubiese quedo, porque la venida de V. M. seria breve, y all4 no habia en que servir, pues 
V. M. andaba muy de camino, y asi lo hizo hasta que supo que V. M. venia sobre Argel, y pareciendole, que hallan- 
dose en estos reynos no hacia lo que debia ni cumplia su deseo, sino se hallase donde la real persona de V. M. iba, 
fue, y no el menos proveido de los que alld fueron, ni él que menos gasté en la jornada; y llevo dos hijos que tiene 
para poder servir, y asi hiziese con ciento que tuviera, porque otro nifio que no era para la jornada, dejé en servicio 
del Principe Nuestro Sefior, y Dios sabe lo que el deseé con su persona su deseo, aunque Dios no fué servido. 

Otros muchos servicios y no de menos calidad que los que refiere, pudiera manifestar, sino por dar pesadumbre 
4 V. M., y porque muchos de ellos son que particularmente tocan 4 su persona y son notorios, y quando los bien- 
aventurados hechos de V. M. pareciesen en sus coronicas, ponen ahora por orla, que no le sera poco premio. 

Solo suplica 4 V. M. mire y resuma sus servicios, en que él solo se ha sefialado en aquellas partes, asi en las con- 
quistas que en ellas se han hecho, como en la conversacion y conversion de los naturales, y poblacion y gobernacion 
de las tierras, y que nadie como él ha hecho estas tres cosas, y que no tiene V. M. en aquellas partes sino lo que él 
gand y goberné, y que tuviera mas sino hubieran estorvado, y habiendo respeto 4 esto, y 4 que le quiso honrar con 
titulo honroso, V. M. le gratifique y honre por manera que él pueda sustentar la honra y estado que V. M. le puso, 
y que no permita que las fuerzas y agravios que Don Antonio de Mendoza le ha hecho, pasen sin restitucion de 
sus dafios; y pues V. M. muy brevemente, y sin pesadumbre, entendiendo como entiende la cosmografia, por la ca- 
pitulacion y asiento que conmigo se toméd, cuan notoriamente se le hizo fuerza, y el dicho Don Antonio se movié 
por su interese, y no por servir 4 V. M., antes ha sido muy deservido en ello, lo mande ver y entender por su real 
persona, pues antes sera recreacion que pesadumbre, y no permita que se haga pleyto ordinario, porque aunque él 
pierde mucho y recibe agravio, V. M. pierde mas, porque aquellas partes nuevamente descubiertas son, segun ha diez 
y siete afios que él tiene noticia de ellas, de mucha calidad y cantidad, y de grande acrecentamiento 4 la corona de 
estos reynos, y como tal les conviene entrar en ellas por la orden necesaria, y no por la ordinaria que se ha tenido y- 
tiene en todo lo conquistado fuera de la Nueva Espafia, porque pequefie yerro al principio és muy grande en el fin, y 
aqui qualquiera que haya no puede ser pequefio, antes irrecuperable y sin remedio, como consta por ejemplo de lo 
pasado, donde Dios nuestro Sefior ha sido muy deservido, y V. M. y sus rentas reales muy desaprovechados. 

Ytem, suplica 4 V. M. considere que habiendo el dicho Marques sido solo y seftalado en aquellas partes, en lo que 
ha dicho y en todas las cosas que pudiera decir, V. M. tambien le ha sefialado en no tener con é1 la orden que con 
todos los que han conquistado en aquellas partes ha tenido, que és no quitar 4 ninguno, como no ha quitado, la go- 
bernacion de lo que conquisto; y con él se ha tenido esta en este reyno, que en lo que conquisté ha proveido V. M. 
muchos gobernadores, y 4 él se le ha quitado todo, no habiendo habido falta en su persona y gobernacion, antes pre- 
firiendose 4 todos, porque aunque en esto él ha recibido mucho, por quitarle el trabajo corporal y de’peligro de su 
conciencia, no dexa de estar afrentado, porque el vulgo no puede dexar de sospechar que siendo sus servicios tan 
notorios, hay con él esta novedad, hay tambien alguna causa que sea bastante, la cual él no conoce; y suplica 4 
V. M. que si la hay, la manifieste, porque por ventura no sera como 4 V.M. le hayan informado, y dara descargo, y 
no le teniendo, conocerse ha que V. M. le hace merced en perdonarle, y no és ingrato en gratificarle.* 

* La copia de esta Memorial esta sacada de otra simple que est& en un tomo folio MS., que contiene un traslado de las Cartas de Relacion de 
fernan Cortes, dirigidas al Emperador Carlos Quinto, y se entregé 4 este fin por Don Miguel de Sarrea, apoderado del excelentisimo Sefior Mar- 

ques de Valle, de que certifico yo Don José Miguel de Flores, Academico de numero, y Secretario perpetuo de la Academia Real de la Historia, en 
Madrid 4 12 de Enero de 1779.—Micuex pr Fronts. 

Rob Aa ON ES. i NE Dt ALS 

DE 

FERNANDEZ DE OVIEDO. 

Dialogo del Alcaide de la Fortaleza de la Ciudad e Puerto de Santo Domingo de la Isla Espanola, 
Autor y Chronista destas Elistorias, de la una parte, é de la otra, un Caballero vecino de la gran 
Ciudad de Mexico, Uamado Ihoan Cano.* 

Auc. SENOR, ayer supe que V. M. vive en la gran ciudad de Mexico, y que os llamais Ihoan Cano, y porque yo 
tube amistad con un caballero llamado Diego Cano, que fue criado del serenisimo principe Don Ihoan, mi Sefior, 
de gloriosa memoria, deseo saber si es vivo, é de donde sois, Seftor, natural, é como quedastes avecindado en estas 
partes, é rescibiré merced que no rescibais pesadumbre de mis preguntas, porque tengo necesidad de saber algunas 
cosas de la Nueva Espafia, y es razon que para mi satisfaccion yo procure entender lo que deseo de tales personas 
é abito que merezcan credito; y ansi, Seftor, recibiré mucha merced de la vuestra en lo que digo. Inoan Cano. 
Sefior Alcalde, yo soi el que gano mucho en conoceros, y tiempo ha que deseaba ver vuestra persona, porque 0s soi 
aficionado, y querria que muy de veras me tuviesedes por tan amigo é servidor como yo os lo seré. _ E satisfaciendo 
alo que V.M. desea saber de mi, digo, que Diego Cano, escribano de camara del principe Don Ihoan, y camarero 
de la tapiceria de su alteza, fue mi tio, é ha poco que murio en la ciudad de Caceres, donde vivia, y yo soi natural. 
Y cuanto 4 los demas yo, Sefor, pasé desde la isla de Cuba 4 la Nueva Espafia con el capitan Pamphilo de Nar- 
vaez, é aunque mozo é de poca edad, yo me hallé cerca del cuando fue preso por Hernando Cortes é sus mafias, é en 
ese trance le quebraron un ojo, peleando el como muy valiente hombre; pero como no le acudié su gente, é con él 
se hallaron muy pocos, quedé preso é herido, é se hizo Cortes sefior del campo, é trujo 4 su devocion la gente que 
con Pamphilo habia ido ; éen rencuentros, é en batallas de manos en Mexico; y todo lo que ha sucedido despues, 
yo me he hallado en ello. Mandais que diga como quedé avecindado en estas partes, y que no reciba pesadumbre 
de vuestras preguntas: satisfaciendo 4 mi asiento, digo, Sefior, que yo me casé con una sefiora, hija de Montezuma, 
llamada Donna Isabel, tal persona que aunque se hubiera criado en nuestra Espaiia, no estuviera mas ensefiada é 

* This dialogue is taken from the fourteenth book of the second part of Oviedo’s inedited ‘ Historia de las Indias’. We have caused it to be 
printed immediately after the inedited letters of Cortes, because it throws much light on some important transactions intimately connected with 
the history of the conquest of New Spain. The following is the account which Oviedo gives of the manner in which he became acquainted with 
the new and valuable information which it contains: “ Permitié Dios que llegé 4 esta ciudad de Santo Domingo, 4 8 dias de Setiembre de 1544, 
un gentilhombre hijodalgo llamado Ihoan Cano, que vive en la ciudad de Mexico, é es natural de la ciudad de Caceres ; el cual venia de Espafia, 
4 donde habia ido sobre sus negocios propios, é es casado con una hija legitima de Montezuma, y pas6 4 la Nueva Espaiia con el capitan Pamphilo 
de Narvaez, é se hallé presente é con él peleando cuando le prendieron, puesto que este hidalgo era mancebo de 16 6 17 aiios, se hallo despues en 
todos los sucesos de la Nueva Espafia, al cual yo comuniqué aqui, é no tanto cuanto yo quisiera que él aqui estuviera, porque como hombre de 
buen entendimiento é testigo de vista me satisfacia 4 mis preguntas, lo que estubo algunas veces en esta fortaleza hasta su partida, que se partio, 
que fué jueves 25 del mes ya dicho, con dos navios que iban 4 la Nueva Espafia, y porque como en otras partes he dicho y he tenido por estilo é 
dar los contestes é nombrar los testigos de lo que escribié, donde me he hallado, sera el capitulo presente continuado 4 manera de dialogo, é satis- 
faciendo en parte ali titulo de este capitulo 54; y porque no canse el lector en el nombre de los interlocutores, donde Inia tales lemmas Ate. 
quiere decir Aleaide; ¢ donde estuviere aquesta Ca. quiere decir Ihoan Cano: y asi, yo preguntando ¢ Thoan Cano Tesppndionda, diré aquellas 
cosas en que platicamos, porque no hubo tiempo para mas, 4 causa que poco antes de su partida venimos en conocimiento © a contraer nuestra 

amicicia.” 

490 RELACIONES INEDITAS DE FERNANDEZ OVIEDO. 

bien dotrinada, é catolica é de tal conversacion é arte que os satisfaria su manera é buena gracia, y no es poco util é 
provechosa al sosiego é contentamientos de los naturales de la tierra, porque como es sefora en todas sus cosas é 
amiga de los Cristianos, por su respeto é egemplo mas quietud é reposo se imprime en los animos de los Mexicanos. 
En lo demas que se me preguntare, é de que yo tenga memoria, yo, Seftor, diré lo que supiere conforme 4 la verdad. 
Auc. Yo acepto la merced que en esto recibiré, y quiero comenzar 4 decir lo que me ocurre, porque me acuerdo que 
fui informado que su padre de Montezuma tubo 150 hijos é hijas, é que él tubo 50 hijos é mas, é que le acaecié 
tener 50 mugeres prefiadas, é ansi escribi esto é otras cosas 4 este proposito en el capitulo 46, lo cual si asi fué, queria 
saber como podeis vos tener por legitima hija de Montezuma 4 la Sefiora Donna Isabel, vuestra muger, é que forma 
tenia vuestro suegro para que se conociesen los hijos bastardos entre los legitimos 6 espurios, é cuales eran mugeres 
legitimas 6 concubinas? Ca. Fué costumbre usada é guardada entre los Mexicanos, que las mugeres legitimas que 
tomaban era de la manera que agora se dira: concertados el hombre y muger que habian de contraer el matrimonio, 
para le efectuar se juntaban los parientes de ambas partes, é hacian un areito despues que habian comido 6 cenado, é al 
tiempo que los novios se habian de acostar é dormir, en uno tomaban la halda delantera de la-camisa de la novia, é 
atabanla 4 la manta de algodon que tenia cubierta el novio; e asi ligados tomabanlos de las manos los principales 
parientes de ambos, é metianlos en una camara, donde los dejaban solos é ascuras por tres dias continuos sin que de _ 
alli saliesen é1 ni ella, ni alla entraba mas de una India 4 los proveer de comer, é lo que habian menester, en el cual 
tiempo deste encerramiento siempre habia bailes 6 areitos que ellos llaman mitote; é en fin de los tres dias no hay 
mas fiesta; é los que sin esta cerimonia se casan, no son habidos por matrimonios, ni los hijos que proceden por legi- 
timos, ni heredan. Ansi como murié Montezuma, quedaronle solamente por hijos legitimos mi muger é un hermano 
suyo, é muchachos ambos, 4 causa de lo cual fué elegido por Sefior un hermano de Montezuma que se decia Cuitla- 
vaci, sefior de Istapalapa, el cual vivid despues de su eleccion solos 60 dias y murié de viruelas, 4 causa de lo cual un 
sobrino de Montezuma, que era Papa 6 sacerdote mayor entre los Indios, que se llamaba Guatimuci, maté al primo 
hijo legitimo de Montezuma que se decia Asupacaci*, hermano de padre é madre de Donna Isabel, é hizose senor é fué 
muy valeroso. Este fué el que perdié 4 Mexico é fué preso,é despues injustamente muerto con otros principales sefiores 
éIndios; pues como Cortes é los Cristianos fueron ensefloreados de Mexico, ningun hijo quedé legitimo sino bastardos 
de Montezuma, excepto mi muger que quedaba viuda, porque Guatimugi, sefior de Mexico, su primo, por fijar mejor 
su estado, siendo ella muy muchacha, la tubo por muger con la cerimonia ya dicha del atar la camisa con la manta; 
é no hubieron hijos ni tiempo para procrearlos: é ella se convirtié 4 nuestra santa fé Catolica, é casose con un 
hombre de bien de los conquistadores primeros que se llamaba Pedro Gallego, é hubo un hijo en ella que se llamaba 
Thoan Gallego Montezuma, é murio el dicho Pedro Gallego, é yo casé con la dicha Donna Isabel, en la cual me ha 
dado Dios tres hijos é dos hijas, que se llaman Pedro Cano, Gonzalo Cano de Saavedra, Ihoan Cano, Donna Isabel, 
é Donna Catalina. Atc. Senor Ihoan Cano, suplicoos que me digais por que mato Hernando Cortes 4 Guatimuci? 
rebelose despues, 0 que hizo para que muriese? Ca. Habeis de saber que asi 4 Guatimugi, como al rey de Tacuba 
que se decia Tetepanquezal, é al seftor de Tezcuco, el capitan Hernando Cortes les hizo dar muchos tormentos é 
crudos, quemandoles los pies, é untandoles las plantas con aceite, 6 poniendosela cerca de las brasas, é en otras 
diversas maneras, para que les diesen sus tesoros, é teniendolos en continuas fatigas, supo como el capitan Cristobal 
de Olit se le habia alzado en Puerto de Caballos é Honduras, la cual provincia los Indios aman Guaimura, é deter- 
mino de ir 4 buscar é castigar el dicho Cristobal de Olit, é partid de Mexico por tierra con mucha gente de Espafioles 
é de los naturales de la tierra, é llevose consigo aquellos tres principales ya dichos, y despues los ahorcé en el 
camino ; é ansi enviudo Donna Isabel, é despues ella se caso de la manera que he dicho con Pedro Gallego, é despues 
conmigo. Axc. Pues en cierta informacion que se embid al. Emperador nuestro senor, dice Hernando Cortes que 
habia sucedido Guatimuci en el seforio de Mexico tras Montezuma, porque en las puentes murié el hijo é heredero 
de Montezuma, é que otros dos hijos que quedaron vivos, el uno era loco 6 mentecapto, é el otro paralitico é inhabile 
por sus enfermedades. E yo lo he escrito ansi en el cap. 16, pensando que ello seria asi. Ca. Pues escriba V. M. lo 
que mandare, y el Marques Hernando Cortes lo que quisiere, que yo digo en Dios y en mi conciencia la verdad; y 
esto es muy notorio. Axc. Sefor Ihoan Cano, digame V. M. de que procedié el alzamiento de los Indios de 
Mexico en tanto que Hernando Cortes salié de aquella ciudad é fué 4 buscar 4 Pamphilo de Narvaez, é dejé preso 4 
Montezuma en poder de Pedro de Alvarado? Porque he oido sobre esto muchas cosas é muy diferentes las unas de 
las otras, é yo querria escribir verdad, asi Dios salve mi anima. Ca. Seftor Alcaide, eso que preguntais es un paso 

* An error, probably, of the transcriber, for Axayacaci, which appears to have been the real name of the son of Montezuma here alluded. to. 

RELACIONES INEDITAS DE FERNANDEZ DE OVIEDO. 491 

_en que pocos de los que hay en la tierra sabran dar razon, aunque ello fué muy notorio, é muy manifiesta la sin 
razon que 4 los Indios se les hizo, y de alli tomaron tanto odio com los Cristianos que no fiaron mas dellos, y que 
se siguieron cuantos males huvo despues é la rebelion de Mexico, y pas6 de esta manera: esos Mexicanos tenian 
entre las otras sus idolatrias ciertas fiestas del afio, en que se juntaban 4 sus ritos é cerimonias; y llegado el tiempo 
de una de aquellas, estaba Alvarado en guarda de Montezuma, é Cortes era ido donde haveis dicho. E muchos 
Indios principales juntaronse é pidieron licencia al capitan Alvarado para ir 4 celebrar sus fiestas en los patios de 
sus mezquitas 6 q. q. mayores junto al aposento de los Espafioles, porque no pensasen que aquel ayuntamiento se 
hacia 4 otro fin. E el dicho capitan les dié la licencia, é asi los Indios, todos los sefiores mas de 600, desnudos é 
con muchas joyas de oro é hermosos penachos, é muchas piedras preciosas, é como mas aderezados é gentiles hom- 
bres se pudieron é supieron aderezar, é sin arma alguna defensiva ni ofensiva, bailaban é cantaban é hacian su areito 
é fiesta segun su costumbre; é al mejor tiempo que ellos estaban embebecidos en su regocijo, movido de codicia el 
Alvarado, hizo poner en cinco puertas del patio cada 15 hombres, él en el centro con la gente restante de los Espa- 
oles, é comenzaron 4 acuchillar é matar los Indios, sin perdonar 4 uno ni 4 ninguno hasta que 4 todos 
los acabaron en poco espacio de hora. Y esa fué la causa porque los de Mexico viendo muertos é robados 
aquellos sobre seguro, é sin haber merecido que tal crueldad en ellos se huviese fecho, se alzaron, é hicieron 
la guerra al dicho Alvarado é 4 los Cristianos que con él estaban en guarda de Montezuma, é con mucha razon que 
tenian para ello. Anc. Montezuma como murid? Porque diversamente lo he entendido, y ansi lo he yo escrito dife- 
renciadamente. Ca. Montezuma murié de una pedrada que los de fuera tiraron, lo cual no se hiciera si delante de 
él no se pusiera un rodelero, porque como le vieran ninguno tirara, y ansi por le cubrir con la rodela, é no creer que 
alli estaba Montezuma, le dieron una pedrada de que murié. Pero quiero que sepais, Sefior Alcaide, que desde la 
primera rebelion de los Indios hasta que el Marques volvid 4 la ciudad despues de preso Narvaez, non obstante la 
pelea ordinaria que con los Cristianos tenian, siempre Montezuma les hacia dar de comer: é despues que el Marques 
tornd, se le hizo gran recebimiento, é le dieron a todos los Espanoles mucha comida. Mas habeis de saber que el 
capitan Alvarado, como le acusaba la conciencia, é no arrepentido de su culpa, mas queriendole dar color, é por 
aplacar el animo de Montezuma, dijo 4 Hernando Cortes que finjiese que él queria prender é castigar, porque Mon- 
tezuma le rogase por él, é que se fuesen muertos por muertos, lo cual Hernando Cortes no quiso hacer, antes muy 
enojado, dijo que eran unos perros; é que no habia necesidad de aquel cumplimiento, é embié un principal 4 que 
hiciesen el tianguez 6 mercado, el cual principal enojado de ver la ira de Cortes, y la poca estimacion que hacia de 
los Indios vivos, y lo poco que se le daba de los muertos, desdefiado el principal é determinado en la venganza, fué 
el primero que renové la guerra contra los Espafioles dentro de una hora. Axc. Siempre oi decir que es buena la 
templanza, é santa la piedad, é abominable la soberbia. Dicen que fué grandisimo el tesoro que Hernando Cortes 
repartid entre sus milites todos, cuando determin6 de dejar la ciudad é irse fuera della por consejo de un botello que 
se preciaba de pronosticar lo que estaba por venir. Ca. Bien sé quien era ese, y es verdad que el fué de parecer 
que Cortes y los Cristianos se saliesen, y al tiempo de efectuarlo no lo hizo saber 4 todos, antes no lo supieron sino 
los que con él se hallaron 4 esa platica, € los demas que estaban en sus aposentos é cuarteles se quedaron 270 hom- 
bres, los cuales se defendieron ciertos dias peleando, hasta que de hambre se dieron a los Indios, é guardaronles la 
palabra de la manera que Alvarado la guardé 4 los que es dicho; casi los 270 Cristianos, é los que dellos no habian 
sido muertos peleando, todos cuando se rindieron fueron cruelmente sacrificados; pero habeis, Sefor, de saber, que 
desa liberalidad que Hernando Cortes us como decis entre sus milites, los que mas parte alcanzaron della, é mas se 
cargaron de oro é joyas, mas presto los mataron, porque por salvar el albarda murié el asno que Hee pesada la toméd, 
é los que no la quisieron sino sus espadas é armas, pasaron con menos ocupacion, haciendose el camino con el espada. 
Ac. Gran lastima fué perderse tanto tesoro, y 154 Espafioles é 45 yeguas, é mas de 2000 Indios, é entre ellos al 
hijo é hijas de Montezuma, € 4 todos los otros sefiores que traian presos: yo ansi lo tengo escrito en el cap. 14 
de esta Historia. Ca. Sefior Alcaide, en verdad quien tal os dijo, 6 no los vido ni supo, 6 quiso callar la verdad: 
yo os certifico que fueron los Espafioles muertos en eso, con los due como dije de suso que quedaron en la ONCEG 
y con los que se prendieron en el camino, siguiendo 4 Cortes y Pomerat anos EME fuga, mas de 1170, é asi pa- 
recié por alarde, é de los Indios nuestros amigos de Tascaltecle que decis 2000, sin duda fueron mas de 8000. 
Auc. Maravillome como despues que Cortes se acogio é los que escaparon 4 la tierra de Tascaltecle, como no aca- 
baron 4 él é 4 los Cristianos, dejando allé muertos 4 los amigos, y aun asi dice que no les daban de comer sino por 
rescate los de Guantepec, que es ya termino de Tascaltecle, é el rescate no le querian sino era oro. Ca. Tenedlo, Sefior, 
iS A 

4.22 RELACIONES INEDITAS DE FERNANDEZ DE OVIEDO. 

por falso todo eso, porque en casa de sus padres no pudieron hallar mas buen acogimiento los Cristianos, é todo 
cuanto quisicron, é aun sin pedirlo se les did gracioso é de muy buena voluntad. Atc. Para mucho ha sido el Mar- 
ques, é digno es de cuanto tiene é de mucho mas, é tengo lastima de ver lisiado un caballero tan valeroso é manco 
de dos dedos de la mano izquierda, como lo escribi y saqué de su relacion, é puse en el cap. 15, pero las cosas 
de la guerra ansi son, élos honores é la palma de la victoria no se adquieren dormiendo. Ca. Sin duda, Sefor, 
Cortes ha sido venturoso ¢ sagaz capitan, é los principes suelen hacer mercedes & quien los sirve, y es bien las 
hagan 4 todos los que en su servicio real trabajan, pero algunos he visto yo que trabajan é sirven é nunca medran, 
é otros que no hacen tanto como aquellos, son gratificados é aprovechados ; pero ansi fuesen todos remunerados 
como el Marques lo ha sido en lo de sus dedos de que le habeis lastima: tubo Dios poco que hacer en sanarle; y 
salid Sefior, de ese cuidado, que asi como los sacé de Castilla cuando pasé la primera vez 4 estas partes, asi se los 
tiene agora en Espafa, porque nunca fué manco dellos ni le faltan, y ansi ni hubo menester cirujano ni milagro 
para guarecer de ese trabajo. Axc. Sefor Ihoan Cano, es verdad que aquella crueldad que dicen que el Marques 
us6 con Chulula, que es una ciudad por donde pasé la primera vez que fué 4 Mexico? Ca. Muy grande verdad es, 
pero eso yo no lo vi, porque aun no era yo ido 4 la tierra; pero supelo despues de muchos que lo vieron é se halla- 
ron en esa cruel hazafia. Atc. Como oistes decir que pas6? Ca. Lo que oi por cosa muy notoria es, que en 
aquella ciudad pidid Hernando Cortes 3000 Indios para que llevasen el fardaje, é se los dieron, é los hizo todos 
poner 4 cuchillo sin que escapase ninguno. Axc. Razon tiene el Emperador nuestro sefior de mandar quitar los 
Indios 4 todos los Cristianos. Ca. Hagase lo que S. M. mandare é fuese servido, que eso es lo que es mejor, pero 
yo no querria que padeciesen justos por pecadores. Quien hace crueldades, paguelas, mas el que no comete delitos, 
porque le han de castigar? Esto es materia para mas espacio; y yo me tengo de embarcar esta noche, é es ya cuasi 
hora del Ave Maria: mirad Seftor Alcaide, si hay en Mexico en que pueda yo emplearme en vuestro servicio, que 
yo lo haré con entera voluntad é obra; y en lo que toca 4 la libertad de los Indios, sin duda 4 unos se les habia de 
rogar con ellos 4 que los tubiesen 6 gobernasen é los industriasen en las cosas de nuestra santa fé Catolica, é 4 otros 
se debian quitar. Pero pues aqui estd el obispo de Chiapa, Fr. Bartolomé de las Casas, que ha sido el movedor 
é inventor destas mudanzas, é va cargado de frailes mancebos de su orden, con él podeis Sefior Alcaide, desem- 
bolver esta materia de Indios; é yo no me quiero mas entremeter ni hablar en ella, aunque sabria decir mi parte. 
Auc. Sin duda Sefior Ihoan Cano, V. M. habla como prudente, y estas cosas deben ser asi ordenadas de Dios ; y es de 
pensar que este reverendo obispo de Ciudad Real en la provincia de Chiapa, como celoso en el servicio de Dios é de 
S. M., se ha movido 4 esas peregrinaciones en que anda, y plega a Dios que él y sus frailes acierten 4 servirle ; pero 
él no esta tam bien conmigo como pensais, antes se ha quejado de mi por lo que escrevi cerca de aquellos labradores 
é nuevos caballeros que quiso hacer, y con sendas cruces que querian parecer a las de Calatrava, siendo labradores, 
é de otras mezclas é genero de gente baja, quando fué 4 Cubagua é 4 Cumana; é lo dijo al sefior obispo de San Joan, 
Don Rodrigo de Bastidas, para que me lo diese, y ansi me Io dijo; y lo que yo respondi a su queja, no lo hice por 
satisfacer al obispo de Chiapa, sino 4 la autoridad y bondad del senor obispo de San Joan, é su santa intencion fué 
que le supliqué que le dijese, que en verdad yo no tube cuenta ni respecto cuando aquello escrevi 4 le hacer pesar ni 
placer, sino 4 decir lo que paso, y que viese un libro que en la Primera Parte de estas Historias de Indias se imprimié 
el afio de 1535, y alli estaba lo que escrevi, é que holgaba porque estabamos en parte que todo lo que dijé y lo que 
dejé de decir, se probaria facilmente ; y que supiese que aquel libro estaba ya en lengua Toscana y Francesa é Ale- 
mafia é Latina é Griega é Turca é Arabiga, aunque yo le escrevi en Castellana; y que pues el continuava nuevas 
empresas y yo no habia de cesar de escrevir las materias de Indias, en tanto que Sus Majestades* desto fuesen servi- 

dos, que yo tengo esperanza en Dios que le dejar mejor acertar en lo por venir que en lo pasado, y ansi adelante le: 

pareceria mejor mi pluma. . Y como el sefor obispo de San Joan es tan noble, é le consta la verdad é cuan sin 
pasion yo escrivo, el obispo de Chiapa quedo satisfecho, aunque yo no ando por satisfacer 4 su paladar ni otro, sino 
por cumplir con lo que debo, hablando con vos, Seftor, lo cierto; y por tanto cuanto 4 la carga de los muchos frayles, 

* It appears from the following passage of Oviedo’s introduction to the fourteenth book of the second part of his inedited ‘Historia General 
de las Indias,’ that his project of writing a history of America received great encouragement from Charles V., who made him historiographer of 
the Indies, and conferred on him, at the same time, a lucrative situation in the island of St. Domingo: ‘ Demas desto digo que yo tengo cedulas 
reales, para que los gobernadores me embien relacion de lo que tocare 4 la historia en sus gobernaciones para estas Historias: é escribi é avisé al 
Marques del Valle, Don Fernando Cortes, para que me embiase la suya conforme 4 lo que successivamente mandaba, é remitiome 4 unas cartas 

missivas que le escribié 4 S. M. de lo sucedido en aquella conquista, y no curé de mas, y de esas y de lo que me informaron, de todo haré me- 
moria en este libro treinta y tres.” 

ra 

RELACIONES INEDITAS DE FERNANDEZ DE OVIEDO. 4.93 

me parece en verdad que estas tierras manan 6 que llueven frailes, pero pues son sin canas todos y de 30 afos 
abajo, plega 4 Dios que todos acierten 4 servirle ; ya los vi entrar en esta ciudad de dos en dos hasta 30 de ellos, 
con sendos bordones é sus sayas é escapularios é sombreros, é sin capas, é el obispo detras dellos: ello parecia 
una devota farsa, € agora la comienzan, no sabemos en que parard, el tiempo lo dirad; y este haga Nuestro Sefior 
al proposito de su santo servicio: pero pues van acid aquellos nuevos vulcanes, decidme Sefor, que cosa son, Si 
los habeis visto, y que cosa esotro que teneis alla en la Nueva Espafa, que se dice Guaxocingo. Ca. El vulcan 
de Chalco 6 Guaxocingo todo es una cosa, é alumbra de noche tres é cuatro leguas é mas, é de dia salia continuo 
humo é 4 veces llamas de fuego, lo cual estdé en un escollo de la Sierra Nevada, en la cual nunca falta perpetua 
nieve, € esta 4 9 leguas de Mexico; pero este fuego é humo que he dicho, duré hasta 7 afios, poco mas 6 menos, 
despues que Hernando Cortes pasé 4 aquellas partes, y ya no sale fuego alguno de alli; pero ha quedado mucho 
azufre € muy bueno, que se ha sacado para hacer polvora, é hay cuanto quisieren sacar dello; pero en Guatimala 
hay dos vulcanes € montes fogosos, € echan piedras muy grandisimas fuera de si quemadas, é lanzan aquellas 
bocas mucho humo, € es cosa de muy horrible aspecto, en especial como le vieron cuando murié la pecadora 
Donna Beatriz de la Cueva, muger del adelantado Don Pedro de Alvarado: plega 4 Nuestro Sefior de quedar con 
V. M. Seftor Alcaide, é dadme licencia, que atiende la barca para irme 4la nao. Auc. Sefior Ihoan Cano, el 
Espiritu Santo vaya con V. M.,y os dé tan prospero viage é navegacion, que en pocos dias y en salvamiento llegueis 
4 vuestra casa, y halleis 4 la Senora Donna Isabel, y los hijos é hijas con la salud que V. M. y ellos os deseais. 

Al muy noble Senor Gonzalo Fernandez de Oviedo, Alcaide de la Fortaleza de Santo Domingo 
en la Isla Espanola, y Coromsta de sus Magestades*. 

Muy noste Senor. Recibi una carta vuestra con el arcediano de esta iglesia: y es verdad que el no responder 
4 la que me trujo el P. Fr. Antonio de Leon, fué la causa estar fuera desta ciudad, y segun lo mucho que habia 
que decir que se partia, yo pensé de ser vuelto antes que el embarcara, que por lo demas bastara ser vos Sefor, 
quien sois, y el egercicio de letras que teneis para desear yo vuestra amistad, cuanto mas pudiendola heredar de 
mi padre; y acordandome de veros Sefor, en Madrid conversar muy familiarmente con él muchas veces, y por 
mi parte no quebrara esta amistad, antes la renovaré, y si alguna cosa se ofreciere en estas partes que os toque lo 
haré con muy entera voluntad. 

Cuanto 4 lo que Sefior decis, que os embiaron de Venecia una relacion que yo embie 4 S. M. de algunas cosas 
de las de esta tierra, y que entre ellas decia venir los Mexicanos de la parte del Peru, es verdad que yo he escrito 
algunas cosas que me parecian de notar; mas no esta, porque tengo la opinion contraria, porque para mi ellos 
vinieron de la parte del Norte; y asi lo dicen, é se muestra en edificios antiguos, y en nombres de lugares por 
donde vinieron; y pues allegaron hasta Guazacalco con un seftor que se llamaba Quezalcoat, no tengo 4 mucho 
que pasen otros 4 aca; lo que se me acuerda haber escrito en este caso es, que a mi me trujeron ciertos huesos 
6 muelas de hombres tan grandes que 4 la proporcion seria de 18 6 19 pies de alto, y esto dicen los naturales 

* The two following letters are inserted by Oviedo in the second volume of his inedited General History of the Indies: they have never been 
published, and their contents will be found extremely interesting. 

+ It would hence appear that the stature of these giants must have three times exceeded that of the tallest men of the present day. It is evi- 
dent, however, from the words of the prophet Amos, in the ninth verse of the second chapter of his prophecies,—‘ Yet destroyed I the Amorite 
before them whose height was like the height of the cedars, and he was strong as the oaks; yet J destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots from 
beneath,’—that their stature fell far short of that of the giants of the land of Canaan. This passage of Amos introduces to our acquaintance a 
fourth race of giants, from whom the Jews wrested the Holy Land, if, indeed, the Emims and Zamzummims were not, as is most probable, the 
same nation, merely divided into different tribes, whose habitation, ‘bordering on the cities of the plain, would appear to have been involved in the 
same destruction as that recorded in the nineteenth chapter of Genesis, which singularly agrees with the tradition preserved amongst the Mexicans 
and Peruvians, who both believed that the giants were destroyed by fire from heaven. It is deserving, however, of remark, that the former varied 
the Mosaic account by affirming that a remnant of the race of those giants who had escaped the general destruction CE Castner by a Eee een 
practised by the ancestors of the Tlascaltecas, who invited them to a banquet, and killed them when in a state OUD AEO A more peel 
account of this Mexican tradition will be found in the one hundred and ninety-first page of the Supplementary Extracts. Cieza de Leon gives the 
following account of the stature of the giants of Peru, in the fifty-second chapter of his Peruvian Chronicle : “‘Unos hombres (eran) tan grandes, 
que tenia tanto uno dellos de la rodilla abaxo como un hombre de los comunes en todo el cuerpo, aunque fuese de buena estatura.” ‘‘ They were 
such large men that they measured as much from the knee downwards, as the entire Bee of a common-sized man even of good stature.” And here 
we may remark that the Mexican tradition, as far as it. relates to the stratagem which the ancestors of the Tlascaltecas employed to destroy the 

‘ 

ADA, RELACIONES INEDITAS DE FERNANDEZ DE OVIEDO. 

que fueron hasta cincuenta hombres, los cuales repartieron por diversos lugares, y los mataron. No tenemos 
noticia que haya gigantes, sino es al estrecho de Magallanes, sospecho yo que aquellos vendrian de alli, porque 
de la parte del Norte yo no tengo noticia de gente tan grande, aunque la hay harto bien dispuesta. 

La relacion de las cosas desta tierra yo he procurado de saberlo muy particularmente, y hallo diversas 
opiniones, porque como habia muchos sefiores en cada provincia, cuentan las cosas de su manera. Yo las ando 
recogiendo é verificando, é hecho, os lo embiaré, porque me parece que seria cosa muy vergonzosa que os embiase 
yo relacion, y que me allegasedes por autor dello no siendo muy verdadera. Y lo de aqui no es tam poco que no 
podais hacer libro de ello, y no serd pequefio, porque aunque Montezuma y Mexico es lo que entre nosotros ha 
sonado, no era menor Sefior el Cazonci de Mechuacan, y otros que no reconocian al uno ni al otro. En lo que 
toca 4 los descubrimientos que yo tengo comenzados, como todos son principios, parece que hay poco que decir. 
Solamente quiero Seftor, que sepais, pues tocais en las desordenes de estas partes, que mi gente ni juega ni reniega, 
ni toman 4 los Indios nada contra su voluntad, ni hacen excesos de los que gente de guerra suelen hacer. 

giants, so singularly agrees with the account given by Herodotus of the manner in which the Scythians were destroyed by the Medes, who having 
made themselves masters of a great portion of Asia, and committing all kinds of excesses, were at last slain at a banquet to which they had been 
invited by the Medes, who thus recovered their lost empire, that we cannot but think it extremely probable that the descendants of the Jews in 
the New World, who must long have retained a recollection of the event which led to the re-establishment of the Median monarchy, and by placing 
Cyrus on the throne of Persia mainly contributed to that order of things which liberated their ancestors from the Babylonian captivity, did in 
progress of time, when tradition had partially faded from their memory, confound the events of sacred and profane history, and form, out of the 
whole, an incongruous mass. The passage of Herodotus which records the destruction of the Scythians by the Medes is the following, which 
occurs in the first book of that author’s history: “Exc fey vuy oKrw Kar etkoot erea npxov rns Aomms of SkvOa, kar ra Tayra ot Uo re UBp.os 
kat o\tywpins avaorara nY. Xwpis sey yap gopwy, expnacoy map éxaoTwy To éxaorotot eme(sadov" xXwpts de Tov opov, nptaloy meprehavvorres Touro 
6 Te exotey éxaoToL. Kat ToUTwY pey Tous teuYas Kvaéapns re car Mydoe Eecrtoavres Kae karapeOvoarres Karedovevoay. kar oirw aveowouyro Thy 
apxny Mnco., cae ewexpareoy rwy mep Kae mporepoy. Kae rnvy re NINON EI‘AON, (Gs de eidoy, ev Ereporor Aoyo.or DnAwow) Kat Tos Acauprous bro- 
Xetplous eolnoavro, TAnv THs BaBudwrns floipns. pera de ravra, Kvagapns per, Gaotkevoas reccepakoyvra erea, ovy rorot SkvOa npéay, TeheuTa.” 
“Igitur octo et viginti annos Asize imperium obtinuerunt Scythe ; per eorumque proterviam et contemptum omnia susque deorsumque versa sunt. 
Nam, preterquam quod tributum exigebant a singulis quod singulis imposuerant, insuper etiam obequitantes rapiebant quod quique haberent. 
Sed horum quidem majorem numerum Cyaxares et Medi, hospitio exceptos et mero imebriatos, obtruncarunt ; atque ita regnum receperunt Medi, et 
rerum quarum antea domini fuerant, denuo sunt potiti. Tum vero et Ninum ceperunt, (quam quo pacto ceperint, in aliis Historiarum libris 
exponam) et Assyrios, exceptd Babylonica ditione, sub potestatem suam redegerunt. Post heec Cyaxares, postquam quadraginta annos (simul 
numeratis his, quibus penes Scythas fuerat imperium) regnasset, fato functus est.” There is much reason to suppose that the discovery of fossil 
bones of elephants and other antediluvian animals induced the early Spanish missionaries to credit the Indian tradition of the existence of giants in 
America. Alonso de la Mota, for example, a Spanish author of the sixteenth century, makes particular mention in the following passage of his 
inedited History of the Kingdoms of New Gallicia, New Biscay, and Leon, of the existence of giants in the New World, and the presumed discovery 
of their bones and sepulchres: “ Los Indios viejos de este pueblo Tlala nos cuentan que por tradicion muy antigua de padres y abuelos, saben 
como en los tiempos pasados vinieron 4 esta valle por la parte del Occidente, una gran tropa de gigantes de muy disforme estatura, que en 
numero dizen los Indios eran quatrocientos, y que entre ellos no vino muger alguna, y que llegados 4 este valle causaron tanto temor en los natu- 
rales del, que algunos se huyeron, y los que quedaron les davan por tributo 4 cada uno cierta cantidad de mugeres para solo hazerles de comer, y 
muchas no eran bastantes segun lo que comian. Y dizen tambien los Indios deste valle, que como estos gigantes no trageron mugeres cometian 
entre si el pecado torpe, en pena de lo qual los havia anegado una gran avenida de aguas con que se consumieron todos. Y quanta verdad sea 
esto no lo sabemos, pero lo que hemos visto por vista de ojos son algunos huesos de sus sepulchros de increible grandeza, y en particular vimos aqui un 
hueso que era de un muslo, que solo el tenia siete palmos de largo, y la hoquesuela que encaja en la cea era como una botija comun en grandeza, 
y desta proporcion hemos visto otros huesos que oy dia estan aqui.” The above tradition deserves to be compared with the following account 
which Ortelius has inserted in his Cosmography, on the authority, as he declares, of Gyraldus Cambrensis, a writer who flourished in the twelfth 
century. ‘This account we the more readily transcribe, because the license which was accorded to the monks in the dark ages, can scarcely be 
denied to the Jews, who colonized another hemisphere: ‘De hoc Erno lacu scribit Gyraldus Cambrensis, quod olim fons fuit, sed ob incolarum 
nefandam cum bestiis venerem, Deo irato, in tantam aquarum diluviem erupisse, ut totum eum tractum cum hominibus inundatione submerserit. ~ 
Atque in rei gestae veritatem hodieque sereno tempore etiamnum templorum turres sub undis hinc inde conspici.” We may further remark, in 
reference to the above passage, that the tradition of God’s having destroyed a race of giants is extremely ancient, and of Hebrew origin. The 
address even of the Deity to the angel Gabriel on that memorable occasion is recorded in the following passage of the book of Enach, of which 
Scaliger published some fragments in Greek, and the celebrated Kircher a Latin translation of the first book, inserted by him in the second chapter 
of his treatise entitled Arca Noe: “Ad Gabrielem vero dixit, Vade, Gabriel, ad gigantes, ad adulterinos et falsarios filios fornicationis, et perdas 
filios Eypnyopwy a filiis hominum.” “But to Gabriel he said, Go, Gabriel, to the giants, to the adulterous and lying sons of fornication, and 
destroy the sons of the Egregori from the sons of men.” Having-elsewhere proved that the Mexicans were acquainted with some of the 
traditions of the apocryphal book of Esdras, it is almost superfluous to add, that the contents of the book of Enoch, and other apocryphal books, 
might equally have been made known to them in very early ages by the first Jewish settlers in America. 

END OF VOL. VIII. 

LONDON :—-PRINTED BY RICHARD AND JOHN E. TAYLOR, RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET.