THE     REPUTED        FOSSIL          MAN        OF        THE        NEANDERTHAL.

 By   Professor   Wiru1am      Kina,   Queen’s     University     in   Ireland,   and
                         Queen’s       College,   Galway.

As it is my intention to confine myself to the consideration of the
Neanderthal fossil with reference to its place in Nature, I must neces-
sarily be brief in my remarks on the circumstances under which it
occurred, and on its geological age.
     The fossil was found in 1857, embedded in mud in a cave or fissure
intersecting the southern rocky side of the ravine or deep narrow
valley, called the Neanderthal, situated near Hochdal between Dissel-
dorf and Elberfeld. A small stream or rivulet, known as the Diissel,
flows along a narrow channel about sixty feet below the lowest part of
the fissure, and on one side of the valley.
     It has long been known that human bones, belonging to an extinct
race, and occurring in stalagmite along with the remains of the mam-
moth and other fossil animals, have been found in the limestone
fissures or caverns of the lofty precipices which overhang the river
Meuse, in Belgium, about seventy English miles south-west of the
Neanderthal.
     Lyell’s late work, ‘The Antiquity of Man,’ contains a very lucid
description of the Meuse caverns, and of the one under consideration.
In both cases it is evident that we have examples of ancient swallow-
holes, into which have been washed bones, mud, and gravel, when
their openings existed in the bed of large and powerful rivers, It was
 doubtless by the incessant abrading action of such ancient streams,
 continued for countless ages, that the Neanderthal, and much of the
 broad valley of the Meuse, became scooped out.
     Few Geologists will dispute that the Meuse caverns are of the same
 age as the flint-implement gravels of the Somme, and that both belong
 to the latest division of the glacial or (as I have lately termed it)
 Clydian period.* If we accept the physical conditions of the Meuse
 caverns as demonstrative of their having been filled up in that remote
 age, we cannot but recognize in the corresponding conditions of the
 Neanderthal fissure evidences which claim for it an equally high
 antiquity,   notwithstanding  certain  differences   seemingly  supporting
 the opposite conclusion.
    The want of stalagmite and the doubtful absence of remains of extinct
 animals in the Neanderthal fissure may be readily explained ; and as
 to the physical differences, the Diissel is certainly not to be compared
 with the Meuse for size and abrading power, but it must be admitted
 that a mere rivulet may take quite as much time to scoop out a “ravine”
 as a river to excavate a considerable portion of a broad valley.
      Having finished my preliminary remarks, I shall next proceed to
 notice the fossil itself.
      According to Dr. Fuhlrott, of Elberfeld, the skeleton was found

       * See ‘Synoptical Table of the Aqueous Rock-Systems,’ 5th edition.
1864.]   Kiva   on   the   Reputed   Fossil   Man   of   the   Neanderthal.   89

  by some workmen while quarrying the rock where the cave occurs ;
  but, knowing nothing of the importance of the discovery, and being
  very careless about it, they secured chiefly only the larger bones.
  Fortunately these fell into the hands of Fuhlrott, and they were
  shortly afterwards described by Professor Schaaffhausen, of Bonn.
  The principal parts of the skeleton which have been preserved are the
  cranium ; both thigh bones, perfect ; a perfect right humerus ; a per-
 fect radius; the upper third of a right ulna corresponding to the
 humerus and radius; a left humerus, of which the upper third is
 wanting ; a left ulna; a left ilium, almost perfect ; a fragment of the
 right scapula; the anterior extremities of a rib of the right side; the
 same part of a rib of the left side; the hinder part of a rib of the
 right side; and two short hinder portions, and one middle portion of
 some other ribs.
      The skeleton, or rather, as much as is preserved of it, is charac-
 terized by unusual thickness, and a great development of all the
 elevations and depressions for the attachment of the muscles. The
 ribs, which have a singularly rounded shape, and an abrupt curvature,
 more closely resemble the corresponding bones of a carnivorous
 animal, than those of man.*
      Although a difficulty may be felt in resting a satisfactory argument
 upon merely the great size of its osseous framework, and the pecu-
 liar form of its ribs, it cannot but be admitted that these characters
 afforded some grounds for the belief, at first entertained, that the
 Neanderthal fossil had not belonged to a human being. Whether a
more close examination of other parts of the fossil will confirm this
hypothesis, it is the object of the present paper to determine.
      The skull is deficient in its basal and facial portions, but retains
all the parts lying above a line connecting the glabella—or space
between the eye-brows—and the centre of the posterior part of the
skull immediately above the hollow of the neck, to which the name
occipital    or  posterior  tubercle    is    given.{   Fortunately   the  parts
alluded to, which are of uncommon thickness, enable one to determine
some highly important points in craniology.
      The frontal—or bone of the forehead {—possesses the upper border
and roof-plate of the eye-sockets, the inter-orbital space, the orifices
of the frontal sinuses, and both outer orbital processes: the upper
part of the alisphenoid belonging to the right side appears also to be
present. The occipital—or posterior bone—retains, in addition to the
tubercle,    the  superior   transverse    ridges.    The   parietals—or  upper
side-bones—possess the impression of the temporal squamosal. The
temporals—or lower side-bones—are broken off, though it would appear
from Huxley’s figure,§ that the mammillary portion of the left one is
still preserved. The lambdoidal sutwre—or joining of the parietals
   * See Busk’s translation of Schaaffhausen’s paper in the ‘ Natural History
Review, 1861, pp. 158-162.
; a ae line A A, in Fig. 1, Plate I., passes from the glabella to the occipital
 ubercie,
  eae explanation of the individual parts of the skull is prefixed to Plates I.
an .
   § See ‘Man’s Place in Nature,’ Fig. 25 A, facing page 138.
 90                  Original                   Articles,               [Jan.

and the occipital—including the additamentum, is well marked ; the
sagittal suture—or joining of the parictals in the medio-longitudinal
line of the skull—is obscure ; while the coronal suture—or joining of
the frontal and parietals in front of, and at right angles to the last-
named suture—is but faintly marked at the crown and obliterated at
the sides. The bounding line of the temporal muscles (situated on
each side of the skull in front of, and above the ear) is tolerably well
defined.
        In general terms, the Neanderthal skull is of an elongated oval
  form, with a basal outline bearing much resemblance to that of the
  Negro cranium represented by Martin.* It is of large size, being
  about an inch longer than ordinary British skulls; in width, however,
 it does not much exceed them, The forehead, uncommonly low and
 retreating, terminates in front by enormously projecting brow or super-
  ciliary ridges, which, besides being very thick, slightly rounded on
 their anterior aspect, and rather strongly arched above the eye-sockets,
 extend uninterruptedly across from one side to the other. The outer
 orbital    processes—or   horns   of   the  brow-ridges—are     also   unduly
 developed; being thick and projecting. On the whole, there is a
 remarkable absence of those contours and proportions which prevail
 in the forehead of our species; and few can refuse to admit that the
 deficiency more closely approximates the Neanderthal fossil to the
 anthropoid apes than to Homo sapiens.
       The greatest width of the skull is towards its posterior part, and on -
 a level not much higher than the mammillary region—a character
 which is essentially pithecoid or simial. In human skulls, the greatest
 width is considerably higher—usually on a line connecting the centres
 of ossification of the parietals:+ on the contrary, the Neanderthal
cranium, like that of the Chimpanzee, is without any particular pro-
minency where those centres may be assumed to be situated.
       In addition to possessing a low retreating forehead, the fossil skull
is remarkably flattened at the vertex, which, according to Huxley, rises
about 3:4 inches only above what is called the glabello-occipital
plane :{ in Man, the corresponding part is generally about an inch
higher. From the vertex there is a slightly curving fall both towards
the front and the back, ending in the former direction at the origin of
the brow-ridges, and in the latter, at the occipital tubercle. The curvin
is more rounded and regular on the anterior half—particularly at the
upper portion of the brow, which, in consequence, is somewhat pro-
minent—than on the posterior half: on the latter, there is a slight
depression just above the apex of the lambdoidal suture. The pos-
terior fall of the Neanderthal skull, as a peculiarity, was first pointed
out by Huxley, who remarks that “ the occipital region slopes obliquely
upward and forward, so that the lambdoidal suture is situated well
upon the upper surface of the cranium:” in other words, when the
glabello-occipital plane is made horizontal, the apex of the lambdoidal
suture is decidedly in front of the posterior tubercle. In ordinary
         * «Natural History of Man and Monkeys,’ Fig. 182, p. 120.
         + Plate IL. Fig. 5, b.
         t See Plate I. Fig. 1, A A.
1864.]   Kine   on    the   Reputed    Fossil   Man    of   the   Neanderthal.    91

 skulls, it is well known, the backward slope terminates near the apex
 of the lambdoidal suture, below which the occipital bone stands more
 or    less  vertical to   the   glabello-occipital plane. The Neanderthal
 cranium, in its posterior features, is approached by some savage races ;
 also occasionally by a few inhabitants of the British Isles. Moreover,
judging from the few data at our command, the approximation appa-
 rently characterized the ancient ‘ Borreby people,” and the extinct
race of the Meuse, supposing the latter to be represented by a nearly
perfect skull which Schmerling obtained from the Engis cave near
Liége ;* but in no human tribe extinct, or existing, do we find both
the vertex and the occiput so depressed and ape-like. Well might
Huxley have felt a “ difficulty in believing that a human brain could
have its posterior lobes so flattened and diminished as must have been
the case in the Neanderthal man.”
     Much*of the hinder half of the skull partakes of the slight round-
ness just noticed; but anterior to its greatest width, in the areas which
were embraced by the temporal muscles, the sides are perpendicular,
and their “fore and aft” outline is straight and remarkably long.
      In these general characters, the Neanderthal skull is at once
 observed to be singularly different from all others which admittedly
belong to the human species; and they undoubtedly invest it with a
 close resemblance to that of the young Chimpanzee, represented by
 Busk in his translation of Shaaffhausen’s memoir.t
     Another differential feature characterizes the fossil in question.
In human skulls, even those belonging to the most degraded races, if
the forehead be intersected at right angles to the glabello-occipital
plane, on a line connecting the two outer orbital processes at their
infero-anterior point, the intersection will cut off the frontal bone in
its entire width, and to a considerable extent rising towards the coronal
suture ;{ whereas in the Neanderthal skull, the same intersection will
cut off only the inferior and little more than the median portion of the
frontal. This is quite a simial characteristic, and rarely, if ever,
occurs in man.||
     * This is the only speciality in which the Engis and Neanderthal skulls agree.
     + See ‘ Natural History Review,’ 1861, Plate IV. Fig. 6.
     { See Plate II. Fig.5, BB. § See Plate I. Fig. 1, BB.
     || I have examined and made myself acquainted with skulls belonging to the
principal races or varieties of man, in all of which the forward position of the
forehead, relatively to the outer orbital processes, is the general rule. The Engis
 skull exhibits it, and the same appears to be the case with the Borreby one,
judging from the figure in Lyell’s ‘Geological Antiquity of Man,’ p. 86. It
may be doubted that the Plymouth skull, represented by Busk (‘ Nat. Hist. Rev.’
 1861, Pl. V. fig. 6), is an exception. I possess a very remarkable skull, probably
 about 500 years or more old, taken last summer out of the beautiful ruins of
 Coreomroo Abbey, situated among the Burren mountains, in county Clare, which
 offers a close approximation to the fossil in the depressed form of the forehead :
 indeed, although not altogether so abnormal in this respect as the Neanderthal
 skull, it has in appearance a better development, in consequence of the median
 part of its frontal being a little more rounded. There is no reason to believe that
 it belonged to an idiot, as it happens that most of the skulls lying about the ruins
 have a low frontal region. It is singular that the inhabitants of Burren a few
 hundred years ago should have been characterized by a remarkably depressed fore-
 head, while those now living have a well-developed cranial physiognomy.
92               Original                Articles.              [               Jan.

     The last peculiarity is concomitant with another equally strik-
ing. Viewing the Neanderthal forehead with reference to the situation
 of that portion of the brain which it enclosed, we may plainly per-
ceive that the frontal lobes of the cerebrum have been situated behind
the outer orbital processes. As far as I have ascertained, we cannot
say this of man; for, apparently, in all existing races, whose skull has
not been modified by artificial pressure, the corresponding parts of the
brain actually extend in front of the orbital processes.*
     Notwithstanding the strong simial tendencies displayed by its
general features, most of the writers who have described this skull
do not appear to think otherwise than that it belonged to an indi-
vidual of our species. There seems to be no doubt, whatever,
on the part of the Honorary Secretary of the Anthropological
Society, Mr. Carter Blake, that the Neanderthal fossil is specifically
identical with Man. He considers it to be the remains of some poor
idiot or hermit, who died in the cave where the bones were found.f
His reasons, however, are obviously unsatisfactory. ‘In reply to the
suggestion,” observes Huxley, “that the skull is that of an idiot, it may
be urged that the onus probandi lies with those who adopt the hypothesis.
Idiotcy is compatible with very various forms and capacities of the
cranium, but I know of none which present the least resemblance to the
Neanderthal skull.”t Blake admits that its frontal peculiarities give
the cranium an “ apparent ape-like character ;” but if such peculiar-
ities be the result of mal-development producing idiotcy, one would be
equally justified in believing that the form of the skull of the gorilla,
or chimpanzee, is also produced by disease of the brain. Schaaff-
hausen, seemingly, would have no hesitation in repudiating the idea
that the frontal specialities of the fossil are the result of individual
 pathological    deformity.§
     In case it should be suggested that this remarkable cranium has
received its form from artificial pressure, I may observe that no one
who has described it seems to entertain such an opinion; indeed its
 symmetry, also noticed by Schaaffhausen, is quite opposed to the
 supposition that the skull has undergone any process of artificial modi-
fication.
     Huxley, while admitting that it is the most ape-like and most
brutal of all human skulls yet discovered, states that it is “closely
 approached” by some Australian forms, and “even more closely affined
 to the skulls of certain ancient people, who inhabited Denmark during
 the Stone period.” || I have no intention to deny that there are gene-

   * The Corcomroo skull, noticed in the previous footnote, although closely
approximated to the Neanderthal one in its low forehead, and this alone, is strietly
human in the forward extension of the frontal lobes of the brain relatively to the
outerorbitalprocesses.
   + See ‘ Geologist,’ vol. V. p. 207.
   t See Lyell’s ‘Geological Antiquity of Man,’ p. 85.
   § The writer of an article on Lyell’s ‘Geological Antiquity of Man,’ in the last
number of the ‘Quarterly Review,’ summarily disposes of the Neanderthal skull
with the gratuitous assertion, that it is quite removed from the pithecoid type, and
possibly belonged to an idiot.
    || ‘ Man’s Place in Nature,’ p. 157.
1864.]   Kina   on   the   Reputed   Fossil   Man   of   the   Neanderthal.   93

ral features of resemblance between tho Australian, Neanderthal, and
ancient Danish crania; but it appears to me, judging from the figures
(31 and 82) in the deeply philosophical work, ‘Man’s Place in Na-
ture,’ that a closer resemblance is assumed than really exists. No one
would have any hesitation in admitting that the Borreby skull, repre-
sented under one of the figures cited, is strictly human,— nay, from
what I have seen myself, I have no hesitation in saying that precisely
the same cranial conformation is often repeated in the present day ;
but it has yet to be shown that any skulls hitherto found are more
than approximately similar to the one under consideration.
     The proposition at present contended for is apparently invalidated
by the fact that, among certain species of animals—notably those under
domestication—skulls very dissimilar from each other may be found.
It is, therefore, to be apprehended that, however clearly the Neanderthal
fossil may be shown to be inadmissible into the human species, an attempt
will be made to set aside the consequent conclusion by an appeal to
the fact alluded to. But this I contend is not a case in point, as will
be evident after a moment’s reflection on the various breeds of the Dog
—the best known of our domesticated species. These breeds, so re-
markably differentiated by cranial peculiarities, are artificial, whereas
the varieties of mankind are natural. The dissimilar skulls met with
in the former are merely striking illustrations of organic or structural
modifiability, produced by what Darwin calls Natural Selection, but
nothing more.
     Again, some weight seems to be due to the consideration that the
human species (in which I include all the existing races of man) is
characterized by a great variety of skulls. We have abundant ex-
amples affording characters which closely iink together the most dis-
similar forms, so that it is impossible to draw a line of demarcation
between the extremes of dolichocephaly and brachycephaly,* or between
the lofty forehead of Indo-Europeans and the depressed one of the
Australian. Nay, the most degraded race we are acquainted with —
the Mincopies of the Andaman Islands — may be strictly regarded as
closely affined by cranial conformation to the highest intellectual races.
It might, therefore, be urged that the Neanderthal skull is simply
an aberrant form, but which is, nevertheless, inseparably linked on to
the Indo-European type. If sufficient has not yet been adduced to
dispel this idea, the following additional evidences, referring to the
particular parts of the bones composing the fossil cranium, will, it is
thought, be deemed fully adequate for the purpose.
     Commencing with the Frontal.—Fuhlrott and Huxley have satis-
factorily shown that this bone is furnished with large frontal sinuses ;
and apparently they regard these as the cause of the excessive pro-
minency of the superciliary ridges. It may be reasonably doubted,
however, that this is the case. Frontal sinuses, it is well known, do
not always coexist with prominent brow-ridges, as, for example, in the
Australian and the Chimpanzee: on the other hand, the former may
exist without being associated with any more than an ordinary de-
   * Professor Retzius distinguished long skulls, and short or round skulls, re-
spectively by the names dolichocephalic and brachycephalic.
94                     Original                    Articles.                   [Jan.

velopment of the latter. I have seen frontal sinuses extending to
nearly the origin of the outer orbital processes, and almost large
enough, even at their termination, to admit the small finger to be in-
serted into them, yet the brow-ridges were not particularly prominent.
But whether the Neanderthal sinuses extend the whole length of the
brow-ridges, or they are simply confined to the region of the glabella,
their large size, in either case, is unusual in man, and they more strongly
approach to, or resemble, as the case may be, those of the Gorilla.
     As to the excessive prominency of the brow-ridges,—instead of re-
garding this feature as having been produced by the frontal sinuses, —
there is more probability that, like the other extraordinary “ elevations
and depressions ”.,of the skeleton, pointed out by Schaafthausen, it
is another speciality consequent on the greatly developed muscular
system, which, from what has already been stated, evidently cha-
racterized the so-called Neanderthal man.
     The orbital cavities appear to have had a circular rim, as in cer-
tain apes, there being no angle in that part joining the glabella. This
is a feature unknown in any of the human races: in them the orbits
are always subquadrate.*
     The roof of the orbital cavities is altogether less concave, par-
ticularly on the outer side, than in Man; and, although the inner ex-
tremity of the plate forming the roof is broken off, sufficient remains
to show that the cavities contracted sooner than usual. The cavities
also appear to have been uncommonly divergent: if this were actu-
ally the case, its significance would point towards one of the spe-
cialities of the Gorilla.
      Temporals.—As already stated, only the impression of the upper
squamosal is seen on the parietals; but it suffices to show, as pointed
out by Huxley, that this part had a comparatively low arcuation:
the highest point of the arch reaches little more than half the height
it attains in ordinary human skulls. Besides occurring among apes,
an equally low arcuated squamosal distinguishes the human fcetus ;
and in some savage races—Australians and Africans—the same part
is also depressed, but not so much as in the fossil. The Engis and
Borreby skulls are strictly normal in this particular.

    * Tn some apes the rim of the orbits is of the human form.
    + Under this head may be noticed a part which appears to have been over-
looked in the fossil. On an excellent cast, supplied by Mr. Gregory, of Golden-
square, London, there occurs on the right side and in front of the squamosal
impression a raised flattened plate, which looks like the upper portion of the
alisphenoid (see Plate I. Fig. 1, b): the forward situation of this plate prevents
it being taken for the anterior part of the temporal; besides, its posterior side
exhibits what appears to be the impression of the squamosal. The anterior
margin of the supposed alisphenoid is about an inch behind the outer orbital
process. Dr. Knox long ago pointed out in a Tasmanian skull a square-shaped
bone, nearly an inch in extent, interposed between the alisphenoid and the parietal.
I perceive that this abnormality in a Tasmanian skull is represented in Fig. 225
of the beautiful edition, just published by Renshaw, of Dr. Knox’s translation of
Milne-Edwards’ ‘Manuel de Zoologie.’ I have also seen the same bone, but only
on the ‘left side, of an “Australian” skull belonging to the Dublin University
Museum. Perhaps this interposed bone corresponds, in nature as well as situation,
to the flattened plate observable in the Neanderthal fossil.
1864.]   Krye   on   the    Reputed    Fossil   Man    of   the   Neanderthal.     95

      Occipital.—The upper portion of this bone is quite semicircular in
outline, its sutural (lambdoidal) border running with an even crescentic
curve from one transverse ridge to the other :* generally in human
skulls, including the Engis one, the outline approaches more or less to
an isosceles triangle.t The width of the occipital at the transverse
ridges is much less than is common to Man; and the disparity is the
more striking in consequence of the widest portion of the fossil occu-
pying an unusually backward position.
     Taking into consideration the forward and upward curving of the
upper portion of the occipital bone as previously noticed, its semicir-
cular outline, and smallness of width, we have in these characters,
taken together, a totality as yet unobserved in any human skull belong-
ing to either extinct, or existing races; while it exists as a conspicuous
feature in the skull of the Chimpanzee.
     Parietals.—In Man the upper border of these bones is longer than
the inferior one; but it is quite the reverse in the Neanderthal skull.
The difference, amounting to nearly an inch, will be readily seen by
referring to Figures 1 and 2, in Plate II.; the former representing the
right parietal of a British human skull, and the latter the correspond-
ing bone of the fossil. These figures also show that the Neanderthal
parietals are strongly distinguished by their shape, and the form of
their margins: in shape they are five-sided, and not subquadrate, ike
 those of the British skull; { while their anterior and posterior margins
have each exactly the reverse of the form characteristic of Man.
      The additamentum, which undoubtedly gives the parietals their
five-sided shape, is on a level with the superior transverse ridge, and
much longer than usual. This peculiarity is common to the human
foetus: I have, likewise, observed an approach to it in a “ Caffre”
skull belonging to the Dublin University Museum, in which, also, the
upper and lower borders of the parietals are about equal in length.
 But still the abnormality of the latter case is not at all so extreme
as the condition observed in the fossil. These particular features
also are characteristically simial; for in extending our survey to the
 Chimpanzee, and some other so-called Quadrumanes, their parietals
are seen to present a great similarity to those of the Neanderthal
 skull.$
      I have now, as it appears to me, satisfactorily shown that not only
in its general, but equally so in its particular characters, has the fossil

     * Plate II. Fig. 4. { Plate IT. Fig. 3.
     + The outlines were taken by pressing a sheet of paper on the parietals; and,
when in this position, marking their margins by following the bounding sutures ;
next, by cutting the paper according to the lines given by the sutures, and
allowing it to retain its acquired convexity : the outlines were then marked off on
another sheet of paper. Possibly the antero-inferior angle of the Neanderthal
parietal, as given in the figure, is not strictly correct, owing to the coronal suture
being obliterated in that part, but I venture to state that it is approximately true.
     § On the cast, an incised line runs from the lambdoidal suture (where the ad-
ditamentum joins it) towards the posterior tubercle. Is this the suture which
occurs near and parallel to the transverse ridges in foetal skulls, and occasionally
in that of adults? In the skull of the “ Caftre,” noticed in the text, this suture,
which is only seen on the right side, is situated above the ridge ; but in the fossil,
it is below this part.
96                Original                Articles.               [               Jan.

under consideration the closest affinity to the apes. Only a few points
of proximate resemblance have been made out between it and the
human skull ; and these are strictly peculiar to the latter in the fatal
state. The cranium of the human fcetus, however, possesses the lofty
dome, the forward position of the frontal respectively to the outer
orbital processes, the greatest width at the parietal centres of ossifica-
tion, and the vertical occipital, which are so conspicuous in the adult,
but which are remarkably non-characteristic of the Neanderthal skull.
Besides, so closely does the fossil cranium resemble that of the Chim-
panzee, as to lead one to doubt the propriety of generically placing it
with Man. T'o advocate this view, however, in the absence of the facial
and basal bones, would be clearly overstepping the limits of inductive
reasoning.
     Moreover, there are considerations of another kind which power-
fully tend to induce the belief that a wider gap than a mere generic
one separates the human species from the Neanderthal fossil.
    The distinctive faculties of Man are visibly expressed in his elevated
 cranial dome—a feature which, though much debased in certain savage
races, essentially characterizes the human species. But, considering
that the Neanderthal skull is eminently simial, both in its general and
particular characters, I feel myself constrained to believe that the
thoughts and desires which once dwelt within it never soared beyond
those of the brute. The Andamaner, it is indisputable, possesses but
the dimmest conceptions of the existence of the Creator of the
 Universe: his ideas on this subject, and on his own moral obli-
 gations, place him very little above animals of marked sagacity ; *
 nevertheless, viewed in connection with the strictly human conforma-
 tion of his cranium, they are such as to specifically identify him with
 Homo sapiens. Psychical endowments of a lower grade than those
 characterizing the Andamaner cannot be conceived to exist: they
 stand next to brute benightedness.
      Applying the above argument to the Neanderthal skull, and consi-
 dering that it presents only an approximate resemblance to the
 cranium of man, that it more closely conforms to the brain-case of
 the Chimpanzee, and, moreover, assuming, as we must, that the simial
 faculties are unimprovable—incapable of moral and theositic concep-
 tions—there seems no reason to believe otherwise than that similar
darkness characterized the being to which the fossil belonged.t

    * It has often been stated that neither the Andamaners, nor the Australians,
have any idea of the existence of God: there are circumstances, however, recorded
of these races which prevent my accepting the statement as an absolute truth.
    + A paper advocating the views contained in this article was read at the last
meeting of the British Association, held in Neweastle-on-Tyne. In that paper I
called the fossil by the name of Homo Neanderthalensis ; but I now feel strongly
inclined to believe that it is not only specifically but generically distinct from Man.
                                   Quarterly dou rnal of Science, Ni.




                                  aes




Avian A King De i                                     Wdswin
                                                          Wilhams,Se¢
                                                          M

                    BER   ED   OF NBANDERTHAL | +
1864,]     Krna   on    the   Reputed    Fossil   Man    of     the   Neanderthal.   v7

                               JIXPLANATION OF PLAty I,
                         Via. 1—Right Side of Neanderthal Skull.
         A A. Glabello-oecipital plane.
         B B. Line intersecting the forehead at right angles to the last plane through
                    both outer orbital processes.
                       (These lines are interrupted so as not to obscure any parts of
                    theskull.)
            a to a. Border of squamosal impression.
                    (Letter ‘a’ is just below the widest part of the skull.)
            b. ? Alisphenoid.
            c. Portion of additamentum.

                           Fic. 2.—Top of Neanderthal Skull.
          a,a. Outer orbital processes.
                     The transverse line on the middle of skull represents the coronal
                  suture. (This and the corresponding line in Fig. 1 are copied
                  from Busk’s figures.)
                     The semicircular line at the posterior part of skull represents
                  the lambdoidal suture.
                     The medio-longitudinal line represents the sagittal suture.
                          Fic. 3.—Front of Neanderthal Skull.
           a, a. Outer orbital processes or horns of the brow-ridges.
           b. Inter-orbital space.
           ec. Portion of roof-plate of right orbital cavity.
                  (Only the anterior half of the frontal bone is represented.)
              ** The figures in this plate are taken from a plaster cast,


                              EXPLANATION OF Puate II.
               Fie. 1.—Right Parietal of a Human (Irish) Skull,
                               a. Coronal edge.
                               b. Lambdoidal edge.
                               ec. Sagittal edge.
                               d. Squamosal edge.
               Fie, 2.—Right Parietal of Neanderthal Skull.
                          a, b, c, d. Same as in last Figure.
                               e. Additamental edge.
               Fig. 3.—Occipiial of a Human (Irish) Skull.
                           aa. Lambdoidal edge.
                           b, b. Transverse ridges.
                             e. Occipital or posterior tubercle.
               Fic. 4.—Occipital of Neanderthal Skull.
                           Letters same as in last Figure.
             Fic. 5.—Right Side-view of Dome of Human Skull
          .
     looked Glabello-occipital plane.
          .
      OPofp Glabello-occipital intersecting plane.
          . Frontal.
          . Parietal. (The letter is on the centre of ossification and widest part
                of the skull.)
         . Occipital.
        a0
         . Temporal.
        e. Alisphenoid.


 VOL.                                    I.                                 H
King, William. 1864. "The reputed fossil man of the Neanderthal." The
Quarterly journal of science 1, 88–97.
