The Gnostics and Their Remains, Ancient and Mediaeval (C. W. King, 1887)
Public domain.
Source: Internet Archive (gnosticsandtheir00kinguoft).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

CEBACMA  OF  CKEES  JADE,  COSVEBTED  INTO  A  GNOSTIC  TALISM
(See  page  197.)


THE GNOSTICS


AND


THEIR REMAINS,


ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL.


C. W. KING, MA.


Nam  veluti  puori  trcpidant  atque  omnia  caacis
In  tencbris  metuimt,  sic  nos  in  luce  timemus
Intcrdum  nilo  qua;  sunt  metueuda  magis  quam

ori  in  tenebris  pavitant,  finguntque  futura.


SECOND EDITION.


LONDON:
DAVID NUTT, 270, STRAND.

1887.


LONDON :

PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,
STAMFORD  STREET  AND CHARINQ CROSS.


[All  rights  reserved.]


PREFACE.


WHEN  this  work  first  appeared,  three-and-twenty  years  ago,  it
became  at  once  an  object  of  unmerited  abuse,  and  of  equally
unmerited  praise.  Small  divines  mistaking  it  for  an  insidious
attempt  to  overthrow  opinions  "  as  by  law  established,"  spurted
at  it  with  pens  dipped  in  the  milk  of  the  Gospel ;  whilst,  under
the  very  same  hallucination,  "  Friends  of  Light "  lauded  it  to
the  skies — either  party  equally  ignorant  both  of  the  subject,
and  of  the  purpose  of  my  labours.  One  noted  Zoilus  (whose
recollections  of  Homer  would  seem  to  be  of  the  same  deeply-
marked  nature  as  Ensign  Blifil's)  is  disgusted  at  my  citing
"  Aidoneus "  as  a  title  of  the  God  of  the  Shades ;  another  is
astonished  at  my  ignorance  in  calling  Bardanes  a  Persian,
whereas  he  was  a  native  of  Pontus ;  not  understanding  that
my  argument  was  equally  valid  in  spite  of  the  mistake — Pontus
being  originally  a  province  of  the  empire  of  Darius,  and  what
is  more  to  the  purpose,  the  actual  focus  whence  Mithraicism
diffused  itself  over  the  Eoman  world.

A  still  greater  cause  of  outcry  against  the  book  was  my
presuming  to  lay  presumptuous  hands  upon  the  Sacred  Ark  of
Masonry,  and  openly  express  my  opinion  that  the  "  Free  and
Accepted  "  of  these  times  have  no  more  real  connexion  with  the
ancient  Craft,  out  of  whose  terms  and  forms,  like  fig-leaves,  they
have  stitched  together  aprons,  wherewith  to  cover  the  real
nakedness  of  their  pretension,  than  the  Italian  Carbonari  of
Murat's  day  had  with  the  trade  of  charcoal  burners,  whose
baskets  were  borrowed  for  the  President's  throne.  King
Hiram's  skull  gnashed  his  teeth  with  rage  within  the  cista
mystica  ;  and  one  valiant  young  Levite  of  the  course  of  Abia,


VI  PREFACE.

proceeds  thus  logically  to  confute  all  my  assertions  :  "  Athelstan
built  a  church  :  he  could  not  build  without  masons ;  argal,
Athelstan  was  the  founder  of  Masonry  in  England.

But  enough  of  this ;  the  same  treatment  is  necessarily  in  store
for  the  present  edition ;  it  must  look  fur

"  Verbera,  carnifices,  robur,  pix,  lamina,  taedae."

The  one  reviewer  of  its  predecessor  who  exhibited  any  acquain
tance  with  the  literature  of  the  subject,  felt  himself  (from  his
position)  "  in  duty  bound  "  to  qualify  his  praise  by  passing  the
summary  judgment  "  that  I  had  displayed  in  the  work  more  of
the  spirit  of  a  Gnostic  than  of  a  Catholic  Christian."  This
sentence,  intended  for  condemnatory,  I  accept  as  the  highest
praise  that  could  be  given  to  my  labours — taking  yvwortKos  in
its  strict  sense  of  "  one  addicted  to  knowledge " ;  and  who
therefore  studies  the  history  and  remains  of  any  opinion  for
the  solo  purpose  of  understanding  the  truth ;  and  not  for  the
sake  of  demonstrating  the  Truth  can  only  exist  under  one
defined  form.

Let  me  now  proceed  to  state  how,  in  the  present  edition,  I
have  endeavoured  still  further  to  deserve  the  appellation  attached
to  me  by  the  good-natured  Aristarchus.  My  Treatise  was  the
only  one  upon  Gnostic  Archaeology  (for  Dr.  Walsh's  little  book
scarce  deserves  the  name)  that  had  appeared  since  Chiflet's
admirable  "  Apistopistus  "  (1617); — Matter,  in  his  '  Histoire
Critique  du  Gnosticisme  (1827),  an  excellent  analysis  of  the
doctrines  of  the  Gnosis,  doing  nothing  for  its  monuments,
beyond  republishing,  on  a  reduced  scale,  the  engravings  of  the
"  Apistopistus."  The  only  sources  of  information  accessible  to
me  at  the  time  of  writing  that  edition  were  the  same  as  those
drawn  upon  by  Matter  before  me,  namely  the  treatises  of
Irenaeus  and  Epiplianius.  In  the  interval,  I  have  become
acquainted  with,  and,  in  order  thoroughly  to  master,  have
made  complete  translations  of,  two  recently  discovered  works
that  throw  much  light  upon  many  difficult  questions  in  this
investigation.  The  one  is  the  'Refutation  of  all  Heresies,'
ascribed,  either  to  Origen  or  Hippolytus :  its  author  being  inti
mately  acquainted  with  the  doctrines  which  he  holds  up  for


PREFACE.  Vll

detestation,  or  for  ridicule ;  and  (what  makes  his  criticisms  of
far  higher  value  to  students  of  the  present  day)  illustrating
them  by  copious  extracts  from  the  then  so  extensive  heretical
literature,  soon  to  be  completely  exterminated  by  the  triumph
of  the  "  orthodox  "  Faith.

The  other  aid  is  the  "  Pistis-Sophia,"  sole  survivor  of  the  once
numerous  family  of  Gnostic  Gospels ;  but  fortunately  the  most
important  of  them  all  for  our  purpose,  and  the  very  one  for
whose  escape  (in  its  Coptic  disguise)  the  archreologist  ought  to
feel  most  grateful  to  the  ignorance  of  the  destroyers.  For,
whereas  the  other  Gnostic  teachers  appear  (as  Hippolytus  loves
to  point  out)  to  build  up  their  systems  upon  the  lines  of  various
Grecian  philosophies,  the  "  Pistis-Sophia  "  makes  known  to  us
what  were  the  deepest  secrets  of  the  so  celebrated  Egyptian
Mysteries,  which  are  identical  with  those  of  the  Eabbinical
Kabbala,  the  only  alteration  being  that  of  putting  them  into
the  mouth  of  Scripture  personages,  in  order  to  adapt  them
to  the  prevailing  change  of  ideas.  This  book,  therefore,
from  its  very  nature  supplies  a  kind  of  elucidation  of  con
temporary  monuments  not  to  be  found  elsewhere,  for  the
Christian  Fathers  discuss  only  the  doctrines  of  their  adversaries,
not  condescending  to  notice  their  application  to  the  uses  of
everyday  life.  It  is  the  latter  point  that  gives  such  interest  to
the  "  Pistis-Sophia  " — we  gain  from  it  the  whole  category  of
Holy  Names,  of  such  talismanic  virtue;  the  powers  and  titles
of  the  actual  genii,  the  constitution  of  the  soul ;  and  its
state  after  death.  But  what  is  yet  more  curious,  the  "  Pistis-
Sophia  "  exhibits  the  leading  principles  of  the  Kabbala  already
established,  and  applied  to  the  demonstration  of  the  highest
truths  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  these  principles  wore
used  by  the  heresiarch,  Marcus,  in  the  third  century.  And
here  it  may  be  remarked  parenthetically,  that  no  one  really
acquainted  with  the  history  of  religious  opinions,  can  for  a
moment  imagine  that  Marcus  (a  born  Jew,  be  it  remembered)
was  the  first  inventor  of  the  wondrous  machinery  which  he  used
in  the  development  of  his  system,  and  the  '  Manifestation  of
Truth,' — he  did  but  apply  to  a  new  purpose  the  rules  that  he
found  already  established  as  authoritative  in  the  Rabbinical


Vlll  PREFACE.

schools.  For  in  Religion  there  is  no  "  new  thing  "  ;  the  same
ideas  are  worked  up  over  and  over  again ;  the  gold  in  the
sovereign  of  to-day  may  first  have  circulated  in  the  new-coined
stater  of  Croesus.

Last,  in  point  of  time,  but  equally  valuable  with  any  of
the  fresh  sources  that  have  served  me  for  the  completion  of
this  work,  must  I  gratefully  acknowledge  the  oral  teachings
of  Eabbi  Dr.  Schiller-Szinessy — that  unchanged  representative
of  the  Gamaliels  of  old — at  whose  feet  I  have  sat  for  many
years,  listening  to  his  exposition  of  the  "  Holy  Zohar."  What
ever  may  be  the  date  of  the  present  form  of  that  transcendental
development  of  the  Torah — no  one  but  an  inverted  Jew,  totally
unread  in  the  Greek  historians  of  the  Gnosis,  can  fail  to
perceive  that  its  principles  and  traditions  are  the  veiy  same
as  those  taught  in  the  schools  of  Babylon  and  Tiberias  at  the
time  when  Simon  Magus  and  Justinus  studied  there.

During  the  many  years  that  have  slipped  by  since  its  first
publication,  I  have  irom  time  to  time  re-cast  and  re- written  the
entire  Treatise,  incorporating  with  the  former  contents  what
ever  fresh  information,  reading,  or  chance,  might  throw  in  my
way.  In  the  same  interval,  two  other  works  upon  this  subject
have  made  their  appearance.  Dean  Mansel's  l  Gnostics '  is  a
well- written  and  accurate  summary  of  all  that  the  Greek  Fathers
have  left  us  upon  the  doctrines  of  the  various  sects ;  but,  as  the
book  is  evidently  intended  for  the  use  of  theological  students
alone,  the  author  has  regarded  his  subject  from  a  strictly  pro
fessional  point  of  view ;  totally  ignoring  the  archaeological  side
of  the  question  (with  which  I  am  chiefly  concerned),  as  being
altogether  foreign  to  the  purpose  for  which  he  wrote.

On  the  other  hand,  Dr.  Ginsburg's  '  The  Kabbala :  its
Doctrines,  Development,  and  Literature,'  possesses  not  only  the
merit  of  a  lucid  exposition  of  the  most  abstruse  of  all  Theo-
sophies,  as  contemplated  in  the  shape  to  which  it  has  been
brought  by  the  refining  subtlety  of  successive  generations  of
Bobbins — but  will  be  found  an  invaluable  guide  to  all  who
attempt  the  interpretation  of  talismanic  inscriptions.  For
example,  the  Hebrew  radicals,  which  express  the  Names  of
the  Sephiroth,  are  ta  be  discovered  in  the  strings  of  Greek


PREFACE.  IX

consonants, now dumb for want of vowels, which have
hitherto  baffled  the  ingenuity  of  every  reader.

There  seems  reason  for  suspecting  that  the  Sibyl  of  Esoteric
Buddhism  drew  the  first  notions  of  her  new  religion  from  the
analysis  of  the  Inner  Man,  as  set  forth  in  my  first  edition.  I
may  therefore  promise  to  myself  the  gratitude  of  those  "  clear
spirits  "  (the  Miltonian  phrase)  who  are  busying  themselves  "  by
searching  to  find  out  God,"  for  now  making  known  to  them  a
still  more  profound  theosophy,  whose  revelations  definitely
settle  hardest  problems  relating  to  our  mental  nature,  and  the
world  beyond  the  grave.  Investigators  of  the  same  order  as  the
Esoteric  Buddhists  will  find  here  a  Gospel  ready  made  to  their
hand — so  full  of  great  truths,  so  original  in  its  conceptions,
that  it  would  seem  to  flow  from  no  human  source ;  and  must
carry  conviction  of  its  divine  origin  to  every  mind  that  shall
be  adapted  by  its  nature  for  the  reception  of  the  good  seed.

In  conclusion,  I  must  express  my  grateful  acknowledgments
of  the  services  of  my  indefatigable  friend,  Mr.  S.  S.  Lewis,
Fellow  of  Corpus  Christi  College;  but  for  whose  persuasion,
and  negotiations  with  the  publishers,  these  pages  would  never
have  seen  the  light.  Not  merely  this,  but  he  has  enabled  me  to
overcome  an  apparently  insurmountable  difficulty  in  the  way  of
the  publication — the  failure  of  my  sight,  which  totally  prevented
my  conducting  the  work  through  the  press — by  taking  upon
himself  the  correction  of  the  proofs  :  a  laborious  and  irksome
task  to  any  one  besides  the  author  ;  and  demanding  a  sacrifice
of  time  that  can  only  be  appreciated  by  those,  who,  like  myself,
know  the  multifarious  nature  of  the  engagements  by  which
every  hour  of  his  life  is  so  completely  absorbed.

Mr.  Joseph  Jacobs  has  furnished  a  carefully  compiled  list  of
authors  quoted  in  this  work,  and  of  the  references  made  to  them,
which  will  be  found  of  use  to  those  who  wish  to  pursue  the
subject  still  further.

C.  W.  KING.

THINITY  COLLEGB:,  CAMBRIDGE,
August  26,  1887.


>AGK
V


CONTENTS.


PREFACE

xin
Introduction .

PART  I.

GNOSTICISM  AND  ITS  SOURCES.

Introduction— Gnosticism  and  its  origin— Pistis-Sophia— Book  of
Enoch— Gnosticism in its beginning— Influence of  Judaism
on  the  Ancients— The  Zendavesta— The  Kabbala  and  the  T
mud— Indian  Sources  of  Gnosticism,  Manes— Buddhism— Simon-
ianism— Basilides— The  Ophites— Machinery  of  the  Gnosis

PART  II.

THE WORSHIP  OF  MITHRAS  AND  SERAPIS.

Origin  of  Mithraicism— The  Mithraic  Sacraments— A  Roman  Mithas
°in his Cave— Mithraic Talismans— Gnostic Sacraments  and
Initiations,  as  Connected  with  the  Mithraic— St.  Augustine on
Gnosticism— The  Worship  of  Serapis— The  Figured  Representa
tions of  Serapis— Probable  Origin of  Serapis— Monuments
the  Serapis-worship— The  Caduceus  and  its  Symbolism— Death,
as  Represented  in  Ancient  Art— Tomb-treasures— Gnostic  con
nection  with  Superstitious  Practices,  the  Evil  Eye— Cerauma
Jade  converted  into  a  Gnostic  Talisman

PART  III.

ABRAXAS,  ABRAXASTER  AND  ABRAXOID  GEMS.
A^athodacmon  Worship— The Chnuphis Serpent— The Abraxas
—Abraxaster, or  Borrowed  Types— Abraxoids, or  Gems  con
founded  with  the  true  Gnostic— The True Abraxas <
The  god  Abraxas, as described  by  the  Christian  Fathers-
«  Abraxas,"  Etymology  of-"  Abraxas,"  its  numerical  Vain
The Abraxas Religion-The Ineffable name  m its Hindoo
Form-Abraxas-gerns, their Materials, Workmanship,
Nature— Legends  and  Formulas .


Xll  CONTENTS.

PART  IV.
THE  FIGURED  MONUMENTS  OF  GNOSTICISM.

Gnostic  Siglxj  Symbols,  Legends  Explained — The  Name  IAQ —
Abraxas,  a  New  Type  of — Original  Purpose  of  these  Formula —
The  Gnostic  Theogony — The  Schema  of  the  Ophites — The
Cause  of  Sin — State  after  death  of  the  Uninitiated — Future
Punishments,  and  the  Infernal  Hierarchy — Talismanic  Leaden
Scrolls  —  Leaden  Books  —  Numerals,  Their  Virtues  —  Magic
Squares  ..........  303

PART  V.

TEMPLARS,  ROSICBUCIAN&,  FREEMASONS.

Preservation  of  Gnostic  Symbols  among  the  Freemasons — Masonic
Pretences — " Constitutiones  Artis  Geometriae  " — Henry  VI.  and
his  Masons — Hindoo  and  Chinese  Symbols — Masons'  Marks —
Stonehenge — The  Carbonari — De  Quincey — The  Rosy  Cross —
"Vultus  Triformis" — Hosea  Lux — Lodges  First  Established —
Templars  Suppressed — "Mystery  of  Baphomet  Revealed" —
Articles  of  Accusation  against  the  Templars — Orphic  Mysteries
• — Clarkson  on  the  Temple  Church — "  Baphometic  Vases  " —
Manicheism  in  France — The  Assassins  of  the  Lebanon — The
Druses — The  Sufi  of  Persia — Lodges  first  Established — Spartacus
Weishaupt — Wren — "  Scottish  Knights  "—Cypher  Writing —
"  Book  of  Kells  " — Brand-marking,  National  and  Mystic  .  373

DESCRIPTION  OF  WOODCUTS .......  432

DESCRIPTION  OF  PLATES  ........  435

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  APPENDIX,  by  Joseph  Jacobs,  B.A. . . .  449

INDEX ...........  457

PLATES  A  to  0.


INTRODUCTION.


THAT  nothing  upon  the  subject  of  Gnosticism  should  have
hitherto  been  attempted  in  our  language  except  by  Dr.  Walsh
in  his  very  meagre  sketch  (long  since  out  of  print),  seemed  to
me  a  sufficient  excuse  for  my  undertaking  the  same  task  upon  a
more  comprehensive  scale,  as  well  as  upon  different  principles.
Dr.  Walsh's  performance,  entitled  « An  Essay  on  Coins,  Medals,
and  Gems,  as  illustrating  the  progress  of  Christianity  in  the
Early  Ages,'  is  little  more  than  an  abridgment  of  some  popular
Church  History  for  the  period  comprehended  within  its  scope,
illustrated  from  the  very  scanty  store  of  monuments  at  his
command ;  whilst  his  explanations  are,  like  the  source  supply
ing  them,  based  upon  grounds  altogether  fallacious,  and,  even  to
the  beginner,  obviously  unsatisfactory.

Taking  for  granted,  upon  the  bare  word  of  their  opponents,
that  the  various  Teachers  of  the  Gnosis  were  mere  heretics,  that
is,  perverters  of  the  regular  (!)  Christian  doctrine  which  they  had
at  first  embraced  as  a  divine  revelation,  he,  like  his  guides,  did
not  trouble  himself  any  further  to  investigate  the  true  origin  of
their  systems,  but  was  content  with  roughly  sketching  their
most  prominent  features ;  whilst  in  explaining  their  extant  pro
ductions,  he  refers  all,  however  diverse  in  nature,  to  the  same
school,  and  interprets  them  according  to  his  own  preconceived
and  baseless  views  of  their  character.

On  such  a  plan  as  this,  neither  the  doctrines  nor  the  monu
ments  they  have  bequeathed  to  us  in  such  profusion  are
susceptible  of  even  a  plausible  explanation,  much  less  of  one
capable  of  satisfying  an  unprejudiced  and  inquiring  mind.  The
method,  therefore,  of  treating  the  subject  which  I  have  followed
in  the  present  work  is  to  begin  by  reviewing  the  great  religions
systems  of  the  East,  flourishing  at  the  time  of  the  promulgation


XIV  INTRODUCTION.

of  Christianity  in  those  regions,  with  the  influence  of  these
systems  upon  the  modes  of  thought  and  expression  of  both  the
missionaries  of  the  new  creed  and  their  opponents ;  and  lastly
to  establish,  upon  the  testimony  of  the  Apostle  to  the  Gentiles
himself,  the  previous  existence  of  the  germs  of  Gnosticism  in  the
cities  that  were  the  scene  of  his  most  important  labours.

In  my  sketch  of  these  older  systems  I  have  done  little  more
than  condense  Matter's  admirable  introduction  to  his  *  Histoire
Critique  du  Gnosticisme ' ;  but  from  that  point  forward  have
carried  on  my  investigations  according  to  a  theory  to  which
that  writer  once  alludes  approvingly,  although,  from  some  un
accountable  reason,  he  has  neglected  to  follow  it  out  to  its
legitimate  consequences.  Eestricting  himself  to  describing  in
his  lucid  and  elegant  style  the  speculations  of  the  several  heresi-
archs,  and  seeking  no  further  back  than  the  Zendavesta  and
Kabbala  for  the  storehouses  whence  they  all  must  have  drawn
their  first  principles,  he  falls  into  the  grave  error  of  represent
ing  their  doctrines  as  novel,  and  the  pure  inventions  of  the
persons  that  preached  them.

That  the  seeds  of  the  Gnosis  were  originally  of  Indian  growth,
carried  so  far  westward  by  the  influence  of  that  Buddhistic
movement  which  had  previously  overspread  all  the  East,  from
Thibet  to  Ceylon,  was  the  great  truth  faintly  discerned  by
Matter,  but  which  became  evident  to  me  upon  acquiring  even
a  slight  acquaintance  with  the  chief  doctrines  of  Indian
theosophy.  To  display  this  in  the  most  incontrovertible  manner,
the  two  systems,  each  in  its  highest  form  of  development — that
of  Valentinus,  and  that,  of  the  Nepal ese  Buddhists — are  described
and  confronted  for  the  sake  of  establishing  their  original
identity:  and  throughout  these  pages  innumerable  other  points
of  affinity  will  be  found  noticed  as  they  present  themselves.
Actual  historical  proof  of  the  same  fact  will  also  be  adduced,
establishing  the  important  circumstance  (but  hitherto  entirely
unnoticed,  or  disregarded)  that  Buddhism  had  already  been
planted  in  the  dominions  of  the  Seleucida3  and  the  Ptolemies  at
least  as  early  as  the  times  of  the  generation  following  the
establishment  of  those  dynasties,  and  was  provided  for  in
treaties  made  between  those  Grecian  princes  and  the  great


INTRODUCTION.  XV

Hindoo  promoter  of  the  religion.  In  the  history  of  the  Church
it  is  most  certain  that  almost  every  notion  that  was  subsequently
denounced  as  heretical  can  bo  traced  up  to  Indian  speculative
philosophy  as  its  genuine  fountain-head  :  how  much  that  was
allowed  to  pass  current  for  orthodox  had  really  flowed  from  the
same  source,  it  is  neither  expedient  nor  decorous  now  to
inquire.

In  order  to  obtain  a  clear  view  of  the  principal  forms  of
Gnosticism,  as  well  as  to  escape  relying  upon  second-hand
information  (in  this  case  more  than  elsewhere  untrustworthy),  j
commenced  the  collecting  materials  for  the  present  work  by
carefully  perusing  the  vast  '  Panarion  '  of  Epiphanius — a
laborious  undertaking,  but  well  repaid  by  the  vivid  picture  he
presents  of  the  inner  state  of  society  under  the  Lower  Empire,
and  of  the  war  even  at  that  late  period  so  fiercely  waged
between  Reason  and  Faith.  The  '  Panarion  '  is  a  connected
history  of  the  Gnosis  in  all  its  developments  during  the  first
three  centuries — the  author  quoting  Irenasus  for  the  earlier  ages  ;
for  the  later  his  account  is  of  the  highest  value,  having  been
derived  from  personal  experience,  Epiphanius  having  in  his
youth  belonged  to  the  Marcosian  sect.  After  his  days  nothing
new  sprung  up  in  the  field  of  Eeligious  philosophy,  before  so
diversified  with  the  vigorous  and  more  curious  flowers  (or
weeds)  of  the  Gnosis ;  the  civil  now  combining  with  the
ecclesiastical  power  to  cut  down  and  root  out  all  such  daring
and  irregular  growths  of  the  human  mind.

Since  the  first  publication  of  this  treatise  I  have  become
acquainted  with  and  minutely  studied  two  authorities  of  the
greatest  importance  for  the  true  understanding  of  Gnosticism —
the  one  for  its  philosophy ;  the  other  for  its  tangible  remains.
*  The  Refutation  of  all  Heresies,'  of  Hippolytus,  written  two
centuries  before  the  'Panarion,'  gives  a  view  of  the  chief
schools  of  the  Gnosis,  drawn  up  with  the  utmost  intelligence
united  with  the  most  charming  candour  ;  qualities  sadly  to  seek
in  the  other  ecclesiastical  historians.  The  '  Pistis-Sophia,'  the
only  Gnostic  Gospel  preserved,  throws  a  light  upon  the
terminology  and  machinery  of  the  religion  that,  before  its
discovery  and  publication  was  perfectly  unattainable.  Both


XVI  INTRODUCTION.

these  treatises  are  of  recent  discovery,  and  consequently  their
assistance  was  lost  to  the  previous  historians  of  Gnosticism.  I
have  therefore  availed  myself  largely  of  these  invaluable
resources,  which  will  be  found  doing  good  service  in  almost
every  section  of  the  present  work.

After  considering  the  class  of  speculations  that  owed  their
birth  to  India,  next  in  importance  for  her  contributions  to  the
opinions,  still  more  to  the  monuments  before  us,  conies  Egypt
with  her  primeval  creed,  although  exhibited  in  its  Romanized
and  latest  phase ;  and  whose  productions  are  too  often  confounded
with  the  true  offspring  of  the  Gnosis.  These  remains  are  here
discriminated ;  their  distinctive  characters  are  pointed  out ;  and
they  are  arranged  under  several  heads,  according  as  their  object
was  religious  or  medicinal.  In  the  consideration  of  these
remains,  Bellermann's  classification  has  been  chiefly  followed ;
according  to  which  the  truly  Gnostic  are  regarded  as  those
only  that  exhibit  the  figure  of  the  Pantheus,  Abraxas,  the  actual
invention  of  Basilides,  and  which  gives  its  name  to  the  class.
The  second,  Abraxoids,  includes  the  types  borrowed  from  different
religions  by  the  other  Gnostic  teachers.  The  third,  Abraxaster,
consists  of  such  as  in  their  nature  are  purely  astrological,  and
intended  for  talismans;  deriving  their  virtues  from  the  stars.
In  the  first  of  these  classes  much  space  has  been  devoted  to
the  ingenious  creation  of  the  Alexandrine  philosopher,  the
pantheistic  image  of  the  supreme  Abraxas ;  whose  title  has
hitherto  been  improperly  applied  to  monuments  some  of  which
are  anterior  in  date  to  his  embodiment  in  a  visible  form;
whilst  others  spring  from  nations  entirely  unconnected  with  his
worship.  Of  this  eidolon  of  the  personage  thereby  typified,  of  the
meaning  of  his  name  and  titles,  much  information  has  been
collected,  and  presented  here  in  a  connected  form  for  the  benefit
of  those  interested  in  learning  what  can  on  safe  grounds  be
established  in  elucidation  of  these  abtruse  questions.

Mithraicism,  under  whose  kindly  and  congenial  shelter  so  much
of  Occidental  Christianity  grew  up  unmolested,  is  reviewed  in  its
due  order,  and  the  causes  explained  of  an  alliance  at  first  sight
BO  inexplicable.  With  this  subject  are  connected  the  singular
resemblance  between  the  ceremonial  of  the  two,  and  the  transfer


INTRODUCTION.  XVH

of  so  much  that  was  Mithraic  into  the  practice  of  the  orthodox  ;
and  many  curious  memorials  will  be  found  described  bearing
witness  to  the  reality  of  this  adaptation.

After  the  Mithraic,  the  religion  of  Serapis  comes  to  be
considered  ;  a  worship  which,  besides  being  the  last  of  the
Heathen  forms  to  fall  before  the  power  of  Christianity,  had
previously  contributed,  as  largely  as  the  Mithraic,  to  the  con
stitution  of  the  later  Gnosticism.  It  is  in  truth  a  great  mis
take,  the  confining  the  name  of  "Gnostic"(as  is  commonly  done)
to  the  sectaries  who,  boasting  of  their  "  superior  lights,"  declared
that  they  were  the  only  real  Christians  (as  did  the  Ophites),  and
that  too  in  virtue  of  a  creed  professedly  of  their  own  devising.
Such  Gnostics  indeed  were  Christians  by  their  own  showing,
and  regarded  all  who  differed  from  them  as  heretics :  but  at  the
same  time  they  based  their  arguments  upon  the  tenets  of  Pagan
religions;  very  far  from  regarding  the  latter  as  the  empty
fabrications  of  demons,  which  was  the  persuasion  of  the  ortho
dox.  But  although  they  accepted  these  ancient  Ethnic  legends,
it  was  only  because  through  the  help  of  their  "  knowledge  "  they
were  enabled  to  discern  the  truth  enveloped  within  these
seemingly  profane  traditions.  But  the  followers  of  Mithras  and
of  Serapis  had  in  reality,  and  long  before  them,  a  Gnosis  of
their  own,  communicated  in  their  Mysteries  to  the  initiated  few  ;
and  they  opposed  to  the  predictions  of  orthodox  and  Gnostic
alike  claims  and  pretensions  lofty  as  their  own.  The  Emperor
Hadrian,  a  most  diligent  inquirer  into  things  above  man's
nature,  got  himself  initiated  into  one  mystery  after  another;
nevertheless  we  shall  find  him  writing  from  Alexandria  that  the
worship  of  Christ  and  of  Serapis  was  in  that  city  one  and  the
same,  and  moreover  the  sole  religion  of  that  immense  population.
Consequently,  those  initiated  into  the  true  secrets  of  the  old
religion  must  have  recognised  the  fact  that  their  deity,  whether
the  Sun  or  the  Soul  of  the  Universe,  was  nothing  but  a  type  of
the  One,  the  Saviour  recently  revealed  to  them  :  or  else  it  would
appear  (which  tells  equally  for  our  argument)  that  the  new
converts,  in  order  to  escape  persecution,  enjoyed  their  own  faith
under  the  covert  of  the  national  worship,  which  was  susceptible
of  a  spiritual  interpretation  quite  cognate  to  their  own  ideas,

b


XV111  INTRODUCTION.

and  indeed  enshrouding  the  same.  As  for  the  worshippers  of
Mithras,  their  whole  elaborate  system  of  sacraments  and  degrees
of  initiation  had  no  other  object  than  the  securing  of  spiritual
enlightenment  and  spiritual  blessings.  The  foundation  being
the  pure  teaching  of  Zoroaster,  its  holders  were  prepared  gladly
to  accept  any  higher  revelation,  and  to  discover  that  the  greater
mystery  had  been  foreshadowed  in  the  types  and  ceremonies
of  the  former  one.  In  this  way  a  man  might  continue  a
Mithraicist  and  yet  accept  all  the  doctrines  of  Christianity,  as
the  priests  of  that  religion  in  their  last  days  assured  the
incredulous  Augustine.

After  thus  pointing  out  the  various  elements  which  the
Apostles  of  the  Gnosis  worked  up  so  ingeniously  into  one
harmonious  whole,  incorporating  therewith  so  much  of  the
Christian  scheme  as  fitted  to  the  rest,  we  come  prepared  to  the
examination  of  the  Symbols  and  Terminology  by  which  these  ideas
were  communicated  to  the  members  of  the  sect  who  had  attained
to  the  Arcanum;  the  composite  images  or  sigils  "  having  a  voice
for  the  intelligent,  which  the  vulgar  crowd  heareth  not."

Astrology  justly  claims  for  her  own  a  large  share  of  the  relics
popularly  called  Gnostic;  for  Gnosticism,  from  the  beginning,
had  linked  its  own  speculations  to  those  of  the  Magians'  national
science,  and  borrowed  as  a  vehicle  for  its  own  peculiar  ideas
the  machinery  of  the  latter — its  Astral  Genii,  Decani,  and
Myriageneses.  And  this  truth  was  seen  by  the  earliest  writers
upon  Gnosticism,  for  Hippolytus  proves  conclusively,  at  much
length,  that  the  system  of  the  Peratae  (a  branch  of  the  Ophites)
was  nothing  more  than  a  barefaced  plagiarism  from  the  rules  of
Astrology.  Under  this  head  I  have  endeavoured  to  separate  the
purely  Astrological  talismans  from  those  to  which  the  illuminati,
their  makers,  had  given  a  more  spiritual  sense.  "Astrology,
not  Christ,  is  the  author  of  their  religion,"  says  Hippolytus  of
the  sects  founded  by  Euphrates  and  Celbes ;  and  proceeds  to  give
extracts  from  their  writings,  held  in  the  highest  esteem  at  the
time,  which  amply  bear  out  his  assertion.

Next  pour  in,  a  multitudinous  swarm,  the  stones  covered  over
with  long  strings  of  bare  inscriptions,  genuine  offspring  of  the
Kabbala,  that  betray  the  handiwork  of  the  idol-hating  Jewish


INTRODUCTION.  XIX

dreamers  of  Alexandria — spoils  even  then  ascribed  to  Solomon,
and  which  secured  the  favour

"  Of  those  demons  that  are  found
In  fire,  air,  flood,  or  under  ground;
Whose  power  hath  a  true  consent
With  planet  or  with  element."

One  object  I  have  kept  steadily  in  view  throughout  the  whole
of  this  investigation — to  show  how  the  productions  of  the
different  schools  are  to  be  distinguished  from  each  other  ;  and  to
this  particular  attention  has  been  given  in  describing  the
numerous  remains  proceeding  from  the  several  sources  just
enumerated,  that  are  collected  in  the  accompanying  plates,
and  thus  in  some  degree  to  remedy  the  confusion  that  reigns
at  present  in  the  whole  department.  My  predecessor,  Matter,
busied  himself  only  with  the  doctrines,  making  use  of  the
monuments  merely  in  illustration  of  his  remarks  ;  but  as  my  own
labours  are  properly  designed  to  be  subsidiary  to  his  invaluable
treatise,  I  refer  the  reader  to  him  for  the  more  complete
elucidation  of  the  philosophy  of  Gnosticism,  and  give  my  full
attention  to  its  archaeological  side,  which  he  has  too  cursorily
glanced  at,  and  for  which  nothing  has  been  done  of  any
importance  since  the  publications  of  Chiflet  and  Montfaucon.

Last  to  be  considered  comes  the  Gnosis  in  its  final  and
grandest  manifestation,  the  composite  religion  of  Manes :  with
its  wonderful  revival  and  diffusion  over  Medieval  Europe  ;  and
its  supposed  connexion  with  the  downfall  of  the  Templars,  of
which  catastrophe  the  history  and  causes  are  here  briefly
sketched ;  although  to  form  a  satisfactory  judgment  on  the  merits
of  the  case  is  about  the  hardest  problem  history  can  offer.  With
their  scandal  and  their  fate  is  coupled  the  most  singular  phe
nomenon  of  modern  times — the  preservation  by  their  professed
descendants,  the  Freemasons,  of  so  much  symbolism  that  appears
to  be  indisputably  Gnostic  in  its  origin.  For  this,  however
(unfortunately  for  the  lovers  of  mystery),  a  very  matter  of  fact
but  doubtless  sufficient  cause  can  be  assigned,  and  by  valid
arguments  established:  when  the  solution  of  the  enigma
irresistibly  brings  to  mind  ^Esop's  apologue  of  the  "  Fox  and  the
Mask,"  and  his  exclamation  of  disappointment  after  he  had  at


XX  INTRODUCTION.

last  mustered  up  sufficient  courage  to  examine  the  interior  of  the
awe-inspiring  and  venerable  head.  This  section  is  illustrated
by  all  the  information  I  have  been  able  to  glean  from  different
sources  upon  the  curious  subject  of  Masons'  Marks — which,
yet  existing  and  in  common  use  amongst  our  own  craftsmen
and  equally  so  amongst  the  Hindoos  in  daily  religious
observance,  can  be  traced  back  through  Gothic  retention,  and
Gnostic  usage,  through  old  Greek  and  Etruscan  art,  to  their
ultimate  source  ;  and  which  attest  more  convincingly  than  any
thing  else  what  region  gave  birth  to  the  theosophy  making  such
liberal  use  of  the  same  siylse  in  Roman  times.  To  assist
inquirers  into  this  point  I  have  been  careful  to  give  references  to
all  the  published  lists  of  these  Marks  that  have  come  to  my
knowledge  ;  which  same  rule  I  have  observed  as  regards  other
monographs  upon  the  several  various  questions  discussed  in  the
following  pages.  In  this  way  the  shortcomings  of  myself  can  be
supplied  by  those  desirous  of  fuller  information :  for  1  am  well
aware  that  my  own  best  qualification  for  attempting  an  arduous
investigation  like  the  present,  extending  over  so  many  and  un
connected  branches  of  learning,  lies  in  a  larger  practical  ex
perience  of  the  monuments  themselves,  tangible  and  literary,
than  was  possessed  by  those  who  have  hitherto  attempted  it.
And  as  it  is  a  most  true  adage,  "  Dans  le  pays  des  aveugles  le
borgne  est  roi,"  there  is  some  probability  of  my  labours  proving
both  novel  and  interesting  to  many,  who  desire  to  know
something  authentic  upon  the  much-talked-of  but  little  under
stood  subject  of  Gnosticism.

Related  to  this  religion  by  their  nature  are  talismans  and
amulets  in  general ;  for  Gnostic  symbols  and  Gnostic  formulae
gave  their  virtue  to  many  of  the  class  :  being  borrowed  either
directly  from  the  Gnosis,  or  from  the  older  creeds  out  of  which
the  latter  was  constructed.  Their  employment,  and  the  notions
generating  them,  have  been  here  described ;  showing  the  deriva
tion  of  many  of  the  medieval  examples  from  the  Gnostic  class ;
and  by  following  out  the  same  principle  it  has  been  attempted
to  find  a  key  to  their  cabalistic  legends,  which  may  fit  them
better  than  any  hitherto  offered  by  their  interpreters — symbols
and  emblems  being  with  them  those  conveying  the  idea  of  death,


INTRODUCTION.  XXI


which  last  indeed  has  of  all  others  furnished  the  richest  store
of  such  imagery ;  for  thereby  the  human  mind  endeavoured  to
familiarise  itself  with  the  thought  of  mortality,  and  by  em
bellishing  the  idea  tried  to  reconcile  itself  to  the  inevitable.
This  being  a  topic  of  universal  interest,  to  say  nothing  of
its  very  important  relations  to  Art,  my  collections  connected
therewith  have  been  somewhat  extensive,  and  embrace  many
particulars  neglected  by  Lessing  in  his  curious  es^ay  entitled
*  Wie  die  Alien  den  Tod  gebildet.'

With  respect  to  the  illustrations  of  this  book,  many  doubtless
will  be  surprised  as  well  as  disappointed  at  finding  them
derived  entirely  from  monuments  of  such  small  apparent  im
portance  as  engraved  stones ;  and,  thinking  this  part  incomplete
on  that  account,  may  accuse  the  author  of  negligence  in  not
having  had  recourse  to  other  evidences  of  a  more  public
character.  But  the  limitation  is  in  truth  the  necessary  result
of  the  nature  of  the  things  discussed  in  this  inquiry.  Secret
Societies,  especially  the  one  whose  maxim  was  (as  Clemens
records)  that  truly  wise  one —

"  Learn  to  know  all,  but  keep  thyself  unknown ; "
erect  no  monuments  to  attract  public  attention.  They  deal  but
in  symbols,  to  be  privately  circulated  amongst  their  members  in
passwords  known  only  to  the  illuminati ;  or  else  they  embody
their  doctrines  in  mystic  drawings,  like  the  Ophite  "  Dia-
gramma  "  ;  or  upon  papyri  long  since  committed  to  the  flames.
The  man  of  taste,  but  not  an  antiquary,  will  certainly
exclaim  against  the  rudeness  of  the  drawing  in  my  illustrations ;
but  the  truth  is  that,  rude  as  they  look,  they  in  most  cases
flatter  their  originals,  the  extreme  barbarism  of  which  it  was
often  found  impossible  to  reproduce  with  any  hope  of  leaving
the  meaning  recognisable.  Be  it  remembered  that

"  Gratia  non  habitat,  non  hoc  Cyllenius  antro."

Pallas  no  longer,  as  in  the  earlier  ages  of  the  art,  guided  the
engraver's  hand,  but  Siva  and  Bhavani  (ill-disguised  as  Hermes
and  Isis)  suggested  the  designs  ;  or  else  he  was  inspired  by  the
Typhonian  monsters  which  imagined  the  Genii  of  Astrology.
The  religion  of  Fear,  under  its  various  manifestations,  n  »w


XX11  INTRODUCTION.

reigned  supreme,  having  banished  the  beauteous  sensuous
machinery  of  the  old  Greek  Nature-worship,  into  which  nothing
that  was  malignant  or  hideous  was  ever  suffered  to  intrude.
The  virtue  of  the  talisman  lay  in  the  type  it  carried ;  and  in  its
own  material  substance  the  manner  of  the  exhibition  of  the
potent  sigil  was  altogether  unregarded.  One  of  the  most
learned  men  this  University  has  ever  produced  once  re
marked  to  me  that  the  Gnostic  theories  reminded  him  of  the
visions  that  float  through  the  brain  of  a  madman — not  of  a  fool.
Circumstances  following  gave  a  melancholy  force  to  this  acute
and  accurate  distinction.  Let  any  imaginative  person  read  my
extracts  from  the  "  Revelation "  of  Marcus,  with  all  its  crazy
ingenuity  in  deducing  the  nature  of  the  Deity  from  the  pro
perties  of  numerals ;  above  all,  his  exemplification  of  Infinity
by  the  perpetual  multiplication  of  the  letters  contained  in  other
letters  making  up  a  name — he  will  speedily  find  his  brain  begin
to  whirl,  and  be  reminded  of  similar  phantoms  of  numerals
recurring  in  endless  series,  and  the  equally  endless  attempts  to
sum  them  up  in  order  to  obtain  repose,  that  fill  the  head  when
suffering  from  the  first  approaches  of  fever  before  actual
delirium  pushes  memory  from  her  seat.  Or,  again,  when  the
febrile  disturbance  of  the  brain  is  yet  slighter,  one  will
sometimes  awake  out  of  a  dream  with  a  fleeting  sensation  of
inexpressible  happiness  arising  from  the  immediate  attainment
of  Omniscience  in  virtue  of  something  that  has  just  been
revealed  to  him ;  but  too  soon  he  finds  that  ineffable  something
has  fled  for  ever,  all  that  is  left  of  it  being  the  faint  recollection
that  it  was  contained  in  a  numeral.  And  one  of  the  most  striking
points  in  the  revelation  of  the  *  Seherin  von  Prevorst,'  so
religiously  recorded  by  Justinus  Kerner  (and  which  proves
that  all  the  wondrous  narrative  was  not  imposture),  is  her
declaration  that  she  could  see  the  entire  history  of  each  year  as  it
closed,  with  every  event,  however  trifling,  clear  and  distinct
before  her  mind,  all  comprehended  within  the  form  of  a  single
numeral;  and  her  assertion  upon  these  grounds  that  at  the
Judgment-Day  the  whole  past  life  of  every  man  will  thus  be
pictured  in  a  single  moment  before  his  mind's  eye.

About half  the  number  of  the  drawings  for  these  illustra-


INTRODUCTION.  XX111

tions  were  done  by  myself  from  the  most  interesting  specimens
that  came  under  my  notice  in  the  course  of  several  years,  so
that  I  am  able  to  vouch  for  their  scrupulous  fidelity.  After
wards,  when  the  sudden  failure  of  my  sight  prevented  my
carrying  on  the  drawings,  the  kindness  of  the  then  owner  of
most  of  the  originals  came  to  my  assistance  and  furnished  the
remainder.  Most  of  them  in  fact  were  taken  from  the  largo
and  unpublished  set  contained  in  the  ancient  Praun  Cabinet
(formed  three  centuries  ago),  now  unfortunately  broken  up.
The  Gnostic  stones,  however — 73  in  number — have  been  since
that  time  purchased  for  the  British  Museum,  where  they  will  be
found  conveniently  arranged  for  consultation,  iri  the  Egyptian
Room,  which  contains  the  works  in  terra-cotta.  This  my
collection  of  drawings  was  in  truth  the  occasion  of  the  present
work;  for  after  making  out  a  detailed  description  of  each
specimen,  it  became  easy  to  put  the  mass  of  materials  I  had
collected  for  their  elucidation  into  a  form  available  for  support
ing  my  explanations  by  showing  the  grounds  on  which  they
were  based :  and  in  this  way  the  work  has  grown  up  by  gradual
accretion  to  its  present  dimensions.  The  theme  offers  so  bound
less  a  variety  of  interesting  subjects  for  research,  one  suggesting
another  in  endless  succession,  that  it  can  only  be  compared  to
Marcus'  own  exposition  of  the  infinite  composition  of  the  In
effable  Name  (quoted  above),  and  would  alone  supply  materials
for  a  whole  library  of  distinct  treatises  upon  its  various  sub
divisions.

In  those  few  instances  where  the  better  style  of  the  original
deserved  reproduction  by  a  more  artistic  hand,  I  have  had
recourse  to  the  services  of  Mr.  E.  B.  Utting,  who  has  executed
the  woodcuts  with  a  spirit  as  well  as  an  accuracy  that  leave
nothing  to  be  desired.


PART  I.
GNOSTICISM  AND ITS SOURCES.


TOVTOV  pc  Xl'lPLV


&ioSev<rco,
fj.v(TTr]pi(i  TrdvTa  Stavoi^co,


/cai  ra  Kcupvpufva  rfs  ayias
TNH2IN  KaXeo-as,  7rapa8a)O-co.

ifc  J/2/WW,  (Hippolytus,  v.  10.)


Nan  e  pulcggio  da  piccola  barca

Quel  die  fendcndo  va  1'  ardita  prora,

Nb  da  nocclner  ch'  a  sc  medesmo  parca."

(Dante,  Farad,  xxiii.  68.)


THE  GNOSTICS  AND  THEIR  REMAINS,


GNOSTICISM  AND  ITS  ORIGIN.

THE  general  name  "  Gnostics "  is  used  to  designate  several
widely  differing  sects,  which  sprang  up  in  the  Eastern  provinces
of  the  Roman  Empire  almost  simultaneou.-ly  with  the  first
planting  of  Christianity.  That  is  to  say,  these  sects  then  for
the  first  time  assumed  a  definite  form,  and  ranged  themselves
under  different  teachers,  by  whose  names  they  became  known
to  the  world,  although  in  all  probability  their  main  doctrines  had
made  their  appearance  previously  in  many  of  the  cities  of  Asia
Minor.  There,  it  is  probable,  these  sectaries  first  came  into
definite  existence  under  the  title  of  "  Mystae,"  upon  the  estab
lishment  of  a  direct  intercourse  with  India  and  her  Buddhist
philosophers,  under  the  Seleuciclae  and  the  Ptolemies.

The  term  "  Gnosticism  "  is  derived  from  the  Greek,  Gnosis,
knowledge — a  word  specially  employed  from  the  first  dawn  of
religious  inquiry  to  designate  the  science  of  things  divine.
Thus  Pythagoras,  according  to  Diogenes  Laeitius,  called  the
transcendental  portion  of  his  philosophy,  Pvwo-ts  TOJV  oi/ron/,  "  the
knowledge  of  things  that  are."  And  in  later  times  Gnosis  was
the  name  given  to  what  Porphyry  calls  the  Antique  or  Oriental
philosophy,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  Grecian  systems.  But  the
term  was  first  used  (as  Matter  on  good  grounds  conjectures)  in
its  ultimate  sense  of  supernal  and  celestial  knowledge,  by  the
Jewish  philosophers  belonging  to  the  celebrated  school  of  that
nation,  flourishing  at  Alexandria.  These  teachers,  following
the  example  of  a  noted  Rabbi,  Aristobulus,  surname  d  the
Pcripatician,  endeavoured  to  make  out  that  all  the  wisdom
•of  the  Greeks  was  derived  immediately  from  the  Hebrew

B  2


4  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Scripture ;  and  by  means  of  their  well-known  mode  of  alle
gorical  interpretation,  which  enabled  them  to  elicit  any  sense
desired  out  of  any  given  passage  of  the  Old  Testament,  they
sought,  and  often  succeeded,  in  establishing  their  theory.  In
this  way  they  showed  that  Plato,  during  his  sojourn  in  Egypt,
had  been  tlieir  own  scholar ;  and  still  further  to  support  these
pretensions,  the  indefatigable  Aristobulus  produced  a  string  of
poems  in  the  names  of  Linus,  Orpheus,  Homer,  and  Ilesiod —
all  strongly  impregnated  with  the  spirit  of  Judaism.  But  his
Judaism  was  a  very  different  thing  from  the  simplicity  of  the
Pentateuch.  A  single,  but  very  characteristic,  production,  of  this
Jewish  Gnosis  has  come  down  to  our  times.  This  is  the  "  Book
of  Enoch  "  (v.  p.  18),  of  which  the  main  object  is  to  maJcc  Imown
the  description  of  the  heavenly  bodies  and  the  true  names  of  tho
same,  as  revealed  to  tho  Patriarch  by  the  angel  Uriel.  This
profession  betrays,  of  itself,  the  Magian  source  whence  its
inspiration  was  derived.  Many  Jews,  nevertheless,  accepted  it
as  a  divine  revelation ;  even  the  Apostle  Jude  scruples  not  to
quote  it  as  of  genuine  Scriptural  authority.  The  "  Pistis-
Sophia,"  attributed  to  tho  Alexandrian  heresiarch  Valentinus
(so  important  a  guide  in  the  following  inquiry),  perpetually
refers  to  it  as :  Tho  highest  source  of  knowledge,  as  being
dictated  by  Christ  Himself,  "speaking  out  of  the  Tree  of  Life
unto  I  EOT,  the  Primal  Man."  Another  Jewish-Gnostic  Scripture
of  even  greater  interest,  (inasmuch  as  it  is  the  "  Bible  "  of  the
only  professed  Gnostic  sect  that  has  maintained  its  existence
to  tho  present  day,  the  Mandaites  of  Bassora,)  is  their  text
book,  the  "  Book  of  Adam."  Its  doctrines  and  singular
application  of  Zoroastrism  to  Jewish  tenets,  present  frequent
analogies  to  those  of  the  Pistis-Sophia,  in  its  continual  reference
to  the  ideas  of  the  "  Religion  of  Light,"  of  which  full  particulars
will  be  given  when  the  latter  remarkable  work  comes  to  be
considered  (see  p.  14).  "  Gnosticism,"  therefore,  cannot  receive
a  better  definition  than  in  that  dictum  of  the  sect  first  and
specially  calling  itself  *'  Gnostics,"  the  Naaseni  (translated  by
the  Greeks  into  "  Ophites  "),  viz.,  "  the  beginning  of  perfection
is  the  knowledge  of  man,  but  absolute  perfection  is  the  know
ledge  of  God."  And  to  give  a  general  view  of  the  nature  of


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  5

the  entire  system,  nothing  that  I  can  do  will  serve  so  well  as
to  transcribe  the  exact  words  of  a  learned  and  very  acute  writer
upon  the  subject  of  Gnosticism  ("  Christian  Remembrancer,"
for  1866).

"Starting,  then,  from  this  point  we  ask  what  Gnosticism
is,  and  what  it  professes  to  teach.  What  is  the  peculiar  Gnosis
that  it  claims  to  itself?  The  answer  is,  the  knowledge  of  God
and  of  Man,  of  the  Being  and  Providence  of  the  former,  and  of
the  creation  and  destiny  of  the  latter.  While  the  ignorant  and
superstitious  wore  degrading  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible  God
into  an  image  made  with  hands,  and  were  changing  « the  truth
of  God  into  a  lie,  and  worshipped  and  served  the  creature  rather
than  the  Creator/  the  ancient  Gnostics  held  purer  and  truer
ideas.  And  when  these  corrupted  and  idolatrous  forms  of
religion  and  worship  became  established,  and  were  popularly
regarded  as  true  and  real  in  themselves,  the  "  Gnostics  "  held  and
secretly  taught  an  esoteric  theology  of  which  the  popular  creed
of  multitudes  of  deities,  with  its  whole  ritual  of  sacrifice  and
worship,  was  but  the  exoteric  from.  Hence  all  the  mysteries
which,  almost  if  not  all,  the  heathen  religions  possessed.  Those
initiated  into  these  mysteries,  whilst  they  carefully  maintained
and  encouraged  the  gorgeous  worship,  sacrifices  and  processions
of  the  national  religion,  and  even  openly  taught  polytheism,  and
the  efficacy  of  the  public  rites,  yet  secretly  held  something
very  different — at  the  first,  probably,  a  purer  creed,  but  in
course  of  time,  like  the  exoteric  form,  degenerating.  The
progress  of  declination  differed  according  to  race  or  habit  of
thought :  in  the  East  it  tended  to  superstition,  in  the  West  (as
we  learn  from  the  writings  of  Cicero)  to  pure  atheism,  a  denial
of  Providence.  This  system  was  adopted  likewise  by  the  Jews,
but  with  this  great  difference,  that  it  was  superinduced  upon
and  applied  to  a  pre-existent  religion;  whereas  in  the  other
Oriental  .religions,  the  external  was  added  to  the  esoteric,  and
developed  out  of  it.  In  the  Oriental  systems  the  external  was
the  sensuous  expression  of  a  hidden  meaning ;  in  the  Jewish,
the  hidden  meaning  was  drawn  out  of  pre-existing  external
laws  and  ritual ;  in  the  former  the  esoteric  alone  was  claimed
as  divine,  in  the  latter  it  was  the  exoteric  which  was  a  matter


6  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

of  revelation.  To  repair  this  seeming  defect,  the  Kabbalists,  or
teachers  of  the  *  Hidden  Doctrine,'  invented  the  existence  of  a
secret  tradition,  orally  handed  down  from  the  time  of  Moses.
We  may,  of  course,  reject  this  assertion,  and  affirm  that  the  Jews
learnt  the  idea  of  a  Hidden  Wisdom,  underlying  the  Mosaic
Law,  from  their  intercourse  with  the  Eastern  nations  during
the  Babylonian  captivity ;  and  we  may  further  be  assured  that
the  origin  of  this  Secret  Wisdom  is  Indian.  Perhaps  we  shall
be  more  exact  if  we  say  that  the  Jews  learnt  from  their  inter-
Bourse  with  Eastern  nations  to  investigate  the  external  Divine
Law,  for  the  purpose  of  discovering  its  hidden  meaning.
The  heathen  Gnostics,  in  fact,  collected  a  Gnosis  from  every
quarter,  accepted  all  religious  systems  as  partly  true,  and
extracted  from  each  what  harmonized  with  their  ideas.  The
Gospel,  widely  preached,  accompanied  by  miracles,  having  new
doctrines  and  enunciating  new  truths,  very  naturally  attracted
their  attention.  The  Kabbalists,  or  Jewish  Gnostics,  like
Simon  Magus,  found  a  large  portion  of  apostolic  teaching  in
accordance  with  their  own,  and  easily  grafted  upon  it  so  much
us  they  liked.  Again  the  Divine  power  of  working  miracles
possessed  by  the  Apostles  and  their  successors  naturally
attracted  the  interest  of  those  whose  chief  mystery  was  the
practice  of  magic.  Simon  the  Magician  was  considered  by  the
Samaritans  to  be  '  the  great  Power  of  God  ; '  he  was  attracted
by  the  miracles  wrought  by  the  Apostles;  and  no  doubt  he
sincerely  '  believed,'  that  is,  after  his  own  fashion.  His  notion
of  Holy  Baptism  was  probably  an  initiation  into  a  new
mystery  with  a  higher  Gnosis  than  he  possessed  before,  and  by
which  he  hoped  to  be  endued  with  higher  powers;  and  so
likewise  many  of  those  who  were  called  Gnostic  Heretics  by
the  Christian  Fathers,  were  not  Christians  at  all,  only  they
adopted  so  much  of  the  Christian  doctrine  as  accorded  with
their  system."

The  consideration  of  the  local  and  political  circumstances  of
the  grand  foci  of  Gnosticism  will  serve  to  explain  much  that  is
puzzling  in  the  origin  and  nature  of  the  system  itself.  Epliesus
was,  after  Alexandria,  the  most  important  meeting-point  of
Grecian  culture  and  Oriental  speculation.  In  regard  to


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

commerce  and  riches,  although  she  yielded  to  the Egyptian
capital,  yet  she  rivalled  Corinth  in  both,  which  city  in  truth
she  far  surpassed  in  her  treasures  of  reli-ion  and  science. Her
richness  in  theosophic  ideas  and  rites  had  from  time  immemorial
been  manifested  in  her  possession  of  Diana,  "whom  all  Asia
and  the  world,"  worshipped— that  pantheistic figure  so  con
formable  to  the  genius  of  the  furthest  East;  her  College  of
"  Essenes  "  dedicated  to  the  service  of  that  goddess ;  and  her
"  Megabyzae,"  whose  name  sufficiently  declares  their  Magian
institution. Hence,  also,  was  supplied  the  talisman  of  highest
repute  in  the  antique  world,  the  far-famed  "  Ephesian  spell,"
those mystic  words graven  upon the zone and feet of  the
"image that fell down from Jupiter;" and how  zealously
magic  was cultivated  by  her citizens is apparent  from St.
Luke's  incidental  notice  of  the  cost  of  the  books  belonging  to
those  that  used  "  curious  arts  "  (ra  irepUpya,  the  regular  names  for
sorcery  and  divination)  destroyed  by  their  owners  in  the  first
transports  of  conversion  to  a  new  faith. Such  converts,  indeed,
after  their  early  zeal  had  cooled  down,  were  not  likely  to  resist
the  allurements  of  the  endeavour  to  reconcile their  ancient,
far-famed  wisdom,  with  the  new  revelation  ;  in  short,  to  follow
the  plan  invented  not  long  before  by  the  Alexandrian  Jew,  in
his  reconciliation  of  Plato  with  Moses  and  the  Prophets.
Ephesus,"  says  Matter,  "  the  speculations  of  the  Jewish-Egyptian
school,  and  the  Semi-Persian  speculations  of  the  Kabbala,  had
then  recently  come  to  swell  the  vast  conflux  of  Grecian  and
Asiatic  doctrines;  so  there  is  no  wonder  that  teachers  should
have sprung up  there,  who  strove to combine the religion
newly  preached  by  the  Apostle  with  the  ideas  so  long  estab
lished  in  the  place. As  early  as  the  year  A.D.  58,  St.  Paul,  in
his  First  Epistle  to  Timothy,  enjoins  him  to  warn  certain  persons
to  abstain  from  teaching  '  strange  doctrines,'  those  myths  and
interminable  genealogies  that  only  breed  division. These  same
«  myths and genealogies '  apply, without any  doubt,  to the
theory  of  the  Emanation  of  the  ^ons-Sephiroth,  and  to  all  the
relations  between  the  Good  and  Bad  Angels  that  the  Kabbalists
had  borrowed  from  the  religion  of  Zoroaster."

Again,  after condemning certain doctrines concerning the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

obligation  to  complete  asceticism,  adopted  literally  from  the
Essence,  the  Apostle  adds,  "  keep  safe  the  precious  charge
entrusted  to  thee,  avoiding  profane  novelties  and  the  antitheses
of  the  knowledge,  falsely  so-called,  of  which  some  making
profession  have  gone  astray  from  the  faith  of  Christ."  It  was
assuredly  not  the  mere  fables  by  which  the  new  converts
sought  to  enrich  and  complete  the  Christian  doctrine  (such  as
we  still  have  samples  of  in  the  childish,  though  pious  fictions
of  the  Apocryphal  Gospels),  such  things  as  these  were  certainly
not  the  "  false  knowledge,"  which  set  itself  up  against  the
"  true  knowledge,"  that  is,  Eevelation  itself,  as  something
superior  to  that  Revelation.  It  must,  on  the  contrary,  have
been  a  doctrine  professing  to  make  a  science  out  of  the  Christian
faith,  and  that,  too,  a  science  founding  its  principles  upon
antitheses.  Now  what  are  these  "  antitheses  "  (or,  oppositions)
but  the  teaching  of  the  Zendavesta,  concerning  the  two
Empires  of  Light  and  Darkness ;  the  two  grand  classes  of
Intelligences,  the  good  and  the  evil  spirits ;  and  the  perpetual
combat  going  on  between  them  ?  Now  these  antitheses,  or  the
principle  of  Dualism,  is  that  which  forms  the  most  conspicuous
feature  of  the  Gnostic  scheme  ;  and  in  the  Apostle's  words  we
trace  one  of  the  most  [obvious  ways  in  which  such  doctrines
were  communicated,  and  how  they  insinuated  themselves  into
the  infant  Church.

In  fact  the  ancient  commentators,  Theodorot  and  Chrysostom,
who  were  thoroughly  conversant  with  the  Gnosticism  of  their
own  day,  apply  this  passage  of  St.  Paul  to  that  actual  pre
cursor  of  Gnosticism,  his  indefatigable  rival  Simon  Magus
himself,  whose  curious  tenets  had  by  that  time  been  widely
diifused  throughout  Asia  Minor.

So  deeply  rooted  were  such  speculations  in  the  minds  of
many  of  the  Ephesians,  that  the  Apostle,  in  his  second  Epistle
to  Timothy,  written  six  years  later,  returns  perpetually  to  the
subject,  whilst  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Church  at  Ephesus,  he
entreats  his  flock  not  to  be  seduced  by  "  vain  discourses,"  or
"  new-coined  appellations,"  (as  one  reading  has  it,  and  which
applies  forcibly  to  the  Gnostic  nomenclature),  nor  by  human
doctrines  that  have  no  more  solidity  in  themselves  than  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

wind,  whereof  no  one  knows  whence  it  oometh,  or  whither  it
gooth. Nay  more,  ho  oven  employs  the  very  terminology  of
Gnosticism,  as  when  he  says,  "  Ye  were  dead  in  error  and  in
sins :  ye  walked  according  to  the  2Eon  of  this  world,  according
to  the  ArcJion  who  has  the  dominion  of  the  air,"  that  is,  the
Demiurgus  Ildabaoth. Hero wo  have  the  Devs  of  Zoroaster,
whose  hosts  fill  the  air,  deceive mankind,  blind  their  under
standings,  and  lead  them  into  temptation. Again  when  ho
adds,  "Wo  war  not  against  flesh  and  blood,  but  against  the
Dominions,  the  Powers,  the  Lords  of  the  Darkness,  the  malevolence
of  the  Spirits  in  the  upper  regions"— all  these  are  regular  Gnostic
epithets,  having  also  their  place  in  the  Kabbali.stic  theology.
The  later  Gnosticism  is,  in  fact,  as  Chiflet  has  well  expressed  it,
"the  spirit  of  Asiatic  antiquity  seeking  to  assert  its  empire
over  the  soul  of  Man  by  insinuating  itself  into  the  Christian
Church." The  Ophites,  even  in  the  early  times  of  Ilippolytus,
boasted  that  they  of  all  men  were  the  only  real  Christians,
because  they  alone  comprehended  the  real  nature  of  the  Saviour.
At  the  same  time,  they  diligently  attended  the  celebration  of
all the ancient Mysteries, notably the Eleusinian and the
Phrygian, declaring that through their Jcnoivledge they had
gotten  the  key  to  the  hidden  meaning  of  the  whole  ceremonial,
which  by  types  and  figures  foreshadowed  the  coming  of  the
Christ. But indeed, Gnosticism,  in its primitive  form,  had
almost  supplanted,  by  spiritualizing  it,  the  beautiful  materialism
of the early Greek and Latin mythologies. Catholicism,
through  its  unity  and  greater  simplicity,  in  the  end  tiiumphed
over  the  conflicting  Gnostic  philosophies,  which  became  extinct
as  a  professed  religion  in  the  sixth  century,  so  far  as  Europe  was
concerned,  and  whose  relics  in  Asia  were  at  the  same  moment
covered  over  with  impenetrable  obscurity  by  the  sudden  deluge
of  the  Mahommedan  conquest. Nevertheless,  even  in  the  first-
named  scene  of  its  domination,  it  was  not  to  be  eradicated  with
out  leaving  behind  it  deep  traces  in  the  writings  and  symbolisms
of  the  magicians,  astrologers,  and  seekers  after  the  grand  arcanum
throughout  the  whole  course  of  the  Middle  Ages. Thus  there  is  a
passage  in  Dante  (Paradiso,  xviii.)  replete  with  the  profoundest
symbolism,  and  which,  of  course,  our  Freemasons  claim  for  their


10  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

own,  and  that  with  all  possible  security,  because  the  very  nature
of  the  assumption  exempts  them  from  being  called  upon  to  publish
the  interpretation  of  the  mystery.  The  poet  here  tells  how  the
five  times  seven  letters  making  up  the  five  words  "  Diligito
justitiam  qui  judicatis  terrain  "  came  forth  in  the  star  Jupiter,
when  the  beatified  spirits  of  just  princes  hovered  over  the  final
M,  forming  their  hosts  into  the  figure  of  an  eagle.  Certainly
the  importance  given  to  the  numerals  five  and  seven  in  this
revelation  savours  much  of  Gnostic  phraseology,  and  reminds
one  of  the  thiity  letters  which  make  up  the  quadrisyllable
Name  of  God,  as  made  known  by  Truth  unto  the  heresiarch
Marcus,  the  history  of  which  shall  be  given  in  the  fitting  place.
Dante  had  before  (Canto  vi.)  spoken  of  the  "  awe  that  over
comes  him  before  the  B  and  I  C  E,"  evidently  the  initials
of  some  mighty  password,  although  his  commentators  most
prosaically  interpret  them  as  the  mere  diminutive  of  the  name
of  his  lost  love,  Beatrice.  It  was  to  its  connection  with  Gnosticism
that  primitive  Christianity  owed  the  accusation  of  being  a
Magical  system — a  superstition  not  only  nova  but  malefica.
There  is  a  curious  passage  in  Dio  Cassius,  where,  mentioning
how  the  Christian  Legion  in  M.  Aurelius' Quadian  War  obtained
rain  from  Heaven  through  their  prayers,  he  remarks,  "  the
Christians  can  bring  about  anything  they  desire  through
prayer."  In  later  times  the  various  factions  within  the  Church
were  fond  of  retorting  upon  each  other  this  ancient  aspersion  of
the  pagans:  it  was  on  the  charge  of  magical  practices,  says
Ammianus,  that  the  Arians  managed  to  depose  and  exile  the
great  Athaiiasius  himself.

The  history  of  Gnosticism,  written  by  its  contemporaries,  still
forms  a  copious  library,  despite  the  losses  and  damages  it  has
sustained  through  the  injuries  of  time.  In  the  carrying  out  of
the  chief  object  of  the  present  work — the  elucidation  of  the
tangible  remains  of  the  Gnosis — no  historical  record  has  yielded
me  by  any  means  so  much  service  as  "  The  Eefutation  of  all
Heresies,"  composed  by  Hippolytus,  bishop  of  Ostia  (Portus),
early  in  the  third  century.  Many  points,  hitherto  seeming
hopelessly  enveloped  in  darkness,  have  been  made  clear  by
the  careful  perusal  of  his  judicious  summaries  of  the  systems


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  11

of  the  different  gnostic  apostles.  His  views  of  their  doctrines
are  evidently  drawn  up  with  equal  candour  and  intelligence,
and  fully  bear  out  his  declaration,  "  that  his  design  was  not  to
vilify  the  holders  of  such  doctrines,  but  merely  to  make  known
the  sources  whence  they  had  really  derived  their  pretended
revelation."  And  he  keeps  his  word  throughout,  never  once
indulging,  like  the  later  controversialists,  in  invectives  against
asserted  practices,  but  exhibiting  the  tenets  only  of  his  opponents,
and,  with  much  ingenuity,  showing  up  their  gross  plagiarism
from  Pagan  philosophy.  His  eagerness  for  discovering  the
latter  source  in  the  fount  ©f  every  gnostic  stream,  sometimes
leads  him  to  detect  relationship  that  does  not  actually  exist,  and
still  oftener  to  pronounce  a  recent  copy  of  the  other  what  was  in
reality  drawn  directly  from  the  same  Oriental  prototype — true
origin  of  the  old  Greek  idea  with  which  he  identifies  it.  But
this  invaluable,  as  well  as  most  interesting,  treatise  breathes
all  through  that  spirit  of  charity  and  forbearance  that  made  a
writer  belonging  to  a  still  persecuted  religion,  happy  to  be
allowed  to  subsist  through  the  tolerance  of  its  neighbours.
The  abuse  and  scurrilous  tales  in  which  the  later  Epiphanius
revels  sufficiently  indicate  the  writer  belonging  to  an  established
Church,  able  at  length  to  call  in  the  secular  power  to  assist  in
convincing  all  adversaries  of  their  errors  by  the  unanswerable
arguments  of  rack,  rope  and  faggot.

Ircnacus,  a  Gaul  by  birth,  and  disciple  of  Poly  carp,  himself  a
disciple  of  St.  John,  was  elected  Bishop  of  Lyon  in  the  year
174.  In  that  city  he  composed  his  great  treatise  generally
styled  "  Five  Books  against  Heresies,"  written  in  an  easy,  and
indeed  elegant  style,  although  in  one  place  he  excuses  its  rude
ness  by  the  fact  of  his  having  been  forced  during  so  many  years
to  converse  "  in  a  barbarous  language  " — a  remark  of  interest
as  showing  that  Celtic  still  remained  the  vulgar  tongue  in  his
diocese.  He  is  supposed  to  have  died  soon  after  the  year  A.D.  200  ;
and  therefore  is  somewhat  earlier  than  Hippolytus,  who  was
put  to  death  in  A.D.  222,  and  whose  "  Eefut  ition  "  was  clearly
written  after  the  death  of  Irenasus,  for  he  quotes  him  occasionally
by  the  title  6  paKtipios,  "  the  deceased  "  ;  and  has  incorporated
some  entire  chapters  respecting  Marcus  in  his  own  work.


12  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

The  great  Origen,  another  contemporary,  has  given  some
important  details  concerning  the  religious  systems  of  the
Ophites  in  his  celebrated  "  Reply  to  Celsus."  Two  centuries
after  him  comes  Theodoret,  Bishop  of  Cyrrhus,  in  Syria,  during
the  second  quarter  of  the  fifth  century,  who  has  left  very  full
particulars  respecting  the  great  Gnostic  school  flourishing  in
that  region.  The  other  Christian  writers  who  have  treated
upon  the  origin  and  nature  of  the  same  doctrines  were  nothing
more  than  ignorant  churchmen,  able  to  discern  nothing  in  any
religion  beyond  its  external  forms,  and  which  they  construed  in
the  darkest  possible  sense,  ever  seeking  for  the  worst  interpre
tation  of  which  these  external  appearances  were  susceptible.
At  the  head  of  this  latter  class  stands  Epiphanius,  author  of  the
most  detailed,  and,  from  its  furious  partisanship,  amusing  account
of  the  Gnostic  sects  that  is  extant — his  vast  Panarion,  "  Bread
basket,"  or  rather,  "  Scrap-basket,"  a  whimsical  title  intended  to
express  the  motly  nature  of  its  contents,  picked  up  from  all
quarters.  This  immense  folio  (admirably  translated  into  elegant
Latin  by  the  learned  Petavius)  is  of  the  highest  interest,  full  of
pictures  of  the  struggles  of  the  human  mind  to  devise  for  itself
a  revelation  that  shall  plausibly  solve  all  the  problems  of  Man's
other  nature.  Its  compiler  lived  as  Bishop  of  Salamis  in  Cyprus
A.IV  367-403,  and  displays  great  zeal  in  raking  up  all  manner
of  scandalous  stories  against  the  enemies  of  his  adoptive  Church.
But  there  is  one  thing  that  gives  immense  value  to  his  labours,
the  minute  account  given  of  Manichasism — that  latest  and
grandest  development  of  the  gnosis,  which  had  come  into
existence  in  the  interval  between  Epiphanius  and  Hippolytus.

The  rule  observed  by  all  these  later  historians  of  Gnosticism  is
to  represent  it  as  a  mere  spurious  offshoot  and  corruption  of
Christianity;  invented,  usually  out  of  disappointed  ambition,
by  apostates  from  the  true  faith  established  by  the  several
apostles  in  the  Eastern  provinces  of  the  Empire — a  mode  of
representing  the  system  than  which  nothing  can  be  more  un
founded.  For  in  its  earliest  shape,  such  as  it  shows  itself  in
the  doctrine  of  Simon  Magus,  or  of  Basilides,  the  heaven-sent
knowledge  merely  added  upon  the  old  foundations  such  articles
and  terms  of  the  Christian  faith  as  seemed  capable  of  being


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


13


assimilated to  and combined  therewith,  whilst on the other
hand  she  availed  herself  of  the  machinery  of  the  older  paganism,
to  elucidate  and  prove  the  mysteries  of  the  now  theosophy ;  and
this  was  conspicuously  the  character  of  the  systems  of  Justinus,
and  of  the  Poratae; as  the  very curious  extracts given by
Ilippolytus  from  their  text-books  exhibit  to  the  astonishment  of
the  modern  reader. That  sagacious  controversialist  was  right
in  calling  all  these  heresies  nothing  better  than  the  old  philo
sophies  disguised  under  now  names  ;  his  only  error  lay  in  not
going  back  far  enough  to  find  their  ultimate  source. Basilides,
for  example,  never  professed  Christianity  (in  fact,  Tortulliaii  calls
him  a  Platonist),  but  ho  suporadded  upon  the  esoteric  doctrines
of  the Egyptian priesthood the newly-imported notions of
Buddhism— that  probable  source  of  so  much  that  is  strange  in
the  Gnosis. The  introduction  of  the  religion  of  Buddha  into
Egypt  and  Palestine,  a  fact  only  recently  discovered,  yet  sub
stantiated  by  strong  monumental  testimony,  affords the best
solution  for  innumerable  difficulties  in  the  history  of  religion ;
but  the  circumstances  relating  to  this  very  important  question
must  bo  reserved  for  a  separate  chapter.

As  for  the  actual  TEXT-BOOKS  of  the  Gnostics,  which  in  their
day  formed  so  immense  a  library  (every  founder  of  a  sect  being,
as  if  by  obligation,  a  most  prolific  writer,  as  Ilippolytus  shows
by  the  number  of  works  ho  quotes),  hunted  up  aud  carefully
destroyed  by  the  victorious  orthodox,  never  perpetuated  by
transcripts  after  the  sectaries  became  extinct,  all  have  perished,
leaving  one  sole  specimen  to  attest  their  nature.  But  this
survivor  is  of  a  character  so  wild  and  wondrous,  that  had  fortune
left  it  to  our  choice  we  could  not  have  preserved  a  more
characteristic  representative  of  its  class.  This  is  the  Piatis-
Sophia, "  Faith-Wisdom,"  a  work  to  be  perpetually  quoted  in
the  following  pages,  as  it  throws  more  light  {upon  the  actual
monuments  of  Gnosticism  than  could  hitherto  be  collected  from
all  the  other  writers  ou  the  subject  put  together.  On  this
account  a  brief  summary  of  its  contents  will  be  the  best
introduction  to  our  inquiry  into  the  nature  of  the  system.


14  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


PISTIS-SOPHIA.

This  treatise,  ascribed  to  Valentinus  (I  know  not  on  what
authority)  was  discovered  by  Schwartze  in  a  Coptic  MS.
preserved  in  the  British  Museum.  He  transcribed  the  Coptic
text  and  translated  it  into  Latin  ;  both  texts  and  version  were
published  by  Petermann  in  the  year  1853.  The  original  is
copiously  interspersed  with  Greek  words  and  phrases  ;  in  fact,
the  Coptic  was  evidently  so  poor  a  language  as  to  have  no  terms
of  its  own  to  express  any  but  the  most  materialistic  ideas.  The
matter  of  its  professed  revelation  is  set  forth  also  with  endless
repetitions,  bespeaking  a  language  destitute  of  relative  pronouns,
of  conjunctions,  and  of  all  the  other  grammatical  refinements
necessary  for  the  clear  and  concise  expression  of  thought.*

The  authorship  of  this  record  is  assigned  by  itself  in  several
places  to  Philip  the  Apostle,  whom  the  Saviour  bids  to  sit  down
and  write  these  things !  This  circumstance  made  me  at  first
conclude  it  to  be  the  lost  Gospel  of  Philip  quoted  by  Epiphanius,
but  the  particular  anecdote  adduced  by  him  from  that  gospel  is
not  to  be  discovered  anywhere  in  this.  But  as  the  original  is
full  of  wide  lacunae,  which  often  fall  in  very  interesting  places,
as  if  purposely  defaced  to  escape  the  eyes  of  the  profane,  such
an  omission  is  not  altogether  conclusive  against  the  identity  of
the  two.

The  nature  of  the  book  may  be  briefly  sketched  as  follows.
It  professes  to  be  a  record  of  the  higher  teaching  of  the  Saviour
communicated  to  his  disciples  during  the  eleven  years  he  passed
with  them  on  earth  after  his  crucifixion,  and  when  he  had
returned  from  his  ascension  into  Heaven.  This  ascension  had
been  made  from  the  Mount  of  Olives,  where  he  received  from  on
high  two  shining  vestures  inscribed  with  five  mystic  words  (§  16),
and  the  names  of  all  the  powers  whose  domains  he  had  to
traverse.  He  thus  (as  he  relates  to  the  disciples)  passes  through
the  gate  of  the  Firmament,  the  Sphere  of  Fate,  and  the  regions

*  It  is  intended  to  issue  an  English  translation  as  a  supplement  to  the
present  work.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  15

of  the  Twelve  Great  TEons,  all  of  whom  in  succession  are  terror-
smitten,  and  fall  down  before  him  and  sing  hymns  of  praise.
On  arriving  at  the  thirteenth  aeon,  he  finds  seated  below  and
weeping  the  excluded  Power  Pistis-Sophia,*  who  gives  her  name
to  the  revelation.  She,  having  once  caught  a  glimpse  of  the
Supreme  Light,  was  seized  with  a  desire  to  fly  upwards  into  it :
but  Adamas,  the  ruler  of  her  proper  place,  being  enraged  at  this
act  of  rebellion  against  himself,  caused  a  false  light,  a  veritable
ignis  fatuus,  to  shine  upon  the  waters  of  the  subjacent  chaos
which  lured  down  the  hapless  aspirant,  and  she  was  inextricably
immersed  in  the  abyss,  and  beset  by  the  spirits  thereof,  all
eager  to  deprive  her  of  her  native  light.  This  doctrine  of  the
admixture  of  light,  derived  from  the  Treasure  of  Light,  with
matter,  its  imprisonment  therein,  and  its  extraction  and  recovery
by  the  appointed  "  Receivers  of  the  Light "  is  the  pervading  idea
of  this  revelation,  to  a  greater  extent  even  than  in  the  Ophite
scheme.  As  part  of  the  same  notion  comes  the  frequent  allusion  to
the  Kepcur/Aos  or  chaotic  commixture  of  Light  and  Matter,  to
reorganise  which  is  the  special  object  of  the  Saviour's  descent
from  above.

At  least  one  half  of  the  book  is  taken  up  with  the  account
of  the  successive  steps  by  which  she  ascends  through  all  the
Twelve  .ZEons  by  the  Saviour's  aid,  and  the  confession  she  sings
at  each  stage  of  her  deliverance  out  of  chaos.  Each  confession
is  proposed  by  Jesus  to  a  disciple  for  explanation,  and  is
referred  to  some  psalm  or  other  prophecy  containing  parallel
sentiments;  this  concordance  being  occasionally  made  out  with
considerable  ingenuity.  A  remarkable  peculiarity  is  that  all
throughout  Mary  Magdalene  is  the  chief  speaker,  and  the  most
highly  commended  for  her  spiritual  knowledge,  though  once
she  is  sharply  rebuked  by  Peter  for  her  presumption  in  thus
perpetually  putting  herself  forward  unbidden— and  not  giving
the  men  a  chance  to  speak.  After  Pistis-Sophia  has  thus
regained  her  lost  position,  the  most  valuable  portion  of  the

*  This  banishment  of  Sophia  from  assigns  a  different reason for  her

the  society  of  the  other  ^Eons  is  the  degradation, as in the system of

grand  turning-point  of  the  principal  Valentinus,  and  also  that  of  the  later

Gnostic schemes, although each  Ophites.


16  THE GNOSTIOB AND THEIR REMAINS.

exposition  of  doctrines  commences.  The  Magdalene  asks  the
great  question  as  to  the  final  cause  of  Sin  (§  281),  to  which  Jesus
returns  a  long  and  minute  description  of  the  composition  of  the
soul  of  man,  which  is  fourfold,  the  divine  spark  therein  (a
particle  of  the  Light  yet  entangled  in  the  Kepaoyxos)  being
encased  in  a  three-fold  envelope  formed  out  of  the  effluvia  of  the
rebellious  ^Eons,  the  tendency  of  which  is  to  keep  it  in  subjection
to  the  passions,  and  to  themselves,  so  that  when  separated  from
the  body  it  may  not  bo  able  to  escape  out  of  their  domains,  "  the
regions  of  mid-space  "  here  represented  as  places  of  pain.  These
.ZEons  are  elsewhere  identified  with  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac.  Next
comes  a  detailed  account  of  the  Kulers  of  the  regions  of  torment
(§  320),  of  their  authentic  forms,  a  crocodile,  a  bear,  a  cat,  a  dog,  a
serpent,  a  black  bull,  &c.,  and  of  their  authentic  names  ;  these  last
are  not  Semitic,  but  either  Coptic  or  belong,  judging  from  their
terminations,  to  the  mystic  language  generally  used  upon  the
Gnostic  stones.  After  this  wo  have  the  several  punishments
appointed  for  the  various  sins  of  mankind,  and  the  exact  number
of  years  and  even  of  days  required  for  the  expiation  of  each  in
its  proper  dungeon  (ra/xetov).  These  places  of  torment  are  all
enclosed  within  the  Dragon  of  Outward  Darkness.  It  is  worthy
of  remark  that  the  serpent,  whenever  introduced,  is  a  thing
of  evil — a  sure  indication  that  the  book  is  under  the
influence  of  the  Kabbala.  The  same  conclusion  is  doducible
from  the  malignity  pervading  the  entire  dispensation  which  it
pictures;  and  the  evident  delight  it  takes  in  creating  and
parcelling  out  the  various  punishments,  of  which  heretics
naturally  get  the  largest  share.  The  philosophic  Gnostic
schemes  have  no  severer  penalty  for  those  who  do  not  listen  to
them  than  the  want  of  Knowledge,  and  the  subjection  to  Matter.
After  purgation  in  these  prisons  the  souls  are  put  into  new
bodies,  and  begin  a  new  probation  upon  earth.

The  judge  of  souls  is  the  Virgin  of  Light,  attended  by  her
seven  hand-maids.  Certain  sins,  but  few  in  number,  are
punished  by  annihilation,  and  admit  of  neither  expiation  nor
atonement.  But  for  all  the  rest  instant  remission  is  procurable,
it'  the  friends  of  the  deceased  celebrate  on  his  behalf  the
"  Mystery  (or,  Sacrament)  of  the  Ineffable  One."  This  must  be


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  17

the  very  earliest  notice  extant  of  the  belief  in  the  efficacy  of
the  offering  up  of  a  sacrament  for  the  redemption  of  souls,
There  is  a  singular  provision  made  for  the  salvation  of  a  per
fectly  righteous  man,  but  who  in  his  life-time  has  not  enjoyed
the  opportunity  of  being  converted.  The  angels  take  his
departed  soul,  and  carry  it  through  all  the  realms  of  punishment
with  the  utmost  rapidity,  and  then  conduct  him  before  the
Virgin  of  Light,  who  clothes  it  in  a  new  body  to  recommence
its  earthly  career,  to  obtain  there  the  advantage  of  the  mysteries
and  so  become  an  heir  of  Light.  The  nature  of  the  particular
Mystery,  so  perpetually  alluded  to  in  this  work,  is  in  no  place
explained ;  it  is,  however,  the  highest  of  the  Four  and  Twenty  :
for  such  is  the  number  of  the  Mysteries  here  mentioned,  one  for
each  of  the  grades  in  its  celestial  hierarchy,  for  the  Five  Marks,
for  the  Seven  Vowels,  for  the  Five  Trees  and  for  the  Seven  Amcns.
Throughout  are  interspersed  frequent  allusions  to  the  seals,
and  the  numbers  of  the  Mysteries,  courses,  and  divine  personages,
borrowed  partly  from  the  usages  of  the  Temple,  partly  from  those
of  the  old  Egyptian  worship.  They  are  repeated  and  involved
in  a  multitudinous,  inextricable  sequence,  that  to  one  not  having
the  key  thereto  belonging,  strongly  calls  to  mind  the  numerical
vagaries  that  flit  before  the  mind  when  slightly  delirious  :  and
which  even  the  plodding  German  editor  confesses,  in  his  preface,
often  made  his  brain  whirl  as  he  attempted  to  transcribe  them.
Lastly  comes  a  long  fragment  (§  358),  headed  "  a  Portion  of  the
Prayers  of  Jesus,"  which  tells  more  directly  upon  the  subject  of
these  researches  than  anything  that  has  fallen  in  my  way.
The  Saviour,  attended  by  his  disciples,  standing  sometimes  on
a  mountain,  sometimes  by  the  sea,  and  sometimes  in  mid-air,
addresses  prayers  to  the  Father,  prefaced  with  long  formulae  of
the  same  character,  and  often  in  the  same  words,  as  those
covering  the  more  important  Gnostic  monuments.  Some  of
these  opening  invocations  are  expounded,  and  seemingly
paraphrased,  in  the  prayers  following  them,  though  not  in  a
very  satisfactory  manner.  Also  Jesus  celebrates,  with  many
singular  formalities,  a  sacrifice  of  wine  and  water,  which,  there
is  reason  to  believe,  is  the  grand  Mystery  or  Sacrament  so  often
lauded  in  the  foregoing  chapters.  The  whole  closes  with  a

c


18  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

long  exposition  by  him  of  the  influence  of  the  ^ons  of  the
Zodiac  upon  the  soul  of  the  infant  born  under  each,  and  of  the
fortunate  or  malign  intervention  of  the  planets  in  such  cases.
Of  the  latter  the  sacred  names  are  communicated  apparently  as
used  by  the  Magi.  A  few  Egyptian  deities,  eg.  Bubastes  and
Typhon,  are  named  here,  and  the  Syrian  Barbelo  is  frequently
introduced,  as  a  personage  of  the  very  highest  importance,  being
no  less  than  the  lieavenhj  mother  of  the  Saviour  himself.  His
earthly  Mother  is  indeed  represented  as  attending  at  these
revelations,  but  she  plays  a  very  secondary  part  therein  to  the
Magdalene  and  even  to  Salome.  The  last  thing  to  be  noticed  in
this  most  remarkable  fruit  of  a  crazy,  mystic  imagination — it  is
bard  to  say  whether  more  Kabbalist,  or  Magian,  or  Christian — is
the  opposed  dualism  of  many  of  the  Powers  introduced  as  agents
in  the  economy  of  the  universe :  for  example,  there  is  an
obedient  and  a  rebellious  Adamas  (that  highest  name  with  the
earlier  Naaseni),  a  great  and  a  little  Sabaoth,  and  similar
antitheses  to  be  met  with  also  in  the  later  Ophite  schemes.


THE  BOOK  OF  ENOCH.

This  most  ancient  (as  it  professes)  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures
being  so  frequently  referred  to  as  the  highest  authority  by  the
./Eon  Pistis-Sophia,  a  brief  summary  of  its  doctrine  seems  to
form  the  necessary  complement  to  the  preceding  section.  The
Book  of  Enoch,  though  often  quoted  by  the  Fathers,  had  been
lost  ever  since  the  eighth  century  (with  the  exception  of  a  few
chapters  of  a  Greek  version  preserved  by  Georgius  Syncellus),
until  Bruce  brought  back  three  copies  of  it  from  Abyssinia.  In
the  canon  of  that  Church  it  takes  its  place  in  the  Old  Testament
immediately  before  the  Book  of  Job.*

*  An English translation was  The  best  German  translation  is  that

made by  Dr. Lawrence, Bishop  of  of Dillmann, 1857. Cf. Schodtle

Cashel,  of which  the  third  edition,  7?oofc  of  Enoch,  1882.
with notes,  was  published  in  1837.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

This  book  is  divided  into  ninety  chapters,  and  begins  with
the  preface :  "  In  the  Name  of  God,  the  merciful  and  gracious,
slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  mercy,  and  holiness. This  Book  is
the  Book  of  Enoch  the  prophet. May  blessing  and  help  bo
with  him  who  loves  Him,  for  ever  and  ever. Amen. Chapter  I.
This  word  is  the  blessing  of  Enoch  with  which  ho  blessed  the
chosen  and  the  righteous  that  were  of  old. And  Enoch  lifted
up  his  voice  and  spoke,  a  holy  man  of  God,  while  his  eyes  wcro
open,  and  he  saw  a  holy  vision  in  the  heavens,  which  the  angels
revealed  to  him. And  I  heard  from  them  everything,  and I
understood  what  I  saw." After  this  follows  the  history  of  the
angels,  of  their  having  descended  from  heaven,  and produced
giants  with  the  daughters  of  men ;  of  their  having  instructed
them  in  the  arts  of  war,  and  peace,  and  luxury. The  names  of
the  leading  angels  are  mentioned,  which  appear  to  be  of  Hebrew
origin,  but  corrupted  by  Greek  pronunciation. The  resolution
of  God  to  destroy  these  is  then  revealed to  Enoch. These
topics  occupy  about  eighteen  chapters. From  the  eighteenth
to  the  fiftieth  chapter  Enoch  is  led  by  the  angels  Uriel  and
Kaphael  through  a  series  of  visions  not  much  connected  with
the preceding. He saw the Burning Valley of  the fallen
angels,  the  Paradise  of  the  saints,  the  utmost  ends  of  the  earth,
the  treasuries  of  the  thunder  and  lightning,  winds,  rain,  dew
and  the  angels  who  presided  over  these. He  was  led  into  the
place  of  the  General  Judgment,  saw  the  Ancient  of  Days  on  his
throne,  and  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  before  him. At  the  fifty-
second chapter,  Noah is said to have been alarmed  at  the
enormous  wickedness  of  mankind,  and,  fearing  vengeance,  to
have  implored  the  advice  of  his  great-grandfather. Enoch  told
him  that  a  flood  of  water  should  destroy  the  whole  race  of  man,
and  a  flood  of  fire  punish  the  angels  whom  the  deluge  could
not  affect. In  Chapter  L1X.  the subject  of  the  angels  is  re
sumed,  Semeiza,  Artukaru,  Arimeoii,  Kakabael,  Tusael,  Kamiel,
Damdal,  and  others  to  the  number  of  twenty,  appear  at  the  head
of  the  fallen  spirits,  and  give  fresh  instances  of  their  rebellious
dispositions. At  Chapter  LXII.  Enoch  gives  his  son  Methuselah
a  long  account  of  the  sun,  moon,  stars,  the  year,  the  months,
the  winds,  and the  like  physical  phenomena. This  takes  up

c  2


20


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


eight  chapters,  after  which  the  Patriarch  makes  a  recapitulation
of  the  former  pages.  The  remaining  twenty  chapters  are
employed  on  the  history  of  the  Deluge,  Noah's  preparations  for
it,  and  the  success  which  attended  them.  The  destruction  of
all  flesh  excepting  his  family,  and  the  execution  of  divine
vengeance  on  the  angels,  conclude  the  work.


Fio.  1.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  21


GNOSTICISM  IN  ITS  BEGINNING.

To  begin  with  the  received  account  of  the  RISE  AND  PROGRESS
of  the  Gnostic  philosophy,  for  that  is  its  proper  appellation,
heresy  being  properly  restricted  to  differences  of  opinion  between
members  of  one  regularly  established  community,  we  find
that  as  early  as  the  year  A.D.  35,  the  Samaritans  were  regarding
Simon  Magus,  as  "  the  Great  Power  of  God,"  and  he  and  his
disciple  Cerinthus,  are  represented  by  the  Christian  Fathers  as
the  actual  founders  of  Gnosticism,  under  that  accepted  name.

Of  the  former,  Hippolytus  gives  a  history  which  there  is  no
reason  for  not  accepting  as  correct  in  the  main  particulars.  He
was  a  native  of  Gitteh,  in  the  province  of  Samaria,  and  com
menced  his  career,  and  soon  acquired  great  influence  amongst
his  countrymen,  by  practising  magic  after  the  "  Thrasymedian
method  "  (i.e.  jugglery,  as  previously  described  by  Hippolytus),
nay  more,  by  working  miracles  "  through  the  agency  of  devils."
Having  fallen  in  love  with  a  beautiful  courtezan  at  Tyre,  rue
bought  her  from  her  owner,  and  always  carried  her  about  with
him,  declaring  that  she  was  the  "  Intelligence  "  (vEi/vota)  that  of
old  was  imprisoned  in  the  body  of  the  Grecian  Helen,  then  of  the
Lost  Sheep,  but  now  was  restored  to  him  for  the  salvation  of  the
world.  Even  before  the  preaching  of  Christianity  he  had  set
up  for  a  teacher  of  a  new  religion,  plagiarised  from  Moses  and
Heraclitus  the  "  Obscure,"  based  upon  the  axiom  that  Fire  was
the  First  Principle  of  all  things,  subordinate  to  which  were  the
"  Six  Radicals  "  :  a  curiously  compounded  mixture  of  Judaism
and  Magism,  of  which  Hippolytus  gives  a  full  though  not  very
intelligible  summary.  "  This  Simon,  after  he  had  ransomed
Helen,  granted  salvation  unto  men  by  means  of  his  own  know
ledge.  For  inasmuch  as  the  angels  had  governed  the  world  ill
by  reason  of  their  own  ambitiousness,  he  pretended  that  he  was
come  to  set  all  things  right ;  and  having  changed  his  form  and
made  himself  like  to  the  Principalities,  the  Powers,  and  the


22  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Angels,  wherefore  it  was  that  he  showed  himself  in  the  form  of
man  although  not  a  man  at  all,  and  had  suffered  the  Passion  in
Juda3a,  although  he  had  not  really  suffered  it;  moreover,  that
lie  had  manifested  himself  to  the  Jews  as  the  Son,  in  Samaria
as  the  Father,  and  amongst  the  Gentiles  in  other  parts  as  the
Holy  Ghost;  but  he  submitted  to  be  called  by  whatsoever
name  they  pleased.  The  Prophets  were  inspired  by  the  Angels,
creators  of  the  world,  when  they  delivered  their  prophecies ;  on
which  account  they  that  believe  in  Simon  and  Helen  pay  no
regard  to  them  (the  Prophets)  even  in  our  times  :  and  they  do
whatever  they  please,  pretending  that  they  are  redeemed
through  his  grace."  ..."  Now  this  same  Simon,  when  he  was
by  his  magic  arts  deceiving  many  in  Samaria,  was  confuted  by
the  Apo-stles,  and  having  been  cursed  by  them,  he  afterwards
fell  from  his  reputation  and  invented  these  fables.  At  last,
having  travelled  to  Rome,  ho  again  ran  against  the  Apostles,
and  Peter  had  many  encounters  with  him  when  he  was  seducing
'multitudes  through  his  magical  practices.  Finally,  having  gone
into  the  land  of  Persia,  ho  took  up  his  abode  under  a  plane-tree,
mid  there  preached  his  doctrine.  But  at  last,  when  he  was  on
the  point  of  being  convicted  for  an  impostor,  in  consequence  of
his  making  too  long  a  stay  in  the  same  place,  he  gave  out  that,
if  he  were  buried  alive,  he  would  rise  again  on  the  third  day.
And  iti  truth,  having  caused  a  pit  to  be  dug  by  his  disciples
lie  commanded  himself  to  be  covered  over  with  earth.  They
therefore  did  what  he  commanded  them,  but  he  never  came
back  unto  this  day,  inasmuch  as  he  was  not  a  Christ.  Now  this
is  the  story  told  concerning  Simon,  from  whom  Valentinus
borrowed  his  first  ideas,  but  called  them  by  different  names.
For  '  Mind,'  and  '  Truth,'  and  ' the  Word,'  and  *  Life,'  and  '  the
(  'liurcli,'  and  *  Man,'  the  ^Eons  of  Valentinus,  are  confessedly
the  Six  Radicals  of  Simon,  namely,  *  Mind,  Intelligence,  Voice,
Name,  Eeason,  and  Thought.'  "

But  to  go  on  with  the  series  of  teachers — this  counter-
apostolical  succession — Simon  was  followed  by  Menander,  he  by
Basilides  at  Alexandria,  who,  dying  about  A.D.  138,  was  replaced
by  Valentinus,  born  of  Jewish  parentage  in  the  same  city.  This
last  is  styled  by  Ireneeus  "  Chief  of  the  Gnostics,"  on  account


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  "23

of  the  importance  and  wide  diffusion  of  his  doctrines  even
during  his  own  lifetime.  In  Syria  other  sects  were  being
founded  contemporaneously  with  these,  taking  their  names
from  Marcion  and  Bardesanes,  both  of  whom  tradition  represents
as  Persians  by  origin,  and  consequently  Magians  by  religious
training.  The  latter  is  by  some  called  a  native  of  Pontus,  a
circumstance,  however,  making  no  difference  as  to  the  source
of  his  opinions,  that  region  being  confessedly  the  seat  of
Mithraicism,  and  ruled  over  by  a  line  claiming  descent  from
the  first  Darius,  or  a  satrap  of  his.  It  is  needless  to  enumerate
here  the  founders  of  less  important  sects,  until  we  come  to  the
uprising  of  Manes,  author  of  the  most  daring  and  most
permanent  theosophy  of  them  all,  which  fought  twice  over
so  long  and  obstinate  a  battle  with  the  Catholic  faith.  This
sect,  its  origin,  and  tenets,  on  account  of  the  curiosity  of  its
doctrines,  and  the  immense  influence  that  they  exerted  over  the
ancient  and  mediaeval  world,  will  be  considered  at  length  in
another  chapter ;  as  will  also  the  Opliites  whose  name  figures
so  conspicuously  in  the  history  of  the  primitive  Church.

What  has  been  mentioned  above  with  respect  to  the  countries
producing  the  founders  of  all  these  sects — Egypt,  Syria,  or
Persia — leads  us  to  expect  to  find  one  common  principle
pervading  the  systems  of  all,  and  such  is  most  probably  the
case.  The  fundamental  doctrine  held  in  common  by  all  the
chiefs  of  the  Gnosis  was,  that  the  whole  creation  was  not  the
work  of  the  Supreme  Deity,  but  of  the  Demiurgus,  a  simple
Emanation,  and  several  degrees  removed  from  the  highest  power.
To  the  latter,  indeed,  styled  by  them  the  "  Unknown  Father  "
(or  as  Simon  first  designated  him  "  The  Boundless  Power,"  and
"  The  Root  of  all  Things"),  they  attributed  the  creation  of  the
intellectual  world — that  is,  the  Intelligences,  the  ^Eons,  and  the
Angels — whilst,  to  the  Demiurgus  they  referred  the  creation  of
the  World  of  Matter,  subject  to  imperfection  from  its  very  nature.
But  in  order  clearly  to  understand  the  grand  principles  under
lying  these  doctrines,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  possess  the
main  features  of  the  older  systems  from  which  these  same
doctrines  were  principally  borrowed  ;  these  systems  being  that
of  the  Zendavesta,  of  the  Kabbala  (which  is  little  more  than  a


24  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

translation  of  the  same),  and  of  the  reformed  Brahminical
religion  as  taught  by  the  Buddhist  missionaries  in  the
dominions  of  the  Syro-Macedonians,  or  picked  up  in  India
by  Alexandrian  merchants  visiting  the  emporia  of  Guzerat
for  the  sake  of  trade.

Although  to  express  their  ideas  visibly  upon  their  monuments
(the  elucidation  of  which  is  the  special  object  of  this  treatise)
the  Gnostics  largely  borrowed  the  images  and  symbols  of  the
ancient  Egyptian  mythology  (especially  those  connected  with
the  Agathodaemon,  the  Solar  god  lao,  and  the  guide  of  souls,
the  jackal-headed  Anubis),  yet  these  figures  were  employed  in  a
new  sense,  unless  indeed  we  suppose  (what  is  probable  enough)
that  their  esoteric  meaning  had  been  from  the  very  beginning
similar  to  that  published  by  the  teachers  of  the  new  faith.
This  last  explanation  was  in  fact  the  perpetual  boast  of
Valeiitinus,  and  runs  through  every  article  of  his  theosophy  as
we  read  it  in  the  interesting  summary  given  by  Hippolytus ;
and  again,  it  must  never  be  forgotten,  for  it  is  the  key  to  many
of  the  seeming  contradictions  in  the  different  systems  about  to
be  passed  in  review,  that  Greek  and  Jew  carried  with  them
their  ancient  quarrel  into  the  new  field  of  the  Gnosis.  The
former  exalts  the  Bacchic  Serpent,  whilst  he  makes  Sabaoth  little
bettor  than  a  demon;  the  latter  continues  to  abominate  the
Serpent  as  the  impersonation  of  Satan,  but  his  Sabaoth  is  the
"  Great  and  Good  "  (as  Pistis-Sophia  perpetually  entitles  him),
the  defender  of  the  believer's  soul  against  the  malignant  "  JEons
of  the  Sphere,"  and  the  influence  of  Judaism  radiating  from  its
second  focus,  the  school  of  Alexandria,  was  so  much  more
powerful  than  ordinary  readers  of  history  have  ever  suspected,
that  a  few  remarks  upon  this  very  curious  subject  will  form  a
useful  introduction  to  our  consideration  of  its  later  philosophy.


INFLUENCE  OF  JUDAISM  ON  THE  ANCIENT  WOKLD.

People  in  these  times  are  still  so  influenced  by  the  ideas
engendered  by  the  fifteen  centuries  of  ecclesiastical  regime,  during
which  hatred  and  contempt  for  the  Jewish  race  formed  an


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  25

important Christian virtue,  that they  entirely  overlook the
influence  exercised  by  Judaism  over  the  minds  of  the  heathen
world  so  long  as  the  Temple  stood,  and  the  national  worship  was
celebrated  there  in  all  its  glory. When  the  Komans,  by  their
conquest  of  Syria,  and  soon  after  of  Egypt,  came  into  direct
contact  with  the  Jewish  nation,  although  they  disliked  them
individually,  yet  they  conceived  an  intense  admiration  for  their
ancient,  mysterious,  and  solemn  worship. But,  in  fact,  every
institution,  hallowed  by  the  stamp  of  antiquity,  immediately
commanded the respect of the genuine old Roman. The
Emperors  lost  no  time  in  gaining  a  new  patron,  of  mighty  and
undefined  power,  in  Jehovali,  by  instituting  a  daily  sacrifice  to
be  ever  offered  at  their  own  cost  on  behalf  of  themselves  and
empire. The  discontinuance  of  this  sacrifice,  by  the  faction  of
the  Zealots  which  had  taken  possession  of  the  Temple,  is  noted
by  Josephus  as  the  consummating  act  of  the  great  revolt  and
attempt  to  re-establish  independence,  which  brought  down  final
destruction  upon  Zion. To  give  a  few  examples  of  the  hold
Judaism  had  taken  upon  the  imaginations  of  the  highest  classes
in  Rome,  whence  its  vastly  magnified  power  over  the  minds  of
the  vulgar,  may  be  calculated  according  to  the  well-known  rule
of  proportion  in  such  matters. To  mark  Augustus'  freedom
from superstition,  Suetonius  quotes  the circumstance of  his
highly  commending  the  conduct  of  his  grandson  Caius,  his  heir
apparent,  because — during  his  visit  to  Egypt  and  Palestine — he
had  forborne  to  visit  Apis  in  the  one  and  the  Temple  in  the
other  country. Putting  the  two  religions  in  this  way  upon  an
equality,  of  itself  demonstrates  the  high  place  then  held by
the Jewish in popular estimation ; for by that time the
Egyptian,  as  the  chapter  upon  the  Serapis-worship  will  show,
had  to  a  great  extent  superseded  the  worship  of  the  national
deities  of  Koine. Fuscus Aristius,  a  friend  of  Horace's,  and
therefore to be supposed a person of consequence and of
education,  makes  it  his  excuse  for  not  attending  to  a  business-
matter,  that  the  day  happened  to  be  the  Sabbath,  and  that  "  ho
was  a  little  superstitious,  like  many  others."

The  influence  and  numbers  of  the  Jews  actually  residing  at
Rome under the Republic is strikingly exhibited by some


2(J  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

observations  of  Cicero  in  his  oration  in  defence  of  Flaccus.
Flaccus,  when  commanding  in  Asia,  had  prohibited  the  sending
of  money  to  Jerusalem.  This  money  can  only  mean  the  tribute
paid  by  each  adult  Jew  to  the  Temple,  of  half  a  shekel,  or  two
drachmas  a  head.  Flaccus  seized  the  money  that  had  been
collected  for  the  purpose  in  defiance  of  his  edict,  amounting  at
Apamea  to  nearly  one  hundred  pounds  weight  of  gold,  at
Laodicea  to  twenty.  The  only  gold  piece  of  the  age  being  the
stater,  current  for  twenty-five  drachma3,  and  of  the  weight  of  fifty
to  the  pound,  these  collections  would  give  us  fifty  thousand
tribute-payers  at  the  former  city,  and  ten  thousand  at  the  other.
The  orator  considers  this  "  auri  Judaici  invidia  "  so  damaging
to  his  cause,  that  he  explains  the  circumstances  in  a  whisper  to
the  jurymen,  in  order  not  to  excite  the  indignation  of  the  Jews
amongst  his  audience.  He  actually  declares  that  Flaccus's
enemies  had  managed  that  his  cause  should  be  tried  in  that
particular  court  in  order  to  have  the  aid  of  the  Jews  domiciled
in  that  quarter  of  Koine,  to  intimidate  the  jury,  and  so  gain  a
verdict  against  him.  "  Sequitur  auri  ilia  invidia  Judaici.  Hoc
niinirum  est  illud,  quod  non  longe  a  gradibus  Aureliis  ha3C  causa
dicitur.  Ob  hoc  crirnen  hie  locus  abs  te,  Laoli,  atque  ilia  turba
quaisita  est.  Scis  quanta  sit  rnanus,  quanta  concordia,  quantum
valeat  in  concionibus.  Submissa  voce  agani,  tantum  ut  judices
audiant.  Neque  enim  desunt  qui  istos  in  me  atque  in  optimum
quemque  inciteiit,  quos  ego  quo  id  facilius  faciant  non  adjuvabo."
(Chapter  XXYIII.)  And  what  is  still  more  surprising  this
influence  continued  to  work  even  after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,
and  the  extinction  of  the  people  as  a  nation.  Spartianus  mentions
that  Severus  in  his  tour  of  investigation  throughout  Asia,  when
he  forbade  people  to  turn  Christians,  extended  the  same  inter
dict  to  the  Jewish  religion  also.  Again,  to  show  the  natural
good-heartedness  of  Caracalla,  he  instances  his  indignation  on
account  of  the  severe  flogging  which  a  boy,  his  playfellow,  had
received  from  his  father,  with  the  emperor's  approbation,  on  the
score  of  his  Judaising.  The  circumstances  of  the  friendship
point  out  that  the  boy  thus  made  a  "  confessor  "  must  have
belonged  to  one  of  the  best  families  of  Rome.  Such  a  position
yet  retained  by  the  religion  of  Abraham  is  uluio»t  inconceivable


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  27

at  that  late  period,  when  it  had,  besides  the  vigorous  and  ever-
increasing  growth  of  Christianity,  to  contend  with  the  varieties
of  the  Gnosis  which  suited  themselves  to  every  taste,  and  in  many
instances  had  sprung  immediately  out  of  herself  (not  out  of  her
hated  daughter  and  rival),  and  by  their  union  with  heathen
philosophy,  were  naturally  more  attractive  to  the  Gentiles  than
the  original  parent. Even  at  the  time  when  one  would  have
expected the prejudice against anything belonging to that
nation  to  have  been  the  most  violent  amongst  the  Romans,  we
find  Vespasian,  the  actual  destroyer  of  their  national  existence,
erecting  a  statue  in  the  most  honourable  of  all  situations,  to
an  Alexandrian  Jew, Tiberius,  who  had  assisted  him  in  his
attempt  to  gain  the  empire,  in  some  manner  not  recorded,  but
possibly  in  his  capacity  of  the Rothschild  of  the  age  by  an
opportune  loan. It is true  that  Juvenal  cannot repress  his
indignation  of  all  this  prostitution  to  a  foreigner  of  an  honour
before  confined  to  the  most  eminent  of  his  countrymen,  and
hints  it  to  bo  the  duty  of  every  true  Roman  to  express  his  sense
of  the  injury  by  committing  nuisances  under  the  very  nose  of
the  statue.

"  Atqiie  triumphales,  inter  quos  ausus  habere
Nescio  quis  titulos  yEgyptius  atquc  Alabarchcs,
Cujus  ad  effigicin  non  tantum  meicrc  fas  cst." — I.  130.

In  the  third  century  we  find  the  model  emperor,  Severus
Alexander,  setting  up  the  image  of  Abraham  by  the  side  of
Christ  and  Orpheus,  all  considered  as  the  divinely-inspired
founders  of  the  several  schools  of  mystery  (or  to  go  to  the
probable  root  of  the  belief,  as  so  many  different  Buddlias),  in
the  most  holy  recess  of  his  domestic  chapel.  A  little  research
amongst  the  annals  of  the  later  emperors  would  no  doubt,
furnish  many  other  examples  of  the  hold  taken  by  various
particulars  of  the  Jewish  creed,  in  its  Babylonian  and
Alexandrian  phases,  upon  the  religious  notions  of  the  Romans
The  fact  is  easily  accounted  for,  when  men's  ideas  upon  the
nature  of  the  soul,  of  God's  Government,  and  of  a  future  state,
are  entirely  vague,  as  were  those  of  the  educated  heathen  of
those  times,  when  (old  traditions  being  discarded  as  mere
unsatisfying  poetical  fables)  they  attempted  to  build  up  systems


28  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

that  should  explain  every  difficulty  by  the  help  of  reason  and
philosophy  alone,  although  destitute  of  any  solid  grounds  upon
which  to  lay  the  first  foundation  of  the  fabric.  Things  being
in  this  state,  a  religion  venerable  by  its  antiquity  (itself  an
impenetrable  shield  against  the  shafts  of  infidelity,  as  even
Tacitus  concedes:  "Hi  ritus,  quoquo  modo  inducti,  antiquitate
defenduntur  "  Hist.  v.  5),  possessing  a  complete  system  that  solved
every  problem  by  a  professedly  divine  revelation,  totally  setting
itself  above  reason  and  human  experience,  but  proclaiming  un
questioning  credence  as  the  most  meritorious  of  virtues,  such  a
religion  could  not  but  gain  the  victory  over  its  disorderly  and
discordant  competitors,  which  had  nothing  but  arguments
deduced  from  probabilities  and  analogies  wherewith  to  oppose
it.  The  same  contest  we  behold  passing  under  our  own  eyes ;
Roman  Catholicism  with  its  doctrines  overthrown,  exploded,
rejected  by  reason,  learning,  and  philosophy,  for  the  space  of
three  centuries,  is  again  rapidly  bringing  back  into  her  fold  her
lost  sheep,  which,  having  wandered  through  the  tempting  ways
of  Protestantism,  and  of  philosophy  or  infidelity,  however  people
choose  to  call  it,  and  unable  to  discover  any  reason  that  will  bear
the  test  for  standing  fast  at  any  ultimate  point  as  the  absolute
truth,  at  last  return  weary  and  disappointed  to  whence  they
started,  and  find  it  conducive  to  peace  of  mind  to  accept  assertion
for  demonstration,  and  the  age  of  a  tenet  as  equivalent  to  its
truth.

There  is  yet  another  consideration  that  is  of  great  importance
in  the  present  inquiry,  which  is  the  close  affinity  between  the
Judaism  of  this  period  and  Magism,  the  extent  of  which  will
be  pointed  out  in  the  following  sections  when  we  come  to  speak
of  the  Talmud.  Remembering  how  much  of  the  machinery  of
the  one  was  borrowed  from  the  other,  there  is  little  cause  for
astonishment  at  discovering  that  what  are  generally  considered
peculiarly  Jewish  titles  of  Deity  upon  relics,  may  rather  be
attributed  to  a  Magian  source.

The  three  circumstances  thus  briefly  adduced — namely,  the
direct  influence  of  the  religion  of  Zion  as  a  "  mystery  "  of  the
most  venerable  antiquity,  vying  with  those  of  Egypt  and  of
Babylon  ;  its  subsequent  indirect  influence  through  its  offshoots


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  29

(which  left  its  visible  impress  upon  things  tangible) ;  the
virtue  of  its  connection  with  the  creed  of  the  Magi,  the  secret
priesthood,  or  rather,  freemasons  of  the  ancient  world;  these
are  the  things  solving  the  difficulty  that  must  have  struck  any
inquiring  mind  when  beginning  to  study  the  so-called  Gnostic
remains.  From  the  foregoing  considerations,  at  least  a  plausible
reason  may  bo  gathered  for  the  fact  of  the  Hebrew  names  of  the
Deity,  and  of  his  angels,  and  of  the  patriarchs,  so  perpetually
being  repeated  on  works  presenting  the  figures  of  genii  and
of  astral  spirits— forms  of  idol-monsters  the  most  repugnant,
one  would  have  thought,  to  the  feelings  of  the  worshippers  of
those  sacred  names,  profaned  by  such  union ;  and  imagery,  from
beholding  which  the  true  follower  of  Moses  must  certainly  have
recoiled  in  horror.


THE  ZENDA VESTA.

The  Zendavesta,  literally  "  text  and  comment,"  is  the  doctrine
of  Zoroaster  (Zaratltmstra),  comprised  in  eight  parts,  written  at
different  periods,  but  of  which  the  earliest  have  been  assigned  to
the  date  of  B.C.  1200-1000.  In  its  present  form  it  was  collected
by  Ardeshir,  the  founder  of  the  Sassanian  dynasty,  from  oral
tradition,  at  the  time  when  he  re-established  the  ancient  religion
of  Persia.

In  this  revelation  the  Supreme  Being  is  called  "Boundless
Time  "  (Zarvana  Akarana\  because  to  him  no  beginning  can  be
assigned;  he  is  so  surrounded  by  his  own  glory,  and  so  far
exalted  beyond  all  human  comprehension,  that  he  can  only  be
the  object  of  silent  veneration.  The  beginning  of  creation  was
made  by  means  of  Emanations.  The  first  emanation  of  the
Eternal  One  was  Light,  whence  issued  Ormuzd  (Ahuramazda),  the
King  of  Light.  Ormuzd  is  styled  the  Firstborn  of  Boundless
Time ;  and  the  "  Fcrouer  "  of  him,  or  Pre-existing  Soul  (type
or  idea  in  Platonic  phrase),  had  existed  from  all  eternity  within
the  primitive  Light.  By  means  of  his  "Word,"  Ormuzd
created  the  pure  world  of  which  he  is  the  preserver  and  the


30  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

judge.  Next,  he  created  in  his  own  image  the  six  Amshaspands,
who  stand  about  his  throne,  and  are  his  agents  with  the  lower
spirits,  and  with  mankind,  whose  prayers  they  offer  up  to  him,
and  to  whom  they  serve  for  models  of  perfection.  These  Am-
shaspands,  of  whom  Ormuzd  is  the  first,  thus  making  up  the
mystic  number  seven,  are  of  both  sexes,  and  the  Gnostics
adopted  them,  as  we  shall  see  further  on,  into  their  own
systems,  with  the  same  distinction  of  sex.  The  next  series  of
emanations  were  the  Izeds,  twenty -eight  in  number,  of  whom
Mithras  is  the  chief.  Like  the  superior  order,  they  watch  over
the  purity  and  happiness  of  the  world,  of  which  they  are  the
genii  and  guardians.  The  principal  names  amongst  them  are
Vohu-mano,  Mazda,  Asha,  Vayu  (Ventus),  Geusurvi  (Soul  of  the
Earth),  Sraosha  (who  exactly  answers,  in  point  of  duties,  to  the
Grecian  Hermes  and  Jewish  Gabriel,  for  he  carries  the  mandates
of  Ormuzd,  and  conveys  up  to  him  the  souls  of  the  righteous).

The  third  series,  the  Fcrouers,  are  in  number  infinite.  These
are  the  Thoughts  or  "  Ideas  "  conceived  in  the  mind  of  Ormuzd
l>ofore  he  proceeded  to  tlig  creation  of  things.  They  are  the
protectors  of  mankind  during  this  mortal  life,  and  will  purify
their  souls  on  the  Day  of  the  Besurrection.

The  creation  of  these  chiefs,  with  their  angelic  hosts,  had
become  necessary.  Ahriman,  the  Second-born  of  the  Eternal
One — like  Ormuzd,  an  emanation  from  the  Primal  Light,  and
equally  pure,  but  ambitious  and  full  of  pride — had  become
jealous  of  the  Firstborn.  On  this  account  the  Supreme  Being
condemned  him  to  inhabit  for  twelve  thousand  years  the  space
that  is  illumined  by  no  ray  of  light — the  black  empire  of
Darkness.  This  interval  will  suffice  to  decide  the  struggle
between  Light  and  Darkness,  between  Good  and  Evil.  Ahriman,
in  order  to  oppose  his  rival,  created  in  his  turn  three  series  of
evil  spirits,  corresponding  in  number,  and  antagonistic  in  office,
to  each  one  of  the  good,  and,  like  them,  male  and  female.  The
first  series  is  that  of  the  Arch-Dem,  chained  each  one  to  his
respective  planet,  and  of  whom  the  chief  is  Astomogt,  "  the  two-
footed  Serpent  of  lies."  These  Devs  are  the  authors  of  all  evil,
both  physical  and  moral,  throughout  the  universe.

Ormuzd,  after  a  reign  of  three  thousand  years,  then  created


THE GNOSTICS AND THEITl REMAINS.

the  Animal  World  in  six  periods,  creating  first  light— a  faint
image  of  the  Light  celestial — then  water,  earth,  plants,  beasts,
and  lastly,  man.  Ahriman  had  concurred  in  the  creation  of
earth  and  water,  for  Darkness  being  already  inherent  in  these
two  elements,  Ormuzd  was  unable  to  exclude  its  nature  from
them.

Ormuzd  had  produced  by  his  Word  a  being  the  type  and
source  of  universal  life  for  all  creation  ;  this  being  was  called
Life,  or  the  Bull  (the  same  word  in  Zend  stands  for  both).
This  creature  Ahriman  contrived  to  destroy,  but  out  of  its
scattered  seed  Ormuzd,  through  the  agency  of  the  Amshaspand
Saphandomad  (Wisdom),  formed  the  first  human  pair,  Meschia
and  Meschiano.  This  couple  Ahriman,  by  a  bribe  of  fruits  and
milk,  succeeded  in  corrupting,  having  gained  over  the  female
first.  Then,  to  all  the  good  animals  made  by  Ormuzd,  ho
opposed,  by  his  own  creation,  as  many  mischievous  and  venomous
ones.  The  struggle  still  goes  on ;  the  Power  of  Darkness  often
is  the  superior,  but  the  pure  souls  are  assisted  and  defended  by
the  good  genii,  and  will  ultimate!^  triumph.  For  when  things
shall  seem  at  their  worst,  and  Evil  all-powerful  in  the  creation,
three  prophets  shall  appear  and  restore  the  lost  Light.  One  of
these,  Sosioch,  shall  regenerate  the  world  and  restore  it  to  its
pristine  excellence.  Then  comes  the  general  Resurrection,
when  the  good  shall  immediately  enter  into  this  happy  abode—
the  regenerated  earth,  and  Ahriman,  together  with  his  angels
and  the  wicked,  be  purified  by  immersion  in  a  lake  of  molten
metal,  so  as  to  render  them  fitting  members  of  the  new  kingdom.
Thenceforth  all  will  enjoy  unchangeable  happiness,  and,  headed
by  Sosioch,  ever  sing  the  praises  of  the  Eternal  One.

The  religion  of  Zoroaster  was  a  reformed  version  of  the
ancient  creed  held  by  the  inhabitants  of  Eritene  in  Bactria.
For  it  is  probable  that  the  first  gods  of  the  Aryan  race  before
it  split  into  Indian  and  Zend,  were  the  powers  of  Nature,
Indra,  thunder,  Mithra,  sunlight,  Vayu,  wind,  Agni,  fire,  Armaiti,
earth,  Soma,  intoxication.  The  worship  of  the  last  may  have
been  the  source  of  the  Dionysia,  introduced  from  India,  as  the
Greeks  themselves  always  asserted.  These  powers  were  called
Almras  and  Devas  indifferently  ;  but  Zoroaster  reduced  all  these


32  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

powers  to  the  secondary  rank  of  angels,  and  used  the  name  Dcvas
in  a  bad  sense  only.  The  Zoroastrian  was  the  established  re
ligion  of  the  Persians  at  the  time  when  they  conquered  Assyria ;
and  to  a  great  extent  it  superseded  the  material  idolatry  of
the  Babylonians,  whose  gods  Darius  and  Xerxes  melted  down
without  any  scruple.  But  Matter  is  of  opinion  that  the  College
of  Magi,  established  long  before  the  Persian  conquest  of  Babylon,
accepted  the  new  religion  upon  the  change  of  masters,  retaining
nothing  of  the  old  besides  Astrology  and  Divination.

It  must  not  bo  forgotten  how  large  a  portion  of  the  Jewish
captivity  remained  permanently  in  Assyria — only  two  tribes,
Judah  and  Levi,  having  been  sent  back  to  Jerusalem  by  Cyrus ;
and  Babylon  long  continued  the  seat  of  a  most  flourishing
Kabbinical  school,  whilst  Judea  itself,  down  to  the  time  of  the
Macedonian  conquest,  remained  a  province  of  the  Persian
Empire.  How  important  a  part  of  the  Persian  population
at  a  much  later  period  were  either  Jews,  or  under  Jewish
influence,  appears  from  the  very  remarkable  assertion  of  Jose-
phus,  "  that  his  nation  were  encouraged  to  brave  all  extremities
in  their  final  struggle  against  the  power  of  Rome  by  the
confident  expectation  of  aid  from  their  brethren  beyond  the
Euphrates."  And  three  centuries  later  Ammianus  notices
that  Julian's  invading  army  came  upon  a  city  entirely  in
habited  by  Jews  in  the  very  centre  of  Persia.  After  the
captivity,  the  principal  literary  establishments  of  the  Jews
appear  to  have  been  seated  in  central  Asia.  The  schools  of
Nahardea,  of  Sora,  of  Punbiditha,  were  at  least  as  famous  as  the
schools  of  Palestine  (cf.  Jos.  Ant.  xviii.  12).  The  latter  even
appear  to  have  paid  a  sort  of  filial  deference  to  these  foundations  :
the  Chaldee  version  of  the  Pentateuch,  made  by  Onkelos  of
Babylon,  was  accepted  as  the  authorised  version  by  all  the  Jews
living  in  Palestine ;  and  the  Eabbi  Hillel,  coming  from  that
capital  to  Jerusalem,  was  received  by  the  doctors  of  the  Holy
City  as  an  ornament  of  the  same  national  school,  and  this  only
a  few  years  before  the  birth  of  Christ.  From  all  these  circum
stances  it  is  easy  to  perceive  how  much  of  the  Zoroastrian
element  may  have  pervaded  the  Jewish  religion  at  the  time  of
the  promulgation  of  Christianity,  when  its  principal  teachers


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

were  the  Pharisees  or  "  separatists,"  if,  indeed,  their  doctors
did  not  actually  get  their  appellation  from  the  word  Pharsi,
"Persian" — an  etymology  that  has  something  to  recommend
it.  These  doctrines,  as  then  taught,  are  set  forth  in  the
Kabbala,  or  "  Traditions,"  so  called  from  Kalbal,  "  to  receive  "
— the  main  features  of  which  shall  be  sketched  in  the  following
sections.


THE  KABBALA  AND  THE  TALMUD.

The  origin  of  the  Kal/b.ala  is  placed  by  most  authors  much
later  than  that  of  Christianity  ;  and,  indeed,  it  is  not  impossible
that  its  doctrines  may  have  received  great  developments  after
that  epoch ;  *  nevertheless,  the  elements  of  them  go  back  to  n
much  more  remote  antiquity.  The  Book  of  Daniel  bears  the
most  conspicuous  traces  of  this  antiquity,  and  to  the  attestation
of  this  record  are  added  other  proofs  no  less  convincing.  The
idea  of  Emanation  is,  so  to  speak,  the  soul,  the  essential  element
of  the  Kabbala  ;  it  is  likewise,  as  we  have  already  seen,  the
essential  character  of  Zoroastrism.  We  may  therefore  consider

that  it  was  through  their  very  intimate  connection  with  Persia

that  the  Jews  imbibed  that  idea.

According  to  the  Kabbala,  as  according to the  Zendavesta,

all  that  exists  has emanated from  the  source  of  the Infinite

Light.

Before  all  things  existed  the  Primal  Being,  the  "Ancient  of

Days,"  the  eternal  King  of  Light. This  King  of  Light  is  the

All;  he  is  the  real  cause  of  all  existence ; he  is  the  Infinite

(En  Soph) ;  he  alone  is  He,  there  is  in  him  no  Thou  •  but  he

cannot  be  known,  "  he  is  a  closed  Eye."

The  universe  is  the  revelation  of  the  King  of  Light,  and  only

subsists  in  Him. His  qualities  are  manifested  in  it,  variously

modified  and  in  different  degrees ; it  is  therefore  his  "  Holy

*  The  tradition  is  that  it  was  first for  the  space of  cloven  years,  the
committed  to  writing  by  Simon  Ben whole  of  which  he  devoted  to  tins
Jochai, who, being proscribed by work,  in  which, he  was  nan
Titus,  concealed  himself  in  a  cavern the  prophet  Elfau.

D


34  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Splendour  " — the  mantle,  as  it  were,  wherewith  he  must  be
clothed  in  silence.  All  is  an  emanation  from  this  Being ;  the
nearer  therefore  that  any  approaches  to  him,  the  more  perfect
is  it?  and  the  less  so  does  it  become  as  it  recedes  from  him :
this  idea  of  gradation  is  eminently  Persian.  Before  the  creation
of  the  world,  the  Primal  Light  filled  all,  so  that  there  was  no
void  at  all ;  but  when  the  Supreme  Being,  residing  within  this
Light,  resolved  to  display  and  manifest  his  perfection,  he
retired  within  himself,  and  formed  around  him  a  void  space.
Into  this  void  he  let  fall  his  first  emanation — a  ray  of  the
Light,  which  is  the  cause  and  principle  of  all  existence,  uniting
in  itself  the  generative  and  conceptive  forces  ;  being  both  father
and  mother  in  the  sublimest  sense,  pervading  all,  and  without
which  nothing  can  for  an  instant  subsist.

From  this  Double  Force,  designated  by  the  first  two  letters
of  the  name  Jehovah  (Forf,  He  *),  emanated  the  First-born  of
God,  the  Tiltkun,  or  "  Universal  Type "  (Platonic  Idea),  and
the  general  container  of  all  beings,  united  within  himself  bv
means  of  the  Primal  Ray.  lie  is  the  creator,  preserver,  and
prime  animator  of  the  world.  He  is  the  "  Light  of  light,"
possessing  the  three  primitive  forces  of  the  Godhead :  the  light,
the  spirit,  and  the  life.  Inasmuch  as  he  has  received  what  he
gives,  the  light  and  the  life,  he  is  considered  as  equally  a
generative  and  conceptive  principle  as  the  "  Primitive  Man,"
Adam-Kadmon  ;  and  as  man  himself  is  called  the  "  little  world,"
or  the  microcosm,  so  this  Being,  his  Type,  is  properly  designated
the  "  great  world,"  or  Macrocosm.  In  this  their  Adam-Kadmon,
the  principle  of  light  and  life,  the  Kabbalists  have  united  the
attributes  of  the  same  principles  amongst  the  Persians.

Adam-Kadmon  has  manifested  himself  in  ten  emanations,
which  are  not  indeed  actual  beings,  but  sources  of  life,  vessels
of  the  Almighty  Power,  types  of  all  the  creation.  Their  names
are :  the  Crown,  Wisdom,  Prudence,  Magnificence,  Severity,
Beauty,  Victory,  Glory,  Foundation,  Empire.  To  Wisdom  they
gave  the  title  Jah ;  to  Prudence  Jehovah  ;  to  Magnificence  El ;

*  The  I.  H.  so  conspicuously  placed  nearest  equivalents  the  Greek  alpha-
on  some  Gnostic  stones  probably  ex-  bet  could  furnish  for  the  Hebrew
presses  this  name;  as  being  the  letters.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  oi>

to  Severity  Elohim ;  to  Victory  and  Glory  Sabaotlt ;  to  Empire
Adonai.

These  are  all  attributes  of  the  Supreme,  as  displayed  in  Ids
works,  through  which  alone  it is possible  for  the  human  mind
to  conceive  him. To  the  same  emanations  the  Kabbalists  give
other  titles,  which  constantly  present  themselves  in Gnostic
inscriptions. For  example,  the  Croicn  (Parmenides  also  calls
the  Godhead  Sre'^avos)  nas  tlie  synonym  of  Or,  "  Light,"  (possibly
the  same  with  Our,  the  name  of  a  Sabean  genius). Wisdom  is
called  Nous  and  Logos,  and  is  equivalent  to  the  Sophia  of  Gnos
ticism  ;  she  has  also  the  names  of  Fear,  Depth  of  thought,  Eden,
according  to  the  several  passions  that  animate  her. Prudence  is
the  "  river  flowing  out  of  Paradise,  the  fountain  of  the  oil  of
unction." Magnificence  has  for  symbol  a  lion's  head  ;  Severity,  a
red and black fire ; Beauty, the  colours green and yellow  ;
the symbol of  Beauty  is an illuminating mirror ; Victory  is
Jehovah  Sabaoth,  having  for  symbol  the pillar  on the  right
hand, called Jachin ; Glory has the left pillar Boaz, called
likewise  the  "  Old  Serpent," and sometimes  "  Cherubim  and
Seraphim  ; "  this  principle  answers  to  the  genius  OpMs  of  the
Gnostic systems. "Jachin" and "  Boaz " signify Strength
and  Power  :  they  figure  conspicuously  in  the  symbolism  of  the
secret  societies  of  modern  times  ; and  naturally  so,  for  these
illuminati  have  borrowed  (probably  without  understanding  it)
all  the  terminology  of the  Valentinians  and the Kabbalists.
"  Foundation  "  becomes  the  Tree  of  the  knowledge  of  Good  and
Evil:  also  Noah,  Solomon,  and  the  Messiah— all  which  titles
merely express the eternal alliance existing between the
Supreme  and  all  that  emanates  from  him,  and  in  virtue  whereof
he  brings  back  into  himself  all  the  souls  that  have  lost  their
original  purity. "Empire"  is  the  Consuming  Fire,  the  wife
of  the Church— all three  titles  being also employed in  thu
Valentinian  system.

The  relationship  of  the  "  Sephiroth,"  or  yEons,  to  one  another
the  Kabbalists  represent  by  a  number  of  circles  intersecting  iu  a
mysterious  manner  ad  infinitum ;  or  again,  by  the  figure  of  a
Man,  orof  a  Tree,  made  up  of  such  circles.  The  figure  of  the  Man,
Seir-Anpin,  consists -of  two  hundred  and  forty-three  numbers,


36  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

"bers,  being  the  numerical  value  of  the  letters  in  the  name  Abram,
and  signifying  the  different  orders  in  the  celestial  hierarchy.
The  first  idea  of  this  type  was  possibly  borrowed  from  the
Hindoo  figure  of  Brahma  and  the  several  types  typified  by  the
different  parts  of  his  body,  to  which  mystical  values  are  still
attached  by  the  Hindoos.

The  ten  Sephiroth  served  as  types  or  models  for  the  visible
Creation ;  and  from  them  emanated  the  Four  Worlds,  Aziluth,
B'riah,  Jezirah,  and  Asiah  ;  each  world  successively  proceeding
out  of  the  one  above  it,  and  each  in  succession  enveloping  its
superior.  A  theory  this,  possibly  borrowed  from  Plato's  de
scription  of  the  arrangement  of  the  seven  spheres,  as  given
in  the  "  Vision  of  Er,"  at  the  end  of  his  "  Kepublic,"  where
he  compares  them  to  a  set  of  the  hemispherical  bowls  used
by  jugglers,  fitting  into,  and  moving  loosely  within,  each
other  (lib.  x.  614B,  seq.~).

These  Four  Worlds  become  less  pure  as  they  descend  in  the
series ;  the  least  pure  of  all  being  the  material  world.  But
nothing  is  entirely  material,  for  all  subsists  through  God,  the
ray  of  his  light  penetrating  through  all  creation  being  the
Life  of  the  life,  and  consequently  "  all  is  God."  This  universal
All  is  divided  into  thirty-two  "  Gates,"  the  elements  or  energies
out  of  which  all  beings  are  formed.

The  world  Aziluth  is  inhabited  by  the  Parsuphaim,  the  purest
emanations  of  the  Deity,  having  nothing  material  in  their
composition.  B'riah  is  possessed  by  an  inferior  order,  who  are
the  servants  of  Aziluth,  although  still  immaterial  creatures.
Still  lower  are  the  inhabitants  of  Jezirah,  to  which  world  belong
the  Cherubim  and  Seraphim,  the  Elohim  and  the  Bene-Elohim.
But  Asiah  is  peopled  by  gross  material  existences  of  both  sexes,
the  Klippoth  delighting  in  evil,  whose  chief  is  Belial.  These
last  beings  are  full  of  ambition,  and  ever  at  war  with  the  pure
spirits  of  the  superior  worlds,  whose  empire  they  unceasingly
endeavour  to  usurp.

The  three  superior  orders  just  described  answer  to  the
Amshaspaiids,  Izeds,  and  Fravashis,  of  Zoroaster ;  as  do  the
Klippoth,  in  their  vast  numbers  and  malicious  nature,  to  his
Devs.  This  discord  did  not  exist  in  the  beginning,  it  was  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  37

result  of  a  revolution  in  heaven,  called  the  "  Fall  of  the  Seven
Kings,"  from  whom*  the  Creator,  as  a  punishment,  extracted  the
principle  of  good  and  light,  and  bestowed  it  upon  the  inhabi
tants  of  the  three  superior  spheres.

This  last  notion  is  common  to  many  forms  of  Gnosticism.
The  Ophites  make  Achamoth  extract  from  Ildabaoth  and  his
six  sons  the  inherent  ray  of  Divine  Light,  in  order  to  bestow  it
upon  Man.  Again,  the  Pistis-Sophia  represents  two  great
angels,  Melchisedech  and  Zorocothora  (gatherer  of  light)  making
their  annual  rounds  through  the  rebellious  "  ^Eons  of  the
sphere  "  (zodiacal  signs),  and  squeezing  out  of  them  all  the  rays
of  Divine  Light  that  are  still  left  in  their  composition,  which
havino-  been  all  extracted,  the  fulness  of  time  and  the  kingdom
of  heaven  are  come  ;  and  so,  according  to  the  Kabbala,  when
the  contest  shall  have  endured  for  the  space  ordained  from  the
beginning  of  the  world,  the  Supreme  shall  deliver  the  spirits  in
Asiah  from  their  material  envelope,  shall  strengthen  the  feeble
ray  of  his  light  that  is  within  them,  and  shall  establish  its
pristine  harmony  throughout  all  Creation.

The  Human  Soul  is  composed  of  all  parts  borrowed  from  each
of  these  four  worlds.  From  Asiah  it  gets  the  Ncphesh,  or  seat  of
the  physical  appetites  ;  from  Jezirah  the  Buach,  or  seat  of  the
passions,  from  Briah  the  Neshamah  or  reason,  and  from  Aziluth
it  obtains  the  Cliaiali,  or  principle  of  spiritual  life.  This  looks
like  an  adaptation  of  the  Platonic  theory  of  the  soul's  obtaining
its  respective  faculties  from  the  Planets  in  its  downward
progress  through  their  spheres.  But  the  Pistis-Sophia,  with  its
accustomed  boldness,  puts  this  theory  into  a  much  more  poetical

*  The author of the Book of  consummation  of  heaven  and earth

Enoch  alludes  to  the same  legend :  will  be  the  prison  of  the  stars  and

"Over these fountains also I per-  the host of heaven. The stars

ceived  a  place  which  had  neither  the  which  roll  over  fire  arc  those  who

firmament  of  heaven above it,  nor  transgressed the  commandments  of

the solid ground underneath it;  God before their time  arrived,  for

neither  was  there  water  above  it,  nor  they  came  not  in  their  proper  season,

any  thing  on  wing,  but  the  spot  was  Therefore was he offended with

desolate.0  And  then  I  beheld  seven  them,  and bound them  until the

stars  like  great  blazing  mountains,  consummation  of  their  crimes  in  the

and  like  spirits  entreating  me. Then  secret  year."— Chap,  xviii.
the  Angel  said,  this  place  until  the


38  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

shape  (§  282).  The  Inner  Man  is  similarly  made  up  of  four
constituents,  but  these  are  supplied  by  the  rebellious  ^Eons  of
the  Sphere,  being  the  Power  (a  particle  of  the  Divine  light
("Divina3  particula  aurae")  yet  left  in  themselves);  the  Soul
"  formed  out  of  the  tears  of  their  eyes,  and  the  sweat  of  their
torments " ;  the  'Ai/Tifu/xov  IIi/ev/xaTos  Counterfeit  of  the  Spirit
(seemingly  answering  to  our  Conscience)  ;  and  lastly  the  Motpa
Fate,  whose  business  it  is  to  lead  the  man  to  the  end  appointed
for  him ;  "  if  he  hath  to  die  by  the  fire,  to  lead  hi  in  into  the  fire  ;
if  he  hath  to  die  by  a  wild  beast,  to  lead  him  unto  the  wild
beast,  &c."  But  in  truth  the  entire  sy stem  of  this  most  wondrous
Gospel  is  a  mixture  of  the  Kabbala  with  the  ideas  of  Magian
astrology,  clouded  under  the  terminology  of  the  old  Egyptian
creed,  to  which  belong  its  "  Triple  Powers,"  "  Invisible  Gods,"
and  "  the  Proper  Forms  "  assigned  by  it  to  the  different  ^Eons.

All  the  human  race  having  sinned  in  the  First  Man,  that  is
as  regards  their  souls,  all  which  were  necessarily  contained  within
his  soul  at  the  time  of  the  Fall,  these  souls  are  exiled  hither
into  prisons  of  Matter,  called  bodies,  in  order  to  expiate  their
sin,  and  to  exercise  themselves  in  good  during  their  residence
on  earth.  Such  as  upon  quitting  the  body  are  not  found
sufficiently  purified  for  entrance  into  Aziluth,  have  to  recom
mence  their  penance  in  this  world.  Hence  the  question  of  the
Disciples  whether  a  man's  being  lorn  blind  were  the  punish
ment  for  his  own  sins,  which  on  this  supposition  must  have
been  committed  by  him  in  a  previous  life.  This  penitential
transmigration  of  souls  forms  a  very  conspicuous  feature  in  the
doctrine  set  forth  in  the  Pistis-Sophia.  The  wicked,  after  under
going  torment  for  periods  nicely  apportioned  to  their  deserts,  in
prisons  belonging  to  the  several  Infernal  Powers,  are  sent  into
this  world  again  to  inhabit  human  bodies  afflicted  in  different
ways — lame,  Mind,  or  sunk  in  abject  poverty.  Similarly  the
righteous,  but  unreycncrate,  man  is  provided  with  a  fresh  body
wherein  to  avail  himself  of  the  sacraments  of  the  new  religion  ;
which  in  his  former  life  he  had  neglected  through  ignorance,
and  not  wilfully.

The  nature  of  God,  and  of  Man,  is  therefore  the  subject  of
the  Kabbala ;  the  Government  of  the  Creation  is  set  forth  in  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  39

Talmud,  the  doctrine  of  which  concerning  the  Nature  of  the  Aiujcls
is  extremely  important  for  the  understanding  of  much  in
Gnosticism.  The  whole  system  in  this  particular  is  borrowed
from  the  Zendavesta ;  and  could  not  have  originated  before,  or
indeed  without  the  Captivity,  so  opposite  is  the  spirit  pervading
it  to  the  genius  of  the  Mosaic  Law.  According  to  it,  the
government  of  all  things  is  entrusted  to  the  Angels,  of  whom
there  are  seventy  Princes,  watching  over  each  element,  nation,
and  language.  Thus,  Johuel  is  the  Prince  of  Fire,  and
has  under  him  seven  subordinates :  Seraphiel,  Gabriel,  Uriel,
Temanael,  Shimsael,  Hadranael,  and  Samiel.  Again,  Michael
is  Prince  of  Water,  and  similarly  attended  by  seven  inferior
spirits.  Moreover,  there  are  an  infinity  of  Angels  yet  lower  in
degree,  guardians  of  ttie  various  animals,  plants,  heat,  winds,
rains,  &c.  There  also  are  others  presiding  over  the  passions
of  the  soul,  fear,  grace,  favour,  love,  and  so  on.  Hence  it  is  not
to  be  wondered  at,  that  the  Angel  who  directs  the  course  of  the
sun  should  have  under  him  no  less  than  two  hundred  and  ninety-
six  hosts,  whose  sum  is  expressed  by  the  numerical  letters  in  the
word  Haaretz  "  the  earth."  The  head  of  them  is  Metatron,  the
"  number  of  his  name  "  being  three  hundred  and  fourteen,  and
therefore  equivalent  to  that  of  Shaddai,  "the  Almighty."
Metatron  is  the  Persian  Mithras;  the  names  of  the  others  are
all  compounded  with  El  "  God,"  and  contain  his  titles,  or
invocations  to  him.*  All  this  celestial  roll-call  fully  explains
St.  Paul's  warning  to  his  flock  at  Colossae  against  being  reduced
into  a  "  voluntary  (that  is,  an  uncalled  for)  humility,  and  the
worshipping  of  Angels,"  whilst  the  copious  appearance  of  their
names  upon  talismans  strongly  testifies  to  the  veneration  in
which  their  power  was  held.

This  last  circumstance  was  a  necessity  of  the  case,  for  all
these  monuments  proceed  from  two  sources — the  two  great
schools  of  Magi  mentioned  by  Pliny,  the  most  ancient,  the

*  The  Book  of  Enoch  thus  states  luminaries  ;  Michael, who presides

the  names  and  offices  of  the  "  Angels  over human  virtue, commands the

who  watch "  : Uriel  presides over  nations. Sarakiel  over  the  spirits  of

clamour and terror  ;  Raphael over  the  children  of  men  who  transgress ;

the spirits  of  men  ; Eagicl  inflicts  Gabriel over  Ikisat,  over Paradise,

punishment on the world and  the  and  over  the  ClieruMm.


40  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Chaldean,  founded  by  Zoroaster  and  Orthancs,  the  modern  of  his
own  day,  by  Moses  and  Jambres. So  Juvenal,  after  bringing  J
the  proud  and  pompous  Chaldean,  the  maker  of  emperors-

«  Cujus  amicitia  conducendaque  tabella
Magnus  civis  obit,  et  formidatus  Othoni," (vi.  55<-8.)

makes  the  poor  trembling  Jewess  fortune-teller  steal  in  with
whispers for the  lady's  private  ear-her  profession  going  no
further than the interpreting or the vending  of dreams-
"Qualiacunquo  voles  Judaa  somnia  vendent." Such  nocturnal
revelations, we are told, were to bo procured  by sleeping
with  the proper  talisman put  under  one's pillow.
writer  on  magie  quoted  by  Camillo  di  Leonardo,  lays  down  that
-a woman with her hair hanging  down loose,  and  a i
approaching her  making  a  gesture  of  love,  engraved  upon  a
crystal,  or  jacinth,  being  placed  under  the  head  upon  goingj
sleep  will  make  one  see  in  a  dream  whatsoever  one  desires.

Such  being  the  nature  of  the  case,  the  existing  productions  c
Gnosticism will be most appropriately investigated m  _the
present Treatise by considering the nature of  the various
sources  from  which  they  emanated. The  series  commences  with
the  IKihraic,  as  being  the  most  ancient  in  origin,  and  in  whic.
the  Magianandtho  Jewish  Kabbalistie  ideas  are  found  the  most
frequently united. To this class succeed the Abraxas-gems,
properly  so-called,  in  which  the  Magian  ground-work  is  mod
fied by the refinements of Basilides, introducing a strong
tincture  of  the  primitive  Egyptian  theology. To  Egypt  herself
more  properly  belong  the  Agaikodxmo*  talismans  bearing  t
figure  of  the  good  serpent,  Chnuphis-an  emblem  which  gave
ite  name  to  that  very  wide-spreading  and  clearly  defined  sect,
the OpUtcs. Last  of  all  come  the  innumerable  rel


treasures,  and  of  the  right  manner  of hghtful  visions.
finding  them." Also,  «  Cepheus, a


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


41


worship  of  Scrapis,  that  most  recent  of  all  the  gods  in  the
Egyptian  Pantheon,  and  in  which  the  Brahminical  influence
is  most  distinctly  to  be  traced.  This  last  subject,  so  curious
in  itself,  shall  bo  the  subject  of  the  following  section,  where  the
numerous  facts  brought  forward  may  perhaps  serve  to  remove
some  of  the  incredulity  with  which  such  a  thesis  will  naturally
at  first  be  regarded.


FIG.  2.


42  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


INDIAN  SOUKCES  OF  GNOSTICISM.— MANES.

The  Persian  origin  of  so  considerable  a  portion  of  the  Gnosis
Laving  been  set  forth  in  the  foregoing  pages,  it  remains  to
show  what  portion  is  due  to  a  purely  Indian  source,  and  to
indicate  the  channels  through  which  a  direct  intercourse  was
carried  on  between  the  farthest  east  and  the  foci  of  Gnosticism,
Alexandria  and'Ephesus.  For  the  Christian  Gnosis  was  indirectly
the  daughter  of  the  Hindoo  Gnosis,  such  as  it  was  taught  in  the
various  mysteries  ;  possibly  in  the  Eleusinian  and  the  Phrygian.
For  universal  tradition  made  the  first  founder  of  mysteries,
Bacchus,  bring  them  direct  from  India ;  and  Jove's  fi%)09,  the
fabled  birth-place  of  the  god,  may  have  been  no  other  than
Mount  Mem,  the  Olympus  of  the  Hindoo  Pantheon.*

Certain  Gnostic  tenets  concerning  the  duality  of  the  Divine
emanations,  absorption  into  the  god-head,  asceticism,  penance,
and  self-collection,  are  identical  with  the  Buddhistic  teaching
upon  the  same  points ;  of  which  agreement  several  remarkable
examples  will  be  adduced  in  their  fitting  place.  But  we  are
not  left  to  mere  conjecture  on  this  point,  for  the  actual  circum
stances  of  their  importation  from  India  are  minutely  detailed,
in  one  case  that  doubtless  had  many  parallels,  by  the  laborious
Epiphanius  in  his  "  Life  of  Manes,"  (Hasres.  lxv.).f

This  celebrated  heresiarch,  equally  abhorrent  to  Zoroastrian
and  Christian  orthodoxy,  was  by  birth  a  Persian,  named
Cubricus  ;  but  who  upon  commencing  his  mission  assumed  the
title  of  Manes,  signifying  in  the  Babylonian  tongue  "  The
Vessel,"  for  the  same  reason,  we  may  suppose,  that  Dante  gives
to  St.  Paul  the  epithet  "  Vas  Electionis."  This  Cubricus  had

*  The  bearer  of  the  phallus  (lin-  (drawn  upon  by  Epiphanius  also),

gam)  in  the  grand  Dionysian  pro-  is  the  "Disputation  of  Archelaus

cession  celebrated  by  Ptolemy  Phila-  and  Manes,"  held  at  Charrae  in

delphus  was  blackened  all  over  with  A.D.  275-9.  This  book  was  written

soot,  doubtless  to  indicate  the  native  in  Syriac,  but  is  only  extant  in  a

country  of  that  very  equivocal  symbol.  Latin  version.

f  The  earliest  authority,  however,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  43

been  slave,  and  subsequently  sole  heir,  to  a  certain  wealthy
widow  who  had  inherited  all  the  effects  belonging  to  one
Terminthus,  surnamed  in  Assyrian  "  Buddas."  This  Termin-
thus  had  similarly  been  the  slave  of  a  rich  Saracen  merchant,
Scythicus,  who  had  studied  the  Greek  language  and  literature
in  some  place  on  the  borders  of  Palestine  (perhaps  the  school  of
Palmyra),  and  who  "had  there  attained  to  eminence  in  the
empty  learning  of  this  world."  By  constant  journeys  between
his  home  and  India,  this  Scythicus  had  amassed  a  large  fortune.
With  this  he  settled  down  in  Hypsele  in  the  Thebaid,  where
ho  married  a  beautiful  courtezan,  whom  ho  had  bought  and
emancipated.  "  Here,  out  of  sheer  idleness  and  licentiousness,
he  set  up  to  preach  new  doctrines,  not  derived  from  Scripture
but  from  mere  human  reason."

These  doctrines,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  can  hardly  have
been  of  his  own  concoction,  but,  in  all  probability,  things  that
he  had  picked  up  in  India,  where  all  the  ancient  emporia  lay
on  the  Guzerat  Coast,  the  seat  of  the  powerful  Jaina  (Buddhist)
monarchy.  A  mere  Eastern  trader,  a  common  Arab  merchant
who,  after  making  his  fortune  by  long  and  dangerous  travels  in
the  East,  who  could  afterwards  in  advanced  life  set  himself
down  to  study,  nay  more,  to  attain  proficiency  in  the  Greek
philosophy,  must  have  been  a  man  of  no  ordinary  intellect.
Assuredly  it  was  not  the  mere  want  of  anything  better  to  do,
(as  his  malicious  biographer  asserts),  that  made  him  turn
preacher  of  a  new  religion.  His  marriage  with  the  enfranchised
courtezan  looks  like  a  theological  addition,  added  to  the  portrait
for  the  sake  of  so  completing  his  resemblance  to  Simon  Magus.
The  nature  of  the  doctrines  he  was  likely  to  imbibe  in  the  great
Indian  marts,  Baroche,  Barcellore,  Pultaneh,  or  in  the  semi-
Grecian  cities  of  Bactria,  is  attested  to  this  day  by  the  innumer
able  Buddhist  temples  and  topes,  with  their  deposit  of  relics  yet
studding  the  provinces  this  side  of  the  Indus;  and  whose
contents  declare  the  flourishing  state  of  that  religion  even
when  the  country  had  passed  under  the  rule  of  the  Sassaniaii
Kings  of  Persia.

But  to  return  to  Scythicus  in  his  retirement :  "  Taking
Pythagoras  for  guide,  he  composed  four  books,  namely,  *  The


44  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Mysteries,'  'The  Summary/  'The  Gospel,'  and  'The  Trea
suries.'"  (Pythagoras  was  then  universally  believed  to  have
visited  India,  and  there  to  have  obtained  the  elements  of  his
philosophy,  which  has  a  certain  Brahminical  character.)  "  After
this,  Scythicus  made  a  journey  to  Jerusalem  in  the  very  times  of
the  Apostles,  and  held  conferences  with  the  elders  of  the  church
upon  the  Origin  of  Evil,  and  such  like  points.  But  not  being
satisfied  by  their  explanations,  he  took  to  preaching  magic,  the
knowledge  of  which  he  had  gotten  along  with  his  other  wares
from  the  Indians  and  Egyptians.  But  as  he  was  showing  off  a
miracle  upon  the  roof  of  his  house,  he  fell  down  and  was  killed.
Upon  this,  his  servant  and  sole  disciple,  Terminthus,  instead  of
returning  to  his  mistress  at  Hypsele,  ran  off  with  his  money
into  Persia,  where,  in  order  to  escape  detection,  he  assumed  the
name  of  Buddas,  which  signifies  "Wise."  (This  last  fact
proves  incontestably  the  nature  of  the  doctrines  he  and  his
master  had  been  gathering  up  in  their  Indian  travels ;  and  the
truth  lying  at  the  bottom  of  this  story  seems  to  be  that  he  gave
himself  out  for  a  fresh  incarnation  of  Buddha,  of  which  there  had
been  seven*  before  his  date.)

"  This  Terminthus  was  himself  a  man  of  learning  and  con
versant  with  his  master's  four  treatises.  He  lodged  in  the
house  of  a  widow,  where  he  used  to  hold  conferences  with  the
priests  of  Mithras,  especially  with  two,  Parcus  and  Labdacus,
upon  the  Two  Principles,  and1  similar  subjects.  He,  too,  having
been  killed  by  accident,  like  his  master,  his  landlady  kept
possession  of  all  his  baggage,  religious  books  included  ;  and  in
her  turn  bequeathed  them  to  her  servant  Cubricus,  the  after
wards  so  celebrated  Manes."

It  is  necessary  here  to  point  out  a  certain  violent  anachronism
in  the  story  as  told  by  Epiphanius.  If  Scythicus  visited
Jerusalem  at  all,  he  must  have  done  so  before  the  year  of  its
destruction,  A.D.  70.  His  disciple,  Terminthus,  could  therefore
not  have  survived  far  into  the  second  century.  The  landlady
of  the  latter  could  for  this  reason  have  hardly  had  for  slave
Manes,  who  flourished  about  two  hundred  years  later.  It  is,

*  The  seventh  heaving  been  that  gakyal  who,  from  Benares,  diffused
Buddhism  all  over  the  peninsula.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  45

however,  possible  that  the  works  plagiarised  by  Manes  had
been  preserved  in  her  family  down  to  the  period  of  his  service
in  it.

In  this  history  of  Scythicus,  however  disguised  Toy  tradition,
we  have  at  one  view  the  complete  history  of  the  rise  and
progress  of  Gnosticism.  Wo  find  an  Arab  merchant  of  a
subtle  and  inquiring  mind,  occupying  himself  during  his  long
and  frequent  sojourns  at  the  Indian  marts  in  studying  the
philosophy  of  these  prevailing  religionists,  the  speculations  of
the  Buddhist  monks,  and  equally  investigating  the  secrets  of
the  "  wisdom  of  Egypt,"  when  detained  at  the  other  head
quarters  of  the  Eastern  trade.  Then  retiring  from  business,
he  goes  to  Palmyra  for  the  purpose  of  studying  Grecian
philosophy,  as  then  taught  in  its  school,  which  philosophy
would  be  no  other  than  Neo-Flatonism ;  thence  returning  home,
he  occupies  his  leisure  in  reducing  to  one  harmonious  system
the  numerous  conflicting  theories  upon  subjects  too  high  for
human  knowledge,  which  he  had  so  laboriously  collected  from
the  three  great  fountains  of  philosophy — India,  Egypt,  and
Athens.

Finally  attracted  by  the  fame  of  a  new  religion  that  professed
to  throw  the  clearest  light  upon  all  things  relating  to  God
and  Man,  being  preached  at  Jerusalem,  he  immediately  starts
for  the  focus  of  this  new  light,  leaving  behind  him  wife
and  property,  only  accompanied  by  one  servant,  himself  an
educated  man,  and  his  own  treasured  theological  speculations.
On  his  arriving  at  the  Holy  City,  we  find  him  (as  might  be
expected  from  his  previous  training)  grievously  disappointed
in  his  hopes  of  at  last  obtaining  the  solution  of  all  the  problems
that  had  so  long  occupied  his  thoughts — for  on  subjects  of  that
kind  the  Christian  Presbyters  could  tell  no  more  than  what  he
had  learnt  already  from  the  Rablis  of  Alexandria,  or  the  Jaina
monks  of  Guzerat.  Thus  disappointed,  he  appears  to  have  set
up  himself  for  a  teacher  of  a  new  and  higher  doctrine,  supporting
his  pretensions  (after  the  customary  fashion  of  the  times)  by
miracle-working ;  and  as  a  matter  of  course  getting  his  career
speedily  cut  short,  for  Jerusalem  was  not  the  place  where  a  new
religion  would  be  promulgated  with  impunity  by  a  single  indi-


46  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

vidual,  and  that  too  an  Arabian.  His  disciple, 'Terminthus,  taking
warning  by  his  fate,  resolves  to  try  another  school  of  profound
wisdom,  formed  from  time  immemorial,  but  as  yet  unvisited  by
his  master,  and  proceeds  to  hold  discussion  with  the  Wise  Men
of  the  East  at  their  head  college  in  Babylon,  seeking  for  the
final  solution  of  his  difficulties  in  the  doctrine  of  Zoroaster.  It
is  very  probable  that  he,  as  the  result  of  this  study,  engrafted
upon  the  system  of  Scythicus  whatever  features  of  the
Zendavesta  appeared  to  him  the  most  satisfactory,  and  consistent
best  with  his  preconceived  ideas  of  the  truth.  It  would  be
interesting  to  know  whether  he  shaped  all  these  fresh  acquisi
tions  into  conformity  with  the  original  Indian  groundwork  of
his  master's  system.  As  already  observed,  such  appears  to
have  been  his  course  from  the  title  that  he  assumed,  declaring
himself  an  eighth  "  Buddha,"  successor  to  the  famous  Gua-
tama,  founder  of  the  religion,  and  like  him  commissioned
to  teach  a  new  way  of  salvation.  Terrain  thus,  like  his  master,
came  to  an  untimely  end.  The  Magi  were  not  members  of  a
powerful  establishment  who  would  suffer  themselves  to  be
puzzled  and  confuted  by  an  over-wise  foreigner,  disputing  so

boldly—

"  Of  Providence,  foreknowledge,  will,  and  Fate,
Fixed  Fate,  freewill,  foreknowledge  absolute,"

still  less  to  allow  him  to  go  off  exulting  in  his  victory,  as  his
asserted  follower  Manes  likewise  found  to  his  cost.

Manes  himself  appears  to  have  belonged  to  the  order  of
Magi  (probably  being  admitted  after  gaining  his  freedom  and
changing  his  name),  for  he  is  reported  to  have  been  famous  for
his  skill  in  astrology,  medicine,  magic,  and  painting  !  This  last
is  curious ;  it  shows  that  the  Magi,  like  the  media3val  monks,
monopolised  the  arts  as  well  as  the  sciences  of  their  times.
Whether  he  conceived  the  scheme  from  the  accidental  acquisi
tion  of  the  writings  of  Scythicus  or  not  (M.  Matter  supposes  him
to  have  got  his  first  inspiration  from  some  Egyptian  Basilidan
who  had  found  his  way  into  Persia),  certain  it  is  that  he  first
gave  to  these  notions  a  definite  shape,  and  constructed  his
system  with  such  skill  that  it  spread  not  merely  all  over  the
East  but  throughout  Europe.  In  the  latter  region  its  im-


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  47

portanco  is  evinced  by  the  fact  (mentioned  incidentally  by
Ammianus)  that  Constantino  himself,  before  finally  changing
his  religion,  following  the  Apostolical  precept  "  Try  all  things,
hold  fast  that  which  is  good,"  carefully  studied  the  Manicha3an
system  under  the  guidance  of  the  learned  Musonianus,  whom
we  must  suppose  to  have  been  a  great  doctor  of  the  sect.*  Nay
more,  this  religion,  after  long  seeming  extinction  from  the
pertinacious  persecution  of  the  Byzantine  emperors,  again
blazed  forth  with  extraordinary  lustre  in  the  Paulicianism  of
the  Middle  Ages.

The  grand  purpose  of  the  scheme  of  Manes  was  the  reconcile
ment  of  the  two  religions,  which  had  by  that  time  come  to
dispute  the  empire  of  the  world — the  flourishing,  though  still
unrecognised  Christianity  of  Rome,  and  the  equally  vigorous
but  newly  revived  Zoroastrism  of  Sassanian  Persia.  Calling
himself  the  "  Promised  Paraclete,"  Manes  accepted  the  gospel,
but  only  after  purifying  it  from  all  taint  of  Judaism,  whilst  he
utterly  rejected  the  Old  Testament.  But  whilst  Zoroaster
makes  all  to  begin  in  the  harmony,  and  to  end  in  the  mutual
reconciliation  of  the  Two  Principles,  Manes  declares  these  Two
Principles  immutable  and  existent  from  all  eternity  as  they
shall  continue  for  ever  to  exist.  His  Good  is  Zoroaster's  "  Lord
of  Light " ;  but  his  Bad  is  Satan-Matter,  deliverance  from
whose  bondage  is  to  bo  obtained  only  through  the  strictest
asceticism.  From  the  Christian  Church  he  borrowed  its
institution  of  presbyters  and  deacons,  being  sensible  how
greatly  that  organisation  had  conduced  to  its  rapid  develop
ment,  and  in  his  own  enterprise  it  met  with  almost  equal
success.  Manes  was  a  genuine  Pantheist,  teaching  that  God
pervaded  all  things,  even  plants  (of  which  tenet  I  subjoin  a
singular  illustration  from  his  once  ardent  follower,  St.  Augus
tine)  ;  he  also  adopted  the  entire  theory  of  Emanations,  exactly

*  "  Constantinus  enim  cum  limatius  gium  dictitaturn." Ammianus  xv.  G.

superstitionum  qusoreret  sectas,  Ma-  The  sainted  Emperor's  eulogists  have

nichsBorum  et  similium,  nee  interpres  carefully  hushed  up  this  trait  of  an

inveniretur  idoneus,  hunc sibi com-  inquiring  spirit,  anxious  to  weigh  the

meudatum ut sufficientem elegit ;  relative  merits  of  the  existing  rivals

quern  officio  functum  perite  Musoni-  of  Catholicism,
auum  voluit  appellari  ante  Strate-


48  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

as  it  was  defined  in  the  older  Gnostic  systems.  St.  Augustine's
words  are  ('  Confessions '  iii.  10)  :  "  And  I,  not  understanding
this,  used  to  mock  at  those  holy  servants  and  prophets  of  thine.  *
And  what  was  I  doing  when  I  mocked  at  them,  except  that  I
myself  was  mocked  at  by  thee,  being  seduced  gently  and  by
degrees  into  such  absurdities  as  to  believe  that  the  fig  weeps
when  it  is  plucked,  and  likewise  its  parent  tree,  with  tears  of
milk  ?  Which  same  fig,  however,  should  any  holy  man  eat,  that
is  to  say,  after  it  has  been  plucked  through  the  sin  of  another,
not  by  his  own,  he  would  mingle  with  his  bowels,  and  breathe
out  of  it  angels,  nay  more,  particles  of  God  himself,  in  his  sighs
and  eructations  whilst  praying,  which  same  particles  of  the
Supreme  and  True  God  would  have  been  bound  up  in  that  fruit,
had  they  not  been  set  at  liberty  by  the  tooth  and  stomach  of  the
chosen  saint ;  and  I,  like  a  wretch,  believed  that  greater  com
passion  ought  to  be  shown  unto  the  fruits  of  the  earth  than  to
man,  for  whose  sake  they  were  created.  For  if  any  one  not
a  Manichtcan,  being  an  hungered,  should  ask  for  the  same,  it
would  have  been  thought  a  crime,  worthy  of  capital  punish
ment,  if  a  single  mouthful  thereof  were  given  to  him."
Compare  the  following  rule  of  the  Buddhist  priesthood  :  "  They
will  not  kill  any  animal,  neither  root  up  nor  cut  any  plant,
because  they  think  it  has  life."  (*  Ayeen  Akbari,'  p.  435.)

Manes  invented  a  theory  of  salvation,  so  very  whimsical
that  it  ought  to  be  inserted  here,  to  recreate  the  wanderer  in  this
dreary  and  dusky  theological  labyrinth.  "  When  the  Son  came
into  the  world  to  effect  the  redemption  of  mankind,  he  contrived
a  machine  containing  twelve  bowls  (cadi),f  which  being  made
to  revolve  by  the  motion  of  the  spheres,  attracts  into  itself  the
souls  of  the  dying.  These  the  Great  Luminary  (the  sun)  takes
and  purifies  with  his  rays,  and  then  transfers  to  the  moon ;  and
this  is  the  method  whereby  the  disk,  as  we  call  it,  of  the  moon
is  replenished."  Epiphanius  triumphantly  refutes  this  theory

*  Alluding  to  the  Manichsean  re-  of  Palmyra,  for  it  is  unmistakably

jection  of  the  Old  Testament  as  a  borrowed  from  the  eight  concentric

divine  revelation.  basins  set  in  motion,  one  inside  the

t  In  the  notion  of  this  machine  other,  by  the  fingers  of  the  Fates,  so

may  be  traced  the  influence  of  minutely  described  in  the  Vision  of

die  study  of  Plato  in  the  school  Er  the  Pamphylian.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


Ill


by  asking  how  the  moon's  disk  was  replenished  during  the  nine
hundred  years  that  elapsed  after  the  Creation  before  any  deaths
took  place  ?

But  the  career  of  this  inventive  heresiarch  was  speedily
brought  to  a  close.  The  Persian  king,  Varanes  I.  (about  the  year
275),  alarmed  by  the  rapid  spread  of  these  new  doctrines,
convoked  a  General  Council  of  the  Magi  to  sit  in  judgment
upon  them ;  by  whom  the  unlucky  apostle  was  pronounced  a
heretic,  and  a  traitor  to  his  own  brethren,  and  sentenced  to  be
flayed  alive.


BUDDHISM.

For  the  sake  of  comparison  with  the  above-described  systems,
all  based  upon  the  doctrine  of  successive  Emanations  from  One
First  Principle,  the  means  of  escaping  from  the  bondage  of
Matter,  and  the  struggles  of  the  souls  towards  ultimate  absorption
into  its  original  source,  I  shall  subjoin  a  very  brief  sketch  of  the
principal  features  of  the  Buddhistic  theosophy.*  Here  also  we
find  a  First  Buddha  in  his  proper  state  of  eternal  repose  (tho
Indolentia  of  Epicurus)  corresponding  to  the  Zoroastrian
"  Boundless  Time,"  and  the  Valentinian  "  Bythos."  AVhile  in
this  state  termed  "  Nevriti,"  wishing  to  create  the  universe  he
produced  the  Five  divine  Buddhas,  the  makers  of  the  Elements,
who  in  their  turn  produced  the  Five  Buddhasativas,  and  by
their  agency  created  the  material  world.  The  grand  aim  of
this  religion  is  to  effect  the  release  of  the  soul  from  its  connection
with  Matter.  All  things,  according  to  the  Buddhists,  exist  only
in  illusion,  consequently  they  can  only  return  into  non-existence
or  repose  by  means  of  True  Knowledge  (compare  the  Gnosis  we

*  Buddhism  was  founded  in  the  years  old. He  chose  Benares  for  the

fifth  century  before  our  era,  by  Sakya  centre  of  his  mission,  whence  in  the

Muni, son of  the  Raja  of  Kapila.  spaco  of  forty-five  years  his  doctrines

At  the  a^e  of  twenty-nine  he  began  were  diffused  over  the  fairest  districts

to study0  religion, and  by force of  of  the Ganges from the Delta  to

prayer became  the  embodiment  of  Agra  and  Cawnpore. His  death  is

the  Supreme  Deity  when  thirty-five  placed  by  some  writers  in  B.C.  477


50  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

are  considering).*  "  Illusion  "  is  the  belief  in  the  reality  of  the
eternal  world  ;  the  degradation  of  the  sonl  towards  Matter  is  the
effect  of  a  succession  of  acts  ;  and  therefore  its  release  is  effected
by  relinquishing  the  belief  in  the  reality  of  external  objects.

The  Buddhists  of  Nepal,  who  have  preserved  the  original
doctrines  of  the  religion  in  their  greatest  purity,  teach  the
following  cosmogony  :  Padnapani,  one  of  the  original  Five
Emanations,  created  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Siva,  or  the  Principles  of
Creation,  Preservation,  and  Destruction.  Adi-Buddha  first
created  thirteen  mansions  for  his  own  eternal  abode,  and  for
the  dwelling-place  after  death  of  Buddha's  followers.  Below
these  are  eighteen  mansions  made  by  Brahma;  lower  yet  are
six  made  by  Vishnu  ;  and  lowest  of  all  —  three,  the  work  of  Siva.
These  three  series  of  abodes  receive  the  souls  of  the  followers  of
their  respective  creators.

Below  all  these  lie  the  mansions  of  the  Planetary  gods,
Indra  and  Chandra;  and  after  these  there  comes  the  Earth
floating  upon  the  face  of  the  waters  like  a  boat.  Below
these  waters  are  the  Seven  Patala,  or  regions  of  Hell,  the  abode
of  evil  spirits  and  the  damned.  This  arrangement  presents  tho
most  striking  resemblance  to  the  construction  of  the  Ophite
Diagramma  (to  be  given  further  on),  which  Origen  has  described
from  the  original,  and  which  M.  Matter  has  reconstructed  from
Origen's  description  to  illustrate  his  treatise  in  his  Plate  X.

The  promulgation  of  these  Indian  speculations  from  so  remote
a  source—  a  difficulty  at  first  sight  insurmountable  —  may
nevertheless  be  readily  explained.  The  spirit  of  this  religion
was  the  spirit  of  proselytism  ;  the  Buddhists  from  the  very
beginning  sent  out  their  missionaries  (some  of  whose  narratives,
full  of  interest,  are  extant  and  have  been  translated  from  the
Chinese)  with  all  the  zeal  of  the  old  Propaganda.  From  the

*  The Buddhist  "  Confession of  causes  of  the  cessation  of  existence."

Faith," regularly set up in the  The  essence  of  the  religion  therefore

temples,  engraven  on  a  stone  tablet,  is  Perfect  Knowledge;  the  object  of

runs  thus  :  "  Of  all  things  proceeding  Virgil's  aspiration  —


"  F°tuit

Sarinana  hath  likewise  explained  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  51

mainland  they  converted  Ceylon,  Japan,  and  the  recesses  ofTar-
tary ;  and  penetrated  into  regions  where  their  former  presence  and
tolerated  existence  are  now  little  dreamed  of.*  That  Buddhism
had  been  actually  planted  in  the  dominions  of  the  Seleucidoe
and  the  Ptolemies  (Palestine  belonging  to  the  former)  before
the  end  of  the  fourth  century,  at  least,  before  our  era  is  shown
by  a  clause  in  the  Edicts  of  Asoka.  This  prince  was  grand
son  to  Chandragupta  (the  Sandracottus  of  the  Greeks,  con
temporary  and  friend  of  Seleucus  I.),  who,  at  the  head  of  an
army  of  60,000  men,  had  conquered  all  India  within  the  Ganges.
Asoka,  at  first  a  licentious  tyrant,  had  embraced  the  newly
preached  doctrines  of  Buddhism,  a  Brahminical  Protestantism,
and  propagated  them  by  persuasion  and  by  force  through  the
length  and  breadth  of  his  immense  kingdom,  with  all  the  usual
zeal  of  a  new  convert.

The  Edicts  referred  to  are  graven  on  a  rock  tablet  at  Girnur
in  Guzerat.  To  quote  the  words  of  the  Indian  Archaeologist
Prinsep,  to  whom  the  discovery  is  due,  (article  xvii.  '  Indian
Antiquities ' ).  "I  am  now  about  to  produce  evidence  that
Asoka'sf  acquaintance  with"  geography  was  not  limited  to  Asia,
and  that  his  expansive  benevolence  towards  living  creatures
extended,  at  least  in  intention,  to  another  quarter  of  the  globe,
that  his  religious  ambition  sought  to  apostolize  Egypt,  and  that
we  must  look  hereafter  for  traces  of  the  introduction  of  Buddhism
into  the  fertile  valley  of  the  Nile,  so  productive  of  metaphysical
discussions  from  the  earliest  ages.  The  lino  which  I  allude  to
is  the  fifth  from  the  bottom.  'And  the  Greek  King  (Yoni-
raja)  {  besides,  by  whom  the  Chapta  (Egyptian)  Kings,  Ptole-

*  Two  Chinese  pilgrims,  Fa  Hian  dence,  have  been  found  to  be  to  a  large
and  Hiouen  Thsang,  visited  Benares  extent  singularly  correct.  See  *  Me
at  the  beginning  of  the  fifth,  and  at  moires  de  Hiouen  Thsang,'  translated
the  middle  of  the  seventh  centuries  from  the  Chinese  by  Stanislas  Julien.
of  our  era.  These  keen  and  sagacious  f  Asoka's  zeal  was  so  ardent  that
observers  have  left  records  of  their  he  sent  his  son  and  daughter,  Ma-
travels  in  India  of  the  utmost  import-  hendra  and  Saugamitra,  as  missiou-
anco  to  the  historian  and  antiquary.  aries  to  Ceylon ;  who  in  a  short  time
Their  narratives  are,  for  the  most  effected  the  conversion  of  the  island
part,  plain  matter-of-fact  productions,  to  their  new  religion,
free  from  the  haze  and  uncertainty  of  %  The  Persian  envoy  in  Aristo-
Hindoo  writings  ;  and  whenever  they  phanes'  Acharniana  used  the  same
have  been  tested  by  extraneous  evi-  word,  'ia6vav.  for  the  Greek  nation.

E  2


52  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

maios,  and  Gonkakenos  (Antigonus  Gonatas)  have  "been  induced
to  allow  that  both  here  and  in  foreign  countries  everywhere  the
people  may  follow  the  doctrine  of  the  religion  of  Devanipya,
wheresoever  it  reacheth.' "  The  "  Essenes,"  so  like  to
Buddhist  Monks  in  many  particulars  (for  which  see  the  minute
description  of  this  ascetic  rule  as  given  by  Josephus,  '  Antiq.
Jud.'  xv.  10),  had  been  established  on  the  shores  of  the  Dead
Sea  for  "  thousands  of  ages  "  before  Pliny's  time.  "  On  the
West  its  shores,  so  far  as  they  are  unhealthy,  are  shunned  by
the  Esseni,  a  solitary  race,  and  wonderful  beyond  all  others  on
the  globe ;  without  woman,  renouncing  all  usual  enjoyment,
without  money,  associates  of  the  palm-trees,  from  day  to  day
they  are  recruited  by  the  flocks  of  new-comers :  all  those
flocking  in  numerously  whom  the  world  drives  from  itself,  all
tempest-tossed  by  the  waves  of  fortune.  In  this  way,  incredible
to  tell,  the  race  wherein  no  birth  ever  takes  place,  has  endured
for  thousands  of  years,  so  prolific  for  them  is  other  people's
disgust  at  the  world  "  (Hist.  Nat.  v.  15).  The  great  Naturalist's
"  thousands  of  years  "  must  be  allowed  as  one  of  his  favourite
oratorical  tropes,  but  nevertheless  serves  for  testimony  to  the
belief  in  the  great  antiquity  of  the  sect.  Perhaps  they  may
have  been  a  continuation  of  those  early  ascetic  associations
known  as  the  "  Schools  of  the  Prophets."

The  influence  of  Jewish  Essenism  upon  primitive  Chris
tianity  (as  to  rules  of  life  at  least)  is  a  thing  that  will  not  be
disputed  by  any  who  have  read,  with  a  wish  to  learn  the
truth,  not  to  evade  it,  the  account  of  it  given  by  Josephus.
But  over  the  semi-Christian  Gnostics  of  Syria  such  long-esta
blished  authority  must  have  had  a  still  stronger  influence.  It
is  easy  to  discover  how  the  source  of  the  slavish  notions
about  the  merits  of  asceticism,  penances,  and  self-torture  (of
which  Simon  Stylites  is  the  most  conspicuous  illustration),  was
the  same  one  whence  the  Indian  fakirs  drew  their  practice —
for  even  in  their  methods  they  were  identical.  Simon's  cele
brated  life-penance  (which  gives  him  his  title),  undergone  upon
the  summit  of  a  lofty  pillar,  had  been  practised  in  the  same
regions  many  generations  before  his  time.  The  pseudo-Lucian,
in  his  amusing  description  of  the  famous  Temple  of  the  "  Syrian


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  53

Goddess  "  at  Emesa  ('  De  Dea  Syria '),  particularly  notices  the
phallus  or  obelisk,  300  feet  high,  planted  in  front  of  the
edifice,  upon  the  apex  of  which  the  devotee  sat  without  bleep
for  one  and  twenty  days  and  nights,  keeping  himself  awake  by
constantly  ringing  a  handbell.  Ideas  like  these  pervade  the
Christianity  of  the  Lower  Empire,  nay,  they  constitute  the
very  essence  of  the  religion.  Neither  is  it  difficult  to  see  upon
how  many  points  Manes,  with  his  rigid  Buddhistic  tenets,  came
into  collision  with  the  humane  and  rational  law  of  Zu roaster
(the  brightest  system  of  natural  religion  ever  promulgated),
and  what  good  causes  Yaranes,  with  his  spiritual  advisers,  had
for  condemning  his  heresy.

In  our  investigation  of  this  particular  subject  it  must  never
bo  forgotten  that  so  long  as  philosophy  was  cultivated  in  Greece,
(even  from  the  times  of  the  Samian  sage,  inventor  of  the  naniej,
India  was  often  regarded  as  the  ultimate  and  purest  source  of
the  "  True  Wisdom,"  the  knowledge  of  things  divine.  Even
so  late  as  Lucian's  time,  the  middle  of  the  second  century,  that
author  concludes  his  evidently  true  history  of  Antiphilus  and
Demetrius,  by  making  the  latter,  a  cynic  philosopher  by
profession,  resign  all  his  property  to  his  friend,  and  depart  for
India,  there  to  end  his  life  amongst  the  Brachmaiies,  ('  Toxaris,'
34).  In  the  same  century  the  well-known  pilgrimage  of
Apollonius  of  Tyana,  and  his  deep  conference  with  the  Indian
philosophers,  as  recorded  by  his  companion  Damis,  go  to  prove
the  same  thing ;  and  although  the  meagre  journal  of  the  sage's
travelling  companion  may  have  been  largely  supplemented  and
embellished  by  the  fancy  of  his  editor,  Philostratus,*  the  main
features  of  the  narrative  are  doubtless  authentic.  The  great
thaumaturgist's  proceedings,  as  there  detailed,  show  how  the
apparent  difficulty  of  such  a  pilgrimage  vanishes  upon  a  better
knowledge  of  the  circumstances.  Apollonius  presents  himself,
first  of  all,  to  the  Parthian  King,  Bardaiies  (a  "  Hiilhelleiie  "
as  he  yet  boasts  himself  upon  his  coinage),  and  as  warm  an
admirer  of  Grecian  savants  as  any  of  his  Achaiinenian  pre-

*  Who  composed  his  very  interest- a century after the death of tho
ing 'Life of Apollouius' at the philosopher,
request  of  the  EUJ press  Julia,  about


54  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

decessors,  from  whom  he  obtains  a  firman  securing  to  him
protection  and  entertainment,  everywhere  within  the  limits  of
his  rule,  which  extended  then,  probably,  as  far  as  the  Indus.
Thenceforward  his  letters  of  recommendation  from  the  *'  King  of
Kings  "  to  the  various  native  princes  his  allies,  secure  to  the
traveller  an  equally  favourable  reception.  A  safe  and  regular
communication  between  the  extreme  points  of  the  Persian
Empire  had  been  from  the  beginning  the  great  care  of  its
mighty  rulers  (the  first  institutors  of  highways,  posting-stages,
and  post-horses),  passing  through  what  was  not,  as  now,  a  series
of  deserts  infested  by  robber-tribes,  but  a  populous  and  well-
cultivated  country;  so  favoured,  with  a  passport  from  the
sovereign,  the  pilgrim  would  find  his  journey  both  expeditious
and  agreeable.

The  same  facilities  were  necessarily  made  use  of  by  the  natives
of  Hindustan.  It  is  curious  to  observe  how  the  occasional
"  Brachman  "  who  found  his  way  into  Greece  was  received  as  a
model  philosopher — like  that  Zarmanes  Chagan,  who,  coming
from  Bargose  (Baroclie),  finally  burnt  himself  alive  upon  a
pyre  at  Athens,  in  the  reign  of  Augustus  ;  of  which  edifying
spectacle  Nicolaus  Damascenus  was  eye-witness  (Strabo  XV.).
Before  him,  we  have  Calanas  the  *'  gymnosophist "  (a  happy
Greek  expression  for  fakir)  in  high  repute  at  Alexander's
court,  and  who  similarly  chose  to  leave  earth  in  a  "  chariot  of
fire."  Their  example  was  followed  by  the  "Peregrinus
Proteus,"  so  happily  ridiculed  by  Lucian  in  his  book  thus
entitled ;  Proteus,  to  give  his  apotheosis  as  much  celebrity  as
possible,  chose  for  its  scene  the  occasion  of  the  Olympic  games.
This  last  worthy  had  been  a  philosopher,  then  a  Christian
teacher,  and  lastly  had  started  a  new  religion  of  his  own
invention.  That  the  sect  so  celebrated  by  the  ancients  under
the  name  of  "  Brachrnanes  "  was  Buddhistic,  not  Brahminical,
may  be  inferred  from  their  locality,  Bactria ;  and  yet  more
from  a  circumstance  mentioned  by  Strabo  (Book  XV.).  He
speaks  of  their  devoting  thirty  years  to  the  study  of  Theology,
living  in  a  community  (a  vihar  or  monastery),  sequestered  from
the  world  in  the  midst  of  forests  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
different  cities,  and  totally  abstaining  from  sexual  intercourse,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  55

and  all  animal  food ;  on  the  contrary,  the  Brahmins  hold  that
to  leave  children  behind  them  is  a  most  sacred  duty,  and  one
upon  which  their  admission  into  heaven  depends.  Whether
the  Buddhists  be  the  true. representatives  of  the  primal  religion*
of  their  country,  or  only  the  Reformers  of  the  more  ancient
Brahminical  Church,  it  is  the  natural  weapon  of  all  dissenters
from  an  established  creed,  to  ridicule  and  even  to  pronounce
damnable,  the  favourite  tenets  of  their  adversaries.  Witness
Martin  Luther  with  his  invectives  against  vows  of  virginity,
and  his  well-known  motto

"  Wer  nicht  liebt  Weib,  Wein  und  Gesang,
Der  bleibt  ein  Narr  sein  Leben  lang."

Similarly  wo  find  the  Essenes  running  counter  to  the  ancient
prejudices  of  their  nation,  and  spontaneously  embracing  what
the  Mosaic  Law  had  denounced  as  the  greatest  of  curses — the
leaving  no  offspring  behind  to  keep  up  their  name  in  Israel.

To  exemplify  the  severe  discipline  maintained  in  the  Brah
man  communities,  Strabo  mentions  that  the  mere  act  of  blow
ing  the  nose,  or  spitting,  caused  the  offender  to  bo  excluded  for
that  day,  as  incontinent,  from  the  society  of  his  fellow-recluses.
Similarly  Josephus  particularises,  amongst  other  Essenian  rules,
the  obligation  of  abstaining  from  all  natural  evacuations  upon
the  Sabbath  day.  But  even  their  rigour  is  surpassed,  and  in  our
day  too,  by  a  certain  sect  of  Indian  Yogis,  who  profess  to  have
completely  emancipated  themselves  from  all  such  defiling
necessities  of  nature.  This  they  effect  by  living  entirely  upon
milk,  which,  after  retaining  a  short  time  in  the  stomach,  they
throw  up  again  by  swallowing  a  ball  fastened  to  a  string ;  and
maintain  the  animal  expenditure  solely  through  the  nutriment
imbibed  by  the  system  during  the  continuance  of  the  liquid  in
the  stomach  ;  and  which  consequently  leaves  no  residuum  to
descend  into  the  lower  bowels.  A  doctrine  this,  the  finest

*  Which  of  course  their  theologians  for  the  most  part  are  worshippers  of

claim  to  be,  ami  treat  the  Brahmins  Siva." And yet he  candidly  owns

as  corrupters  of  the  true  faith. For  that  the  Buddhists  possessed  no  more

example Hionen Thsang : "They  than thirty  monasteries, numbering

reckon  (in  the  kingdom  of  Benares)  only  three  thousand  members,  in  the

a  hundred  temples  of  gods,  inhabited  same  place,
by  about  tell  thousand  herdics,  who


56  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

possible  redudio  ad  absurdam  of  the  notion  of  meritorious  con
tinence,  and  exhibiting  on  the  ludicrous  side  the  mischief  of
being  too  logical  in  matters  of  religion.

As  for  the  profundity  of  the  philosophical  speculations  of  the
Orientals,  even  at  a  very  late  period,  the  Byzantine  Agathias
quotes  a  very  remarkable  example.  Chosroes  (better  known
to  us  as  Nushirwan  the  Just),  besides  giving  an  asylum,  as  to
his  brethren,  to  the  last  Athenian  philosophers,  when  expelled
from  their  chairs  by  the  stupid  bigot  Justinian,  caused  all
Plato's  works  to  be  translated  into  Persian,  and  professed  to  be
himself  able  to  comprehend  even  the  mysteries  of  the  '  Tirnasus.'
The  Greek  sophist  is  naturally  indignant  at  the  impudence  of
the  foreigner  who  could  pretend  that  "  his  own  barbarous  and
rustic  language  "  was  capable  of  expressing  the  divine  thoughts
of  the  Athenian  sage ;  for  he  little  suspected  that  the  great
King,  or  at  any  rate  the  Magi  and  "  Sufis  "  about  him,  were
masters  of  the  sources  whence  Plato  may  have  ultimately  drawn
his  inspiration  whilst  planning  that  inscrutable  composition.
The  religious  instruction  of  the  Persian  princes  had  from  the
beginning  been  carefully  attended  to,  and  proficiency  therein
was  a  matter  of  pride :  thus  Cyrus  the  younger  puts  forward
his  superior  knowledge  of  Theology  (in  his  manifesto  upon
claiming  the  kingdom)  as  a  just  cause  why  he  should  be
preferred  to  his^elder  brother.

Leaving  out  of  the  question  the  now  received  theory  as  to
the  immigration  of  the  "  Indo-Germanic  "  race  into  the  farthest
recesses  of  Europe,  modern  history  furnishes  the  example  of  ex
tensive  migration,  effected  under  infinitely  greater  difficulties,  by
the  hordes  of  low-caste  Hindoos,  who,  flying  from  the  invasion
of  Tamerlane,  spread  themselves  all  over  Europe  as  Gipsies,  still
retaining  their  native  language  and  habits,  and  to  the  present
day  claiming  "  Sind"  or  "  Siridha"  for  their  national  name.

The  facts  adduced  in  the  foregoing  sketch  will  suffice  to
indicate  the  manner  in  which  the  germs  of  the  various  Gnostic
doctrines  were  impoited  from  the  East,  how  they  M  ve  engrafted
upon  previously  existing  notions,  and  how  vigorously  they
flourished  when  transplanted  into  the  kindly  soil  of  Alexandria
and  Ephesus.  To  complete  the  general  view  of  the  subject,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


57


before  proceeding  to  consider  the  tangible  monuments  left  us
by  these  ideas,  it  will  be  necessary  to  give  some  account  of  the
forms  in  which  they  attained  to  their  fullest  development.
For  this  purpose  I  shall  select  the  three  principal  systems,  re
presented  by  historians  as  the  parents  of  all  the  rest,  those  of
Simon  Magus,  Bcuilides,  and  the  Ojjltitcs ;  the  most  satisfactory
manner  of  doing  which  will  bo  to  transcribe  the  exact  words
of  the  well-informed  and  impartial  llippolytus.


FIG.  3.


58  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


SIMONIANISM.

"It  is  my  intention  hero  to  exhibit  the  system  of  Simon
Magus,  a  native  of  Gitteh  in  Samaria,  and  I  will  prove  that
from  him  all  those  that  come  after  have  derived  the  elements
of  their  doctrines,  and  impudently  attempted  the  same  things
under  different  appellations.  This  Simon  was  skilled  in  magic
and  had  imposed  upon  great  numbers,  partly  by  practising  the
art  of  Thrasymedes  after  the  manner  which  I  have  already
exposed  (in  the  Book  upon '  Magicians  '),  and  partly  by  miracle-
working  through  the  agency  of  demons.  He  attempted  to
set  up  for  a  god,  being  a  thorough  impostor  and  altogether
unscrupulous  and  daring ;  for  he  was  that  one  whom  the
Apostles  confuted,  as  is  recorded  in  the  Acts.

"  Much  more  wisely  therefore  and  sensibly  than  Simon  did
that  Apscthus  act,  when  he  aimed  at  being  accounted  a  god,
who  went  to  work  in  Libya ;  whose  story,  not  being  very
dissimilar  to  the  scheme  of  our  foolish  Simon,  it  were  fitting
here  to  quote,  inasmuch  as  it  is  quite  of  a  piece  with  the
procedure  of  the  latter.

"  Apsethus  the  Libyan  was  very  desirous  of  making  himself  a
god,  but  when,  after  long  labouring,  he  had  failed  in  his
endeavours,  he  wanted,  as  the  next  best  thing,  to  be  supposed  to
have  made  himself  a  god ;  and  in  fact  for  a  considerable  time
he  did  enjoy  such  a  reputation.  For  the  simple  Libyans  used
to  sacrifice  to  him  as  to  a  Divine  Power,  in  the  belief  that  they
were  obeying  a  voice  sent  forth  out  of  Heaven.  He  had  got
together  and  confined  several  parrots  in  one  and  the  same  little
room,  for  parrots  are  plentiful  all  over  Libya,  and  they  distinctly
mimic  the  human  voice ;  and  having  kept  these  birds  for  some
time,  he  taught  them  to  say  '  Apsethus  is  a  god.'  And  when
the  birds  in  course  of  time  were  taught,  and  could  speak  that
sentence  which  he  supposed,  when  spoken,  would  cause  him
to  pass  for  a  god,  then  he  opened  their  place  of  confinement.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  59

and  allowed  the  parrots  to  escape  in  different  directions.  And
as  the  birds  flew  about,  the  sound  was  carried  all  over  Libya,
and  the  words  travelled  as  far  as  the  Greek  territory  (Gyrene)  ;
and  thus  the  Libyans,  being  struck  with  amazement  at  the
voice  of  the  birds,  and  not  suspecting  the  trick  played  them  by
Apsethus,  accounted  him  a  god.  But  one  of  the  Greeks  having
clearly  detected  the  contrivance  of  the  supposed  deity,  did,  by
means  of  the  self- same  parrots,  not  merely  confute,  but  also
extinguish  that  vain-glorious  and  impudent  fellow.  This  Greek
caged  several  of  the  same  parrots,  and  taught  them  to  utter  a
contrary  strain,  *  Apsethus  shut  us  up,  and  forced  us  to  say
Apsethus  is  a  god.'  But  when  the  Libyans  heard  this  recan
tation  of  the  parrots,  they  all  came  together  with  one  accord,
and  burnt  Apsethus  alive,

"  In  this  light  wo  ought  to  regard  the  magician  Simon,
and  compare  him  to  this  Libyan,  a  man  who  made  him
self  a  god  in  that  very  expeditious  manner ;  for  in  truth  the
comparison  holds  good  in  all  particulars,  and  the  sorcerer  met
with  a  fate  not  unlike  that  of  Apsethus.  I  will  therefore
endeavour  to  un-tcach  Simon's  parrots  by  showing  that  Simon
was  not  the  Christ  '  AVho  hath  stood,  standeth,  and  shall
stand,'  but  a  man,  mortal,  generated  from  the  seed  of  woman,
begotten  from  blood  and  carnal  concupiscence  like  the  rest  of
mankind  :  and  that  such  was  the  fact  I  shall  clearly  demonstrate
in  the  course  of  my  narrative.  For  Simon  speaks,  when  in
terpreting  the  Law  of  Moses,  in  an  impudent  and  fraudulent
fashion,  for  whenever  Moses  says  '  Our  God  is  a  burning  and
a  consuming  fire,'  Simon,  taking  what  Moses  has  said  in  a  false
sense,  maintains  that  Fire  is  the  Principle  of  all  things.  lie
does  not  perceive  the  true  meaning  that  God  is  not  '  a  fire,'
but  '  a  burning  and  a  consuming  fire,'  and  so  not  only  mutilates
the  Law  of  Moses,  but  plagiarises  from  Heraclitus,  suriiamed
*  the  Obscure.'  For  Simon  designates  the  Principle  of  all
things  *  Boundless  Power '  in  the  following  words :  *  This  is
the  Book  of  the  Declaration  of  the  Voice,  and  of  the  Name,  from
the  inspiration  of  the  Great,  the  Boundless  Power.  Wherefore
the  same  is  sealed,  hidden,  wrapped  up,  stored  in  the  dwelling
wherein  the  lioot  of  all  things  is  established.'  This  dwelling


60  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

he  says,  signifies  Man  here  below,  who  is  born  of  blood,  and
also  signifies  that  there  dwells  within  him  that  '  Boundless
Power'  which  he  asserts  is  the  Root  of  all  things.  But  this
Boundless  Power  (or  Fire,  according  to  Simon)  is  not  a  simple
substance,  in  the  same  way  as  most  people  who  call  the
Elements  '  simple '  account  Fire  likewise  as  simple  :  on  the
contrary,  he  maintains  that  the  nature  of  Fire  is,  as  it  were,
double ;  and  of  this  double  number  he  terms  one  part  the
Insensible,  the  other  the  Visible;  asserting  that  the  insensible
are  contained  within  the  visible  parts  of  the  Fire,  and  that  the
visible  parts  are  generated  by  the  invisible.  (This  is  the  same
thing  that  Aristotle  expresses  by  his  '  Force  '  and  '  Energy ' ;
and  Plato  by  his  '  Intelligible  '  and  *  Sensible.')

"  Again  the  Visible  part  of  Fire  contains  within  itself  all  things
whatsoever  one  can  perceive,  or  even  fail  to  perceive,  of  things
visible.  The  Invisible,  on  the  other  hand,  is  whatsoever  one
can  conceive  as  an  object  of  thought,  but  which  escapes  the
sense,  or  even  what  one  fails  to  comprehend  by  the  thought.
And  to  sum  up,  it  may  be  said  that  of  all  things  that  exist,
whether  objects  of  sense  or  of  thought,  or,  as  Simon  terms  them,
Visible  and  Invisible,  the  store-house  is  the  Great  Fire  that  is
above  the  heavens :  '  As  it  were  a  great  Tree,  like  to  that  seen
in  his  dream  by  Nabuchadonosor,  from  the  which  all  flesh  was
fed.'  And  the  Visible  he  considers  to  be  the  trunk  of  the  Tree
and  the  branches,  and  the  leaves,  and  the  bark  surrounding  the
same  on  the  outside.  All  these  parts  of  the  great  Tree,  says
he,  are  kindled  from  the  all-devouring  flame  of  the  Fire,  and
are  destroyed.  But  the  Fruit  of  the  Tree,  if  it  takes  a  shape
and  assumes  a  proper  form,  is  laid  up  in  a  storehouse,  and  not
cast  into  the  fire.  For  the  fruit  is  made  in  order  that  it  may  be
laid  up  in  the  storehouse,  but  the  husk  that  it  may  be  committed
to  the  fire  ;  which  same  is  the  trunk,  ordained  not  for  the  sake
of  the  husk  but  of  the  fruit.

"And  this,  according  to  Simon,  is  what  is  written  in  the
Scripture  :  '  The  vineyard  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  the  House  of
Israel,  and  a  man  of  Judah  the  well-beloved  branch  thereof.'
Now,  if  a  man  of  Judah  be  the  '  well-beloved  branch,'  it  is  a
proof  that  the  wood  can  be  nothing  else  than  a  man.  But  as


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  61

regards  the  excretion  and  the  dispersion  from  the  same,  the
Scripture  hath  spoken  fully  and  sufficiently  for  the  instruction
of  all  such  as  be  brought  to  their  perfect  form  :  according  to
the  saying,  *  All  flesh  is  grass,  and  the  glory  thereof  as  the
flower  of  the  grass;  the  grass  withereth,  the  flower  thereof
fadeth,  but  the  Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever.'  Now
this  Word  of  the  Lord,  says  Simon,  is  the  word  that  is  produced
in  the  mouth,  that  is,  Speech ;  for  the  place  of  its  birth  is
nowhere  else.

"  To  be  brief  therefore  :  since,  according  to  Simon,  the  Fire  is
of  the  aforesaid  nature,  and  all  things  that  be,  both  visible  and
invisible,  and  vocal  and  voiceless,  and  numbered  and  un
numbered,  are  this  Fire,  therefore  in  his  '  Great  Bevelation '  ho
terms  this  the  Fountain-head  of  all,  the  Great  Intellectual,  as
constituting  each  individual  of  all  things  in  their  infinite  order,
which  are  capable  of  being  conceived  in  the  mind,  and  likewise
of  speaking,  of  thinking,  and  of  acting.  As  Empedocles
hath  it—

" '  Through  Earth,  the  Earth  perceive,  through  Water,  Water ;
Through.  Air  scan  Air;  through  Fire  the  hidden  Fire;
Through  Love  view  Love;  through  Discord,  hateful  Discord.'

"  For  Simon  held  that  all  the  members  of  this  Fire,  both  the
Visible  and  the  Invisible,  possessed  intelligence  and  a  portion  of
mind.  The  world  that  is  created,  consequently,  according  to
him,  comes  from  the  uncreated  Fire.  The  commencement  of
its  creation  was  in  this  wise  :  six  '  Eadicals '  (  lit.  Boots),  the
First  Principles  of  the  beginning  of  Creation,  were  taken  by
the  Begotten  One  out  of  the  Principle  of  that  Fire;  for  he
asserts  that  these  Six  Eadicals  emanated  by  pairs  out  of  the
Fire.  These  Six  Eadicals  he  names,  'Mind  and  Intelligence,
Voice  and  Name,  Eeason  and  Thought.'  And  there  exists  in
these  Eadicals  taken  together  the  whole  of  the  'Boundless
Power,'  but  existing  in  potentiality,  not  in  activity.  And  this
Boundless  Power  Simon  calls  '  He  who  standeth,  hath  stood,
and  shall  stand  ; '  who,  if  ho  shall  be  figured  (invested  with
form)  when  he  is  in  those  Six  Powers,  shall  be  in  reality,  force,
power  and  perfection,  the  one  and  the  same  with  the  Un-
begotten  Boundless  Power.  But  if  he  shall  abide  in  potentiality


62  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

alone  in  those  Six  Powers,  and  not  assume  a/orwz,  he  vanishes
and  perishes,  as  does  a  grammatical  or  a  geometrical  power
in  a  man's  mind.  For  potentiality,  when  it  has  gotten  art,
becomes  the  light  of  things  generated;  but  when  it  has  not
gotten  art  (execution)  it  remains  in  inertness  and  darkness,  and
exactly  as  when  it  did  not  exist  at  all,  and  dies  with  the  man
upon  his  death.

"  Now  of  these  Six  Powers,  and  of  the  Seventh  which  goes
along  with  them,  the  First  Thought  Simon  terms  '  Mind  and
Intellect,'  '  Heaven  and  Earth ' ;  teaching  that  the  one  of  the
male  sex  looks  down  upon  and  takes  care  of  his  consort ;  whilst
the  Earth  below  receives  from  Heaven  the  '  Intellect,'  and
fruits  of  the  same  nature  with  the  Earth,  which  are  poured
down  from  above.  For  this  cause,  says  Simon,  the  Word,  often
looking  down  upon  the  things  that  spring  out  of  Mind  and
Intellect,  says,  '  Hear,  0  Heavens,  and  receive  with  thine  ears,
O  Earth !  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken :  I  have  begotten  and
brought  up  sons,  but  they  have  despised  me.'  He  that  saith
this  is  the  Seventh  Power,  '  He  who  standeth,  hath  stood,  and
shall  stand  ; '  for  He  is  the  author  of  those  good  things  which
Moses  commended,  saying  that  they  were  very  good.

'  Voice  and  name  are  the  Sun  and  Moon ;  *  Reason  and
Thought '  are  air  and  water.  But  with  all  of  these  is  mingled
and  combined  that  Boundless  Power,  '  He  who  standeth,'  as  I
have  already  mentioned.

"  Therefore  when  Moses  says,  '  In  six  days  the  Lord  made
heaven  and  earth,  and  on  the  seventh  day  he  rested  from  all  his
works,'  Simon,  distorting  the  passage  after  the  aforesaid
fashion,  makes  himself  out  to  be  God.  "When  therefore,  the
Simonians  say  that  there  were  three  days  before  the  Sun  and
the  Moon  were  made,  they  understand  by  it  Mind  and  Intelli
gence,  or  Heaven  and  Earth,  and  also  that  '  Boundless  Power '
of  theirs.  For  these  three  Powers  were  made  before  all  the  rest.
Again,  where  it  is  said :  '  Before  all  the  world  he  hath  begotten
me,'  these  words,  as  they  pretend,  refer  to  the  Seventh  Power
Now  this  Seventh  Power,  who  was  a  Power  existing  within  the
Boundless  Power,  and  who  was  made  before  all  the  world,  this,
as  Simon  teaches,  is  that  Seventh  Power  of  whom  Moses  spake :


THE GNOSTICS  AND THEIR REMAINS.  63

*  And  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  tho  face  of  tho  waters,'
that  is  to  say,  the  Spirit  containing  all  things  within  itself,  tho
Image  of  tho  Boundless  Power,  concerning  which  Simon  saith,

*  tho  image  is  tho  incorruptible  Power  governing  all  things  by
himself ! '

"  Now  the'creation  of  the  world  having  been  after  this  or  a
similar  fashion,  God,  says  he,  made  Man  out  of  clay  taken  from
the  earth ;  and  he  made  them  not  single,  but  double,  both  as
regards  the  image,  and  the  likeness.  For  the  image  is  the
Spirit  moving  upon  the  face  of  the  waters,  who,  if  he  be  not
clothed  with  form  will  perish  together  with  the  world,  inas
much  as  ho  abode  merely  in  potentiality,  and  was  not  made
concrete  by  activity.  For  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  Scripture :

*  Lest  wo  be  condemned  together  with  the  world.' But  if  it
shall  take  a  form,  and  spring  out  of  an  indivisible  point,  it  is
what  is  written  in  the  Eevelation : '  The  little  shall become
great.' This '  Great ' shall continue to all eternity, and
unchangeable,  inasmuch  as  it  is  no  longer  to  le  made  (z'.e.,  no
longer  abstract).

"  In  what  way  therefore,  and  after  what  manner  did  God  form
man  ?  In  Paradise — for  in  this  point  Simon  also  agreed.  But
this  '  paradise '  must  be  the  womb  (according  to  him),  and  that
such  is  the  true  explanation  is  proved  by  the  Scripture,  which
saith,  '  I  am  he  that  formed  thee  in  thy  mother's  womb,'  for  so
he  will  have  it  to  be  written.  The  womb  Moses  called  Paradise
by  an  allegory,  if  we  choose  to  listen  to  the  word  of  God ;  for  if
God  did  form  man  in  his  mother's  womb,  that  is,  in  paradise
then  *  Paradise  '  must  needs  signify  the  womb.  *  Eden  '  is
that  same  region,  and  the  river  going  forth  out  of  Eden  to
water  the  garden,  is  the  navel.  This  navel  is  divided  into  four
heads;  because  from  each  part  thereof  proceed  two  arteries
running  side  by  side,  channels  for  the  breath ;  and  also  two
veins,  channels  for  the  blood.  When,  therefore,  this  navel
proceeding  out  of  the  region,  Eden,  is  attached  to  the  foetus  at
the  lower  belly  which  we  commonly  term  the  navel.  .  .  [Here
some  words  are  evidently  lost].  And  the  two  veins  through
which  the  blood  flows,  and  is  carried  out  of  the  region  Eden,
through  what  are  called  'the  gates  of  the  liver'  which  nourish


64  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

the  embryo.  Again,  the  two  tubes  which  we  have  spoken  of  as
the  channels  of  the  blood,  embrace  the  bladder  at  each  side  of
the  pelvis,  and  touch  the  great  artery  which  runs  along  the
same,  called  the  aorta ;  and  thus  the  breath,  passing  through
the  veins  into  the  heart,  produces  the  motion  of  the  embryo.
For  so  long  as  the  child  is  being  formed  in  '  paradise,'  it  neither
takes  nourishment  through  the  mouth,  nor  breathes  through
the  nostrils ;  for,  placed  as  it  is  in  the  midst  of  fluid,  it  would  be
instant  death  for  it,  were  it  to  breathe,  inasmuch  as  it  would
draw  a  fluid  and  be  destroyed.  Moreover,  the  child  is  conceived
within  an  envelope,  which  is  called  the  aminium ;  but  it  receives
nourishment  through  the  navel,  and  takes  in  the  essence  of  the
breath  through  the  dorsal  artery  above  described.  The  Eiver,
therefore,  going  forth  out  of  Eden,  is  divided  into  four  heads,
namely,  Seeing,  Hearing,  Smelling,  Touching  and  Tasting,  for
these  are  the  only  senses  that  the  infant  formed  in  Paradise  is
possessed  of.

"  This  then,  according  to  Simon,  is  the  law  which  Moses  gave
and  his  Four  Books  are  written  in  accordance  with  that  law,  as
their  own  titles  do  manifest.  For  the  first  book  is  Genesis;  the
very  title,  he  affirms,  were  sufficient  for  the  understanding  of
the  whole  matter.  For  this  '  Genesis  '  is  the  Sight,  into  which
one  section  of  the  Eiver  branches  off",  because  the  whole  outer
world  is  perceived  through  the  sight.  Again,  the  title  of  the
second  book  is  Exodus,  which  signifies  that  it  was  necessary  for
the  thing  born  to  pass  through  the  Eed  Sea  (meaning  by
<Eed  Sea,'  the  blood),  and  to  enter  into  the  wilderness,  and  to
drink  of  the  bitter  water  (Marah).  Now  this  *  bitter  water  '
which  lies  beyond  the  Eed  Sea,  is  the  path  of  knowledge  during
life,  which  leads  through  places  toilsome  and  unpleasant.  But
after  it  hath  been  changed  by  Moses,  that  is,  by  the  Word,  that
same  bitter  water  becometh  sweet.  And  that  such  is  the  reality
one  may  learn  from  everybody  who  exclaims  in  the  words  of
the  poet  :—

u « Black  is  the  root,  the  flower  as  white  as  milk,
Named  Moly  by  the  gods,  full  hard  to  find
By  mortals :"  but  the  gods  all  things  can  do.'

"  Even  what  is  said  by  the  Gentiles  is  sufficient  for  the  under-


THE GNOSTICS AND THEItt REMAINS.  Of>

standing  of  the  whole  matter  unto  him  that  hath  oars  to  hear.
lie  that  tasted  of  tho  fruit  given  by  Circe*  was  not  only
himself  not  changed  into  a  beast,  but  by  making  use  of  the
virtue  of  tho  self-same  fruit,  remodelled,  reformed  and  re
called  those  already  transformed  by  her  into  their  own  proper
shape.  For  the  Faithful  Man,  and  the  beloved  by  that
sorceress,  is  found  out  by  means  of  that  divine  and  milky
potion.

"  In  the  like  manner  Leviticus  is  the  Third  Book  (or  River)  ;
which  signifies  the  sense  of  smell,  or  the  respiration ;  for  the
whole  of  that  Book  is  concerning  sacrifices  and  oblations.  But
wheresoever  there  is  sacrifice,  there  also  dues  a  sweet  smell  of
perfume  arise  up  from  the  sacrifice;  concerning  which  sweet
odour  the  sense  of  smelling'  is  the  approver.

"  '  Numbers,'  the  Fourth  of  the  Books,  signifies  the  Taste,  for
then  the  speech  is  active,  inasmuch  as  it  is  through  the  Speech
that  all  objects  are  designated  in  numerical  order.

"  '  Deuteronomy,'  Simon  makes  out,  is  so  named  in  reference
to  the  child  that  has  been  formed  for  Touching.  For  as  the
Touch  doth  by  feeling  reciprocate  and  confirm  the  impressions
received  by  tho  other  senses ;  proving  an  object  to  be  either
hard,  or  hot,  or  slippery — in  the  like  manner  the  Fifth  Book  of
the  Law  is  a  recapitulation  of  the  four  preceding  Books.

"  All  things,  therefore  (continues  he),  that  are  not  created  exist
within  us  in  potentiality,  not  in  activity  ;  like  the  science  of
grammar,  or  of  geometry.  In  the  case,  therefore,  where  they
shall  have  met  with  the  proper  training  and  instruction,  there
4  shall  the  Bitter  be  turned  into  Sweet ' ;  that  is,  '  the  spears
shall  be  turned  into  reaping-hooks,  and  the  swords  into  plough
shares  ; '  they  shall  be  no  longer  chaff  and  sticks  born  for  the  fire,
but  the  Perfect  Fruit,  like  and  equal,  as  already  said,  unto  the
Unbegotten  and  Boundless  Power.  But  where  the  Tree  shall
stand  alone,  not  bearing  fruit,  there,  because  it  hath  not  received
form,  it  shall  be  destroyed.  '  For  now  (saith  he)  the  axe  is  nigh
unto  the  root  of  tho  tree.  Every  tree  therefore  that  beareth  not
good  fruit,  is  hewn  down  and  cast  into  tlie  fire.'

*  Simon has here forgotten  his  "  Odyssey  " ;  the  antidote  Moly  having
been  given  to  Ulysses  hy  Hermes.

F


66  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

"  According  to  Simon,  therefore,  that  blessed  and  inscrutable
thing  lies  hidden,  and  within  every  man,  but  in  potentiality
alone,  not  in  activity;  the  which  is  'He  who  standeth,  hath
stood,  and  shall  stand ' ;  who  standeth  above  in  the  Unbegotten
Power,  who  hath  stood  below  in  the  *  River  of  Waters  '  when  he
was  begotten  in  the  image,  and  who  shall  stand  above  by  the  side
of  the  Blessed  and  Boundless  Power,  provided  that  he  shall  have
received  form.  For  there  are  three  that  stand,  and  unless  there
be  the  three  ^Eons  that  stand, '  the  Begotten  One  is  not  adorned,'
meaning  Him,  who,  according  to  Simon's  teaching,  moved  upon
the  face  of  the  waters ;  who  hath  been  re-created  after  the
image,  perfect  and  heavenly;  who  likewise  is  in  no  degree
lower  than  the  Unbegotten  Power."

"  This  is  a  saying  amongst  the  Simonians,  '  I  and  thou  are  one  ;
thou  before  me,  I  after  thee.'  *  Tltis  is  the  One  Power,  divided
into  Above  and  Below,  begetting  itself,  nourishing  itself,
seeking  after  itself/finding  itself,  being  its  own  mother,  its  own
father,  its  own  sifter,  its  own  consort,  its  own  daughter,  son
mother,  father,  inasmuch  as  it  alone  is  the  Root  of  all  things.'

"  That  Fire  is  the  origin  of  the  generation  of  all  things  gene
rated,  Simon  demonstrates  after  this  fashion.  '  Of  all  things
whatsoever  that  exist,  being  generated,  the  final  cause  of  the
desire  for  their  generation  proceeds  out  of  Fire.  For  "  to  be  set
on  fire  "  is  the  term  used  to  designate  the  desire  of  the  act  of
generation  and  propagation.  Now  this  "Fire,"  which  is  one,  is
changed  into  two.  For  in  the  male  the  blood  which  is  hot  and
red,  like  Fire  in  a  visible  shape,  is  converted  into  seed ;  in  the
female  this  same  blood  is  converted  into  milk.  And  this  change
in  the  male  becomes  the  generation-faculty  itself;  whilst  the
change  in  the  female  becomes  the  instrument  (efficient  cause),
of  the  thing  begotten.  This  (according  to  Simon)  is  the
"  Flaming  Sword,"  which  is  brandished  to  keep  the  way  unto  the
Tree  of  Life.  For  the  blood  is  turned  into  seed  and  into  milk  ;
and  this  Power  becomes  both  father  and  mother ;  the  father  of
those  that  be  born,  and  the  nutriment  of  those  that  be  nourished  ;
standing  in  need  of  none  other,  sufficient  unto  itself.  More
over  the  Tree  of  Life,  which  is  guarded  by  the  brandished  naming
sword  is,  as  we  have  said,  the  Seventh  Power,  the  self-begotten,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  67

which  comprehends  all  the  others,  and  which  is  deposited  within
the  other  Six  Powers.  For  if  that  Flaming  Sword  should  not  be
brandished,  then  would  that  beautiful  Tree  be  destroyed  and
perish ;  but  when  it  is  changed  into  the  seed  and  the  milk,  then
lie  that  is  stored  up  within  them  in  potentiality,  having  ob
tained  the  necessary  Logos  {Reason)  and  the  fitting  place
wherein  that  Logos  may  be  generated,  then,  beginning  as  it  were
from  the  smallest  spark,  he  shall  wax  great  to  perfection,  and
increase,  and  become  a  Power  without  end,  and  without  change,
being  equal  and  like  unto  the  infinite  TEon,  being  no  more
begotten  again  to  all  eternity.'

"  Now,  on  the  strength  of  this  theory,  as  all  are  agreed,  Simon
made  himself  out  a  god  unto  the  ignorant,  like  that  Libyan
Apsethus  above  mentioned ;  '  being  begotten  and  subject  to
passion  so  long  as  he  is  in  potentiality,  but  not  subject  to
passion  after  he  shall  have  been  begotten,  and  have  received  the
image,  and  having  been  made  perfect  shall  pass  out  of  the
dominion  of  the  first  two  Powers,  that  is,  of  Heaven  and  Earth.'
For  Simon  speaks  expressly  upon  this  point  in  his  '  Revelation,1
in  the  following  manner.  '  Unto  you  therefore  I  say  what  I
say,  and  write  what  I  write.  The  Writing  is  this.  There  are
Two  stocks  of  all  the  /Eons  put  together,  having  neither  be
ginning  nor  end,  springing  out  of  one  Root,  the  which  is  Silence,
invisible,  inconceivable,  of  which  Stocks,  the  one  shows  itself
from  above,  the  which  is  a  great  Power,  Mind  of  the  all,  per
vading  all  things,  and  of  the  male  sex  :  the  other,  showing  itself
from  below,  is  the  Great  Intelligence,  and  is  of  the  female  sex  ;
generating  all  things.  From  thence  they  correspond  with  each
other,  and  keep  up  a  partnership,  and  illuminate  the  Middle
Space  lying  between  them  (which  is  the  air),  inconceivable,
having  neither  beginning  nor  end.  In  this  Middle  Space  is  the
Father,  who  bears  up  all  things  and  nourishes  the  things  that
have  beginning  and  ending.  This  is  "  He  who  standeth,  hath
stood,  and  shall  stand  ;  being  both  male  and  female,  a  Power
after  the  image  of  the  pre-existing  infinite  Power,  that  hath
neither  beginning  nor  ending,  existing  in  Unity."  For  the  In
telligence  in  Unity  proceeded  out  of  this  last  and  became  Twain.
Now  He  (the  Father)  is  One,  for  whilst  he  contained  that

F  2


DO  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Power  within  himself  he  was  single ;  nevertheless  he  was  not  the
First,  although  he  was  pre-existent,  but  when  he  was  mani
fested  to  himself  out  of  himself,  he  became  Second,  and  neither
was  he  named  the  "  Father,"  before  that  Power  called  him
Father.  In  the  like  manner  therefore  as  the  drawing- forth
himself  out  of  himself  manifested  unto  himself  his-  own  Intelli
gence,  so  did  this  Intelligence  also,  when  manifested,  not  create,
but  contemplate  Him;  and  thereby  stood-up  the  Father  within
herself,  that  is  to  say,  the  Power.  And  this  Intelligence  like
wise  is  both  a  male  and  female  Power ;  on  which  account  they
answer  to  one  another,  for  the  Power  differs  not  at  all  from  the
Intelligence,  being  one  and  the  same.  From  that  which  is
above,  indeed,  is  formed  the  Power ;  from  that  which  is  below,
the  Intelligence.  Of  the  same  kind  therefore  is  the  Unity,
which  is  manifested  out  of  them  both  ;  for  being  one  it  is  found
to  be  Twain ;  both  male  and  female,  containing  within  itself
the  female.  In  this  manner  the  Mind  exists  within  the  Intelli
gence  ;  which,  when  severed  from  each  other,  although  they
are  One,  are  found  to  be  Two.'

"  Simon,  therefore,  by  publishing  these  notions,  did  not  merely
distort  arid  wrest  to  his  own  purpose  the  sayings  of  Moses,  but
equally  those  of  the  heathen  poets.  For  he  makes  an  allegory
out  of  the  Trojan  Horse  of  wood,  and  the  story  of  Helen  with
the  torch,  and  much  else,  which  he  applies  to  his  own  fables
concerning  himself  and  his  '  Intelligence.'  *  Again  he  makes
out  the  latter  to  be  the  Lost  Sheep,  which,  always  taking  up  her
abode  in  the  persons  of  women,  doth  cause  trouble  amongst  all
earthly  Powers  by  reason  of  her  incomparable  beauty  ;  where
fore  the  Trojan  War  came  to  pass  because  of  her.  For  this
'  Intelligence '  *  of  his  took  up  her  abode  in  Helen  who  was  born
just  at  that  time ;  and  so,  when  the  Powers  laid  claim  to  her
possession,  strife  and  discord  arose  amongst  all  the  nations  to
whom  she  manifested  herself.  At  any  rate,  it  was  on  this
account  that  Stesichorus,  for  having  reviled  her  in  his  verses,
was  deprived  of  sight ;  but  afterwards,  when  he  had  repented,

*  That  is  his  wife  Helena.  By  a  of  Novara  also  went  about  accom-
remarkable,  though  doubtless  uii-  panied  by  a  similar  female  "  Intelli-
designed  coincidence,  Fia  Dolcino  gence."


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

and  written  his  *  Recantation,'  in  which  ho  sang  her  praises,
he  recovered  the  use  of  his  eyes.  Then,  after  she  had  been
placed  in  another  body  by  the  Angels  and  the  Powers  below
(who  according  to  Simon  were  the  creators  of  the  world),  she
was  standing  upon  a  housetop*  in  Tyre,  a  city  of  Pho3nicia,  where
he  found  her  on  his  landing.  For  he  pretends  to  have  gono
thither  expressly  in  quest  of  her,  to  deliver  her  out  of  bondage  ;
and,  after  having  ransomed  her,  he  always  carried  her  about
with  him,  pretending  that  this  was  the  Lost  Sheep,  and  ho
himself  was  the  Power  that  is  over  all.  But  the  truth  is,  the
impostor  had  become  enamoured  of  this  harlot,  whose  real
name  was  Helena,  so  that  he  bought  and  kept  her  ;  but  out  ol
shame  as  regards  his  disciples,  he  invented  the  aforesaid  fable.
Furthermore,  nowadays  those  that  be  the  followers  of  this
deceiver  and  magician,  Simon,  imitate  his  example,  asserting
that  it  is  right  to  have'intercourse  with  all  women  promiscuously,
for  they  say  *  All  land  is  land,  and  it  matters  not  where  one
sows  his  seed  so  long  as  he  does  sow  it.'  Nay  more,  they  pride
themselves  upon  this  promiscuous  intercourse,  affirming  that
this  is  the  '  Perfect  Love,'  and  quote  the  text  '  The  Holy
of  holies  shall  be  made  holy.'  For  they  hold  that  they  are
bound  by  no  obligation  as  regards  anything  usually  accounted
wicked,  inasmuch  as  they  have  been  redeemed.  In  this  way,
Simon,  after  he  had  ransomed  Helena,  granted  salvation  unto  men
by  means  of  his  own  Knowledge  (or  the  Gnosis).  For  inasmuch
as  the  Angels  governed  the  world  badly  by  reason  of  their  own
ambitiousness,  Simon  pretended  that  he  was  come  to  set  all
things  right,  having  changed  his  form,  and  made  himself  like
to  the  Principalities,  the  Powers,  and  the  Angels ;  wherefore  it
was  that  he  appeared  in  man's  shape,  though  not  a  man  at  all,
and  had  suffered  the  Passion  in  Judaea,  although  he  had  not
suffered  it;  moreover  that  he  had  manifested  himself  to  the
Jews  as  the  Son,  in  Samaria  as  the  Father,  and  amongst  the
Gentiles  elsewhere  as  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  that  he  submitted  to
be  called  by  whatever  name  men  pleased.  The  Prophets  were
inspired  by  the  Angels,  creators  of  the  world,  when  they

*  A  euphemism  for  "  living  in a which  these  ladies  advertised  them-
brothel," such being the mode  in selves.


70  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

delivered  their  prophecies ;  on  which  account  those  who  believe
in  Simon  and  Helena  pay  no  regard  to  them,  even  in  our  times  ;
and  they  do  whatever  they  please,  affirming  that  they  are  re
deemed  through  Ms  grace.  For  nothing  is  the  cause  of  dam
nation,  supposing  a  man  to  act  wickedly,  for  Evil  is  evil  not
through  the  nature  of  things  but  by  convention.  For  the  Angels
who  created  the  world  ordained  it  to  be  so  (as  they  assert),
in  order  that  they  might  keep  in  subjection,  by  means  of  such
fictions,  all  men  who  should  listen  to  them.  Furthermore  they
explain  the  dissolution  of  the  world  as  referring  to  the  redemp
tion  of  their  own  sect.

"  The  disciples,  therefore,  of  this  Simon,  practise  magic  arts
and  incantation,  and  make  philtres  and  seductive  spells ;  they
likewise  send  the  so-called  'dream-bringing'  demons  to  trouble
whomsoever  they  choose.  They  likewise  practise  the  rites  of
the  gods  named  Paredroi  (the  Assessors) ;  they  have  also  an
image  of  Simon  in  the  guise  of  Jupiter,  and  likewise  one  of
Helena  in  the  figure  of  Minerva ;  and  these  they  worship,
calling  one  the  *  Master,'  the  other  the  '  Mistress.'  "*

So  much  for  the  system  of  the  renowned  Samaritan,  in  which,
it  will  have  been  seen,  the  place  of  logical  reasoning  is  supplied
by  quibbles  upon  words,  taken  absolutely  without  any  reference
to  the  context— a  style  of  argument,  however,  for  which  it  must
be  confessed  that  he  had  highly  respectable  authority.  In
strong  contrast  to  this  stands  the  next  system,  which  displays
much  of  the  refinement  and  sound  training  (amidst  its  extrava
gance)  of  the  Grecian  mind.


BASILIDES.

Hippolytus,  in  accordance  with  his  theses  that  all  these
"  heresies "  were  mere  plagiarisms  from  the  more  ancient
philosophical  systems,  declares  that  Basilides  stole  the  entire  of
his  scheme  from  Aristotle,  and  proceeds  to  establish  his  charge
by  the  following  comparative  analysis  of  the  two.

"  Aristotle  divides  all  substance  into  the  Genus,  the  Species,

*  Hero  follows  the  account  of  his  career  and  end,  already  extracted
(pp.  21,  22).


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


71


and  the  Individual The  Genus  is,  as  it  were,  a  heap  composed
of  many  and  different  seeds,  from  which  heap  all  the  Species
are  taken ;  and  the  genus  is  the  sufficient  cause  to  all  things
that exist. For example,  'Animal'  is used absolutely,  not
signifying  any  particular  animal. '  Animal '  does  not  signify
a  horse,  an  ox,  or a man,  but simply  'animal.' From this
abstract  '  animal '  all  the  species  of  animals  universally  derive
their  origin,  and  this  '  animal '  without  species  is  the  origin  of
all  animals  generated  according  to  their  species,  and  not  any
one thing of things generated. Thus, Man is an animal,
deriving  his  origin  from  the  '  animal,'  and  Horse  is  an  animal
in  the  same  manner. Similarly  all  other  animals  are  derived
from that  'animal,' who  yet  in itself  is  none  of  them. If
therefore  that  'animal'  is  none  of  these,  then,  according to
Aristotle,  the  substance  of  all  things  that  are  proceeds  out  of
things  that  are  non-existent,  inasmuch  as  the  '  animal,'  out  of
which  they  all  proceed  individually,  is  not  one  thing  (or  '  is
nothing  at  all '). And  this, being  Nothing,  is  the  origin  of
all  that  le.

"  Now  substance  being  divided  into  three  classes — the  genus,
the  species,  and  the  individual— we  have  defined  the  genus  as
'  animal,'  'man'  as  the  species  picked  out  of  the  heap  of
animals,  but  as  yet  undiscriminated,  and  not  separated  into  the
form  of  a  particular  being.  But  when  I  define  by  a  special
name,  like  Socrates,  or  Diogenes,  a  man  taken  from  the  species
the  genus,  then  that  being  is  termed  the  '  individual.'  Thus
the  genus  is  divided  into  species,  the  species  into  individual ;
but  the  individual  once  being  denned  by  name  cannot  be
divided  any  further.  This  is  what  Aristotle  calls  justly  and
properly  '  Substance,'  that  which  cannot  be  predicated  '  of  the
subject,'  nor  'in  the  subject.'  By  the  term  'of  the  subject'
he  means  such  an  idea  as  '  animal,'  which  can  be  predicated  of
all  the  subject  animals  individually— as  a  horse,  an  ox,  a  man-
all  being  called  by  the  same  name,  '  animal.'  Hence,  what  can
be  predicated  '  of  the  subject '  is  that  which  applies  to  many
and  different  species  indiscriminately.  '  In  the  subject '  means
that  which  cannot  be  predicated  without  the  previous  existence
of  something  else  wherein  it  may  exist,  as  'white,'  'black/


72  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

'  just,'  '  unjust ; '  which  are  the  '  accidents '  to  substance,  and
therefore  called  '  qualities,'  because  expressing  what  sort  of  thing
each  thing  is.  But  no  one  quality  can  exist  in  itself;  there  must
be  something  else  for  it  to  exist  in.  If,  therefore,  neither  the
genus  'animal,'  which  is  predicated  of  all  animals  existing
individually,  nor  '  accident,'  which  is  only  to  be  found  in  things
that  exist,  can  either  of  them  exist  by  themselves ;  and  if  indi
viduals  are  made  up  of  these  two,  namely  genus  and  accident,
then  it  follows  that  substance,  which  is  made  up  of  these  three,
and  nothing  besides,  is  made  up  of  things  that  are  non-existent.

"  If,  therefore,  what  is  properly  and  primarily  termed  *  sub
stance'  (the  Individual)  is  made  up  of  these,  it  is,  according
to  Aristotle,  made  up  of  things  non-existent.

"  Besides  the  terms  Genus,  Species,  Individual,  Substance  is
further  designated  as  '  Matter  '  and  '  Formation.'  Upon  this
definition  rests  the  Basilidan  theory  of  the  Universe.  The
Universe  Basilides  divides  into  several  parts  :  That  part  which
extends  from  the  earth  up  to  the  moon  is  destitute  of  foresight
and  of  conduct,  and  is  content  with  its  own  nature.  The  part
beyond  the  moon  is  constituted  with  foresight,  reason,  and
conduct,  up  to  the  surface  of  heaven.  This  '  surface '  is  a  fifth
substance,  free  from  all  the  elements  out  of  which  the  world
was  created  ;  this,  therefore,  is  the  *  fifth  and  supra-mundane
subbtaucc.'  These  three  divisions  Aristotle  has  treated  of  in
three  separate  works  :  his  '  Physics,'  '  Metaphysics,'  and  '  On
the  Fifth  Substance.'  Not  merely  bis  ideas,  but  his  words  and
terminology  have  been  borrowed  by  Basilides,  and  applied  to
the  Scriptures.  How,  then,  can  his  disciples,  being  in  reality
heathens,  expect  to  be  benefited  by  Christ  ?

"  Basilides  and  his  true  son  and  disciple  Isidorus,  assert  that
Matthew  (the  Evangelist)  revealed  to  them  certain  secret
doctrines  which  had  been  specially  communicated  to  himself  by
Christ.  '  There  was  a  time  when  there  was  Nothing  ;  nay,  not
even  that  "  Nothing  "  was  anything  of  being,  but  barely  and
without  reserve,  and  without  any  sophism,  there  was  altogether
Nothing.  When  I  use  the  term  "  was,"  I  do  not  mean  to  imply
that  this  Nothing  was,  but  in  order  to  explain  what  I  wish  to
set  forth,  I  employ  the  expression  "  there  was  absolutely


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  73

Nothing."  Now  that  which  is  called  "  Ineffable  "  is  not  abso
lutely  ineffable,  for  we  ourselves  give  it  that  name  of  ineffable  ;
whereaS'that  which  is  not  even  ineffable  is  not  "  ineffable,"  but
infinitely  above  every  name  that  can  be  named.  Even  for  the
Visible  world,  so  multifarious  are  its  divisions  that  wo  have
not  names  enough  ;  but  we  are  reduced  to  conceive  many  of  its
properties  from  the  names  of  the  properties  already  named,
these  (other)  properties  being  ineffable.  For  an  identity  of
names  occasions  a  disorder  and  confusion  of  ideas  in  the  mind  of
the  learner.'  (This  is  a  direct  plagiarism  from  Aristotle's
discussion  of  synonyms  in  his  book  '  On  the  Categories.')

"  When  therefore  Nothing  was — no  substance,  no  non-sub
stance,  no  simple,  no  compound,  no  incomprehensible,  no
sensible,  no  man,  no  angel,  no  God — when  there  was  nothing
whatever  of  what  is  called  by  name,  perceived  by  sense,
conceived  by  the  mind,  but  all,  and  even  in  a  more  refined
sense  than  this,  being  put  out  of  the  question — then  this  No-
being  God  (Aristotle's  '  thought  of  a  thought,'  which  Basil  ides
alters  into  his  '  No-being '),  without  thought,  without  purpose,
without  counsel,  without  passion,  without  desire,  willed  to
make  the  world.  I  use  the  word  'willed*  merely  to  express
my  meaning,  it  being  without  thought,  without  sensation,
without  will,  that  this  was  done ;  and  by  *  world '  I  do  not
mean  that  world  created  afterwards  and  divided  by  latitude
and  longitude,  but  I  understand  by  it  *  the  Seed  of  the  World.'
This  *  Seed  of  the  World  '  contained  the  All  within  itself,  just
as  the  germ  of  the  mustard-seed  contains  the  root,  the  stalk,  the
leaves,  the  grain,  the  last  containing  again  the  rudiments  of
others  innumerable.  Thus  the  No-being  God  created  the  No-
being  world  out  of  No-being  things,  when  he  deposited  the
seed  containing  within  itself  the  complete  seeds  of  the  universe.
And  to  give  an  illustration  of  my  meaning :  the  egg  of  any
bird  of  diversified  plumage—  the  peacock,  for  example — although
itself  single,  yet  includes  within  itself  the  many-coloured,
multifarious  forms  of  multifarious  substances;  so,  in  like
manner,  did  this  seed  of  the  world  deposited  by  the  No-being
God  include  within  itself  the  multiform,  multifarious  seeds  of
the  universe.


74  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

"  This  seed,  then,  contained  all  things  that  can  be  named  ;  nay
more,  all  things  that  can  not  be  named,  as  yet  hidden  in
futurity,  and  to  come  forth  after  their  kind  by  accretion,  and  by
growth,  after  the  manner  in  which  we  see  the  new-born  infant
acquire  his  teeth,  his  flesh,  his  father's  form,  and  all  his  under
standing,  and  all  such  things  that  come  to  the  child  as  it  grows
up,  not  apparent  in  him  at  the  beginning.  Now,  inasmuch  as
it  is  impossible  to  use  the  term  '  projection '  of  the  No-being
God  (in  fact,  Basilides  is  opposed  to  all  schemes  of  creation  by
means  of  a  'projection'),  for  we  must  not  suppose  Matter
necessary  to  his  operations  in  the  same  way  as  her  threads  are
to  the  spider,  or  as  timber  and  metal  to  man  when  he  sets
about  any  work  ;  but  '  He  spake  and  it  was  made ' ;  and  this  is
what  Moses  means  by  his  '  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was
light.'  Whence,  then,  was  this  light  ?  Moses  saith  not  whence
it  was,  but  that  it  was  from  the  word  of  the  speaker;  but
neither  He  that  spoke  was,  neither  was  that  which  was  made.
The  seed  of  the  world  was  this  word  that  was  spoken,  'Let
there  bo  light.'  And  to  this  the  evangelist  refers  by  his  '  And
that  was  the  true  Light  which  enlighteneth  every  man  coming
into  the  world.'  For  man  draws  his  beginning  out  of  that
seed,  and  is  illuminated  thereby."  (This  "  seed,"  therefore,
divided  into  infinite  other  seeds,  is  nothing  else  than  Aristotle's
"genus,"  which  is  divided  into  infinite  other  "species,"  as
"animal,"  the  genus,  itself  non-existent,  is  divided  into
"species,"  as  ox,  horse,  man,  &c.)

"  Having,  therefore,  got  this  seed  for  his  starting-point,
Basilides  goes  on  thus :  '  Whatever  I  speak  of  as  made  after
this,  there  is  no  need  of  inquiring  out  of  what  it  was  made,
seeing  that  this  seed  comprehended  within  itself  the  principles
of  the  All.  Now  let  us  examine  what  came  out  of  this  seed  in
the  first,  second,  and  third  place.  There  was  in  the  seed  a
Sonship,  triple,  of  the  same  substance  with  the  No-being  God,
and  generated  by  him.  In  this  triple  Sonship  one  part  was
subtile,  another  gross,  the  third  needing  purification.*  Upon
the  first  projecting  (emitting)  of  the  seed,  the  subtile  element
disengaged  itself,  ascending  aloft  "  like  a  feather  or  a  thought,"

*  Corresponding  to  "  Immaterial,  Material,  and  Mixed."


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  75

and  arrived  at  the  No-being One. For Him  all  Nature  de-
sircth,  by  reason of  the super-eminence of his beauty  and
perfection. The  gross  part  endeavoured  to  imitate  its  example,
but  was  weighed down by  its coarser nature,  and detained
within  the  seed. To  assist  it,  therefore,  the  Sonship  equips  it
with  a  wing,  such  as  Plato  in  his  "  Phaedrus  "  wings the  soul
withal. Now  this  wing  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  the  grosser
part  putting  on,  is  both  advantaged  itself,  and  advantages  the
other. For  the  wings  of  a  bird  are  not  able  to  fly  if  severed
from  the  bird,  neither  can the  soul  fly  if  separated  from  her
wings. Such,  then,  is  the  relationship  borne  by  the  Sonship  to
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  also  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  the  Sonship.
Soaring  aloft,  therefore,  upon  its  wings — that  is,  upon  the  Holy
Ghost,  this  Soul  Part  carried  its  wings,  the  Holy  Ghost,  along
with  it  up  to  the  No-being  God,  and  the  Sensible  Sonship,  but
was  unable  to  comprehend  the  latter,  because  its  own  nature  is
not  constituted  of  the  same  substance  with  Him. But  in  the
same  way  as  dry  and  pure  air  is  repugnant  to  the  nature  of
fishes,  so  the  place,  more  ineffable  than  the  Ineifable  One,  and
more  lofty  than  all  names  that  can  be  named,  the  seat  of  the
No-being God  and  of  the  Subtile  Part,  was contrary  to  the
nature  of  the  Holy  Ghost. On  this  account,  the  Sonship  left
it  near  to  that  place  which  cannot  be  conceived  by  mind,  nor
described by words, though not altogether abandoned by
himself,  but  retaining  something  of  his  power  (or  essence),  just
as  a  vessel  once  filled  with  a  precious perfume  ever retains
traces  of  that  perfume,  however  carefully  it  may  have  been
emptied. And  this  is  manifestly  like  the  ointment  upon  the
head  "which  ran  down  to  Aaron's  beard" — that  is,  the  perfume
of  the  Sonship,  brought  down  by  the  Holy  Ghost  even  into  the
impurity  and  degradation  of  mortality,  out  of  which  itself  at
the  beginning  had  soared  aloft,  raised  by  the  Sonship,  as  it
were,  on  eagle's  wings,  being  itself  fastened  upon  his  back.
For all things struggle upwards from that  which  is  below
towards  that  which  is above,  from the  "worse towards the
better,"  whereas nothing  of  those  above  in  the  better place
seeks  to  descend  below.'

"The third part of the Sonship — namely, that requiring


76  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIB REMAINS.

purification,  remained  included  within  the  infinite  head  (or  sum)
of  infinite  seeds,  both  giving  and  receiving  benefit,  in  the
manner  hereafter  to  be  explained.  After  the  first  and  second
ascensions  of  the  Son  ship,  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  had  been  left
above,  became  the  'firmament'  between  the  world  and  the
upper  world.  For  Basilides  divides  all  things  that  are  into
two  great  classes,  the  '  world '  and  the  '  upper  world ' ;  the
Spirit,  therefore,  occupying  the  interval  between  the  two
(namely,  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  retains  the  odour  of  the  Son-
ship)  he  terms  the  *  Boundary  Spirit.'  Now  after  this
firmament  above  the  world  had  been  constituted,  there  broke
forth  out  of  the  Seed  of  the  World  the  'Great  Archon,'  the
Head  of  the  World,  or  beauty,  strength,  magnitude  indissoluble.
More  irieifable  is  he  than  the  Ineffable,  more  powerful  than  the
Powerful,  wiser  than  the  Wise,  more  beautiful  than  any  beauty
that  can  be  named.  As  soon  as  he  was  born  he  soared  upwards
and  reached  the  firmament,  but  tliat  was  the  limit  of  his  flight  ;
for  he  knew  not  of  the  existence  of  anything  beyond  the
firmament,  and  therefore  he  remained  more  beautiful,  more
powerful,  more  wise  than  any  of  the  things  subjacent,  always
excepting  the  Sonship — that  is,  the  Third  impurified  Person —
who  still  lay  enclosed  within  the  immense  universal  seed.
Imagining  himself,  therefore,  to  be  Lord  and  Ruler  and  Intelli
gent  Architect,  he  set  about  the  creation  of  the  world.  In  the
first  place,  not  wishing  to  abide  alone,  he  generated  unto  him
self  a  son  out  of  things  subjacent  (mundane  elements^),  far  wiser
and  more  beautiful  than  himself,  for  this  son  was  in  truth  the
Third  Person  yet  left  enclosed  within  the  seed.  This  thing  had
been  predestinated  by  the  No-being  God  from  the  beginning ;
as  soon  as  he  beheld  this  son  he  was  enamoured  of  his  perfect
beauty,  and  bade  him  to  sit  down  on  his  right  hand.  This
they  call  the  '  Ogdoad,'  the  abode  of  the  Great  Archon.  The
great  and  wise  Demiurgus  then  made  the  entire  setherial  creation,
being  inspired  and  empowered  thereto  by  his  own  son,  so  far
above  himself  in  wisdom."  (This  idea  is  copied  from  Aristotle's
"  Entelechia "  of  the  natural  organic  body ;  the  active  soul  in
the  body  being  itself  wiser,  stronger,  and  better  than  the  body.
The  theory,  therefore,  propounded  originally  by  Aristotle  con-


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  77

corning  the  body  and  the  soul,  Basilides  thus  applies  to  the
Great  Archon  and  the  Son  whom  he  had  created ;  for  as  the
Archon  creates  the  Son,  so  does  Aristotle  make  the  soul  to  be
the  work  and  effect  of  the  natural  organic  body.)  "  All  things,
therefore,  are  ruled  by  the  providence  of  the  Great  Archon  "  (or
rather,  by  the  "  Entelechia  "  of  himself  and  son) — "  all  things,
that  is  to  say,  which  lie  below  the  moon,  and  within  the  aather —
for  the  moon  is  the  division  between  the  gather  and  the  air.

"  The  creation  being  finished,  there  arose  out  of  the  seed  a
'  Second  Archon,'  but  greatly  inferior  to  the  first,  yet  similarly
ineffable.  This  (Archon)  is  designated  the  '  Hebdomad.'  He
proceeded  to  create  all  things  below  the  aether  of  which  he  is  the
Demiurgus  ;  and  ho,  in  his  turn,  generated  a  son  infinitely
superior  to  himself.  The  intermediate  space  between  the
regions  Ogdoad  and  Hebdomad  is  occupied  by  the  universal
seed,  the  heap  of  species,  the  particles  whereof  are  guided  by
the  intelligence  implanted  in  them  by  the  First  Creator  as  to
the  times,  the  natures,  and  the  changes  in  which  they  have  to
come  forth,  and  possess  no  other  guide,  guardian,  or  creator.

"  The  whole  creation  was  in  this  way  completed,  of  the  world
and  of  the  things  above  the  world ;  but  there  was  yet  left
within  the  seed  the  '  Third  Sonship,'  who,  in  his  turn,  had  to  be
developed,  revealed,  and  to  ascend  beyond  the  Boundary  Spirit
up  to  the  Subtile  Sonship  and  the  No-being  One.  This  is  the
interpretation  (meaning)  of  the  Scripture  :  '  The  whole  creation
groaneth  and  is  in  labour,  waiting  for  the  manifestation  of  the
sons  of  God.'  These  '  sons '  are  the  Spiritual  Men  left  hero
below  to  guide  and  to  perfect  the  souls  that  from  their  nature
belong  to  this  place.  *  From  Adam  unto  Moses  sin  reigned '
—that  is  to  say,  the  Great  Archon,  who  had  dominion  up  to  the
firmament,  and  imagined  that  he  alone  was  God,  and  that  there
was  none  other  above  him — for  all  above  him  was  kept  in  the
deepest  silence.  This  is  the  'mystery  not  revealed  unto  the
Fathers  ' ;  the  Great  Archon,  the  Ogdoad,  was,  as  he  supposed,
the  Lord  and  Ruler  of  the  universe.  But  of  the  '  interval,'  or
middle  space,  the  Hebdomad  was  the  ruler ;  now  the  Ogdoad  is
ineffable,  but  the  Hebomad  may  be  uttered  by  speech.  This
ruler  of  the  Hebdomad  was  He  who  spake  unto  Moses,  saying,


78  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

'  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  tho  Name  of
God  I  have  not  revealed  unto  them ' — that  is,  He  did  not  reveal
to  them  the  ineffable  ruler  of  the  Ogdoad.  All  the  prophets
who  were  before  the  Saviour's  coming  spoke  through  the
inspiration  of  the  Second  Archon.

"  When  the  time  was  come  for  the  manifestation  of  the  Sons
of  God,  the  Gospel  came,  penetrating  through  every  power,
dominion,  and  name  that  can  be  named,  although  tho  Sonship
did  not  come  down  from  his  place  upon  the  right  hand  of  the
Incomprehensible  No-being  One.  But,  like  as  Indian  naphtha
kindles  at  the  mere  sight  of  fire  a  long  way  off,  so  do  powers
fly  up  out  of  the  seed  to  the  Sonship  that  is  beyond  the  firma
ment.  The  son  of  the  Great  Archon  of  the  Ogdoad  thus
receives,  like  as  naphtha  catches  the  distant  flame,  the  ema
nations  of  the  Sonship  who  is  beyond  the  firmament ;  and  this
last,  the  Boundary  Spirit,  serves  for  the  communication  of  the
thoughts  fn>m  the  one  to  the  other.

"  The  G  ospel  thus  came  to  the  Great  Archon  through  his
own  son,  and  ho  was  converted,  and  troubled,  and  became  wise,
learning  his  own  ignorance  (or  want  of  knowledge)  ;  and  this  is
the  interpretation  of  '  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of
wisdom.'  For  the  Christ,  sitting  by  him,  instructed  him  con
cerning  the  Ineffable  No-being  One,  concerning  the  Son  who  is
beyond  the  firmament,  and  concerning  the  creation  of  the
universe.  The  Great  Archon  being  thus  instructed,  was  filled
with  fear,  and  confessed  the  sin  he  had  committed  in  magnifying
himself ;  and  this  is  the  meaning  of  '  I  acknowledge  my  trans
gression  and  I  confess  my  sin.'  When,  therefore,  the  Great
Archon  was  enlightened,  every  creature  of  the  Ogdoad  was
likewise  enlightened,  and  then  came  the  time  for  the  enlighten
ment  and  evangelising  of  the  ruler  of  the  Hebdomad.  For  this
end  the  son  of  the  Great  Archon  communicated  to  the  son  of
the  Second  Archon  the  light  which  he  himself  had  received
from  above,  and  he  communicated  his  instruction  to  his  Father,
who  in  like  manner  was  convinced  of,  and  confessed  his  sin.
By  this  time  every  creature  of  the  Hebdomad  was  enlightened,
and  had  the  Gospel  preached  unto  them.  For  in  this  division
(the  region  below  the  aether)  also,  there  is  an  infinite  creation


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  79

of  powers,  principalities,  and  dominions  (concerning  whom
Basilides  has  a  lengthy  dissertation;  who  moreover  in  this
region  places  the  365  heavens,  and  their  ruler  ABRASAX,  so
called  because  his  name  contains  that  sum,  for  which  reason
the  year  consists  also  of  that  number  of  days).

"  After  all  this  it  was  necessary  that  the  Unformedncss  (d/^op^ta)
existing  in  our  region— that  is,  the  Sonship  still  lying  enclosed
in  the  mass  like  an  abortion— should  be  enlightened  in  the  same
manner  with  those  aforementioned.  The  Light  therefore  passed
through  the  Hebdomad  upon  the  son  of  the  Hebdomad — that  is,
upon  Jesus,  the  son  of  Mary.  This  is  '  the  power  of  the  Most
High  shall  overshadow  thee,'  namely,  the  power  of  unction,
descending  from  the  Supreme  through  the  Demiurgus  upon
the  Son.

"The  present  constitution  of  things  will  last  until  every
particle  of  the  Sonship  enveloped  in  the  unformed  mass  shall  be
attracted  into  Jesus,  shall  be  disentangled  and  sublimated  by
him,  and  rendered  capable  of  ascending  by  itself  to  the  first
source  of  Light,  to  which  it  bears  a  natural  affinity.

"In  this  way  the  Three  Persons  of  the  Sonship  being  all
united  once  more  above  the  firmament,  then  mercy  shall  bo
shown  unto  the  creation,  '  which  languishes  and  groans  waiting
for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God ' ;  for  all  men  belonging
to  the  Sonship  shall  ascend  up  unto  Him.  When  this  is
accomplished,  He  will  bring  upon  the  world  a  deep  ignorance,  so
that  all  things  here  below  shall  abide  in  their  nature,  and
desire  nothing  contrary  to  their  nature.  By  this  means  the
souls  appointed  to  abide  here  below  will  be  destitute  of  even
the  slightest  notion  of  anything  existing  above  them,  lest  they
should  be  tormented  by  the  fruitless  desire  of  ascending  up
into  the  same ;  like  as  though  a  fish  should  desire  to  pasture
with  the  flocks  upon  the  hills,  a  wish  which,  if  gratified,  would
be  its  destruction.  For  all  things  are  eternal  so  long  as  they
continue  in  their  natural  place,  but  become  mortal  when  they
endeavour  to  escape  beyond  it.  The  same  ignorance  will  envelop
the  ruler  of  the  Hebdomad,  in  order  that  sorrow  and  grief  and
confusion  may  flee  away  from  him  ;  that  he  may  no  longer  be
troubled  with  the  desire  of  things  above  him  and  contrary  to


80  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

his  nature.  This  ignorance  shall  also  come  over  the  Great
Archon  of  the  Ogdoad,  and  over  all  creatures  subject  unto  him,
and  for  the  same  reason.  This  is  the  '  restoration  of  all  things  ;
enclosed  from  the  beginning  within  the  seed,  and  disposed
according  to  its  season.  This  is  the  Saviour's  meaning  in  '  My
hour  is  not  yet  come ' ;  it  is  also  signified  by  the  Magi  be
holding  the  star,  inasmuch  as  His  coming,  proclaimed  from  the
beginning,  was  subject  to  the  disposition  of  the  stars.*

"  The  Gospel  is  the  Declaration  of  supramundane  things,  which
the  Great  Archon  knew  not  of.  But  when  it  was  told  him  of
the  Sonship,  of  the  Boundary  Spirit,  and  of  the  No-being  God,
he  rejoiced  with  an  exceeding  great  joy.  With  respect  to  the
birth  of  Jesus,  all  things  came  to  pass  as  they  are  written  in
the  Gospels.  For  He  was  the  firstfrttits  of  the  division  of  the
classes,  previously  all  commingled  here  below.  Now,  as  the
world  is  distributed  into  the  Ogdoad,  the  head  of  the  universe,
whoso  chief  is  the  Great  Archon,  and  into  the  Hebdomad,  whose
chief  is  the  Demiurgus,  chief  also  of  our  degree  where  Frailty
(liability  to  error)  subsists,  it  was  necessary  that  this  Confusion
should  be  distributed  and  set  in  order  by  Jesus.  That  part  of  him,
therefore,  which  was  of  the  '  Unfonnedness,'  namely,  his  body
suffered  what  it  did  suffer  and  returned  again  into  unformed-
ness  ;  that  part  which  belonged  to  the  Hebdomad,  namely,  his
soul,  returned  again  into  the  Hebdomad  after  his  resurrection  ;
the  part  belonging  to  the  Ogdoad  remained  with  the  Great
Archon,  and  the  part  belonging  to  the  Boundary  Spirit  was
left  there  in  his  ascension.  But  the  third  Sonship,  thus  purified
in  his  passage  upwards,  was  reunited  to  the  Blessed  Sonship
who  is  supremo  above.  (In  short,  the  whole  theory  of  the
religion  consists  in  the  Confusion  of  the  Seed-heap,  its  Redistri
bution  into  classes,  and  the  Restoration  of  all  things  to  their
natural  places.  This  division  of  the  classes  was  made  in  the
first  instance  by  Jesus,  and  the  sole  object  of  his  passion  was
the  restoration  of  the  classes,  which  were  mixed  up  together,
into  their  proper  order.  And  for  this  reason  Jesus  himself  was

*  This may allude  to the Eab- the  conjunction  of  Saturn  and  Jupi-
binical  explanation  of  the  "  sign  of tcr  in  Pisces.
the  coming  "  of  the  Messiah  as  being


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


81


distributed  as  we  have  shown,  amongst  tho  several  classes.
These  then  are  tho  things  that  Basilides  fables,  who  taught  in
Egypt,  and,  having  learned  his  wisdom  from  the  Egyptians
"brought  forth  such  fruits  as  these.)  "

This  concluding remark  of  Ilippolytus  deserves particular
notice ;  it  shows  that  he  regarded  the  Iksilidan  theory  as  the  mere
adaptation  to  present  requirements  of  an  ancient  esoteric  doctrine
belonging  to  the  Egyptian  priesthood. That  it  was  nothing  more
than  a  plagiarism  from  the  Aristotelian  philosophy,  as  the  learned
Father  labours  to  demonstrate  with  so  much  ingenuity,  appears
to  me  by  no  means  made  out. But  the  Basilidan  theory  has  one
striking  feature  that  distinguishes  it  from  every  other  form  of
tho  Gnosis,  in  its  entirely  ignoring the  existence  of  an  Ecil
Principle,  or  of  malignity  and  rebellion  against  the  Supreme
God. His  two  rulers  of  the  upper  and  lower  worlds,  the  Great
Archon  of  the  Ogdoad,  and  the  Demiurgus  of  the  Hebdomad,
so far from opposing the Gospel receive it with  joy, and
humbly acknowledge their inferiority to the sender. The
Passion  of  Jesus  is  not  due  to  the  malice  of  either  of  them,  but
is  voluntary, and  undertaken  as  the  sole means  of  restoring
confused  elements  of  the  All  to  the  harmony  indispensable  for
their  eternal  duration. Even the final withdrawing of  the
Divine  Light  from  the  Ogdoad  and  Hebdomad  is  done  for  the
same  beneficent  purpose, in order  that both they and their
greatness  may  rest  for  ever  in  blissful  ignorance,  each  holding
himself  supreme  in  his  own  creation,  and  knowing  of  nothing
above  it,  may  no  longer  be  tormented  by  vain  aspirations  after
a  state  of  perfection  for  which  his  nature  is  not  adapted. The
benevolent spirit that pervades the whole theory strongly
supports  the  assertion  of  Hippolytus, and points  out for  its
source  the  Egyptian  mythology, to  which  the  notion  of  two
principles, equal  in  power  but  antagonistic  in  nature,  would
have  been  unutterably  shocking.


82  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


THE  OPHITES.

The  Ophites  should  hold  by  right  the  first  place  amongst
the  schools  we  are  considering,  for  that  impartial  and  acute
historian  of  the  Gnosis,  Hippolytus,  styles  them,  "  The  Naaseni
who  specially  call  themselves  *  Gnostics.'  But  inasmuch  as
this  deception  of  theirs  is  multiform  and  has  many  heads  (a
play  upon  their  name  of  serpent-followers),  like  the  Hydra  of
fable,  if  I  smite  all  the  heads  at  once  with  the  wand  of  Truth,
I  shall  destroy  the  whole  serpent,  for  all  the  other  sects  differ
but  little  from  this  one  in  essentials."  He  therefore  commences
his  history  of  the  Gnostic  heresies,  properly  so  called,  with  a
minute  account  of  this  one,  illustrated  with  copious  extracts
from  their  text-books  ;  on  account  of  their  antiquity  and  im
portance  bestowing  much  more  of  his  space  upon  them  than
upon  any  other  of  their  offshoots  or  competitors.

Their  strange-sounding  title  "  Naaseni  " — "  Followers  of  the
Naas "  (the  only  way  in  which  the  Greek,  from  its  want  of
aspirate  letters,  could  write  the  Hebrew  Nachash,  "  Serpent  ") —
was  literally  rendered  by  "  Ophites,"  the  name  which  has  ever
since  served  to  designate  them.  They  first  assumed  a  definite
existence  about  the  same  time  as  the  Basilidans,  in  the  middle
of  the  second  century,  although  the  elements  of  the  doctrine
are  derived  from  a  source  much  more  remote.  That  source
was  the  secret  doctrines  taught  in  the  various  Pagan  Mysteries ;
and  likewise  certain  philosophic  theories  of  the  Greeks,
although  certainly  not  to  the  same  extent  as  the  learned
Hippolytus  labours  so  ingeniously  to  demonstrate.

In  support  of  this  statement  I  shall  proceed  to  quote  from
the  same  Father  some  curious  examples  of  the  method  in  which
the  Naaseni  pretended  to  recognise  their  own  "  knowledge  "  in
the  esoteric  religions  of  antiquity.  After  quoting  a  long
passage  from  Pindar  about  the  conflicting  theories  as  to  the
creation  of  the  First  Man*  and  the  names  given  to  him  by
different  nations,  the  Ophite  text-book  continues :

*  "  But  the  Libyans  held  that  plains,  first  gathered  the  sweet  dates
larbas  was  the  first-born  of  men ;  he  of  Jove.  And  even  in  our  day,  the
who,  rising  up  out  of  their  droughty  Nile  fattening  the  mud  of  Egypt,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  83

"  This  was  the  Man  brought  forth  by  the  Earth  spontane
ously  ;  but  ho  lay  without  breath,  without  motion,  without
stirring,  like  a  statue ;  being  made  after  the  image  of  their
Adamas  above,  the  subject  of  their  hymns,  through  the  agency
of  several  Powers,  concerning  each  one  of  whom  they  narrate
a  long  fable.  But  in  order  that  the  Man  above  might  be
obtained,  '  from  whom  is  every  tribe  upon  the  Earth,  and
likewise  in  the  Heavens,'  there  was  given  unto  him  a  soul,  that
through  this  soul  the  image  of  the  Man  above  might  suffer  and
be  chastened  in  bondage.  As  to  the  nature  and  source  of  this
soul  sent  down  to  animate  this  image,  the  Ophite  theory  is
derived  not  from  Scripture,  but  from  the  doctrine  of  the  Mysteries.
'  The  Gospel  according  to  the  Egyptians  '  is  their  text-book  on
this  point.  They  premise  that  the  nature  of  the  soul  is
extremely  difficult  to  investigate  by  reason  of  its  inherent
changeableness,  never  abiding  fixedly  in  the  same  place,  habits,
or  passion  :  and  they  adopt  in  this  particular  the  notions  of  the
Assyrian  mystics.  It  is  a  question  with  them  whether  the  soul
comes  from  the  '  Pre-existing,'  or  from  the  '  Self-begotten  One,'
or  from  the  'Effusion  of  Chaos.'  They  adopt  the  Assyrian
division  of  the  soul  as  being  both  one  and  threefold  !  For  all
Nature  longs  for  a  soul ;  the  soul  is  the  efficient  cause  of  all
things  that  grow,  are  nourished  and  have  action.  For  without
a  soul,  growth  and  nutrition  are  impossible  ;  even  stones  have
a  soul,  for  they  possess  the  faculty  of  growth,  and  this  faculty
cannot  exist  without  nutrition.  All  things  therefore  in
Heaven  or  Earth,  and  in  the  Abyss,  are  eager  after  a  soul.  This
soul  the  Assyrians  call  '  Adonis,'  '  Endymion,'  '  Attis ' ;  and
hence  arose  the  fable  of  the  love  of  Venus  for  Adonis ;  Venus
signifying  generation.  The  love  of  Proserpine  for  Adonis  means
that  the  soul  is  mortal  if  separated  from  Venus;  that  is,  from
generation.  When  the  Moon  is  enamoured  of  Endymion,  it  is
Nature  herself  desiring  a  more  sublime  soul.  When  the  Mother
of  the  gods  emasculates  her  lover,  Attis,  it  signifies  the  Power


and giving life to things clothed arose  in their  country, Onnnf*,  the
with flesh, through  his moist  heat eater  of  fish;  but  tne  ilmldeuns  say
breeds living creatures. The As- he  was  Arlam."
Syrians  pretend  that  the First  Man

G 2


84  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

above  recalling  into  itself  the  male  energy  of  the  soul. For  the
Man  that  is  above  is  of  both  sexes." [On  this  account  they
most  vehemently  denounce  all  intercourse  with  women.] "  Attis
was  deprived  of  his  virility,  that  is,  was  divested  of  his  lower,
earthly,  part,  and  then  translated  to  the  Upper  World,  '  where
is  neither  male  nor  female,  but  a  new  creature,'  the  Man  above,
of  two sexes. And to this truth not only Ehea, but all
creation,  beareth  testimony. And  to  this  doth  Paul  refer  in
Komans  (i.  20-27)  : (where  they  strangely. pervert  his  expres
sion  aa-x^/^oa-vvrj,  as  signifying  that  heavenly,  sublime,  felicity,
that  absence  of  all  form  which  is  the  real  source  of  every  form).
These  same  verses  of  Paul,  according  to  them,  contain  the  key
to their whole system, and to their '  Mystery  of  Celestial
Pleasure.' For  the  promise  of  *  Washing '  applies  to  none  save
the  man  who  is  introduced  into  the  eternal  pleasure,  'being
washed  with  the  True  Water,  and  anointed  with  the  Unction
that  cannot  be  spoken.' The  Phrygian  Mysteries,  equally  with
the  Assyrian,  teach  the  same  great  truth,  when  they  teach  the
blessed  nature  of  things  past,  present,  and  to  come,  hidden  and
yet  manifested  ;  the  '  true  kingdom  that  is  within  you.' To
the  same  effect  they  bring  forward  the  Gospel  of  Thomas,  which
has, '  lie  that  seeketh  shall  find  me amongst children  from
seven  years  downwards,  for  in  the  fourteenth  generation,  being
hidden,  I  will  manifest  myself.' [Although  in  reality  this  is
not  a  maxim  of  Christ's,  but  a  maxim  of  Hippocrates. '  The
boy  at  seven  years  of  age  is  the  half  of  his  father,' — in  stature.]
"The  Egyptians  were,  after  the  Phrygians,  the  most  ancient
of  mankind, and the first establishers of mysteries. The
Ophites explain as  follows  the esoteric doctrine concerning
Isis,  and  the  genital  member  of  Osiris,  lost,  sought  after,  and
enveloped by her seven times in a black (or  dark blue)*
vestment. Osiris  is  the  element Water; Nature  seven  times
enveloped in an  etherial robe,  that  is,  the seven planetary
spheres,  stands  for  Generation  and  Change,  or  Creation  trans
formed  by  the  ineffable,  formless,  imageless,  incomprehensible
Deity. The  same  is  implied  in  the  words  of  Scripture,  '  The
righteous  man  shall  fall  seven  times,  and  ^hall  rise  again  ' — his

*  Me'Aas  has  both  these  meanii.'gs.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  85

all signifying  tho  revolutions  of  the  planets  put  in  motion  by
the  All-mover.

"  They  likewise  discourse  concerning  the  essence  (or  existence)
of  the  '  Seed,'*  the  final  cause  of  all  things  that  exist,  although
itself  none  of  them,  and  yet  making  and  generating  all  things  ;
or,  as  they  themselves  express  it,  '  I  become  what  I  will,  and
am  what  I  am ;  therefore  I  say  that  moving  all,  I  am  myself
immovable.' For  it  continues  what  it  is,  making  all  things,
although  itself  is  made  nothing  of all that  exist. To this
doctrine  the  Saviour's  words  refer,  '  Why  callest  thou  me  good  ?
One  only  is  good,  my  Father  which  is  in  Heaven,  who  maketh
the  sun  to  shine  upon  the  just  and  upon  the  unjust,  and  sendeth
His  rain  upon  the  sinners  and  upon  tho  righteous.' And  this
is  the  great  and  unknown  Mystery,  hidden  amongst  the  Egyptians
and  yet  manifested, for  Osiris  standeth  in  his  temple  before
Isis,  having  his  secret  part  exposed  and  pointed  upwards,  and
crowned  with all tho fruits of the creation. And for this
cause,  the  same  member  [the  Phallus]  holds the  first  position.
in  the  most  sacred  places,  being  shown  forth  unto  the  world,
'like  a  light  set  upon  a  candlestick' :  it  is  sot  up  on  the  house
tops,  and  in  the  streets,  and  for  landmarks. Jt  is  a  blessing
acknowledged and proclaimed by all, for they call it the
'  Bringer of Luck  ' (ayafty^opov),— not  understanding what
they  say. This  mystery  the  Greeks  got  from  E<jm>t,  and  observe
unto  this  day. For  by  this symbol  they  represent  Hermes  ;
and  they  entitle  that  god  '  Logicos,'  for  he  is  the  interpreter
and  Creator  of  things  made,  in  making,  and  to  be  made ;  and
he  is  represented  by  this  his  proper  symbol. And  that  this  is
the Hermes, guide,  companion,  and author  of  souls,  Homer
hath  perceived,  for  he  saith  (Od.  xxiv.  1-2)  :—

'  Cyilenian  Hermes  summoned  forth  the  souls  of  the  bold  suitors,'
not  meaning  those  of  Penelope's  suitors,  but  of  us  the  awakened
and  admonished.

'  From  what  vast  happiness,  what  height  of  glory,'
we  have fallen,  namely,  from the Primal Man,  the  Adamas

*  Tho "  Seed of the  World " in the Basilidau system, as already
explained  (p.  73).


86  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

that  is  above,  into  this  vessel  of  clay,  and  become  the  servants
of  the  Demiurgus,  of  Ildabaoth,  the  God  of  Fire,  the  Fourth  in
number  (for  by  this  name  they  call  the  creator  of  the  *  World
of  Species,'  KOCT/XO?  tSucos).

"  In  his  hand  his  wand  Beauteous,  all  golden,  by  whose
potency  the  eyes  of  mortals  he  at  pleasure  lulls  to  sleep,  or
rouses  others  from  their  slumber.  For  lie  is  the  sole  author  of
life  and  death,  therefore  is  it  written,  '  Thou  shalt  rule  them
with  a  rod  of  iron.'  But  Homer  wishing  to  embellish  the  in
comprehensible  reality  of  the  nature  of  the  Logos,  has  given  to
him  a  rod  of  gold,  not  of  iron.  Some  Ho  casts  into  slumber,
others  he  awakens,  and  makes  them  aware  of  their  condition  :
*  Awake  thou  that  sleepest,  and  rise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ
shall  give  theo  light.'  For  this  is  the  Christ  that  is  figured
within  all  the  sons  of  men  by  the  unfigured  Logos.  This  is
the  great  and  profound  mystery  of  the  Eleusinian  rites,  the  cry,
YE  KYE,  Rain  !  Conceive  !  All  things  are  subject  unto  Him,  for
'  their  sound  is  gone  forth  unto  all  lands.'  And  again,  this  is
the  hidden  sense  of  Homer's

'  Ho  waved  his  waud,  they  followed  with  shrill  ery.'

That  is,  the  souls  in  a  continuous  line,  as  the  poet  goes  on  to
express  by  the  simile —

'  As  in  the  furthest  depths  of  some  vast  cave,
Shrill  cry  the  hats  when  one  drops  from  their  chain,
Down  from  the  rock  where  fast  they  cling  together.'

That  is,  the  souls  fallen  down  from  the  Kock  above,  namely
from  the  Adamas.  This  is  the  Adamas,  the  chief  corner-stone,
'  which  is  made  the  head  of  the  corner,'  because  in  the  head  is
placed  the  formative  substance,  the  brain,  out  of  which  all
generation  proceeds.  '  I  will  set  the  Adamant  in  the  founda
tions  of  Zion  '  is  allegorical  for  setting  the  figure  of  the  Man
(in  the  soul).  And  the  text,  '  This  Adamas  is  firmly  held  by
teeth  in  the  wall,'  is  the  Inner  Man  that  is  signified,  the
'stone  cut  without  hands,'  which  hath  fallen  down  from  the
Adamas  above  into  this  earthly  potter's  vessel,  this  figure  of
forgetfulness.*

*  Meaning  the  Body,  in  which  the  Inner  Man imprisoned has  lost  all
recollection  of  his  primal  source.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  87

"  The  souls  follow  Hermes,  or  the  Logos.

'  So  moved  they,  crying,  through  the  darksome  paths ;
Hermes  their  guide,  that  god  devoid  of  ill.'

That  is,  ho  leads  them  to  the  everlasting  places  where  no  ill
comes  ;  for  whither  were  they  going  ?

4  They  passed  o'er  Ocean's  wave  and  Leucas'  rock,
The  Sun's  bright  portals,  and  the  L»nd  of  dreams.'

"  This  '  Ocean  '  signifies  the  generation  of  gods  and  the  gener
ation  of  men,  ever  tossing  in  a  perpetual  flow  and  ebb.  When
it  runs  downwards  it  is  the  generation  of  men  ;  when  it  tosses
itself  upwards  against  its  boundary,*  the  rock  Leucas,  it  is  the
generation  of  gods.  *  For  this  cause,'  saith  the  Wise  One,  '  I
have  said  ye  are  gods  and  the  children  of  the  Most  Highest,
when  ye  shall  make  haste  to  flee  out  of  Egypt,  and  shall  come
beyond  the  Red  Sea  into  the  Wilderness ' ;  that  is,  out  of  this
earthly  mixture  (or  confusion)  up  to  the  Jeiusalem  above,
which  is  the  mother  of  the  living.  '  But  if  ye  return  into
Egypt  (or»  into  this  earthly  nature)  ye  shall  die.'  'Egypt'
being  the  prison  of  the  body.  This  is  the  mighty  Jordan
which,  flowing  downwards,  hindered  the  flight  of  the  Children
of  Israel;  but  which  Jesus  (i.e.  Joshua)  turned,  and  made  to
flow  upwards."

"  Following  guides  like  those  just  cited,  these  very  strange
fellows  the  Gnostics  (observes  Hippolytus),  the  inventors  of  a
new  art  of  grammar  (or,  criticism),  extol  beyond  all  expression
their  prophet  Homer,  who  hath  foreshown  these  doctrines  unto
them  :  and,  by  seducing  those  ignorant  of  the  Holy  Scriptures
into  such-like  fancies,  they  make  fools  of  them  in  the  manner
described.'*

"Another  of  their  maxims  is  that  '  Whoso  saith  that  the  All
cometh  from  One  is  grossly  deceived ;  but  he  that  saith  that
the  All  cometh  from  Three,  hath  the  true  key  to  the  system  of
the  universe.  For  there  is  one  nature  of  the  Man  that  is  above,
Adamas ;  one  mortal  here  below ;  one  without  a  king,  the
generation  existing  up  above,  where  is  Mariam  the  Sough  t-
After,  and  Jothor  the  great  and  wise,  and  Sephora,  she  that

*  The  Basilidan  "  Boundary  Spirit,"  or  Holy  Ghost  (p.  70).


88  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

seoth,  and  Moses,  whose  offspring  is  not  in  Egypt,  for  his  sons
were  born  unto  him  in  the  land  of  Midian.  Neither  hath  this
truth  escaped  Homer,  for  he  sings—

"All  things  are  parcelled  into  portions  three,
And  to  each  portion  its  due  honour  falls."


For  it  is  necessary  that  the  Great  Ones  (TO.  peytO-ri)  should  be  ex
pressed  in  words,  but  in  such  wise  that  "hearing  men  may  not
hear,  and  seeing  they  may  not  perceive."  For  if  the  Great  Ones
were  not  uttered,  the  world  could  not  exist.  These  three  most
sublime  names  are,  KAVLACAV,  SAVLAS  AV,  ZEESAE.  Kav-
lacav  is  the  name  of  the  Adamas  who  is  above  ;  Savlasav  of  him
who  is  below,  mortal  ;  Zeesar  of  the  Jordan  that  floweth  upwards.
This  is  He  that  pervades  all  things,  being  at  once  male  and
female,  named  by  the  Greeks  Geryon,  as  having  three  bodies
and  flowing  out  of  the  Earth  :  whom  the  Greeks  also  call  "  The
Moon's  celestial  horn,"  because  he  has  mixed  and  tempered  all
things  [a  play  upon  the  similar  sounding  words  /cepa?  and
Kpacris].  "  For  all  things  were  made  through  him,  and  without
him  nothing  was  made,  and  what  was  made  in  him  is  Life."
This  Life  is  the  life  unspeakable,  the  generation  of  the  Perfect
Man,  unknown  to  former  ages.  The  "  Nothing  "  that  was  made
without  him  is  the  World  of  Species,  for  that  world  was  made
without  him  by  the  Third  and  by  the  Fourth  One.*  This  is  the
Cup  (condy)  of  Joseph,  "  out  of  which  the  king  doth  drink  and
use  divination."  Of  this  also  do  the  Greeks  (Anacreon)  sing
in  Bacchic  frenzy,

"  Bring  me,  boy,  the  draught  divine  ;
Bring  me  water,  bring  me  wine  ;
Make  me  drunk  with  quaffing  deep,
Lull  my  charmed  soul  to  sleep  ;
For  my  cup  predicts  to  me
Of  what  country  I  shall  be."

Here  Anacreon's  dumb  cup  utters  the  unspeakable  mysteiy,  for
it  tells  him  to  what  country  he  shall  belong,  that  is,  whether  to
the  Spiritual  or  to  the  Carnal  world.  This  also  is  the  "  Water
changed  into  wine,"  at  the  famous  wedding  at  Cana,  when  Jesus
manifested  the  kingdom  of  Heaven  —  that  kingdom  which  is

*  Ildabaoth,  the  God  of  Fire.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

hidden  within  every  man,  like  the  leaven  sufficient  for  the
three  measures.  Hero  likewise  is  the  unspeakable  secret  of  the
Samoihracian  Mysteries,  which  none  but  we  the  "  Perfect "  are
able  to  understand,  for  the  Samothracians  expressly  mention
the  Adamas  who  is  above— the  Primal  Man.  For  in  the  Temple
of  the  Samothracians  stand  two  naked  men,  having  their  hands
and  their  genital  members  elevated  towards  heaven,*  like  the
Hermes  of  Cyllene.  These  two  statues  represent  the  Primal
Man,  and  the  Spiritual  Man  after  he  is  "  born  again,  and  made
like  unto  Him  every  whit." '

"  This  is  the  true  sense  of  the  Saviour's  words,  '  Unless  ye  eat
my  flesh  and  drink  my  blood,  ye  cannot  enter  into  the  Kingdom
of  Heaven ' ;  and  « Though  ye  shall  drink  of  the  cup  that  I
drink  of,  whither  I  go  ye  shall  not  be  able  to  enter.'  For  Ho
knew  the  nature  of  His  disciples,  and  that  every  one  must  abide
in  his  own  nature.  For  out  of  the  Twelve  Tribes  he  chose  the
Twelve  Disciples;  for  which  cause  not  all  who  heard  their
teaching  received  or  understood  the  same  ;  for  that  which  is  not
according  to  Nature  is  contrary  to  Nature.  Him  (Adamas)  do
the  Phrygians  name  '  Corybas,'  for  he  descends  from  the  Head
(cory)  who  is  above,  the  Supernal  Brain ;  and  permeates  the  All
in  a  manner  incomprehensible.  And,  as  the  Prophet  hath  it,
'Ye  have  heard  his  voice,  but  ye  have  not  beheld  his  form';
that  is,  the  Image  coming  down  from  the  Formless  One  above
no  one  knows,  for  it  is  hidden  within  an  earthen  vessel.  This
is  as  the  Psalmist  hath  it:  'The  God  dwelling  in  the  great

*  A  valuable  notice of  the type  DINDIA MAGOLNIA FIEA DE-

under  which  the  Cabiri  were  repre-  DIT NOVIOS PLAVTIOS MED

sented  in  this  the  most  venerated  of  RQMAI  FECID
all  the  Grecian sanctuaries. It  is

curiously  illustrated  by  Ficoroni's  where  it  will  be  seen  that  Dindia
bronze  group,  figured  in  his  "Meinorie  uses  the  metronymic  after  the  Etrus-
di  Labico,"  and  given  to  the  Kir-  can  fashion.  This  group,  six  inches
cherian  Museum.  A  female,  half-  high,  served  for  handle  to  the  lid  of
draped  in  a  star-span-led  robe,  rests  a  cylindrical  pyxis,  two  palms  deep,
her  hands  on  the  shoulders  of  twin  resting  on  three  lion's  claws.  With
youths,  similarly  arrecti,  with  the  it  twas  found  a  mirror,  the  back  oil-
cars  and  standing-up  hair  of  fauns,  graved  with  the  combat  of  Pollux
one  holds  a  horn,  the  other  the  handle  and  Amycus,  LOSN  A  with  her  cres-
of  a  vase.  The  base  is  inscribed  in  cent  standing  in  the  middle,  the
very  archaic  letters—  names  in  regular  Etruscan.


90  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

flood,  and  crying  aloud  out  of  the  waters  of  the  eea ' ;  that  is,
He  cries  aloud  out  of  the  multiform  confusion  (or,  medley)  of
things  mortal  unto  the  Formless  One  who  is  above,  « Save  my
First-born  from  the  lions.'  [And  in  the  same  sense  do  they
interpret  all  the  similes  concerning  '  waterfloods,'  and  the
promises  of  the  Deity's  never  forgetting  His  chosen  people.]

"  The  Ascension  or  Regeneration,  that  is,  the  conversion  of  the
Carnal  Man  into  the  Spiritual,  is  thus  explained  by  means  of  a
curious  perversion  of  words  taken  from  different  Psalms :
'Lift  up  your  heads,  ye  everlasting  gates,  that  the  King  of
Glory  may  come  in.  Who  is  this  King  of  Glory?  The  very
scorn  of  men,  and  the  outcast  of  the  people,  He  is  the  King  of
Glory,  mighty  in  battle.'  Battle  signifies  the  war  in  your
members  ever  being  waged  within  this  earthly  creature  made
up  of  conflicting  elements.  This  is  the  gate  seen  by  Jacob  as  ho
was  journeying  into  Mesopotamia  ;  that  is,  the  young  man
growing  up  out  of  the  boy,  and  Mesopotamia  signifies  the  stream
of  the  Great  Ocean  which  flows  out  of  the  middle  of  the  Perfect
Man.  The  same  deity  is  called  by  the  Phrygians  PAPA,  be
cause  He  appeased  the  confusion  and  chaotic  tumult  which  pre
vailed  before  His  corning.  For  this  name  is  the  unanimous  cry
Trave,  7ra£e,*  of  all  things  in  Heaven,  in  Earth,  and  under  the
Earth,  calling  upon  Him  to  appease  the  discord,  and  to  '  send
peace  to  men  that  were  afar  off ' — that  is,  to  the  earthly  and
mortal — '  and  to  them  that  were  near '  that  is,  to  the  spiritual
and  perfect.  He  is  likewise  called  '  dead '  by  the  Phrygians,
inasmuch  as  he  is  buried  within  the  tomb  of  the  body ;  to  which
circumstance  also  apply  the  words,  '  Ye  are  whited  sepulchres,
full  of  dead  men's  bones  and  all  manner  of  uncleanness ;  because
the  Living  Man  doth  not  dwell  within  you.'

"  '  The  dead  shall  rise  from  their  graves '  signifies  that  the
Earthly  Man  shall  be  born  again  spiritual.  Unless  they  pass

*  A  subsequent  thousand  years'  Quidquid  liabent  alii  solus  vult  pap-
experience  of  the  blessings  of  eccle-  pare :

siastical  rule  has  furnished  Walter  Aut  &i  iiomen  Gallicuin  vis apoco-

de  Mapes  with a more humorous  pare,

etymology  for  this  title —  Payez,  payez  dit  le  mot,  si  vis  im-

"Papa, si rem tangimus nomen  petrare."

habet  a  re,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  91

through  this  *  Gate '  all  continue  dead,  but  him  that  hath
passed  through  the  Phrygians  call  a  god,  for  he  becomes  a  god,
having  passed  through  the  Gate  into  Heaven.  Paul  means  the
same  by  his  '  being  caught  up  into  the  third  heaven,  and
hearing  unutterable  things.'  Again, '  the  publicans  and  harlots
shall  enter  into  the  Kingdo'ii  of  Heaven  before  you,'  where
publicans  means  the  Gentiles  *  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  world
have  come ' ;  *  whore  *  ends '  are  the  seeds  of  the  universe  scat
tered  about  by  the  Formless  One,  as  is  set  forth  by  the  Saviour,
4  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear,'  declaring  that  none
but  the  perfect  Gnostics  can  comprehend  this  mystery.

"  Those  beloved  by  the  Formless  One  are  Pearls  in  this  vessel
of  clay ;  and  to  them  refers  the  precept,  *  Cast  not  that  which
is  holy  to  the  dogs ;  neither  throw  your  pearls  before  swine ; '
meaning  sexual  intercourse  with  women — an  act  fit  only  for
dogs  and  swine.  He  is  also  called  AiVoAos  by  the  Phrygians,
not  because  he  really  kept  flocks,  as  the  profane  fancy,  but
because  he  is  o  cuet  7roA<Sj',  '  he  that  ever  turns '  the  universe
in  its  due  revolutions,  whence  the  phrase,  the  *  poles '  of  heaven.
And  Homer  (Od.  iv.  384-85)  says—

'  Here  turns  about  the  truthful  sea-god  old,
Immortal  Proteus  by  the  Egyptians  called.'

"  He  is  likewise  styled  *  Fruitful,'  because  '  the  children  of
the  widow  shall  be  more  than  those  of  her  that  hath  a  husband ; '
that  is,  the  spiritual  who  are  born  again,  being  immortal,  are
in  number  more  (though  but  few  of  them  are  born  into  this
life)  than  the  carnal,  who,  in  spite  of  their  present  multitude,
do  all  perish  utterly  at  last.

"  The  knowledge  of  the  Perfect  Man  is  very  deep,  and  hard  to
be  attained  to.  '  The  beginning  of  perfection  is  the  knowledge
of  man,  but  absolute  perfection  is  the  knowledge  of  God.'  He
( Adamas)  is  designated  by  the  Phrygians  as, '  the  Green  Wheat-
ear  cut  otf';  on  this  account,  at  the  Eleusinian  rites,  the
initiated  hold  up  in  silence  to  the  Directors  the  wondrous
mystery,  the  green  ear  of  wheat.  This  wheat-ear  is  the
Perfect  Son  descended  from  the  Adamas  above,  the  Great  Giver

*  A  play  upon  TeAwvcu  and  re'ATj.


92  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

of  light,  like  the  Hierophant  himself.  This  latter  is  not
actually  castrated  like  Attis,  but  emasculated  by  the  use  of
hemlock,  so  that  he  despises  all  carnal  pleasure;  and  whilst
celebrating  the  mysteries  amidst  blazing  torches,  he  cries  aloud,
1  The  holy  Brimo  hath  borne  a  sacred  son,  Brimos  ' — alluding
to  the  Spiritual  Birth.  The  rites  are  therefore  named  '  Eleu-
sinian '  and  '  Anactorian,'  from  the  Greek  words  signifying
Coming  and  Ascending.  This  is  what  the  initiated  themselves
declare  concerning  the  mysteries  of  Proserpine ;  and  of  the
road  leading  the  defunct  down  to  her  the  poet  (Amphis)
hath—

'  But  underneath  her  lies  a  rugged  path.
Hollow  and  muddy,  yet  the  best  to  lead
Down  to  the  lovely  groves  of  precious  Venus.'

"  These  are  the  Lesser  Mysteries,  of  earthly  origin,  '  in  which
men  ought  to  rest  themselves  for  a  while,  and  then  proceed  to
the  Greater  Mysteries,'  that  is,  to  heavenly  regeneration.

"  The  Father  of  the  All  is  furthermore  called  by  the  Phrygians
'  Amygdalus,'  the  Almond  Tree ;  not  meaning  the  natural  tree,
but  the  Pre-existing  One,  who,  having  within  himself  the
Perfect  Fruit  pulsating  and  moving  about  in  his  depths,  tore
open  (8iTJyui;£e)  his  bosom,  and  brought  forth  the  Invisible.
Ineffable  Son,  of  whom  we  are  treating.*  lie  is  moreover
denominated  the  '  Piper,'  because  that  which  is  born  is  the
harmonious  Spirit  [or,  breath,  the  Greek  affording  no  distinction
between  the  twc  senses  of  the  word.]  The  Spirit  is  likewise
called  the  Father,  and  the  Son  begotten  by  the  Father ;  for  the
worship  of  the  Perfect  is  not  carnal,  but  spiritual :  therefore,
*  Neither  in  Jerusalem  nor  in  this  mountain  shall  ye  worship
any  more/

"  This  is  the  mystery  of  the  Incomprehensible  One,  furnished
with  innumerable  eyes,  whom  all  Nature  longeth  after  in  different
ways.  [Perhaps  an  allusion  to  the  Brahminical  figure  of  Indra,
<>-od  of  the  heavens.]  This  is  the  '  Word  of  God,'  that  is,  the

*  Some  lurking tradition  of  this  ciation  constructed by  Brunelleschi

mystery may have suggested the  for  the church  of  Sta.  Croce. See

machine  of  the  almond  (machina  della  Vasari's  detailed  account  of  this  re-

mandola)  containing  the  Archangel  markable  example  of  a  miracle-play.
Gabriel,  in  the  spectacle  of  the  Ann un-


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  93

word  of  the  declaration  of  his  great  power :  '  Wherefore  it
shall  be  sealed  up,  and  veiled,  and  hidden,  lying  in  the
dwelling-place,  where  is  established  the  Eoot  of  all  the  TEons,
Powers,  thoughts  [Platonic  Ideas],  gods,  angels,  spirit-mes
sengers  that  are,  that  are  not,  begotten,  unbegotten,  compre
hensible,  incomprehensible,  of  the  years,  months,  days,  hours,
moments,  whence  Time  begins  to  grow  and  increase  by  particles.
For  a  moment  (or  geometrical  point),  itself  being  nothing,  made
of  nothing,  indivisible,  grows  by  accretion  into  a  magnitude
incomprehensible.'  This  is  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  the  grain
of  mustard  seed,  the  Indivisible  Point  existing  within  every
one,  but  only  known  unto  the  Spiritual  Man.

"  *  There  is  neither  speech  nor  language,  but  their  voices  are
heard  amongst  them,'  signifies  that  whatever  men  say  or  do,
has  all  a  spiritual  meaning  to  the  Perfect ;  even  the  actors  in  the
theatre  utter  nothing  without  the  intervention  of  the  Deity.
For  when  the  audience  are  seated,  and  the  actor  comes  upon  the
stage,  clad  in  a  gorgeous  robe  and  twanging  his  lyre,  he  sings
thus  a  great  mystery  without  knowing  what  he  says — 'Whether
thou  be  the  offspring  of  Saturn,  or  of  blessed  Jove,  or  of  the
mighty  TChea,  hail!  Thee  Assyrians  call  the  thrice-desired
Adamas ;  whilst  Egypt  styles  Thee  Osiris ;  the  Greeks  in  their
wisdom  (esoteric  knowledge)  the  Moon's  Holy  Horn  ;  the  Samo-
thracians,  the  venerable  Adamnas ;  the  Hsemonians,  Corybas ;  the
Phrygians,  at  one  time,  Papa,  the  Dead  One ;  at  another,  the
God,  or  the  Barren  One,  or  the  Green  Wheat-car  cut  off ;  or  him
whom  the  fruitful  Almond  Tree  poses  the  man  playing  on  the
pipe.'  He  is  the  multiform  Attis,  whom  they  thus  describe  in
their  hymns :  '  I  will  sing  of  Attis,  the  favourite  of  Ehea,  with
the  clashing  of  cymbals,  the  bellowing  of  the  Idaean  pipe  of
the  Curetes,  and  will  intermingle  the  sound  of  Phoebus'  lyre.
Evoe !  Evau  !  Thou  that  art  like  unto  Pan,  unto  Bacchus,  thou
Shepherd  of  the  white  stars  !  '

"  For  these  "  (adds  Hippolytus)  "  and  other  such  like  reasons,
these  Ophites  frequent  the  Mysteries  of  the  Great  Mother,
fancying  that  by  means  of  what  is  done  there  they  can  see
through  the  whole  secret.  But  in  reality  they  have  not  the
least  advantage  over  other  people,  except  that  they  are  not


94  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

emasculated,  and  yet  they  act  as  though  they  were.  For  they
most  strictly  forbid  all  intercourse  with  women,  and  in  every
other  respect,  as  we  have  fully  described,  they  do  the  same
things  as  the  eunuchs,  the  regular  priests  of  Rhea."

After  giving  an  account  of  their  worship  and  glorification
of  the  Serpent  (which  I  shall  extract  when  treating  of  the
Agathodsemon  religion)  Hippolytus  thus  continues  : — "  The
foregoing  is  a  sample  of  the  insane,  absurd,  and  interminable
theories  of  the  sect.  But  to  show  up,  as  far  as  lies  in  cm-
power,  their  unknowing  'knowledge,'  the  following  hymn*  is
here  inserted,  as  containing  a  summary  of  the  whole  creed : —

" '  The  generative  law  of  the  All  was  the  First  Mind ;
But  the  Second  was  the  effused  chaos  of  the  First :
In  the  third  place  the  Soul  received  a  law,  and  began  to  operate.!
Whereupon  She  (the  Soul)  enveloped  in  the  figure  of  a  fawn,
Struggles  with  Death,  suffering  a  probationary  penance.
At  one  time,  invested  with  royalty,  she  beholds  the  Light ;
At  another,  cast  down  into  misery,  she  weeps.
Now  she  weeps  and  rejoices ;
Now  she  weeps  and  is  judged;
Now  she  is  judged  and  dies.
When  shall  her  deliverance  be?
The  wretched  one

Hath  entered,  as  she  strayed,  into  an  evil  labyrinth.
But  Jesus  said :  Father,  suffer  me ;

She  in  quest  of  evil  (or,  the  chased  of  evil  ones)  upon  earth
Wandercth  about,  destitute  of  Thy  Spirit :
She  seeketh  to  escape  from  the  bitter  chaos,
But  knoweth  not  how  to  pass  through.
For  this  cause  send  me,  O  Father  !
I  will  go  down  holding  the  Seals,
I  will  pass  through  all  the  ^ons ;
I  will  reveal  all  the  mysteries;
I  will  manifest  the  forms  of  the  gods ;  I
And  the  hidden  secrets  of  the  holy  way
I  will  teach,  giving  unto  them  the  name  of  GNOSIS.'

"  This,  therefore,  is  the  system  (or  pretension)  of  the
Naaseni,  who  designate  themselves  'the  Gnostics.'  But  this

*  This  hymn  is  written  in  ana-  mental doctrine "  All is Three,"

psestic  verses;  its  text  is  in  many  already  stated  by  Hippolytus.

places  hopelessly corrupted by  the  J  That is, will disclose to the

transcriber. I  have  therefore  often  faithful  the  different  figures  of  the

been  obliged  to  conjecture  the  original  Archons of the lower spheres, a

sense.  promise  fulfilled  at  much  length  by

t  An  er.:mciation  of the  funda-  the  author  of  the  Pistis-Sophia.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  95

deception  of  theirs  being  multiform,  and  having  many  heads
like  the  Hydra  of  fable,  if  I  smite  all  the  heads  at  a  single
blow  with  the  wand  of  Truth,  I  shall  destroy  the  whole
serpent,  for  all  the  other  sects  differ  but  little  from  this  in
essentials."

Hippolytus  has  not  given  a  connected  analysis  of  the  Ophite
system ;  ho  probably  deemed  it  superfluous  labour,  as  having
been  already  done  with  much  exactness  by  Ireneeus  in  his  great
work,  to  which  the  former  occasionally  refers  as  being  then  in
everybody's  hands.  To  the  Bishop  of  Lugdunum,  therefore,  we
must  apply  for  this  information,  which  will  be  found  given  at
much  length  in  Chapters  xxxi.-xxxiii.  of  the  First  Book  of  his
History.  Pie  states  that  the  Ophites,  like  other  Gnostics,  rejected
tlie  Old  Testament  altogether  as  the  work  of  a  subordinate
divinity,  and  containing  nothing  of  the  revelations  of  their  Sophia,
or  Divine  Wisdom  ;  whilst  they  held  that  the  New,  although
originally  of  higher  authority,  had  been  so  corrupted  by  the
interpolations  of  the  Apostles  as  to  have  lost  all  value  as  a
revelation  of  Divine  truth.  They  drew  the  chief  supports  of
their  tenets  out  of  the  various  "  Testaments  "  and  similar  books
then  current,  and  ascribed  to  the  Patriarchs  and  the  most
ancient  Prophets,  for  example,  the  book  of  Enoch.

The  primary  article  of  this  doctrine  was  the  Emanation  of  all
things  from  the  One  Supreme,  long  utterly  unknown  to  man
kind,  and  at  last  only  revealed  to  a  very  small  number  capable
of  receiving  such  enlightenment.  Hence  he  is  named  Bythos,
"  Profundity,"  to  express  his  unfathomable,  inscrutable  nature.
Following  the  Zoroastrian  and  the  Kabbalistic  nomenclature  they
also  designated  Him  as  the  "  Fountain  of  Light,"  and  "  The
Primal  Man,"  giving  for  reason  of  the  latter  title  that  "  Man
was  created  after  the  image  of  God,"  which  proved  the  nature  of
the  prototype.

The  Beginning  of  Creation,  that  is,  the  Primal  Idea,  or  Emana
tion,  was  the  "  thought,"  Ennoia,  of  Bythos,  who  bears  also  the
significant  name  of  Sige,  "  Silence."  This  Idea  being  the  first
act  of  creation  of  the  Primal  Man,  is  therefore  properly
denominated  the  "  Second  Man."  Ennoia  is  the  consort  (compare
the  Hindoo  Darga)  of  Bythos,  and  she  produced  Pneuma,  "  the


96  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIK REMAINS.

Spirit,"  who,  being  the  source  of  all  created  things,  is  entitled
"the  Mother  of  all  living,"  and  likewise  Sophia,  the  wisdom
from  on  high.  As  the  mother  of  all  living,  Sophia  is  the
medium  between  the  intellectual  and  material  worlds.  In
consequence  of  this,  when  Bythos  and  Ennoia,  charmed  with
her  beauty,  furnished  her  with  the  divine  Light,  Sophia  pro
duced  two  new  Emanations — the  one  perfect,  Christos,  the  other
imperfect,  Sophia- Achamoth.  (This  scheme  resembles  the  Bud
dhistic  ;  Bythos  answering  to  the  First  Buddha ;  Sige,  Sophia,
Christos,  Achamoth,  Ildabaoth,  to  the  successive  other  Five.)

Of  these  emanations  Christos  was  designed  for  the  guide  of
all  who  proceed  from  God  ;  Achamoth,  for  the  guide  of  all
proceeding  out  of  matter ;  nevertheless,  the  Perfect  One  was
intended  to  assist  and  lead  upwards  his  imperfect  sister.

Furthermore,  the  Spirit  rests  upon  Chaos,  or  the  waters  of
Creation,  which  are  Matter,  Water,  Darkness,  the  Abyss.  This
Chaos  was  devoid  of  all  life,  for  life  proceeds  ultimately  from
the  Supreme,  who  has  no  connection  whatever  with  Matter.
Neither  could  his  purely  intellectual  daughter,  Sophia,  act
directly  upon  it;  she  therefore  employed  for  agent  her  own
emanation,  Achamoth,  whose  mixed  imperfect  nature  fitted  her
for  that  office.

This  First  Tetrad,  Bythos,  Ennoia,  Sige,  Sophia,  were  in  the
meantime  creating  Ecdesia,  the  Idea  of  the  Holy  Church.  But
the  imperfect  Achamoth  upon  descending  into  Chaos,  lost  her
way  there,  and  became  ambitious  of  creating  a  world  entirely
for  herself.  She  floated  about  in  the  Abyss,  delighted  at
imparting  life  and  motion  to  the  inert  elements,  until  she
became  so  hopelessly  entangled  in  Matter  as  to  be  unable  to
extricate  herself  from  its  trammels.  In  this  condition  she
produced  the  creator  of  the  material  world,  the  Demiurgus,
Ildabaoth.

But  after  this  event,  Achamoth  feeling  the  intolerable  burden
of  her  material  part,  after  long  and  repeated  efforts,  at  length
struggled  forth  out  of  Chaos.  She  had  never  belonged  to  the
Pleroma,  but  she  attained  to  the  "  Middle  Space  " ;  where  she
entirely  shook  off  her  material  part,  and  determined  to  erect  a
barrier  between  the  World  of  Intelligence  and  the  World  of


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  97

Matter.  Ildabaoth,  "  Son  of  Darkness,"  creator  and  tyrant  of
the  Lower  World,  followed  the  example  of  Bythos  in  producing
subordinate  Emanations.  First  of  all  ho  generated  an  Angel
in  his  own  likeness  ;  this  Angel  a  second  ;  and  so  on  up  to  the
number  of  six.  These  are  all  reflexions  one  of  the  other ;  but
they  inhabit,  with  their  father,  Ildabaoth,  seven  different
regions ;  to  which  the  Middle  Space,  dominion  of  their  origin
Acharnoth,  forms  the  eighth.  Their  names  are  lao,  Sabaoth,
Adonai,  Eloi,  Ouraios,  Astaphaios.  They  became  the  Genii  of
the  seven  worlds,  or  planetary  spheres.  The  first  four  names
are  the  mystic  titles  of  the  God  of  the  Jews — degraded  thus  by
the  Ophites  into  appellations  of  the  subordinates  of  the  Creator ;
the  two  last  signify  the  forces  of  Fire  and  Water.

In  this  degradation  of  the  names  most  sacred  in  the  Jewish
theology,  is  clearly  to  be  recognised,  the  very  teaching  of  those
"  dreamers"  reprobated  by  Jude,  v.  8  for  despising  "Dominion,"
and  speaking  evil  of  "  Dignities."  For  "  Dominion "  is  the
"Empire"  in  the  Sephiroth  (see  page  35)  to  which  the  Kabbala
assigned  the  title  Adonai.  Now  we  find  here  the  Ophites
making  Adonai  the  third  son  of  Ildabaoth,  a  malevolent  Genius,
and  like  his  father  and  brethren,  the  eternal  adversary  of  the
Christ.  The  "  Dignities  "  mean  the  other  personages  of  the
Sephiroth,  similarly  dishonoured  by  the  new  doctrine.  Judo
shows  plainly  whom  he  had  in  view  by  contrasting  in  the  next
verse  the  audacity  of  these  "blasphemers"  with  the  respect
shown  by  the  Archanged  Michael  towards  his  opponent  on
account  of  his  angelic  nature,  however  fallen  from  his  high
estate.  By  a  most  singular  coincidence  (much  too  close  to
have  been  merely  accidental),  Jude's  censure,  nay,  his  very
expressions  are  repeated  by  Peter  in  his  second  Epistle  (ii.  10).
If  either  of  these  Epistles  were  really  written  by  the  Apostles
whose  names  they  bear,  these  passages  bring  to  light  the  very
early  existence  of  this  school  of  Gnosticism,  which  indeed  may
have  been  founded  before  the  promulgation  of  Christianity.
But  to  return  to  the  operations  of  Ildabaoth.  Besides  the
Spirits  above  mentioned,  he  generated  Archangels,  Angels,
Virtues,  and  Powers  presiding  over  all  the  details  of  the
creation.  Ildabaoth  was  far  from  being  a  pure  spirit ;  ambition


98  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

and  pride  dominated  in  his  composition.  He  therefore  re
solved  to  break  off  all  connection  with  his  mother,  Achamoth,
and  to  create  a  world  entirely  for  himself.  Aided  by  his  own
Six  Spirits,  he  created  Man,  intending  him  for  the  image  of  his
power ;  but  he  failed  utterly  in  his  work,  his  Man  proving  a
vast,  soulless  monster,  crawling  upon  the  earth.  The  Six
Spirits  were  obliged  to  bring  their  work  again  before  their
father,  to  be  animated :  he  did  so  by  communicating  the  ray  of
Divine  Light  which  he  himself  had  inherited  from  Achamoth,
who  by  this  loss  punished  him  for  his  pride  and  self-
sufficiency.

Man,  thus  favoured  by  Achamoth  at  the  expense  of  her  own
son,  followed  the  impulse  of  the  Divine  Light  that  she  had
transferred  to  him,  collected  a  further  supply  out  of  the
creation  with  which  it  was  intermingled,  and  began  to  present
not  the  image  of  his  creator  Ildabaoth,  but  rather  that  of  the
Supreme  Being,  the  "  Primal  Man."  At  this  spectacle  the
Demiurgus  was  filled  with  rage  and  envy  at  having  produced
a  being  so  superior  to  himself.  His  looks,  inspired  by  his
passions,  were  reflected  in  the  Abyss,  as  in  a  mirror,  the  image
became  instinct  with  life,  and  forth  arose  "Satan  Serpent-
formed,"  Ophiomorplios,  the  embodiment  of  envy  and  cunning.
He  is  the  combination  of  all  that  is  most  base  in  matter  with
the  hate,  envy  and  craft  of  Spiritual  Intelligence.  Out  of
their  normal  hatred  for  Judaism,  the  Ophites  gave  this  being
the  name  of  Michael,  the  guardian  angel  of  the  Jewish  nation
according  to  Daniel  (v.  21).  But  they  also  called  him  Samiel,
the  Hebrew  name  of  the  Prince  of  the  Devils.

In  consequence  of  his  spite  at  the  creation  of  Man,  Ildabaoth
set  to  work  to  create  the  three  kingdoms  of  Nature,  the
Animal,  the  Vegetable,  and  the  Mineral ;  with  all  the  defects
and  evils  they  now  exhibit.  Next,  in  order  to  regain  possession
of  the  best  of  things,  he  resolved  to  confine  Man  within  his  own
exclusive  domain.  In  order  to  detach  him  from  his  protectress
Achamoth,  and  from  the  celestial  region,  he  forbade  him  to  eat
of  the  Tree  of  Knowledge,  which  could  reveal  the  mysteries
and  confer  on  him  the  graces  from  above.  But  Achamoth,  in  order
to  defeat  his  scheme,  sent  her  own  Genius,  Ophis,  in  the  form


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  99

of  a  serpent  to  induce  him  to  transgress  the  commandment,  and
so  to  break  the  Law  of  Jealousy.  Though  not  so  stated,  it
would  appear  that  the  serpent-form  was  put  on  by  Achamoth's
minister  in  order  to  escape  the  vigilance  of  Ildabaoth,  under
the  disguise  of  his  offspring  Satan,  Ophiomorphos.

Enlightened  by  eating  the  forbidden  fruit,  Man  became
capable  of  comprehending  heavenly  things.  Nevertheless
Ildabaoth  was  sufficiently  powerful  to  revenge  himself,  which
he  did  by  shutting  up  the  First  Pair  in  the  prison-house  of
Matter,  that  is,  in  the  body,  so  unworthy  of  his  nature,  wherein
Man  is  still  enthralled.  Achamoth,  however,  continued  to
protect  him :  she  had  extracted  from  his  composition  and
absorbed  into  herself  the  divine  Spark  of  Light;  and  ceased
not  to  supply  him  therewith,  and  defend  him  in  all  his
trials.

And  of  this  there  was  full  need.  A  new  enemy  had  come
into  the  field  against  Man,  the  Genius  Ophis  whom  Ildabaoth  had
seized,  and  punished  for  his  share  in  the  affair  of  the  Tree  of
Knowledge,  by  casting  him  down  into  the  Abyss ;  and  who,
contaminated  by  his  immersion  in  Matter,  became  converted
into  the  exact  image  of  his  fellow-prisoner,  Ophiomorphos.
The  former  was  the  type,  the  latter  the  antitype,  and  the  two
are  often  confounded  together.  Thus  we  get  a  third  dualism  into
the  scheme.  Sophia  and  Sophia-Achatnoth,  Adam-Kadmon  and
Adam,  Ophis  and  Ophiomorphos.  Ophis,  at  first  Man's  friend,
now  began  to  hate  him  as  the  cause  (though  innocent)  of  his  own
degradation.  With  Ildabaoth,  and  his  Sons,  he  continually  seeks
to  chain  him  to  the  body,  by  inspiring  him  with  all  manner  of
corrupt  desires,  more  especially  earthly  love  and  the  appetites.
But  Achamoth  supplies  Man  with  the  divine  Light,  through
which  he  became  sensible  of  his  Nakedness,  that  is,  of  the  misery
of  his  condition  of  imprisonment  in  this  body  of  death,  where
his  only  consolation  is  the  hope  of  ultimate  release.

But  the  seductions  of  Ildabaoth  and  his  crew  gained  over  all
the  offspring  of  Adam,  except  Seth,  the  true  type  of  the
Spiritual  Man:  and  his  posterity  kept  alive  the  seed  of
Light  and  the  knowledge  of  divine  Truth  throughout  all  the
generations  following.  When  they  in  the  Wilderness  received

H  2


100  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

the  commandments  and  institutions  of  Ildabaoth  and  his  Sons,
the  Planetary  Genii,  and  afterwards  the  teaching  of  the
Prophets,  inspired  from  the  same  source,  Achamoth  infused  into
their  predictions  something  higher,  comprehended  not  even  by
their  Lord,  and  made  them  preach  the  advent  of  the  Primal
Man,  the  eternal  2Eon,  the  heavenly  Christ.  [The  same  notion
was  a  favourite  one  with  the  Medieval  CatJiari.']

Achamoth  was  so  afflicted  at  the  condition  of  Man  that  she
never  rested  until  she  had  prevailed  on  her  mother,  the
celestial  Sophia,  to  move  Bythos  into  sending  down  the  Christ
to  the  aid  of  the  Spiritual  Sons  of  Seth.  Ildabaoth  himself  had
been  caused  to  make  ready  the  way  for  his  coming  through
his  own  minister,  John  the  Baptist ;  in  the  belief  that  the
kingdom  Christ  came  to  establish  was  merely  a  temporal  one :  a
supposition  fostered  in  him  by  the  contrivance  of  Achamoth.
Besides  inducing  him  to  send  the  Precursor,  she  made  him
cause  the  birth  of  the  Man  Jesus  by  the  Virgin  Mary ;  because
the  creation  of  a  material  person  could  only  be  the  work  of  the
Demiurgus ;  not  falling  within  the  province  of  a  higher  power.
As  soon  as  the  Man  Jesus  was  born,  the  Christ,  uniting  himself
with  Sophia,  descended  through  the  seven  planetary  regions,
assuming  in  each  an  analogous  form,  thus  concealing  his  true
nature  from  their  presiding  Genii,  whilst  he  attracted  into
himself  the  sparks  of  the  divine  Light  they  still  retained  in
their  essence.  [These  "  analogous  forms  "  are  explained  by  the
fact  that  the  Ophite  Diagramma  figured  Michael  as  a  lion,
S uriel  as  a  lull,  Eaphael  as  a  serpent,  Gabriel  as  an  eagle,
Sabaoth  as  a  bear,  Erataoth  as  a  dog,  Ouriel  as  an  ass.']  In  this
manner  the  Christ  entered  into  the  man  Jesus  at  the  moment  of
his  baptism  in  the  Jordan.  From  this  time  forth  Jesus  began  to
work  miracles ;  before  that  He  had  been  entirely  ignorant  of  his
own  mission.  But  Ildabaoth  at  last  discovering  that  he  was
subverting  his  own  kingdom  upon  earth,  stirred  up  the  Jews
against  him,  and  caused  him  to  be  put  to  death.  When  he  was
on  the  cross,  the  Christ  and  Sophia  left  his  body,  and  returned
to  their  own  place.  Upon  his  death  the  Two  took  the  Man
Jesus,  abandoned  his  Material  body  to  the  earth,  and  gave  him  a
new  one  made  out  of  the  JEther.  Thenceforth  he  consisted


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  101

merely  of  soul  and  spirit,  which  was  the  cause  why  the
Disciples  did  not  recognise  him  after  his  resurrection.  During
his  sojourn  upon  earth  of  eighteen  months  after  he  had  risen,  he
received  from  Sophia  that  perfect  knowledge,  the  true  Gnosis,
which  he  communicated  to  the  small  portion  of  the  Apostles
who  were  capable  of  receiving  the  same.  Thence,  ascending
up  into  the  Middle  Space,  he  sat  down  upon  the  right  hand  of
Ildabaoth  although  unperceived  by  him,  and  there  he  is
collecting  all  souls  that  have  been  purified  through  the
knowledge  of  Christ.  When  he  shall  have  collected  all  the
Spiritual,  all  the  Light,  out  of  Ildalaoth's  empire,  Redemption
is  accomplished  and  the  end  of  the  world  arrived  :  which  means
nothing  else  than  the  reabsorption  of  all  Light  into  the  Pleroina
from  which  it  had  originally  descended.

The  sect  were  divided  in  their  opinions  as  to  the  nature
of  Ophis.  Although  agreed  that  this  genius  was  in  the
beginning  the  minister  of  Achamoth,  the  Ophites  of  Theodoret's
time  held  that  he  had  been  converted  into  the  enemy  of  Man ;
although  by  inducing  him  to  break  the  commandment  of
Ildabaoth  he  had  proved  the  final  cause  of  Man's  deliverance
from  his  power.  But  all  these  nice  distinctions,  and  compli
cated  machinery  of  Redemption  were  the  invention  of  the  later
schools  :  unknown  to  the  sect  described  by  Hippolytus.  For
the  primitive  Ophites,  retaining  the  Egyptian  veneration  for
the  Agathodgernon,  regarded  their  serpent,  The  Naas,  as  identical
with  either  Sophia,  or  the  Christ.  That  writer  says  positively
**  the  Naas  (Hebrew,  NacJiasJi)  is  the  only  thing  they  worship,
whence  they  are  denominated  Naaseni.  Even  two  centuries
later  when  Epiphanius  wrote,  they  employed  a  living  tame
serpent  to  encircle  and  consecrate  the  loaves  that  were  to  be
eaten  at  the  Eucharistic  supper.  Again  Tertullian  has  (In
Prescript.)  "  Serpentem  magnificant  in  tantum  ut  etiam
Christo  preeferant  " — a  passage  that  suggests  that  their  opliig
was  connected  with  the  antique  Solar  Genius  of  the  Pharaonio
religion.  It  was  a  peculiarity  of  the  Egyptians  that,  like
the  present  Hindoos,  they  were  divided,  as  it  were,  into  sects,
each  of  which  adopted  some  one  deity  out  of  the  Pantheon
for  the  exclusive  object  of  worship,  paying  no  regard  to  all  the


102  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

rest.  As  in  modern  Hindooism  Vishnu  and  Siva  have
engrossed  the  religion  of  the  country,  so  in  the  Egypt  of  the
first  Christian  century  Anubis  and  Cnuph  had  become  the  sole
objects  of  Egyptian  veneration,  as  the  monuments  hereafter  to
be  reviewed  will  abundantly  evince.

To  establish  the  identity  of  their  Ophis  with  the  Saviour,  his
followers  adduced  the  words  of  St.  John,  "  For  as  Moses  lifted
up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness,  even  so  must  the  Son  of  Man
be  lifted  up."  All  this  proves  that  the  section  of  the  Ophites
which  regarded  the  serpent  as  evil  by  its  nature,  had  been  led
astray  from  the  primitive  doctrine  of  their  sect  by  the  prevailing
Zoroastrian  and  Jewish  notions  upon  that  subject.  The  creed
of  the  original  Gnostics,  the  Naaseni,  gave  a  very  different  view
of  the  nature  of  the  serpent  considered  merely  as  a  type  ;  a  fact
which  shall  be  established  in  the  section  on  the  Agathodeemon
worship.

Epiphanius  gives  the  following  abstract  of  their  doctrine  to
explain  their  reverence  for  the  serpent  as  the  true  author  of
divine  knoivlcdgc.  "  The  Supreme  ^Eon  having  produced  other
yEons,  one  of  these,  a  female,  named  Prunicos  (i.e.  Concupiscence),
descended  into  the  waters  of  the  abyss :  whence,  not  being
able  to  extricate  herself,  she  remained  suspended  in  the
Middle  Space,  being  too  much  clogged  by  matter  to  return
above,  and  yet  not  sinking  lower  where  there  was  nothing
cognate  to  her  nature.  In  this  condition  she  produced  Ildabaoth,
the  God  of  the  Jews ;  and  he  in  his  turn  seven  JEons  or  Angels,
who  created  the  seven  heavens.  From  these  seven  ^Eons
Ildabaoth  shut  up  all  that  was  above,  lest  they  should  know  of
anything  superior  to  himself.  The  seven  ^Eons  then  created
Man  in  the  image  of  their  Father,  but  prone,  and  crawling
upon  earth  like  a  worm.  But  the  Heavenly  Mother,  Prunicos,
wishing  to  deprive  Ildabaoth  of  the  power  wherewith  she  had
unadvisedly  invested  him,  infused  into  Man  a  celestial  spark —
the  soul.  Straightway  man  rose  up  on  his  feet,  soared  in  mind
beyond  the  limits  of  the  eight  spheres,  and  glorified  the
Supreme  Father,  Him  who  is  above  Ildabaoth.  Hence  Ilda
baoth,  full  of  jealousy,  cast  down  his  eyes  upon  the  lower  layer
of  Matter,  and  begat  a  Virtue,  whom  they  call  his  Son.  Eve,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


103


listening  to  him  as  the  Son  of  God,  was  easily  persuaded  to  eat
of  the  Tree  of  Knowledge."  Such  is  the  brief  summary  of
Ophite  tenets,  as  given  by  Epiphanius.  The  details  of  the
elaborate  system  given  in  the  preceding  pages  are  extracted
from  Theodoret  who  flourished  half  a  century  later.


FIG.  4.


104  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


MACHINERY  OF  THE  GNOS1S.

The  doctrines  of  the  chief  schools  of  Gnosticism  having  been
fully  described  in  the  preceding  sections,  the  next  step  in  the
natural  order  of  things  will  be  to  consider  the  MACHINERY
employed  by  its  teachers  to  set  forth  these  new  doctrines.

The  deities  of  the  ancient  mythology  continued  to  hold  their
place  in  the  productions  of  the  great  sect  whose  birth-place
was  Alexandria,  and  consequently  some  insight  into  the  sense
in  which  the  novel  theosophy  adopted  them  may  be  obtained
by  learning  what  were  the  powers  and  attributes  of  these  same
gods,  when  their  worship  held  undisputed  possession  of  the
country.  On  this  account,  the  chief  deities  of  Egypt,  and  the
figures  under  which  they  are  recognised,  must  now  be  briefly
described — together  with  their  Coptic  titles,  so  often  found  on
these  monuments  in  strange  companionship  with  the  holy
names  of  the  Jewish  creed,  with  the  Magian  Genii,  even  with
the  appellatives  of  Hindoo  gods — the  very  terminology  of  the
religion  plainly  indicating  its  remote  and  multifarious  sources.

1.  The  great  god  of  Lower  Egypt,  Phthas  (phonetic,  Ptah),  is
represented  in  a  close-fitting  robe,  with  his  feet  joined  together,
and  standing  upon  a  base  of  four  steps,  called  the  "  Four
Foundations,"  and  which  typified  the  Four  Elements,  of  which
ho  was  the  grand  artificer — an  emblem  long  afterwards  taken
in  the  same  acceptation  by  the  Kosicrucians,  sometimes  he
appears  as  a  dwarf  and  Priapean;  sometimes  as  Phtha-Tore
with  a  beetle  forehead.  His  proper  attribute  is  the  Cyno-
cephalus  baboon.  His  four  sons,  the  Cabiri,  are  painted  as  little
ugly  dwarfs,  bearing  for  badges  of  office,  a  sword,  a  crocodile,
a  serpent,  a  human  head  stuck  on  a  hook.  They  become  in  the
hierarchy  of  the  Pistis-Sophia  the  "  Collectors  unto  Wrath "
(epivcuoi),  whose  office  is  to  accuse  souls  in  the  Judgment.
The  many-armed  Genius  brandishing  similar  weapons,  often
found  on  Gnostic  talismans,  probably  expresses  the  same  idea
in  a  condensed  form.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  105

2.  Ammon  (phonetically,  Amen)  has  a  human,  and  occasionally
a  ram's,  head,  from  which  rises  a  parti-coloured  plume. lie  is
modified into "  Pan-Mendes," Priapean,  and brandishing a
whip. In  the  character  of  "  Ammon-Chnubis  "  he  has  his  feet
bound  together,  and  wears  the  horns  of  a  goat. He  is  often
figured  as  the  serpent,  called  by  the  Greeks  the  "  Agathodsemon."
His  symbol  is  the  vase  "  Canopus,"  for  so  the  Greeks  pronounce
the name of Chnubis. United with the sun, ho becomes
"  Animon-Ea."

3.  The  Sun-god,  Phre,  or  Ea,  depicted  with  the  head  of  a
hawk,  supporting  the  solar disc entwined  with the serpent
Uraeus.

4.  Thoth  or  Thoyt,  ibis-headed,  is  the  "  Scribe  of  the  gods."
Sometimes  he takes the head of  a hawk, and  becomes tho
famous  "  Hermes  Trismegistus." His  symbol  is  the  winged  orb,
Tat,  answering  to  the  Mir  of  the  Persians. (He  is  the  prophet
Enoch's  fourth  rebellious  angel,  Penumuc,  "  who  discovered  unto
tho  children  of  men  bitterness  and  sweetness,  and  pointed  out
to  them  every  unit  of  their  wisdom. He  taught  men  to  under
stand writing, and tho use of  ink and paper. Therefore
numerous  have  been  those  who  have  gone  astray,  from  every
period  of  the  world  even  to  this  day. For  men  were  not  born
for  this,  thus  with  pen  and  with  ink  to  confirm  their  faith."
[Ixviii.  10.  13.])

5.  Sochos  is  depicted  with  the  head  of  a  crocodile,  and  is  also
symbolised  by  a  crocodile  with  the  tail  bent.

6.  The Moon-god, Pa-Ioh, (Pa, being the Coptic  definite
article)  is  represented  having  his  feet  close  together ;  upon  his
head  is  a  single  lock  of  hair  and  the  crescent. At  other  times,
this  deity  is  figured  bi-sexual,  and  casting  gold  dust  over  the
heavens,  that  is,  bespangling  them  with  the  stars.

7.  Osiris  is  a  human  figure  distinguished  by  his  lofty  conical
helmet,  and holding a crook and a  whip. The eye is his
symbol.

8.  Aroeres  (Aroi),  the  Horus  of  the  Greeks,  has  a  single  lock
of  hair  upon  his  head. He  is  figured  as  being  suckled  by  I  sis
and  again,  as  seated  upon  the  lotus  ;  ho  also  occasionally  wears
the  head  of  a  hawk,  as  being  one  character  of  the  Solar  god.


106  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

His  symbol,  the  hawk,  appears  upon  the  breast  of  Isis  in  a  torso
in  the  Borgia  Collection.

9.  Anubis  (Anbo)  is  always  jackal-headed,  and  sometimes  has
also  a  human  one  head,  springing  from  a  separate  neck. His
Coptic  name,  ANBO,  may  often  be  observed  in  Gnostic  legends.

10.  Bebon,  or  Bebys,  has  the  head  of  a  hippopotamus,  or  a
crocodile, and carries a sword : a figure which used to be
taken  for  Typhon. He  stands  for  the  constellation  Ursa  Major
in  the  Zodiac  of  Denderah.

Of  goddesses  the  principal  are —

1.  Neith :  expressed  by  the  Vulture,  or  else  by  a  female  with
head  of  a  vulture,  or  lion. In  the  last  case  she  takes  the  name
of  Taf-net. She  symbolizes  the  vault  of  Heaven.

2.  Athor :  with  the  head  of  a  cow,  or  else  of  a  woman  covered
with  the  skin  of  the  Eoyal  Vulture. She  is  denoted hiero-
glyphically  by  a  hawk  placed  within  a  square.

3.  Isis  :  a  female  with  horns  of  a  cow,  between  which  rests  a
disk,  the  lunar  circle.

4.  Sate :  the  Grecian  Hera,  wearing  tall  plumes  on  her  head,
and sometimes personified  with a  feather  in  place  of  head,
stands for "Truth," in which latter quality she appears
regularly  at  the  Judgment  of  the  Soul.

The  Four  Genii  of  the  Amenthes,  or  Hades,  are  represented
with  the  heads  of  a  man,  jackal,  baboon,  and  hawk,  respectively ;
and  are  often  placed  together  like  mummy-shaped  figures,
forming  the  Canopic  Vases.

The  symbols  of  the  same  worship  have  been  to  some  extent
explained  by  persons  writing  at  a  time  when  they  were  still  a
living,  though  fast  expiring,  language.  Of  such  writers  the
most  valuable  is  Plutarch,  who  in  his  curious  treatise  '  De  Iside
et  Osiride,'  has  given  the  meaning  of  several  of  these  symbols,
and,  as  it  would  appear,  upon  very  good  authority.  According
to  him,  Isis  sometimes  signifies  the  Moon,  in  which  sense  she  is
denoted  by  a  Crescent ;  sometimes  the  Earth  as  fecundated  by
the  waters  of  the  Nile.  For  this  reason  water,  as  the  seed  of
Osiris,  was  carried  in  a  vase  in  the  processions  in  honour  of  this


Of  iris  is  denoted  by  the  picture  of  an  Eye  and  Sceptre;  his


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  107

name  being  compounded  of  Os  "  many,"  and  iris  "  eye."  Upon
this  point  Macrobius  states  (Sat.  I.  21),  "  The  Egyptians,  in
order  to  denote  that  Osiris  means  the  Sun,  whenever  they  want
to  express  his  name  in  hieroglyphic  writing,  engrave  a  Sceptre
and  on  top  thereof  the  figure  of  an  Eye ;  and  by  this  symbol
they  express  '  Osiris,'  signifying  this  god  to  be  the  Sun,  riding
on  high  in  regal  power,  and  looking  down  upon  all  things,
because  antiquity  hath  surnamed  the  Sun  the  '  Eye  of  Jupiter.' "

The  Fig-leaf  stands  for  "  King"  ;  and  also  for  the  "  South."

The  Lizard,  which  was  believed  to  conceive  through  the  ear,
and  to  bring  forth  through  the  mouth,  is  the  typo  of  the
generation  of  the  Word,  that  is,  the  Logos,  or  Divine  Wisdom.
(This  belief  explains  the  appearance  of  a  lizard  upon  the  breast
of  certain  figures  of  Minerva.)  *

The  Scarabeus,  in  its  making  spherical  receptacles  for  its
eggs,  and  by  its  retrograde  motion,  imitates  the  action  and
movement  of  the  Sun.  This  insect  had  no  female,  according  to
the  popular  belief  of  the  Egyptians.

The  Asp  expresses  a  planet,  for  like  that  luminary,  it  moves
rapidly,  though  without  any  visible  organ  of  locomotion.

The  Ibis  stands  for  the  Moon :  the  legs  of  the  bird,  when
extended,  making  an  equilateral  triangle.  (It  is  hard  to  discern
any  analogy  between  the  Moon  and  this  figure  of  geometry,  but
,  yet  the  Pythagoreans  denoted  Athene  by  the  same  sign.  But
that  Plutarch  is  here  correct  is  proved  by  many  gems  which
show  a  triangle  set  upon  an  altar  and  adored  by  the  baboon,
Luna's  favourite  beast.)  How  the  later  Egyptians  symbolised
the  Sun  and  Moon  is  well  expressed  upon  a  jasper  (Waterton)
where  Horus,  seated  on  the  lotus,  is  adored  by  the  baboon  ;  in
the  field  are  the  sun-star  and  the  crescent  attached  to  their
respective  figures,  and  also  the  Triangle  very  conspicuously  placed.

Horus — Plutarch  remarks — wears  a  crown  of  the  branches  of
the  Persea,  because  its  fruit  resembles  in  shape  the  heart ;  its
leaves,  the  tongue.  The  legend  goes  that  the  tree  (Cordia  myxa,
or  Sebestene  plum)  was  first  planted  at  Memphis  by  the  hero
Perseus,  whence  its  name.  In  memory  of  his  mythic  ancestor,

*  Of  which  a  fine  example,  an  intaglio,  is  figured  in  the  Museum  (Mescal  -
churn.


108  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Alexander  ordered  that  a  garland  of  Persea  leaves  should  form
the  prize  at  the  games  he  instituted  at  his  new  Capital.  The  tree
never  wants  a  succession  of  flowers  and  fruit ;  the  latter  Pliny
compares  to  a  red  plum,  adding  that  it  will  not  grow  in  Europe.

We  next  come  to  a  professed  treatise  upon  this  recondite
subject,  Horapollo's  *  Interpretation  of  the  Sacred  Animals.'
Unfortunately,  this  work  bears  upon  its  face  clear  evidence  of
having  been  excogitated  by  some  pragmatical  Alexandrian
Greek,  totally  ignorant  of  what  he  was  writing  about,  but
impudently  passing  off  his  own  stupid  conjectures  as  to  the
meaning  of  the  figures  on  the  ancient  works  surrounding  him,
as  though  they  were  interpretations  handed  down  to  him  by
antique  authority.  He  must  have  written  under  the  Lower
Empire,  when  the  art  of  reading  hieroglyphics  was  entirely  lost,
for  we  know  that  it  still  existed  in  the  first  century ;  Tacitus
particularly  notes  that  an  aged  priest  read  to  Germanicus  upon
his  visit  to  Thebes  the  contents  of  the  historical  tablets  on  the
edifices  of  that  city.  "  Mox  visit  veterum  Thebaruin  magna
vestigia ;  et  manebant  structis  molibus  literae  ^Egyptia3  priscam
opulentiam  complexa3,  jussusque  e  senioribus  sacerdotum  patrium
sermonem  interpretari  "  (Ann.  II.  60).  This  happened  A.D.  19.
It  would  appear  that  the  knowledge  of  hieroglyphics  was  fast
dying  out,  and  only  preserved  by  members  of  the  previous
generation.*

It  is  only  in  a  few  instances  that  Horapollo  has  preserved
some  genuine  tradition  of  the  meaning  of  those  symbols  which
were  the  most  generally  used,  and  therefore  the  last  to  be
forgotten.  Of  these  explanations  the  most  important  are  what
follow.

"The  Cynocephalus  baboon  denotes  the  Moon,  because  that
beast  has  a  certain  sympathy  with  the  luminary,  and  during
her  dark  quarter  sits  without  eating,  his  eyes  fixed  upon  the

*  But  the  Demotic  writing  must  edifice  (moles)  an  epitaph  in  Greek,

have  lingered much longer in  use,  Latin,  Persian,  Jewish,  and  Egyptian

for  Capitolinus,  cap.  34,  mentions  the  letters,  so  that  it  might  be  read  by

"  Egyptian  "  as  one  of  the  current  everybody. "  Divo  Gordiano,  victori

alphabets of the third century.  Persarum,  victori  Gothorum,  victori

"The soldiers raised a tomb to  Sarmatarum,  depulsori Eonianarum

Gordian  at  Circeium  Castrum,  on  the  seditionum,  victori  Germanorum,  sed

confines  of  Persia;  placing  upon  this  non  victori  Philipporum."


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  109

ground  as  though  mourning  for  her  loss.  He  moreover  denotes
the  priestly  order,  because  he  is  naturally  circumcised,  and  abhors
fish  and  fishermen.  Erect  and  with  uplifted  paws  and  a
basilisk  (asp)  upon  his  head,  he  symbolises  the  New  Moon,
whose  first  appearance  he  hails  after  this  fashion.  By  his
voiding  his  urine  at  fixed  and  regular  intervals,  he  first  sug
gested  to  observers  the  regular  division  of  the  day  into  hours,
and  furnished  the  first  idea  of  the  invention  of  the  Clepsydra,  or
water-clock.

"  The  Dog  (Jackal)  represents  the  sacred  scribe :  because  that
functionary  ought  to  be  always  studying,  and  likewise  should
bark  at,  and  make  himself  disagreeable  to,  everybody.  In
another  sense  he  expresses  a  Prophet,  from  his  habit  of  staring
fixedly  at  the  statues  of  the  gods.

"  The  Hawk  means  '  God,'  or  «  Sun.'

"  The  Lion,  from  the  resemblance  of  his  round  face  to  the  solar
orb,  is  placed  beneath  the  throne  of  Horus,  the  Egyptian  title  of
the  Sun.

"  The  Eising  of  the  Nile,  called  in  Coptic  Nov  or  Nev,  is  denoted
by  three  large  vases ;  and  also  by  a  lion,  because  it  attains  its
full  height  when  the  Sun  is  in  that  sign  of  the  Zodiac ;  for
which  same  cause  the  spouts  of  the  sacred  lavers  are  made  in  the
shape  of  lions'  heads.

"  By  the  Ibis  is  signified  the  heart,  because  the  bird  belongs  to
Hermes,  who  presides  over  the  heart  and  all  reason.  The  Ibis
also,  by  its  own  shape,  resembles  the  form  of  the  heart ;  con
cerning  which  matter  there  is  a  very  long  legend  current
amongst  the  Egyptians."

But  the  most  graphic  account  of  the  symbols  and  ceremonies
employed  in  the  worship  of  Isis,  whilst  yet  in  its  full  glory
(the  middle  of  the  second  century),  is  to  be  obtained  from  the
description  of  her  Procession  which  Apuleius  (himself  one  of
the  initiated)  has  penned  in  the  eleventh  Book  of  his  "  Golden
Ass."  "  Next  flow  on  the  crowds  of  people  initiated  into  the
divine  mysteries ;  men  and  women  of  every  rank,  and  all  ages,
shining  in  the  pure  whiteness  of  linen  robes ;  the  latter  having
their  dripping  hair  enveloped  in  a  transparent  covering  :  the
former  with  their  heads  shaven  clean,  and  the  crowns  thereof


110  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

shining  white — these  earthly  stars  of  the  nocturnal  ceremony,
raising  as  they  went  a  shrill  tinkling  with  sistra  of  bronze,
silver,  and  even  of  gold.  But  the  chief  performers  in  the  rites
were  those  nobles,  who,  clad  in  a  tight-fitting  robe  of  linen
descending  from  the  waist  down  to  the  heels,  carried  in  the
procession  the  glorious  symbols  of  the  most  potent  deities.

"  The  first  held  out  at  arm's  length  a  lamp,  diffusing  before
him  a  brilliant  light;  not  by  any  means  resembling  in  form
the  lamps  in  common  use  for  illuminating  our  evening  meals,
but  a  golden  bowl  supporting  a  more  ample  blaze  in  the  midst  of
its  broad  expanse.  The  second,  similarly  robed,  held  up  with
both  hands  the  Altar  that  derives  its  name  from  the  beneficent
Providence  of  the  supreme  goddess.  The  third  marched  along
bearing  aloft  a  palm  branch  with  leaves  formed  of  thin  gold,  and
also  the  Caduceus  of  Hermes.  The  fourth  displayed  the  symbol
of  Justice,  the  figure  of  the  left  liand  with  the  palm  open,
which,  on  account  of  its  natural  inactivity,  and  its  being
endowed  with  neither  skill  nor  cunning,  has  been  deemed  a
more  fitting  emblem  of  Justice  than  the  right  hand.  The  same
minister  likewise  carried  a  small  golden  vestibule  made  in  a
round  form  like  an  udder,  out  of  which  he  poured  libations  of
milk.  The  fifth  carried  a  winnowing  fan  piled  up  with  golden
sprigs.  The  last  of  all  bore  a  huge  wine  jar.

"  Immediately  after  these  came  the  Deities,  condescending  to
walk  upon  human  feet,  the  foremost  among  them  rearing
terrifically  on  high  his  dog's  head  and  neck — that  messenger
between  heaven  and  hell  displaying  alternately  a  face  black  as
night,  and  golden  as  the  day ;  in  his  left  the  caduceus,  in  his
right  waving  aloft  the  green  palm  branch.  His  steps  were
closely  followed  by  a  cow,  raised  into  an  upright  posture — the
cow  being  the  fruitful  emblem  of  the  Universal  Parent,  the
goddess  herself,  which  one  of  the  happy  train  carried  with
majestic  steps,  supported  on  his  shoulders.  By  another  was
borne  the  coffin  containing  the  sacred  things,  and  closely  con
cealing  the  deep  secrets  of  the  holy  religion.  Another  carried
in  his  happy  bosom  the  awful  figure  of  the  Supreme  Deity,  not
represented  in  the  image  of  a  beast  either  tame  or  wild,  nor  of  a
bird,  nor  even  in  that  of  man,  but  ingeniously  devised  and


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  Ill

inspiring  awo  by  its  very  strangeness,  that  ineffable  symbol  of
the  deepest  mystery,  and  ever  to  be  shrouded  in  the  profoundest
silence.  But  next  came,  carried  precisely  in  the  same  manner,
a  small  vessel  made  of  burnished  gold,  and  most  skilfully
wrought  out  into  a  hemispherical  bottom,  embossed  externally
with  strange  Egyptian  figures.  Its  mouth,  but  slightly  raised,
was  extended  into  a  spout,  and  projected  considerably  beyond
the  body  of  the  bowl,  whilst  on  the  opposite  side,  widening  as
it  receded  into  a  capacious  opening,  it  was  affixed  to  the  handle,
upon  which  was  seated  an  asp  wreathed  into  a  knot,  and
rearing  up  on  high  its  streaked,  swollen  and  scaly  neck."

These  images  and  symbols  require  a  few  remarks  in  elucida
tion  :  suggested  by  the  notices  of  ancient  writers,  or  by  the
representations  of  these  very  objects  upon  extant  monuments  of
the  same  religion.  The  "  udder-shaped  "  vessel  exactly  describes
the  one  so  frequently  placed  upon  the  Gnostic  gems,  and  which
Matter  so  strangely  interprets  as  the  "  Vase  of  Sins  "  of  the
deceased— an  unlikely  subject  to  be  selected  for  a  talisman
intended  to  secure  the  benevolence  of  heaven.  Much  more  to  the
purpose  is  Kohler's  conjecture  that  it  is  one  of  the  earthen  pots
used  to  be  tied  round  the  circumference  of  the  irrigating  wheel,
still  employed  for  raising  the  water  of  the  Kile  to  fertilise  the
adjacent  fields;  "fecundating  Isis  with  the  seed  of  Osiris"  in
ancient  phrase,  and  certainly  the  string  fastened  about  its  top
favours  such  an  explanation ;  in  fact,  we  have  an  example  of
similar  veneration  for  a  vessel  in  the  case  of  the  Canopns,  the
pot  that  held  the  same  water  when  purified  for  drinking.  The
"winnow-fan"  is  also  often  represented,  placed  ov&er  this
hemispherical  vase ;  the  same  instrument  played  an  important
part  in  the  marriage  ceremony  of  the  Greeks.  When  piled
with  fruit  of  all  kinds,  it  was  placed  on  the  head  of  the  bride ;
the  same  significant  article,  a  broad,  shallow  basket,  was  the
cradle  of  the  infant  Bacchus— the  "  mystica  vannus  lacchi."
The  golden  » Bowl,"  serving  for  lamp,  often  figures  amongst
the  various  emblems  adorning  our  talismans.  The  "  Sistrum  "
got  its  peculiar  outline  from  the  Indian  Yoni  (emblem  of  the
female  sex),  and  it  was  on  account  of  its  similar  shape  the
almond,  luz,  was  also  held  sacred  in  Egypt,  which  seems  the


112  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

true  origin  of  the  "  vesica  piscis,"  serving  as  the  inclosure  for
divine  figures.  The  British  Museum  possesses  a  Hindoo  altar
in  hardstone,  neatly  polished,  having  its  flat  top  formed  into
the  shape  of  the  lingam-yoni ;  at  each  corner  of  the  square  a
little  idol  is  squatted.  This  Indian  figure,  signifying  the
Active  and  Passive  Powers  of  Nature  in  conjunction  for  the
work  of  Creation,  is  sculptured  like  a  round  shallow  basin,  with
long  projecting  lips  tapering  to  a  twist,  with  an  obtuse  cone
rising  out  of  its  middle.  Now  this  is  the  exact  shape  of  a  large
brown  lamp  from  Herculaneum  (Caylus,  vii.  pi.  33),  only  that
from  its  centre,  instead  of  a  cone,  springs  a  bent  fore-finger,
digitus  obsccenus  (with  the  same  meaning  as  the  lingarn)  serving
for  handle  to  carry  it  by,  whilst  from  the  sides  project  the  three
arms  of  the  Egyptian  Tau.  This  vessel  must  have  belonged  to
the  Isis-worship  in  that  town,  no  doubt  as  popular  there  as
it  is  known  to  have  been  at  the  neighbouring  Pompeii.  As  for
the  office  of  "  Anubis-bearer,"  it  is  related  that  when  Commodus
discharged  that  duty  in  the  procession,  he  gratified  the  insane
cruelty  of  his  nature  by  cracking  the  shaven  skulls  of  all  within
reach  with  the  weighty  head  of  the  idol ;  and  it  seems  to  follow
as  a  matter  of  course  that  the  Anubis  of  Apuleius,  in  order  to
display  alternately  an  ebon  and  a  golden  visage,  must  have
possessed  a  pair  of  heads,  human  and  canine,  just  as  he  is
figured,  holding  the  caduceus  and  palm  upon  certain  Basilidan
gems.  Lastly,  the  mysterious  image,  too  awful  to  be  described,
but  whose  nature  is  darkly  hinted  at  as  neither  of  bird,  beast,  nor
man.  These  very  expressions  would  tempt  me  to  believe  a
compound  of  all  three ;  in  a  word,  the  veritable  figure  of  the
Abraxas  god.  And  be  it  remembered  that  this  image  was  the
"Supreme  God,"  and  he,  we  know,  was  the  IAO  of  Egypt.
This  idol  must  have  been  of  small  dimensions,  for  it  was  carried
in  the  bosom  of  the  devotee's  robe,  and  my  suspicion  is  strongly
confirmed  by  the  existence  in  the  late  Mertens-Schaffhausen
Collection  of  a  bronze  statuette,  five  inches  in  height,  found  in
the  south  of  France,  and  thus  described  in  the  Catalogue.  "No
2002.  Statuette  of  lao  standing,  armed  with  cuirass,  shield  and
whip ;  his  head  in  the  form  of  a  cock's,  his  legs  terminating  in
serpents."


PART  II.
THE  WORSHIP  OF  MITHRAS  AND  SERAPIS.


"  0  voi  ch'  avctc  gl'  intelletti  sani,
Mirate  la  dottrina  die  s'asconde
Sotto  il  velame  degli  vcrsi  straui."


"  Salve  vera  Deum  facies,  vultusque  paterne,
Octo  et  Jiexcentis  numeris  cui  litera  trina
Conformat  sacrum  nomen,  cognomen  et
Omen. (Mart.  Capella.  Hymn,  ad  Sol.)

<1>PH  =  THC  =  X  =  h^Lj-


THE  WORSHIP  OF  MITHRAS.


I. ORIGIN  OF  MITHEAICISM.

THE  innumerable  monuments  of  every  kind  bequeathed  to  us
by  the  widely-spread  worship  of  the  deity  styled  Mithras,  serve,
at  the  same  time,  copiously  to  illustrate  the  important  contribu
tions  of  Zoroastrian  doctrine  towards  the  composition  of  Gnosti
cism.  The  Mithraic  religion,  according  to  Plutarch,  first  made
its  appearance  in  Italy  upon  Pompey's  reduction  of  the  Cilician
Pirates,  of  whom  it  was  the  national  worship ;  *  and  who,  when
broken  up  into  colonists  and  slaves  all  over  Italy,  propagated
it  amongst  their  conquerors.  In  the  new  soil  the  novel  religion
flourished  so  rapidly  as,  in  the  space  of  two  centuries,  to
supersede  (coupled  with  the  earlier  introduced  Serapis  worship)
the  primitive  Hellenic  and  Etruscan  deities.  In  fact,  long
before  this  final  triumph  over  the  sceptical,  Pliny  appears
disposed  to  accept  Mithraicism,  in  its  essential  principle,  as  the
only  religion  capable  of  satisfying  a  rational  inquirer ;  as  may
be  deduced  from  this  noble  passage  (ii.  4) :  "  Eorum  medius  Sol
fervidus,  amplissima  magnitudine,  nee  temporum  modo  terra-
rumque  sed  siderum  etiam  ipsorum  ccelique  Rector.  Hanc  osse
mundi  totius  animam  ac  planius  mentem,  nunc  principale
Naturae  regimen  ac  Numen  credere  decet,  opera  ejus  restiniantes.
Hie  lumen  rebus  ministrat,  aufertque  tenebras,  hie  reliqua

*  This  deity,  under  other  titles,  most ancient of  Grecian colonies,

had  ever  been  the  great  god  of  Pon-  For  destroying  his  statue,  the  fanatic

tus. As  patron  of  Sinope  he  appears  Eugenius,  justly  punished  by  Dio-

under  the  form  of  Helios-Dionysos,  cletian,  was  adopted,  in  the  succeed-

upon  the  medallion  of  Pharnaces  II.  ing  times of superstition, for the

In  his  proper  name  lie  was  the  patron  tutelary  saint  of  the  Byzantine  Empire

of  Trebizond,  being  worshipped on  of  Trebizond.
the  Mount  Mithras  overhanging  that


I '2


116  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

sidera  occultat,  illustrat ;  hie  vices  temporum  annumque
semper  renascentem  ex  usu  Naturae  temperat,  hie  coeli  tristi-
tiam  discutit,  atque  etiam  humani  nubila  animi  serenat :  hie
suum  lumen  ceeteris  quoque  sideribus  foenerat ;  prseclarus,
eximius,  omnia  intuens,  omnia  etiam  exaudiens ;  at  principi
literarum  Homero  placuisse  in  uno  eo  video.  Quapropter
effigiem  Dei  formamque  quserere  imbecillitatis  humanee  rear.
Quisquis  est  Deus,  si  modo  cst  alius,  et  qnacuiique  in  parte,  totus
est  sensus,  totus  visus,  totus  auditus,  totus,  animrc,  totus  animi,
totus  sui."  Thus,  during  the  second  and  third  centuries  of  the
lioman  Empire,  Mithras  and  Serapis  had  come  almost  to  engross
the  popular  worship,  even  to  the  remotest  limits  of  the  known
world.  For  Mithraicism  was  originally  the  religion  taught  by
Zoroaster,  although  somewhat  changed  and  materialized  so
as  better  to  assimilate  itself  to  the  previously  established  Nature
Worship  of  the  West.  Under  this  grosser  form  it  took  its  name
from  Mithras,  who  in  the  Zendavesta  is  not  the  Supreme  Being
(Ormuzd),  but  the  Chief  of  the  subordinate  Powers,  the  Seven
Amshaspands.  Mithra  is  the  Zend  name  for  the  sun,  the
proper  mansion  of  this  Spirit,  but  not  the  Spirit  himself.  Hence
the  great  oath  of  Artaxerxes  Mnemon  was,  "  By  the  light  of
Mithras,"  a  counterpart  of  the  tremendous  adjuration  of  our
William  the  Conqueror,  "  By  the  Splendour  of  God  !"  But  the
materialistic  Greeks  at  once  identified  the  Persian  Spirit  with
their  own  substantial  Phoebus  and  Hyperion.  Thus  Ovid  has,

"Placat  cquo  Persis  radiis  Hypcriona  cinctum."  (Fasti  I.  335.)

In  this  view  of  his  nature  Mithras  was  identified  with  other
types  of  the  Sun-god,  such  as  the  "  Phanaces  "  of  Asia  Minor,
and  the  "  Dionysos  "  of  Greece  ;  and  thereby  soon  usurped  the
place  of  the  latter  in  the  long  established  Mysteries,  the  ancient
Dionysia.  The  importance  into  which  the  Mithraica  had  grown
by  the  middle  of  the  second  century  may  be  estimated  from  a  fact
mentioned  by  Lampridius,  that  the  emperor  himself  (Commodus)
condescended  to  be  initiated  into  them.  Nay  more,  with  their
penances,  and  tests  of  the  courage  of  the  neophyte,  they  may  be
said  to  have  been  maintained  by  unbroken  tradition  through
the  secret  societies  of  the  Middle  Ages,  then  by  the  Eosicrucians,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  117

down  to  that  faint  reflex  of  the  latter,  the  Freemasonry  of  our
own  times.  But  this  curious  point  must  be  reserved  for  the
last  Section  of  this  Treatise  investigating  the  nature  of  the  last
named  societies.  My  present  object  is  to  point  out  the  grada
tions  by  which  the  Mithraic  principle  passed  into  the  Egyptian
and  semi-Christian  forms  of  Gnosticism.

The  mystic  name  Abraxas  (asserted  to  have  been  the  coinage
of  the  Alexandrian  Basilides)  is  said  to  mean  either  in  actual
Coptic  "  Holy  Name "  (as  Bellermann  will  have  it) ;  or,  as
seems  equally  probable,  is  merely  the  Hebrew  Ha-Brachah
"Blessing,"  Grecised,  in  the  same  sense.  That  the  symbolic
figure  embodying  the  idea  of  the  Abraxas  god  has  a  reference
to  the  sun  in  all  its  components  is  yet  more  evident,  as  shall
be  shown  hereafter;  similarly,  the  Brahmins  apply  their
Ineffable  Name  Aum  to  the  "  fierce  and  all-pervading  Sun  " ;
and  Macrobius  devotes  much  curious  learning  to  prove  that
all  the  great  gods  of  antiquity,  whatever  their  names  and
figures,  were  no  more  than  various  attempts  at  personifying  the
One  Deity,  whose  residence  is  the  sun.  It  must  here  be  re
membered  that  Basilides  was  by  no  means  a  Christian  heretic,  as
the  later  Fathers  found  it  expedient  to  represent  him,  but
rather  as  his  contemporary  Clemens,  relates,  a  philosopher  de
voted  to  the  study  of  divine  things ;  and  thus  possibly  imbued
with  such  Buddhistic  notions  as  the  intercourse  between
Alexandria  and  the  cities  of  Guzerat  (then  ruled  over  by
the  Jaina  kings)  may  have  naturalized  both  in  Egypt  and
in  Palestine.  This  metropolis,  as  the  grand  emporium  for
foreign  doctrines  as  well  as  foreign  wares,  supplies  the  reason
for  the  frequent  union  of  Mithras  with  Abraxas  in  the  same
stone,  proceeding  from  the  Alexandrian  talisman-factory.  A
curious  exemplification  is  a  green  jasper  (Maiiborough),  bearing
on  one  side  the  normal  Zoroastrian  device,  Mithras  slaughtering
the  Bull ;  on  the  other,  the  well-known  Gnostic  Pantheus.  A
truly  Indian  syncretism,  which  converts  all  deities  from  separate
beings  into  mere  deified  attributes  of  one  and  the  same  God,
and  (for  the  initiated  few,  that  is)  reduces  that  seemingly
unlimited  polytheism  into  the  acknowledgment  of  the  existence
of  the  Supremo  Creator.


118  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

That  model  of  a  perfect  prince,  Severus  Alexander,  must  have
imbibed  a  strong  tinge  of  the  Gnosis  (as  indeed  might  have
been  expected  from  his  birthplace  and  style  of  education),  for
although  upon  every  seventh  day  he  went  up  to  worship  in  the
Capitol,  and  also  regularly  visited  the  temples  of  the  other
Roman  gods,  he  nevertheless  "  was  intending  to  build  a  temple
unto  Christ,  and  to  rank  Him  in  the  number  of  the  gods.
Which  thing  Hadrian  also  is  said  to  have  thought  of,  and
actually  to  have  ordered  temples  without  images  to  be  built  in  all
the  chief  cities  of  the  Empire  :  which  same  temples,  because
they  contain  no  gods,  are  now  called  temples  raised  to  Hadrian
himself,  although  in  reality  ho  is  reported  to  have  prepared
them  for  the  purpose  above-named.  But  ho  was  prevented
from  carrying  out  his  design  by  those  who  consulted  the  oracles
(sacra),  and  discovered  that,  if  it  should  be  carried  out,  everybody
would  turn  Christian,  and  thereby  the  other  temples  would  bo
all  deserted  "  (Lampridius  i.  43).  Indeed,  there  is  every  reason
to  believe  that,  as  in  the  East,  the  worship  of  Serapis  was  at  first
combined  with  Christianity,  and  gradually  merged  into  it  with
an  entire  change  of  name,  though  not  of  substance,  carrying
along  with  it  many  of  its  proper  ideas  and  rites,  so  in  the  West
the  Mithras- worship  produced  a  similar  effect  upon  the  character
of  the  religion  that  took  its  place.  Seel,  in  his  admirable
treatise  upon  Mithraicism  ('  Mithra,'  p.  287)  is  of  opinion  that
"  as  long  as  the  Roman  dominion  lasted  in  Germany,  we  find
traces  there  of  the  Mosaic  law  :  and  in  the  same  way  as  there
were  single  Jewish  families,  so  were  there  single  Christians
existing  amongst  the  heathen.  The  latter,  however,  for  the
most  part,  ostensibly  paid  worship  to  the  Roman  gods  in  order
to  escape  persecution,  holding  secretly  in  their  hearts  the
religion  of  Christ.  It  is  by  no  means  improbable  that,  under
the  permitted  symbols  of  Mithras,  they  worshipped  the  Son  of
God,  and  the  mysteries  of  Christianity.  In  this  point  of  view,
the  Mithraic  monuments,  so  frequent  in  Germany,  are  evidences
to  the  faith  of  the  early  Christian  Romans."  This  same
supremacy  of  the  Mithras- worship  in  his  own  times  makes  the
grand  scheme  of  Heliogabalus  prove  less  insane  than  it  strikes
the  modern  reader  at  the  first  impression.  He  was  intending


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  119

(according  to  report)  to  permit  no  other  worship  at  Eomo  than
that  of  his  own  god  and  namesake,  the  Emesene  aerolite,  apt
emblem  of  the  Sun  ;  "  bringing  together  in  his  temple  the  Fire
of  Vesta,  the  Palladium,  the  Ancilia,  and  all  the  other  most
venerated  relics ;  and  moreover  the  religion  of  the  Jews  and
Samaritans,  and  the  devotion*  of  the  Christians."  (Lampridius
3).  To  such  a  heterogeneous  union  that  numerous  section  of
the  Eoman  public  who  shared  Macrobius'  sentiments  on  the
nature  of  all  ancient  gods,  could  have  found  no  possible  objection
so  far  as  the  principle  was  concerned.

That  such  a  relationship  to  Christianity  was  actually  alleged
by  the  partisans  of  Mithraicism  (when  in  its  decline)  is  proved
by  the  remarkable  declaration  of  Augustine  himself  (John  I.
Dis.  7).  "I  remember  that  the  priests  of  the  fellow  in  the  cap
(illius  pileati)  used  at  one  time  to  say,  '  Our  Capped  One  is
himself  a  Christian.'  "  In  this  asserted  affinity  probably  lay  the
motive  that  induced  Constaiitine  to  adopt  for  the  commonest
type  of  his  coinage  (the  sole  currency  of  the  Western  provinces),
and  retain  long  after  his  conversion,  the  figure  of  Sol  himself,
with  the  legend  "  To  the  Invincible  Sun,  my  companion  (or
guardian)."  A  type  capable  of  a  double  interpretation,  meaning
equally  the  ancient  Phoebus  and  the  new  Sun  of  Righteousness,
and  thereby  unobjectionable  to  Gentile  and  Christian  alike  of
the  equally  divided  population  amongst  whom  it  circulated.
Nay  more,  this  Emperor  when  avowedly  Christian,  selected  for
the  grandest  ornament  of  his  new  Capital,  a  colossal  Apollo,
mounted  upon  a  lofty  column,  which  retained  its  place  until
cast  down  by  an  earthquake  in  the  reign  of  Alexius  Comnenus.

Through  a  similar  interchange,  the  old  festival  held  on  the
25th  day  of  December  in  honour  of  the  "  Birth-day  of  the
Invincible  One,"  and  celebrated  by  the  Great  Games  of  the
Circus  (as  marked  in  the  Kalendar  "  viii  KAL.IAN.  N.  IN VICTI.
C.  M.  xxivj)  was  afterwards  transferred  to  the  commemoration
of  the  Birth  of  Christ,  of  which  the  real  day  was,  as  the  Fathers

*  This  curious  distinction  between  public  sanction.

"  religio  "  and  "  devotio,"  is  meant  f  Signifying  that  twenty-four  con-
to  mark  the  difference  between  a  secutive  races  of  chariots  were  ex-
national  and  established  creed  and  hibited  on  that  occasion  in  the  Circus
one  held  by  individuals,  without  any  Maxinms.


120  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

confess,  totally  unknown:  Chrysostom,  for  example,  declares
(Horn,  xxx i.)  that  the  Birthday  of  Christ  had  then  lately  been
fixed  at  Rome  upon  that  day,  in  order  that  whilst  the  heathen
were  busied  with  their  own  profane  ceremonies,  the  Christians
might  perform  their  holy  rites  without  molestation.

And  Mithras  was  the  more  readily  admitted  as  the  type  of
Christ,  Creator  and  Maintainer  of  the  Universe,  inasmuch  as  the
Zendavesta  declares  him  to  be  the  First  Emanation  of  Ormuzd,
the  Good  Principle,  and  the  Manifestation  of  Himself  unto  the
world.  Now  it  was  from  this  very  creed  that  the  Jews,  during
their  long  captivity  in  the  Persian  Empire  (of  which  when
restored  to  Palestine  they  formed  but  a  province),  derived  all
the  angelology  of  their  religion,  even  to  its  minutest  details,
such  as  we  find  it  flourishing  in  the  times  of  the  Second
Kingdom.  Not  until  then  are  they  discovered  to  possess  the
Belief  in  a  future  state  ;  of  rewards  and  punishments,  the  latter
carried  on  in  a  fiery  lake  ;  the  existence  of  a  complete  hierarchy
of  good  and  evil  angels,  taken  almost  verbatim  from  the  lists
given  by  the  Zendavesta ;  the  soul's  immortality,  and  the  Last
Judgment — all  of  them  essential  parts  of  the  Zoroastrian  scheme,
and  recognised  by  Josephus  as  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  the
Judaism  of  his  own  times.

To  all  these  ideas  Moses  in  the  Law  makes  not  the  slightest
allusion ;  his  promises  and  threatenings  are  all  of  the  earth,
earthy  ;  he  preaches  a  religion  of  Secularists,  and  such  a  religion
was,  down  to  the  latest  days  of  Jerusalem,  still  maintained  by
the  Sadducees.  Now  these  Sadducees  were  the  most  ancient
and  respectable  families  of  the  nation,  who  boasted  of  keeping
the  law  of  Moses  pure,  and  uncontaminated  from  the  admixture
of  foreign  notions  imbibed  by  the  commonalty  during  their  long
sojourn  amongst  the  Gentiles.  Nay  more,  there  is  some  reason
to  accept  Matter's  etymology  of  the  name  of  their  opponents,
the  Pharisees,  as  actually  signifying  "  Persians,"  being  a  term
of  contempt  for  the  holders  of  the  new-fangled  doctrines  picked
up  from  their  conquerors.  And  this  etymology  is  a  Jrnuch  more
rational  one,  and  more  consistent  with  the  actual  elements  of  the
word,  than  the  common  one  making  it  to  mean  "  Separatists  "
— an  epithet  by  no  means  applicable  to  a  party  constituting


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  121

the  immense  majority  of  the  race.  It  is  only  necessary  now  to
allude  to  the  ingenious  theory  of  Bishop  Wai-burton,  set  forth
in  his  *  Divine  Legation  of  Moses,'  who  converts  the  absence
of  all  spiritualism  from  his  teaching  into  the  strongest  argument
for  its  being  directly  inspired  from  Heaven.

But  from  whatever  source  derived,  how  closely  does  the
Zoroastrian  idea  of  the  nature  and  office  of  Mithras  coincide  with
the  definition  of  those  of  Christ  as  given  by  the  author  of  the
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  that  profound  Jewish  theologian,  who
styles  Him  the  "  Brightness  (or  reflection)  of  his  glory,  the
express  image*  of  his  person,  upholding  all  things  by  the  word
of  his  power  ;  "  and  again,  "  being  made  so  much  better  than  the
angels  as  he  hath  by  inheritance  obtained  a  more  excellent
Name  than  they,"  and  here  it  may  be  observed  that  the  Reflection
of  the  Invisible  Supreme  in  his  First  Emanation  is  a  distinguishing
feature  in  most  of  the  Gnostic  systems.  Mithras  used  to  be*
invoked  together  with  the  Sun,  and  thus,  being  confounded  with
that  luminary,  became  the  object  of  a  separate  worship,  which
ultimately  superseded  that  of  Ormuzd  himself  :  and  this  was
the  only  one  propagated  by  the  Pontic  colonists  and  their
converts  amongst  the  nations  of  the  West.  Secondary  deities
often  usurp  the  places  of  those  of  the  first  rank  ;  so  Vishnu
and  Siva  have  entirely  eclipsed  Brahma.  Serapishad  played  the
same  part  with  the  Pharaonic  gods  of  Egypt,  and  yet  more
striking  analogies  from  modern  creeds  are  too  obvious  to  re
quire  quotation.  Through  this  relationship  of  ideas  Mithraic
symbolism  found  its  way  into  early  Christian  art  in  many  of  its
particulars.  The  bas-relief  over  the  portal  of  the  Baptistery
at  Parma  (a  work  of  the  12th  century),  has  all  the  aspect  of  a
Mithraic  monument,  and  certainly  its  design  would  be  very
difficult  to  understand  from  a  Scriptural  point  of  view.


*  'ATravya.(TiJ.a  —  xapaKT-fip,  the  latter title,  "  Tikkan,"  the  Primal  Emanu-
\vord  literally  "impression  ot  a  seal," tion.
is  the  exact  counterpart  of  the  Hebrew


122  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


II. THE  MITHEAIC  SACRAMENTS.

The  principal  rites  of  the  worship  of  Mithras  bore  a  very
curious  resemblance  to  those  subsequently  established  in  the
Catholic  church;  they  likewise  furnished  a  model  for  the
initiatory  ceremonies  observed  by  the  secret  societies  of  the
Middle  Ages,  and  by  their  professed  descendants  in  modern
times.  The  Neophytes  were  admitted  by  the  rite  of  Baptism  ;
the  initiated  at  their  assemblies  solemnly  celebrated  a  species  of
Eucharist:  whilst  the  courage  and  endurance  of  the  candidate
for  admission  into  the  sect  were  tested  by  twelve  consecutive
trials,  called  "  The  Tortures,"  undergone  within  a  cave  con
structed  for  the  purpose ;  all  which  "  tortures "  had  to  bo
completely  passed  through  before  participation  in  the  Mysteries
was  granted  to  the  aspirant.

The  two  distinguishing  Eites,  or  "  Sacraments  "  (to  use  the
technical  term)  are  thus  alluded  to  by  Justin  Martyr  ( Apol.  II)  in
the  earliest  description  which  has  been  left  us  of  their  character.
"  The  Apostles  in  the  Commentaries  written  by  themselves,
which  we  call  Gospels,  have  delivered  down  to  us  that  Jesus
thus  commanded  them :  He  having  taken  bread,  after  that
He  had  given  thanks,*  said  :  Do  this  in  commemoration  of  me  ;
this  is  my  body.  Also  having  taken  a  cup  and  returned  thanks,
He  said  :  This  is  my  blood,  and  delivered  it  unto  them  alone.
Which  things  indeed  the  evil  spirits  have  taught  to  be  done,
out  of  memory,  in  the  Mysteries  and  Initiations  of  Mithras.
For  in  these  likewise  a  cup  of  water,  and  bread,  are  set  out,
with  the  addition  of  certain  words,  in  the  sacrifice  or  act  of
worship  of  the  person  about  to  be  initiated  :  a  thing  which  Ye
either  know  by  personal  experience  or  may  learn  by  inquiry."
Again,  Tertullian,  writing  in  the  following  century,  has  in
the  same  connection :  "  The  Devil,  whoso  business  it  is  to  per
vert  the  truth,  mimicks  the  exact  circumstances  of  the  Divine
Sacraments,  in  the  Mysteries  of  idols.  He  himself  baptises  some
that  is  to  say,  his  believers  and  followers ;  he  promises  forgive-

*  This  expression  seems  to  prove (the  second century)  crept  into  the
that  the  notion  of  llesshiri,  or  con- Christian  practice.
,  the  elements,  had  not  then


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  123

ness  of  sins  from  tho  Sacred  Fount,  and  thereby  initiates  them
into  tho  religion  of  Mithras  :  thus  he  marks  on  the  forehead  his
own  soldiers  :  there  he  celebrates  the  oblation  of  bread :  he  brings
in  tho  symbol  of  tho  Besurrection,  and  wins  the  crown  with
the  sword."  By  tho  "  symbol  of  tho  Kesurrection  "  Tertullian
clearly  means  that  "  simulation  of  death  "  mentioned  by  Lam-
pridius  (of  which  more  hereafter),  and  which  is  typified  on  so
many  talismans  by  the  corpse  bestridden  by  the  Solar  Lion.
The  final  ceremony  he  has  himself  explained  in  another  passage  :
"  Blush,  my  Kornan  fellow-soldiers,  even  though  yo  be  not  to
be  judged  by  Christ,  but  by  any  '  Soldier  of  Mithras/  who
when  he  is  undergoing  initiation  in  the  Cave,  in  the  very  Camp
of  the  Powers  of  Darkness,  when  the  crown  (garland,  rather)  is
offered  to  him  (a  sword  being  placed  between,  as  though  in
semblance  of  martyrdom),  and  about  to  be  set  upon  his  head,  is
instructed  to  put  forth  his  hand,  and  push  the  crown  away,
transferring  it  perchance,  to  his  shoulder,  saying  at  the  same
time :  My  crown  is  Mithras.  And  from  that  time  forth  he
never  wears  a  crown  (garland),  and  this  he  has  for  the  badge
of  his  initiation,  for  he  is  immediately  known  to  be  a  '  soldier
of  Mithras,'  if  he  rejects  a  garland  when  offered  to  him,  saying
that  his  crown  is  his  god.  Let  us  therefore  acknowledge  tho
craftiness  of  the  Devil ;  who  copies  certain  things  of  those
that  be  Divine,  in  order  that  he  may  confound  and  judge  us  by
the  faithfulness  of  his  'own  followers."  As  to  the  ceremony
here  mentioned,  unimportant  as  it  may  seem  to  the  modern
reader,  it  may  be  remarked  that  as  the  wearing  a  garland  was
indispensable  among  the  ancients  on  all  festive  occasions,  the
refusal  of  one  upon  such  occasions  would  be  a  most  conspicuous
mark  of  singularity,  and  of  unflinching  profession  of  faith.  But
every  dispassionate  observer  will  perceive  that  these  over-zealous
Fathers  proceed  to  beg  the  question  when  they  assume  that  the
Mithraic  rites  were  devised  as  counterfeits  of  the  Christian
Sacraments :  inasmuch  as  the  former  were  in  existence  long
before  the  first  promulgation  of  Christianity  ;  unless  indeed  to
imitate  by  anticipation  be  considered  as  merely  another  proof
of  the  mischievous  sagacity  of  its  diabolical  opponent.  On  the
other  hand,  there  is  good  reason  to  suspect  that  the  simple


124  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

commemorative,  or  distinctive,  ceremonies,  instituted  by  the
first  founder  of  Christianity,  were  gradually  invested  with
those  mystic  and  supernatural  virtues  which  later  ages  insisted
upon  as  articles  of  faith,  by  the  teaching  of  unscrupulous  mis
sionaries,  anxious  to  outbid  the  attractions  of  long-established
rites  of  an  apparently  cognate  character.  By  this  assimilation
they  offered  to  their  converts  through  the  performance  of,  as  it
were,  certain  magical  practices,  all  those  spiritual  blessings  of
which  the  rites  themselves  were,  at  their  institution,  the  symbols
only,  not  the  instruments.  A  very  instructive  illustration
of  such  union  of  Mithraicism  and  Christianity,  in  the  cele
bration  of  the  Eucharist,  is  afforded  by  the  Pistis-Sophia's
description  of  the  great  one  celebrated  by  the  Saviour  himself
upon  the  shore  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  which  will  be  found  given
at  length  in  its  proper  place.  And  lastly,  it  deserves  to  bo
mentioned  that  "  eating  the  flesh  and  drinking  the  blood  "  of  a
human  sacrifice  was  far  from  being  a  mere  figure  of  speech  in
certain  of  these  mystic  celebrations.  Pliny  gives  high  praise
to  Claudius  for  having  suppressed  the  worship  of  the  Druids
(whom  he  considers  as  identical  in  their  religion  with  the
Magi),  in  whose  rites  "it  was  esteemed  the  highest  act  of
religion  to  slaughter  a  man,  and  the  most  salutary  of  proceedings
to  eat  the  flesh  of  the  same."  And  in  this  notion,  which  neces
sarily  became  attached  by  suspicion  to  the  proceedings  of  all
secret  societies,  lay  most  probably  the  root  of  the  belief  so
widely  diffused  amongst  the  Eoman  vulgar,  that  the  real
Eucharist  of  the  first  Christians  at  their  nocturnal  meetings  was
the  sacrifice,  and  the  feasting  upon,  a  new-born  child,  concealed
within  a  vessel  of  flour,  into  which  the  catechumen  was  directed
by  his  sponsors  to  plunge  a  knife.

In  the  particulars  preserved  to  us  of  the  Mithraic  Sacrament,
certain  very  curious  analogies  to  those  of  the  Christian  rite
cannot  fail  to  arrest  our  attention.  The  *'  Bread  therein  used
was  a  round  cake,"  emblem  of  the  solar  disk,  and  called  Mizd.
In  this  name  Seel  discovers  the  origin  of  Missa,  as  designating
the  Bloodless  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass,  assuming  that  this  Mizd
was  the  prototype  of  the  Host  (host la),  which  is  of  precisely  the
same  form  and  dimensions.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  125

It  is  not  out  of  place  to  notice  here  the  various  etymologies
which  have  been  proposed  for  the  word  Missa.  The  most
popular  one,  which  moreover  has  the  sanction  of  Ducange,
derives  it  from  the  words  "Ite,  missa  est,"  with  which  the
priest  dismissed  the  non-communicant  part  of  the  congregation,
"before  proceeding  to  the  actual  consecration  of  the  Eucharist.
The  translation  of  the  phrase  by  the  vulgar  into  "  Depart,  it  is
the  Missa,"  would  certainly  bo  obvious  enough.  But,  according
to  the  rule  in  all  such  cases,  the  object  sacrificed  gives  its  name
to  the  ceremony,  rather  than  a  phrase  from  the  ceremonial  itself,
and  this  object  had  from  time  immemorial  gone  by  the  name  of
hostia,  or  "  victim."  The  early  Christians  were  quite  as  partial
as  the  Gnostics  to  the  naturalizing  of  the  Hebrew  terms  belong
ing  to  the  Mosaic  ordinances,  and  applying  the  same  to  their
own  practices.  Thus  the  old  Covenant  went  amongst  them  by
the  name  of  Phase,  for  example  : —

"  In  hoc  festo  novi  Kegis,
Novum  Pascha  nova3  legis
Vetus  Phase  terminal."

The  Eabbins  have  possibly  preserved  a  tradition  that  ex
plains  the  true  origin  of  the  wafer.  Alphonsns  de  Spira,  in
his  "  Fortalitium  Fidei "  (II.  2),  asserts  that  its  circular  form
is  a  symbol  of  the  sun,  and  that  it  is  in  reality  offered  in
sacrifice,  at  the  celebration  of  the  Mass,  to  the  genius  of  that
luminary !  For  the  Kabbalists  hold  that  Moses  and  the
prophets  were  inspired  by  the  genius  of  Saturn,  a  good  and
pure  spirit,  whereas  Jesus  was  by  that  of  Mercury,  a  malevolent
one  ;  and  the  Christian  religion  was  the  work  of  Mercury,
Jupiter  and  the  Sun,  all  combining  together  for  that  purpose.
There  is  yet  another  curious  analogy  to  be  noticed,  when  it  is
remembered  that  the  Mass  symbolises  the  death  of  its  first
institutor.  A  round  cake  (the  chupatty  of  such  evil  notoriety  at
the  commencement  of  the  Sepoy  Mutiny)  is,  amongst  the
Hindoos,  the  established  offering  to  the  Manes  of  their  ancestors.
The  Christian  "breaking  of  bread,"  besides  symbolising  the
great  sacrifice  once  offered,  seems,  from  the  account  of  the
Manifestation  at  Emmaus,  to  have  been  done  in  some  peculiar


126


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


way  which  should  serve  for  a  masonic  token,  or  means  of  mutual
recognition  amongst  the  brethren.

The  sacramental  Cup,  or  chalice,  is  often  represented  as  set
upon  the  Mithraic  altar,  or  rather,  table ;  and  a  curious  piece
of  Jugglery  connected  with  its  employment  (though  not  amongst
the  Mithraicists),  is  described  by  Epiphanius  (Hseres.  xxxiv.).
The  followers  of  Marcus,  in  their  celebrating  the  Eucharist,
employed  three  vases  made  of  the  clearest  glass.  These  were
filled  with  wine  which,  during  the  progress  of  the  ceremony,
changed  into  a  blood-red,  purple,  and  blue  colour,  respectively.
"  Thereupon  the  officiating  minister,  or  more  properly  speaking,
magician,  hands  one  of  these  vessels  to  some  lady  of  the  congre
gation,  and  requests  her  to  bless  it.  Which  done,  he  pours  this
into  another  vase  of  much  greater  capacity,  with  the  prayer,
"May  the  grace  of  God,  which  is  above  all,  inconceivable,
inexplicable,  fill  thine  inner  man,  and  increase  the  knowledge
of  Himself  within  thee,  sowing  the  grain  of  mustard-seed  in
good  ground  ! "  Whereupon  the  liquid  in  the  larger  vase
swells  and  swells  until  it  runs  over  the  brim.

The  worship  of  Mithras  long  kept  its  ground  under  the
Christian  emperors  in  the  capital  itself,  and  doubtless  survived
its  overthrow  there  for  many  generations  longer  in  the  remote
and  then  semi-independent  provinces.  At  the  very  close  of  the
fourth  century,  Jerome,  writing  to  Leeta,  says,  "  A  few  years
ago,  did  not  your  kinsman  Gracchus,  a  name  the  very  echo  of
patrician  nobility,  when  holding  the  office  of  Prefect  of  the
City,  break  down  and  burn  the  Cave  of  Mithras,  with  all  the
monstrous  images  which  pervade  the  initiatory  rites,  as  Corax,
Niphus,  the  Soldier,  the  Lion,  the  Persian,  Helios,  and  Father
Bromius  ?  "

In  the  imagery  here  alluded  to,  it  is  easy  to  recognise  figures
that  perpetually  occur  upon  the  still  extant  representations  of
the  Mithras  worship.  In  Corax,  the  Eaven ;  in  Niphus,  Cneph
the  serpent;  the  armed  man;  the  Lion  bestriding  the  human
victim ;  the  youth  in  Persian  garb ;  the  Sun,  expressed  either
by  Phoebus  in  his  car,  or  by  the  star  with  eight  rays ;  and
Bromius  "  the  lioarer,"  appropriate  title  of  the  Grecian  Dionysos ;
who  also  appears  as  the  Asiatic  Plianaces,  a  youth  holding  a


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMANS.  127

torch  in  each  hand,  one  elevated  and  one  depressed  to  signify
his  rising  and  setting.  Chiflet's  gem  (Fig.  62)  may  on  good
grounds  be  taken  for  a  picture  of  the  Mithraic  ritual,  and
upon  it  all  the  foremen  tioned  figures  and  symbols  are  easily
to  be  discovered.  Two  erect  serpents  form  a  kind  of  frame
to  the  whole  tableau ;  at  the  top  of  which  are  seen  the  heads
of  Sol  and  Luna  confronted;  between  them  stands  an  eagle
with  outspread  wings;  at  the  back  of  each,  a  raven.  In
the  field  are  two  naked,  crowned  men  on  horseback,  tram
pling  upon  as  many  dead  bodies;  between  them  a  kneeling
figure  in  supplicatory  attitude,  over  whose  head  are  two
stars.  Behind  each  horseman  stand  two  soldiers.  In  the
exergue  is  set  out  a  table  supporting  a  loaf,  a  fawn  (sacred  to
Bacchus),  a  chalice,  and  something  indistinct,  but  probably
meant  for  the  crown  Tertullian  speaks  of.  The  reverse  presents
a  more  simple  design  :  two  crested  serpents  (dracones^),  twined
about  wands,  and  looking  into  a  cup ;  two  stars  over  a  table
resting  upon  a  larger  vase ;  and  on  each  side  a  bow,  the  ends  of
which  finish  in  serpents'  heads.

In  this  composition  we  probably  see  portrayed  certain
amongst  the  tests  of  the  neophyte's  courage,  which,  according
to  Suidas,  were  termed  the  "  Twelve  Degrees  "  or  "  Tortures."
These  corresponded  in  nature,  although  of  vastly  more  severe
reality,  with  those  trials  of  courage  to  which  our  Masonic
Lodges  subject  the  "  apprentice  "  who  seeks  admission  amongst
them.  During  the  Mithraic  probation,  which  lasted  forty  days,*
the  candidate  was  tested  by  the  Four  Elements,  he  lay  naked  a
certain  number  of  nights  upon  the  snow,  and  afterwards  was
scourged  for  the  space  of  two  days.  These  Twelve  Tortures
are  sculptured  upon  the  border  of  the  famous  Mithraic  tablets
preserved  in  the  Innsbruck  Museum,  and  a  brief  account  of  their
several  stages  will  serve  to  elucidate  much  of  what  remains  to
be  discussed.  I.  Man  standing  and  about  to  plunge  a  dagger
into  the  throat  of  a  kneeling  figure,  who  holds  up  his  hands  in
supplication.  (This  scene  appears  analogous  to  the  one  in  the
modern  ceremonial,  when  the  candidate,  ordered  to  remove  the
bandage  from  his  eyes,  beholds  many  swords  pointed  in  the
*  Perhaps  the  origin  of  the  Lenten  term  of  self-inflicted  punishment.


128  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

most  threatening  manner  at  his  naked  breast.)  II.  Naked
man  lying  on  the  earth,  his  head  resting  on  his  hand,  in  the
posture  of  repose.  (Probably  the  penance  of  the  bed  of  snow.)
III.  The  same  figure,  standing  with  hands  uplifted  in  a  huge
crescent  (perhaps  an  arJc,  and  representing  the  trial  by  water.
To  this  last,  Plato  is  reported  to  have  been  subjected  during  his
initiation  in  Egypt,  and  to  have  but  narrowly  escaped  drown
ing).  IV.  The  same,  but  now  with  the  pileus,  cap  of  liberty,
upon  his  head,  rushing  boldly  into  a  great  fire  (the  trial  by
fire).  V.  He  is  now  seen  struggling  through  a  deep  stream,
and  endeavouring  to  grasp  a  rock.  VI.  Bull  walking  to  the
left.

On  the  other  side  conie  the  remaining  stages.  VII.  Four
guests  reclining  at  a  horseshoe  table  (sigma),  upon  which  is  set
a  boar  roasted  whole.  VIII.  Youth  guided  up  a  flight  of
interminable  steps  by  an  aged  man.  IX.  Youth  kneeling  before
a  man  in  a  long  robe,  whose  hand  he  grasps  in  prayer.  X.  The
same  figures,  but  their  positions  are  interchanged.  XI.  Seated
man,  before  whom  kneels  a  naked,  crowned,  youth,  escorted  by
one  in  a  long  robe.  XII.  Naked  man  holding  up  the  hind  legs
of  a  cow,  so  as  to  receive  in  his  face  the  stream  still  regarded
by  the  Hindoos  as  the  most  efficient  laver  of  regeneration,
and  consequently  always  administered  to  persons  at  their
last  gasp.  The  same  sacred  fluid  (as  I  am  informed  by  a
Parsee)  is  used  in  the  sacramental  cups  drunk  by  every  male
upon  his  first  admission  into  that  religion,  which  takes  place  on
his  completing  his  seventh  year.  Nay  more,  such  is  the  belief
in  its  cleansing  virtue,  that  scrupulous  Parseos  always  carry  a
bottle  thereof  in  their  pocket,  wherewith  to  purify  their  hands
after  any  unavoidable  contact  with  unbelievers  !

Very  similar  ceremonies  to  these  were  practised  in  the  secret
societies  of  the  Middle  Ages,  if  we  choose  to  accept  Von
Hammer's  interpretation  of  certain  mysterious  sculptures,  still
to  be  seen  in  the  Templar-churches  of  Germany ;  and  which
he  has  copiously  illustrated  in  his  '  Mysterium  Baphometis
revelatum.'  In  the  intaglio  already  described,  the  kneeling
neophyte  is  encompassed  by  all  the  terrific  and  mysterious  host
of  Mithras,  so  remorselessly  destroyed  by  the  zealous  Gracchus.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  129

And  again,  the  corpses  trample;!  on  by  the  crowned  horsemen
clearly  refer  to  that  recorded  test  of  the  candidate's  fortitude—
the  apparent  'approach  of  death— for  Lampridius  puts  down
amongst  the  other  mad  freaks  of  Comrnodiis,  that  during  the
Mithraic  ceremonies,  "when  a  certain  thing  had  to  be  done  for
the  purpose  of  inspiring  terror,  he  polluted  the  rites  by  a  real
murder;"  m  expression  clearly  showing  that  a  scenic  repre
sentation  of  such  an  act  did  really  form  a  part  of  the  proceedings.
The  Haven  properly  takes  its  place  here,  as  being  the  attribute
of  the  Solar  god  in  the  Hellenic  creed,  on  which  account  it  is
often  depicted  standing  upon  Apollo's  lyre.

Many  other  gems  express  the  spiritual  benefits  conferred  by
the  Mithraic  initiation  upon  believer*. A  frequent  device  of
the  kind,  is  a  man,  with  hands  bound  behind  his  back,  seated  at
the  foot  of  a  pillar  supporting  a  gryphon  with  paw  on  wheel,
that  special  emblem  of  the  solar  god ;  often  accompanied  with
the  legend  AIKAIQ2,  "  I  have  deserved  it." Another  (Blacas)
displays  an  unusual  richness  of  symbolism  :  the  same  gryphon's
tail  ends  in  a  scorpion,  whilst  the  wheel  squeezes  out  of  its
chrysalis  a  tiny  human  soul  that  stretches  forth  its  hands  in
jubilation ; in  front  stands Thoth's  ibis,  holding  in  its beak
the balance, perhaps the horoscope of the patient. This
talisman too, unites the Egyptian with the Magian creed,
for  the  benefit  of  the carrier; for  the  reverse  displays  Isis,
but  in  the  character  of  llygieia,  standing  upon  her  crocodile ;
the  field  being  occupied  by  strangely  complicated  monograms,
of  sense  intelligible  to  the  initiated  alone,  and  doubtless  com
municated  to  the  recipient  of  the  talisman,  who  found  in  them
"a New  Name  written,  that  no man  knoweth,  save  he  that
receiveth  the same." But  both  doctrines  and  ceremonial  of
this  religion  are  best  understood  through  the  examination  of
extant  representations  displaying  them  either  directly  or  alle-
gorically;  which  in  their  turn  are  illustrated  by  the  practice
of  the  faithful  few  who  still  keep  alive  the  Sacred  Fire,  namely
the Parsees  of  Guzerat. The series  therefore  will  be most
fittingly  opened  by  the  following  curious  description  of  a  cave
of  Mithras,  as  discovered  in  its  original  and  unprofaned  condition,
written  by  that  eminent  antiquary,  Flaminius  Vacca.  (No.  117.)


130  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


III. A  KOMAN  MITHRAS  IN  HIS  CAVE.

"  I  remember  there  was  found  in  the  vineyard  of  Sig.  Orazio
Muti  (where  the  treasure  was  discovered),  opposite  S,  Yitale,  an
idol  in  marble  about  5  palms  high  (3J  ft.),  standing  erect  upon
a  pedestal  in  an  empty  chamber,  which  had  the  door  walled  up.
This  idol  had  the  head  of  a  lion,  but  the  body  that  of  a  man.
Under  the  feet  was  a  globe,  whence  sprung  a  serpent  which
encompassed  all  the  idol,  and  its  head  entered  into  the  lion's
mouth.  He  had  his  hands  crossed  upon  the  breast,  with  a  key
in  each ;  four  wings  fastened  upon  the  shoulders,  two  pointing
upwards,  two  downwards.  I  do  not  consider  it  a  very  antique
work,  being  done  in  a  rude  manner,  or  else  indeed  it  was  so
ancient  that  at  the  time  when  it  was  made  the  good  style  was
not  yet  known.  Sig.  Orazio,  however,  told  me  that  a  theologian,
a  Jesuit  Father,  explained  its  meaning  by  saying  it  signified
the  Devil,  who.  in  the  times  of  heathenism,  ruled  over  the
world  :  hence  the  globe  under  his  feet,  the  serpent  which  begirt
his  body  and  entered  into  his  mouth,  signified  his  foretelling  the
future  with  ambiguous  responses ;  the  keys  in  his  hands,  his
sovereignty  over  the  world  ;  the  lion's  head,  his  being  the  ruler
of  all  beasts ;  the  wings,  his  presence  everywhere.  Such  was
the  interpretation  given  by  the  Father  aforesaid.  I  have  done
everything  to  see  the  idol,  but  Sig.  Orazio  being  now  dead,  his
heirs  do  not  know  what  has  become  of  it.  It  is  not,  however,
unlikely  that  by  the  advice  of  the  same  theologian,  Sig.  Orazio
may  have  sent  it  to  some  limekiln  to  cure  its  dampness,  for  it  had
been  buried  many  and  many  a  year."  Tims  was  this  most
interesting  monument  destroyed  through  the  conceited  ignorance
of  a  wretched  ecclesiastic,  himself  more  truly  a  worshipper  of  the
Evil  Principle,  than  was  the  ancient  votary  of  the  beneficent
Lord  of  Light  who  carved  that  wondrous  image.  Yacca  adds,
"  I  remember,  there  was  found  in  the  same  place,  after  the
above-mentioned  idol,  another,  only  in  bas-relief,  also  having  a
lion's  head,  but  the  rest  of  the  body  human :  with  the  arms
extended,  in  each  hand  a  torch ;  with  two  wings  pointing  up
wards,  two  downwards,  from  between  which  issued  a  serpen  t.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  131

At  his  right  stood  an  altar  with  fire;  from  the  idol's  mouth
proceeded  a  ribbon  or  scroll  extending  over  the  fire."

This  Zzow-headed  deity  can  be  no  other  than  Jerome's  "  Pater
Bromius,"  a  Grecian  title  of  Bacchus ;  and  he,  we  are  told,
distinguished  himself  under  that  disguise  in  the  famous  war  of
the  giants —

"  Tu  cum  Parentis  regna  per  arduum
Cohors  Gigantum  scanderet  impia,
Rha3tum  retorsisti  leonis

Unguibus  horribilique  mala."

(Horace,  Od.  IT.  xix.  21-24.)

And,  tracing  back  this  composite  figure  to  the  real  source  of
such  iconology,  it  is  found  to  be  the  very  one  under  which
"  Nri-singha-avatar  "  is  depicted.  It  was  assumed  by  the  deity
in  order  to  destroy  the  tyrant  Hiransyakagipu,  who  had  obtained
the  gift  of  invulnerability  against  all  known  beasts,  either  by  day
or  night.

A  Mithraic  cave,  with  the  contiguous  buildings,  was  dis
covered  at  Spoleto  in  1878.  In  the  end  wall  were  the  usual
three  niches  for  the  god  and  his  torch-bearers.  In  front  of
them  an  altar  inscribed  "  Soli  invicto  Mithras  sacrum."  Close
to  the  altar,  a  tall  phallic  stone,  perforated  with  a  square  hole
near  the  top— perhaps  the  "stone  symbolizing  the  Birth  of
Mithras  "  mentioned  by  Firmicus.  The  cave,  with  the  ground
plan  of  the  whole  edifice  is  given  in  the  '  Archa3ologia,'  vol.  47,
p.  205.

IV. MITHRAIC  TALISMANS.

Mithraic  gems  are,  for  the  most  part,  earlier  in  date  than  those
emanating  from  the  Gnosticism  of  Alexandria,  with  whose
doctrines  they  had  no  connection  whatever  in  their  first  orioin.
Little  difficulty  will  be  found  on  inspection  in  separating  the
two  classes,  the  former  being  pointed  out  by  the  superiority  of
their  style,  and  yet  more  so  by  the  absence  of  the  Egyptian
symbols,  and  long  Coptic  legends  that  generally  accompany  the
latter.  Indeed  many  of  them  belong  to  the  best  period  of
Roman  art — the  age  of  Hadrian  ;  and  it  is  easy  to  perceive  how
the  worship  of  Apollo  gradually  merged  into  that  of  his  more

K  2


132  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

spiritual  oriental  representative,  in  the  times  when  religious
ideas  of  Indian  origin  began  to  get  the  upper  hand  throughout
the  Eoman  world — a  religion  essentially  speculative,  and  dealing
with  matters  pertaining  to  another  life  and  the  Invisible,
utterly  different  in  nature  from  the  old  Grecian  creed,  so
materialistic,  so  active,  so  entirely-  busying  itself  with  the
Present  and  the  Visible.

In  accordance  with  the  rule  that  prescribed  the  proper
material  for  talismans,  the  Jasper  (Pliny's  Malachites),  green,
mottled,  or  yellow,  is  almost  exclusively  employed  for  intagli
embodying  Mithraic  ideas,  and  which  take  the  place  of  Phoebus
and  his  attributes  amongst  the  glyptic  remains  of  the  second
and  third  centuries.  To  judge  from  their  fine  execution,  certain
examples  of  the  class  may  even  date  from  the  age  of  the  first
Cgesars,  and  thus  form  as  it  were  the  advanced  guard  of  that
countless  host  of  regular  Gnostic  works,  amidst  whose  terrific
barbarism  ancient  art  ultimately  expires.  In  their  beginning
these  Mithraic  works  were  the  fruit  of  the  modified  Zoroastrian
doctrines  so  widely  disseminated  over  the  Empire  after  the
conquest  of  Pontus — doctrines  whose  grand  feature  was  the
exclusive  worship  of  the  Solar  god,  as  the  fountain  of  all  life — a
notion  philosophically  true,  if  indeed  the  vital  principle  be,  as
some  scientists  assert,  nothing  more  than  electricity.  As  will  be
shown  hereafter  ("  Serapis  "),  the  later  Platonists,  like  Macrobius,
laboured  hard  to  demonstrate  that  the  multitudinous  divinities
of  the  old  faiths,  wheresoever  established,  were  no  other  than
various  epithets  and  expressions  for  the  same  god  in  his  different
phases.  The  aim  of  all  the  school  was  to  accommodate  the
old  faith  to  the  influence  of  the  Buddhistic  theosophy,  the
very  essence  of  which  was  that  the  innumerable  gods  of  the
Hindoo  mythology  were  but  names  for  the  Energies  of  the  First
Triad  in  its  successive  Avatars,  or  manifestations  unto  man.

To  come  now  to  the  actual  types  setting  forth  these  ideas  ;
prominent  amongst  them  is  the  figure  of  the  Lion  (he  being  in
astrological  parlance  the  "House  of  the  Sun"),  usually  sur
rounded  with  stars,  and  carrying  in  his  jaws  a  bull's  head,
emblem  of  earth  subjected  to  his  power.  Sometimes  he  tramples
on  the  serpent,  which  in  this  connection  no  longer  typifies  wisdom,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  133

but  the  Principle  of  Evil.  For  in  all  religions  emanating  from
the  East,  where  deadly  poisonousness  is  the  most  conspicuous
character  of  the  snake-tribe,  the  reptile  has  been  adopted  as
the  most  speaking  type  of  the  Destroyer.  In  the  West,  on
the  other  hand,  where  the  same  species  is  for  the  most  part
innocuous,  and  a  mere  object  of  wonder,  it  has  always  symbolized
wisdom,  and  likewise  eternity,  from  the  popular  belief  in  the
yearly  removal  of  its  youth  through  casting  the  slough ;  on  this
account  the  serpent  was  made  the  companion  of  Apollo  and
Aesculapius;  and  furthermore  plays  so  important  a  part  in
Scandinavian  mythology,  holding  the  whole  universe  together
in  its  perpetual  embrace.

Mithras  himself  often  makes  his  appearance,  figured  as  a
youthful  Persian,  plunging  the  national  weapon,  "  Modus
acinaces,"  into  the  throat  of  a  prostrate  bull  (which  expresses
the  same  doctrine  as  the  type  last  mentioned),  whilst  overhead
are  the  sun  and  moon,  the  group  standing  in  the  centre  of  the
Zodiac.  But  the  completest  assembly  of  Mithraic  figures  and
symbols  that  has  come  under  my  notice,  is  the  intaglio  published
by  Caylus  ('  Recueil  d'Aiitiquites,'  vi.  pi.  84).  It  is  engraved
upon  a  very  fine  agate,  2xlJ  inches  in  measurement.  In  the
centre  is  the  usual  type  of  Mithras  slaughtering  the  Bull,  the
tail  of  which  terminates  in  three  wheat-ears,  and  between  the
hind  legs  hangs  a  huge  scorpion ;  below  is  the  Lion  strangling
the  Serpent — emblem  of  darkness  and  of  death.  On  each  side
stands  a  fir-tree,  admitted  into  this  system  because  its  spiry
form  imitates  a  flame,  for  which  same  reason  its  cone  was  taken
for  the  symbol  of  the  element  fire,  and  therefore  borne  in  the
hands  of  deities  in  the  most  ancient  Syrian  sculptures.
Against  these  fir-trees  are  affixed  torches,  one  pointing  upwards,
the  other  downwards,  which  clearly  stand  for  the  rising  and
setting  of  the  Sun.  At  the  side  of  one  is  a  scorpion,  of  the
other,  a  bull's  head.  Above  each  tree  again  is  a  torch,  each
pointing  in  an  opposite  direction.  The  principal  group  is
flanked  by  Phoebus  in  his  four-horse,  Luna  in  her  two-horse  car
Above  the  whole  stand  two  winged  figures  entwined  with
serpents  and  leaning  upon  long  sceptres,  between  whom  rise  up
three  flames,  besides  four  more  at  the  side  of  the  right-hand


134  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

figure,  making  up  the  mystic  number  seven — perhaps  repre
senting the seven Amshaspands or Archangels. A naked
female,  surrounded  with  stars,  kneels  before  the  angel  on  the
left — doubtless  the  soul  for whose  benefit  the talisman was
composed — soliciting  his  patronage.

Could  this  elaborate  composition  be  interpreted,  it  would
certainly  be  found  to  contain  a  summary  of  the  Mithraic  creed
as  it  was  received  by  the  nations  of  the  West.  As  it  is,  how
ever,  some  portions  of  the  tableau  are  explained  by  certain
legends  to  be  found  in  the  Parsee  sacred  books ;  whilst  others
derive  light  from  comparison  with  the  larger  monuments  of  the
same  worship.  Thus,  the  termination  of  the  bull's  tail  in  ears
of  wheat  allude  to  the  fifty  life-giving  plants  which  sprang
from  the  tail  of  the  Primaeval  Bull  (or  Life,  the  same  word  in
Zend)  after  he  had  been  slain  b}r  Ahriman.  Of  the  same  animal
the  seed  was  carried  up  by  the  Izeds  (genii)  to  the  Moon,  wheiv,
purified  in  her  beams,  it  was  moulded  by  Ormuzd  into  a  new
pair,  the  parents  of  all  that  exists  in  earth,  air  and  water.  The
scorpion  is  appended  to  the  part  of  the  body,  properly  under
the  influence  of  the  sign  so  called,  for  as  Manilius  teaches,
"  The  fiery  scorpion  in  the  groin  delights."  In  this  particular
situation  it  expresses  Autumn,  as  the  serpent  underneath  does
Winter ;  and  with  good  reason  takes  the  place  of  the  bull's
genitals,  for,  as  the  same  poet  sings  (iv.  217.)

"  With  fiery  tail  when  Scorpio  threatens  war,
As  through  the  stars  he  drives  the  solar  car,
He  searches  earth  with  penetrating  rays
And  the  mixed  seed  deep  in  her  furrows  lays."

The  torches  raised  and  lowered  signify  the  East  and  West.
In  the  circular  altar  of  the  Villa  Borghese  (Wiiickelmann  Men.
Ined.  No.  21)  the  bust  of  Luna  appears  resting  on  a  crescent  over
an  aged  head  in  front  face  with  crabs'  claws  springing  out  of  his
forehead — a  speaking  type  of  Oceanus.  The  bust  of  the  rising
sun,  with  his  customary  badge,  the  eight-rayed  star,  in  point,
rests  upon  an  erect  flambeau,  whilst  that  of  the  setting  luminary
looking  downwards,  is  placed  upon  another  lowered  towards
earth.  Again,  the  serpent  winding  four  times  about  the  figures
may  signify  the  sun's  annual  revolution ;  an  explanation


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  135

rendered  the  more  plausible  by  the  torso  of  Mithras  at  Aries,
in  which  the  Zodiacal  Signs  occupy  the  intervals  between  the
coils  of  the  same  serpent.  The  lion  and  raven  stand  for  the
attendant  priests;  for  in  these  mysteries  the  higher  officials
were  denominated  Lions,  the  lower  Ravens  :  whence  the  rites
themselves  got  the  name  of  "  Leontica,"  and  "  Coracica."

The  fires,  the  planets  and  the  genii  presiding  over  them  are
in  number  seven — a  numeral  the  most  sacred  of  all  amongst  the
Persians.  But  of  these  seven  Fires,  three  are  ever  depicted  in  a
special  manner  as  those  most  worthy  to  be  held  in  reverence.
These  three  are  the  "  Eire  of  the  IS  tars,"  that  is,  of  the  planet
Venus,  named  Anahid;  the  "Fire  of  the  Sun,"  or  the  Fire  Mihr ;
and  the  "  Fire  of  Lightning,"  or  the  Fire  Bcrsiov,  that  is,  the
planet  Jupiter.  The  Mihr  is  the  winged  orb,  so  common  in  all
Assyrian  sculpture — an  emblem  which  serves  to  explain  the
Prophet's  simile,  "  the  Sun  of  Kighteousness  with  healing  in  his
wings."

The  worship  of  the  Fire  Gushtasp  (or  that  of  Anahid)  figures
011  the  Zend  sculptures  as  a  very  ancient  worship,  and  also  in
the  "  Shah  Nameh ;  "  just  as  that  of  the  goddess  Anaitis  does  in
many  Greek  authors  from  Herodotus  downwards.  This  his
torian  observes  (I.  131)  that  at  first  the  Persians  worshipped
only  the  sun,  moon,  and  elements,  until  they  learnt  from  the
Assyrians  the  worship  of  Venus  Urania,  whom  they  called
Mitra,  the  same  being  the  Mylitta  of  the  Babylonians,  the
Alata  or  Alilat  of  the  Arabians.  Now  Mitra  (feminine  of
Mithras)  and  Anahid,  are  one  and  the  same  goddess,  that  is  to
say,  the  Morning  Star,  a  female  Genius,  presiding  over  love,
giving  light,  and  directing  the  harmonious  movement  of  the
other  planets  by  the  sound  of  her  lyre,  the  strings  whereof  are
the  solar  rays — "  Apollo's  lyre  strung  with  his  golden  hair  "
(Creuzer,  Kal.  de  1'Antiq.  ii.  731).  In  this  doctrine  we  discover
the  reason  for  the  separation  of  the  Fires  upon  Caylus'  gem  into
two  groups ;  the  principal  group  consisting  of  the  three  most
anciently  adored  ;  the  subsidiary  one  of  the  remaining  four.

Other  Mithraic  symbols  are  of  a  very  speaking  character,  and
almost  explain  their  own  meaning  at  first  sight.  Thus  Mithras
piercing  the  bull's  throat  with  his  dagger  signifies  the  penetration


136  THE GNOSTICS A^B THEIR REMAINS,

of  the  solar  ray  into  tlie  bosom  of  the  earth,  by  whose  action  all
Nature  is  nourished ;  as  is  further  expressed  by  the  Dog's  licking
up  the  blood  that  pours  from  the  wound.  The  sign  Capricorn
frequently  introduced  into  the  same  group,  declares  the
necessity  of  moisture  to  co-operate  with  the  Sun's  influence  in
bringing  about  the  germination  of  the  seed  sown ;  whilst  the
scorpion,  in  the  significant  position  above  noticed,  expresses  the
generative  heat.  The  union  of  two  diverse  religions,  already
mentioned,  is  curiously  exemplified  by  those  stones  that  sho\v
the  Mithraic  group  surrounded  by  sets  of  the  sacred  animals  of
Eyypt,  arranged  by  threes — crocodiles,  goats,  calves,  vultures,
hawks,  ibises — standing  around  in  attitudes  of  adoration,  and
gazing  upon  the  great  work  of  their  supreme  lord,  Mithras  (see
page  41,  fig.  2).

Mithraic  bas-beliefs  cut  upon  the  smoothed  faces  of  rocks,  or
upon  tablets  of  stone,  still  abound  throughout  the  former  western
provinces  of  the  Roman  Empire;  many  exist  in  Germany  ;  still
more  in  France;  others  in  this  island,  along  the  line  of  the  Picts'
Wall,  and  a  remarkably  fine  example  at  York,  the  station  of  the
Sixth  Legion.  The  famous  "  Arthur's  Oon  "  (destroyed  in  the
last  century)  upon  the  Carron,  a  hemispherical  vaulted  building
of  immense  blocks  of  stone,  was  unmistakably  a  Specus  Mitft-
raicum—thG  same  in  design  as  Chosroes'  magnificent  Fire
temple  at  Gazaca.  Inasmuch  as  the  sun-god  was  the  chief
deity*  of  the  Druids,  it  is  easy  to  imagine  what  ready  ac
ceptance  the  worship  of  his  more  refined  Persian  equivalent
would  find  amongst  the  Celtic  Aborigines,  when  once  introduced
by  the  Roman  troops  and  colonists,  many  of  whom  were
Orientals.  To  the  last  circumstance  a  curious  testimony  is
incidentally  borne  by  Lampridius,  when  he  remarks  that  the
entire  military  force  employed  by  Maximinus  in  his  great  in-

*  As  "Belenus"  ho  continued  to  prove  that  Belenus  was  held  to  bo
the  last  the  patron-god  of  Aquileia,  another  name  for  Apollo.  A  shoe  of
lhat  (Gallic  metropolis  of  Cisalpine  the  giant  emperor,  a  convincing  testi-
(Jaul,  and  to  his  power  was  ascribed  niony,  literally  an  "ex  pede  Hercu-
the  death  of  Maximin  when  besieging  lem,"  to  his  incredible  stature,  was
that  city.  The  acclamations  of  the  \et  to  be  seen  in  the  days  of  Lam-
senate  on  the  receipt  of  the  news  pridius,  nailed  to  a  tree  in  the  mcrcd
of  their  deliverance  from  the  tyrant,  yrnve  at  the  place  of  his  fall.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  137

vasion  of  Germany, was  the  same  that  had  been  raised  by  Severus
Alexander,  and  which  had  accompanied  him  to  the  scene  of  his
murder,  "  either  the  North  of  Gaul  or  Britain,"  which  same
army  the  historian  describes  as  "  potentissimus  quidem  per
Armenios  et  Osrhocnos,  et  Partlws,  et  onmis  generis  homiimm."
For  this  sagacious  emperor  had  appointed  to  subordinate
commands  in  his  own  army  all  the  prisoners  of  royal  or  noble
birth  whom  he  had  taken  in  his  preceding  Persian  campaign.

Although  the  modern  Parsees,  like  their  Achseinenian  ancestry
in  the  days  of  Herodotus,  abominate  idols  and  all  visible
representations  of  things  divine,  yet  do  they  still  piously
cherish  the  ideas  embodied  on  the  sculptures  just  passed  under
review.  Amongst  these,  most  conspicuous  is  their  veneration
for  the  Dog  which  they  yet  esteem  the  most  holy  of  animals.
Tavernier  (I.  493)  was  on  this  account  greatly  scandalised  by
the  Guebres  of  Surat ;  "  they  have  another  strange  custom—
when  a  person  is  on  the  point  of  death,  to  take  a  little  dog,  and
place  it  upon  his  breast.  When  they  perceive  that  he  is  at  his
last  gasp,  they  apply  the  dog's  muzzle  to  the  dying  man's
mouth,  and  make  it  bark  twice  when  in  this  position,  as  if  they
meant  to  make  the  person's  soul  enter  into  the  dog,*  which  they
pretend  will  deliver  it  unto  the  angel  appointed  to  receive  the
same.  Moreover,  if  a  dog  happens  to  die,  they  carry  it  out  of
the  town,  and  pray  to  God  in  behalf  of  that  piece  of  carrion,  as
though  the  brute's  soul  could  derive  any  advantage  from  their
prayers  after  its  death."  Following  up  this  analogy,  the
sculptured  dog  licking  up  the  bull's  blood  may  actually  be
intended  for  such  a  vehicle  of  departing  life.  In  these  times
the  Parsees  expose  their  dead,  upon  gratings  laid  on  the  summit
of  the  "  Tower  of  silence,"  to  be  consumed  by  the  birds  alone  ;
but  under  the  Sassanian  monarchy  it  was  the  inviolable  rule  to
lay  out  all  corpses  in  the  open  fields  to  be  devoured  by  the  dogs.
This  was  no  more  than  carrying  out  to  the  full  a  very  ancient
principle  of  the  Zoroastriaii  religion.  Herodotus  (I.  140)  states
from  his  own  knowledge  that  the  corpse  of  a  Magus  was  not
allowed  to  be  buried  before  it  had  been  attacked  by  a  bird  or

*  My  Parsee  informant  assures  mo the  merely  brin^in^  a  tloi,  iuto  l]ic
this  ceremony  is  now  modiiiod into dying  man's  chamber.


138  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

dog ;  adding  that  the  same  was  reported  of  the  other  Persians.
The  Magi  regarded  the  killing  of  a  dog  equally  criminal  with
that  of  a  human  being  This  primitive  style  of  obsequies  the
Sassanians  strove  hard  to  enforce  upon  all  nations  subjected  to
their  sway,  viewing  as  a  LI  eat  sacrilege  the  placing  of  dead
bodies  in  the  bosom  of  the  earth ;  a  still  greater,  the  consuming
them  by  the  sacred  element,  Fire.  This  practice  above  all
others  scandalised  the  narrcw-minded  Byzantines;  the  historian
Agathias  expressing  his  horror  at  the  casting  the  dead  to  the
dogs,  wlntever  their  rank  or  dignity  in  life;  as  in  the  case  of
the  great  Satrap  Mermeroes,  whom  he  saw  thus  exposed  naked
in  the  fields  to  be  so  devoured.  When  the  last  seven  sages  of
Greece,  expelled  from  their  professional  chairs  at  Athens  by  the
stupid  bigotry  of  Justinian,  sought  refuge  in  the  ostentatious
hospitality  of  Nushirwan  the  Just,  even  they  (despite  their
philosophy)  found  themselves  obliged,  by  their  disgust  at  the
sight  of  this  practice,*  to  return  home  with  >ad  loss  of  dignity,
and  submit  to  the  spirit  of  the  times.  If  the  dogs  refused  to
touch  the  carcase,  this  was  looked  on  by  the  friends  of  the
deceased  as  the  very  worst  of  indications  as  to  the  ultimate
destination  of  his  soul.  The  Parsees,  who,  with  more  decency,
constitute  the  raveiif  (or  equally  sacred  creature)  sexton  and
sepulchre  in.  one,  deiivo  a  similar  augury  from  observing
which  eye  is  first  attacked  by  the  bird,  the  preference  for  the
right  one  being  the  token  of  salvation;  for  the  left,  of  ti.c
reverse.

A  very  curious  portion of  the  initiatory ceremony  in  the

*  To  which  they  \\  ould  have  been  into  the  heavens,  a  portion  of  the

forced  to  conform  had  they  continued  spirit  of  the  deceased  is  taken  up

under  the  protection  of  the  Sassanian  into  heaven.  In  the  case  of  rich

king.  people  Lamas  are  employed  to  divide

f  The  same  practice  prevails  in  the  body  into  small  pieces  and  carry

Thibet  with  the  motive  thus  assigned.  it  up  to  the  top  of  a  hill,  where  the

"Several  bodies  exposed  on  the  vulture  and  buzzard  soon  dispose  of

banks  of  the  stream  were  being  de-  it.  Interment  of  the  dead  is  als,o

voured  by  crows  and  buzzards,  which  practised,  but  only  among  the  poorer

soon  leave  nothing  but  the  skeletons,  people,  \vho  cannot  afford  to  pay

which  are  washed  away  by  the  sum-  Lamas  to  perform  the  ceremony  of

raer  rise  of  the  stream.  The  Tibe-  exposing  the  body." — Cooper's  'Tra-

tians  believe  that  as  each  buzzard,  vels  of  a  Pioneer  of  Commerce,'

gorged  with  its  foul  repast,  soars  p.  270.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  139

ancient  Mysteries  was  the  giving  of  the  "  Mark  of  Mithras."
After  successfully  undergoing  each  stage  of  the  ordeal,  the
accepted  candidate  was  marked  in  a  certain  indelible  manner,
but  the  exact  nature  of  this  marking  cannot  now  be  ascertained
The  expressions  used  by  St.  Augustine  (in  Johan.  i.  dis.  7)  lead
us  to  conclude  two  things  :  firstly,  that  the  engraved  stones,  the
object  of  our  consideration,  were  given  to  the  candidate  at  the
end  of  his  probation,  for  a  token  of  admission  into  the  fra
ternity,  and  for  a  medium  of  recognition  between  members :
and  secondly,  that  every  one,  upon  admission,  was  stamped  with
a  secret  Mark,  indelibly  imprinted  in  his  flesh.  "  Something  of
the  sort  has  been  copied  by  a  certain  Spirit,  in  that  he  will
have  his  own  image  to  be  purchased  with  blood,  forasmuch  as  he
was  aware  that  mankind  were  some  day  or  another  to  be
redeemed  by  the  shedding  of  blood."  This  last  expression
shows  that  this  Mark  was  not  burnt  in,  but  incised  or  tattooed  ;
and  the  same  conclusion  may  be  deduced  from  St.  John's  using
the  term  ^apay/xa,  engraving,  not  crT/y/^,  branding,  for  that  badge
of  servitude  which  all  the  subjects  of  the  Second  Beast,  "  having
horns  like  a  lamb's,  and  speaking  like  a  dragon,"  were  forced  to
receive,  either  in  their  right  hands  (i.e.,  upon  the  palm)  or  upon
their  foreheads,  and  he  caused  all,  both  small  and  great,  rich
and  poor,  free  and  bond,  to  receive  a  Mark  in  their  right  hand,
or  in  their  foreheads  :  "  and  that  no  man  might  buy  or  sell,  save
he  that  had  the  Mark,  or  the  Name  of  the  Beast,  or  the  Number
of  his  Name"  (Eev.  xiii.  17).  These  words  contain  a  com
pendious  account  of  the  different  kinds  of  "  Stigmata  "  then  in
use  to  distinguish  those  devoting  themselves  to  any  particular
deity.  The  Mark  was  the  figure  of  the  special  symbol  or
attribute  of  that  deity  (exactly  answering  to  the  caste-marks  of
the  modern  Hindoos)  :  the  Name  was  his  own,  written  at  full
length  in  some  sacred  language  :  the  Number  was  the  more
recondite  way  of  expressing  that  name,  either  by  a  single
numeral  in  the  primitive  Chalda3an  fashion,  or  by  other  letters
taken  numerically,  and  yielding  the  same  sum.  The  author  of
the  Apocalypse  very  probably  had  the  Mithraicists  in  view
when  penning  this  allegory  ;  yet  we  may  be  certain  that  the
members  of  a  secret  society  did  not  receive  the  mark  of  member-


140  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

ship  upon  any  conspicuous  part  of  their  persons.  The  same
necessity  meets  us  here,  as  in  every  other  branch  of  this  inquiry,
for  placing  the  origin  of  all  such  sectarian  bodily  Marks  in
India— the  true  fountainhead,  directly  or  indirectly,  of  so  many
Gnostic  practices.  There,  the  votaries  of  the  several  deities  are
still  distinguished,  each  by  the  proper  symbol  of  his  patron-
god  impressed  upon  his  forehead,  but  by  a  milder  process  than
of  old,  being  traced,  not  in  his  own  blood,  but  with  the  ashes  of
cow-dung,  the  powder  of  sandal-wood,  or  coloured- earths,  daily
renewed.  Inasmuch  as  amongst  them  the  symbol  of  Fire
(Bramah)  is  an  equilateral  Triangle,  with  the  apex  pointing
upwards,  it  may  be  conjectured  that  the  Mithraic  ^apay/xa  was
the  same  simple  figure,  by  which  indeed  Horapollo  informs
us  the  Egyptians  symbolised  the  Moon,  and  Plutarch  that
Pythagoras  expressed  the  goddess  Athene.*  Clarkson,  how
ever,  asserts  positively  that  the  Mark  of  Mithras  was  the  "  Tau
mysticum,"  but  whence  he  derived  this  knowledge  I  have  never
been  able  to  ascertain. f

The  Seven  Stars,  so  conspicuous  upon  these  talismans,  doubt
less  stand  for  something  higher  than  the  mere  planets ;  in  all
likelihood  they  denote  the  Seven  Amshaspands,  the  First  Order
of  Angels  in  the  Zoroastrian  hierarchy ;  and  who  became  the
"  Seven  Spirits  of  God  "  to  the  later  Jews,  and  thenco  by
gradual  transition  gave  the  epithet  "  Septiformis  munere  "  to
the  Spiritus  Sanctus  of  Christianity.  Of  these  Amshaspands
the  names  and  offices  are :  Ormu/d,  source  of  life  and  creation  ;
Bahman,  king  of  the  world  ;  Ardibehest,  giver  of  fire  ;  Shahrivar,
of  the  metals  ;  Qpandarmat  (the  Gnostic  Sophia),  queen  of  the
earth  ;  Khordad,  presiding  over  time  and  the  seasons  ;  Amerdad,
over  trees  and  plants.  Of  these  the  highest  in  place  are  (after
Ormuzd)  the  four  named  next  in  gradation.  Below  this
order  stand  the  Ixeds,  twenty-seven  in  number,  ruled  over  by
Mithras ;  they  govern  the  heavenly  bodies  and  the  elements.

*  Herself  the  lunar  deity,  at-ford-  Crescents,  the  regular  badge  of  tlio

ing  to  an  old  tradition  preserved  by  kings  of  Pontus,  and  as  such  put

Aristotle.  upon  the  states  of  Athens  bearing

t  There  is  very  good  reason  to  the  names  of  Mithridutes  and  Aris-

discover  a  Mithraie  mark  in  the  tion.  (In  the  Due  de  Luyues  Coi-

"  Phanaces"  or,  Sun  between  two  lection.)


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  141

Against  each  Amshaspand  and  Ized  is  arrayed  a  corresponding
Angel  of  Darkness,  to  thwart  all  his  operations,  namely,  the
Seven  Arch-Devs,  and  the  Twenty-Seven  Devs.


V. GNOSTIC SACRAMENTS AND INITIATIONS AS
CONNECTED  WITH  THE  MIT1IRAIC.

In  my  account  of  Mithraicism  notice  has  been  taken  of  the
very  prominent  part  that  sacraments  for  the  remission  of  sin
play  in  the  ceremonial  of  that  religion;  the  following  extracts
from  the  grand  Gnostic  text-book  will  serve  to  show  how  the
same  notions  (and  probably,  forms)  were  transferred  to  the
service  of  Gnosticism.

Baptism,  Remitting  Sins. — (Pistis-Sophia)  (298).  Then  came
forth  Mary  and  said  :  Lord,  under  what  form  do  Baptisms  remit
sins  ?  I  have  heard  thee  saying  that  the  Ministers  of
Contentions  (e/atSatot)*  follow  after  the  soul,  bearing  witness
against  it  of  all  the  sins  that  it  hath  committed,  so  that  they
may  convict  it  in  the  judgments.  Now,  therefore,  Lord,  do  the
mysteries  of  Baptism  blot  out  the  sins  that  be  in  the  hands  of
the  Receivers  of  Contention,  so  that  they  shall  utterly  forget
the  same?  Now,  therefore,  Lord,  tell  us  in  what  form  they
remit  sins  ;  for  we  desire  to  know  them  thoroughly.  Then  the
Saviour  answered  and  said :  Thou  hast  well  spoken  :  of  truth
those  Ministers  are  they  that  testify  against  all  sins,  for  they
abide  constantly  in  the  places  of  judgment,  laying  hold  upon
the  souls,  convicting  all  the  souls  of  sinners  who  have  not
received  the  mystery,  and  they  keep  them  fast  in  chaos
tormenting  them.  But  these  contentious  ones  cannot  pass  over
chaos  so  as  to  enter  into  the  courses  that  be  above  chaos;  in
order  to  convict  the  souls  therefore  receiving  the  mysteries,  it  is
not  lawful  for  them  to  force  so  as  to  drag  them  down  into  chaos,
where  the  Contentious  Receivers  may  convict  them.  But  the
souls  of  such  as  have  not  received  the  mysteries,  these  do  they
desire  and  hail  into  chaos  :  whereas  the  souls  that  have  received

*  The  Cabiri,  "  pimishers,"  of  the  former  duties  under  the  new  dispen-
ancieiit  mythology,  performing  their  sation.


THE GNOSTICS AND TPIEIR REMAINS.

the  mysteries,  they  have  no  means  of  convicting,  seeing  that  they
cannot  get  out  of  their  own  place  ;  and  even  if  they  did  come
forth,  they  could  not  stop  those  souls,  neither  shut  them  up  in
their  chaos.  Hearken,  therefore,  I  will  declare  to  you  in  truth
in  what  form  the  mystery  of  Baptism  remitteth  sins.  If  the
souls  when  yet  living  in  the  world  have  been  sinful,  the  Con
tentious  Receivers  verily  do  come,  that  they  may  bear  witness  of
all  the  sins  they  have  committed,  but  they  can  by  no  means  come
forth  out  of  the  regions  of  chaos,  so  as  to  convict  the  soul  in  the
places  of  judgment  that  be  beyond  chaos.  But  the  counterfeit
of  the  spirit*  testifies  against  all  the  sins  of  the  soul,  in  order
to  convict  it  in  the  places  of  judgment  that  be  beyond  chaos  ;
not  only  doth  it  testify,  but  also  sets  a  seal  upon  all  the  sins  of
the  soul,  so  as  to  print  them  firmly  upon  the  soul,  that  all  the
Kulers  of  the  judgment  place  of  the  sinners  may  know  that  it
is  the  soul  of  a  sinner,  and  likewise  know  the  number  of  sins
which  it  hath  committed  from  the  seals  that  the  counterfeit  of
the  spirit  hath  imprinted  upon  it,  so  that  they  may  punish  the
soul  according  to  the  number  of  its  sins  :  this  is  the  manner
in  which  they  treat  the  soul  of  a  sinner.  (300).  Now  there
fore  if  any  one  hath  received  the  mysteries  of  Baptism,  those
mysteries  become  a  great  fire,  j  exceeding  strong,  and  wise,  so  as  to
burn  up  all  the  sins  :  and  the  Fire  entereth  into  the  soul
secretly,  so  that  it  may  consume  within  it  all  the  sins  which  the
counterfeit  of  the  spirit  hath  printed  there.  Likewise  it  entereth
into  the  body  secretly,  that  it  may  pursue  all  its  pursuers,  and
divide  them  into  parts  —  for  it  pursueth  within  the  body,  the
counterfeit  of  the  spirit,  and  Fate  —  so  that  it  may  divide  them
apart  from  the  Power  and  the  Soul,  and  place  them  in  one  part
of  the  body  —  so  that  the  fire  separates  the  counterfeit  of  the
spirit,  Fate,  and  the  Body  into  one  portion,  and  the  Soul  and
the  Power  {  into  another  portion.  The  mystery  of  Baptism
remaineth  in  the  middle  of  them,  so  that  it  may  perpetually
separate  them,  so  that  it  may  purge  and  cleanse  them  in  order


s,  one  of  tl.e  t  -A-  clear  allusion  to  the  Mithraic

four component parts  of the  soul; "  torture  of  the  fire."
equivalent  apparently  to  our  "  Cyon-  I  The particle of the Godhead

science."  mixed  up  in  the  quadruple  compo&i-

of  the  Inner  Man.


xxiii GX03TICS AND THEIR REMAINS

that  they  may  not  be  polluteil  by  Matter.  Now  therefore,
Mary,  this  is  the  manner  whereby  the  mystery  of  Baptism
remitteth  sins  and  all  transgressions.

(301)  And  when  the  Saviour  ha<)  Urns  spoken,  he  said  to  his
disciples  :  Do  ye  understand  in  what  manner  I  speak  with  you  ?
Then  came  forth  Mary,  saying  :  Of  a  truth,  Lord,  I  perceive  in
reality  all  the  things  that  thou  hast  said.  Touching  this  matter
of  the  Remission  of  Sins,  thou  speaketh  aforetime  to  us  in  a
parable,  saying :  I  am  come  to  bring  fire  upon  the  earth ;  nay,
more,  let  it  burn  as  much  as  I  please.  And,  again  thou  hast  set
it  forth  openly,  saying :  I  have  a  baptism  wherewith  I  will
baptise  and  how  shall  I  endure  until  it  be  accomplished?  Ye
think  that  I  am  come  to  bring  peace  upon  the  earth  ?  By  no
means  so,  but  dissension,  which  I  am  come  to  bring.  For  from
this  time  forth  there  shall  be  five  in  one  house  ;  three  shall  be
divided  against  t\vo,  and  two  against  three.  This,  Lord,  is  the
word  that  thou  speakest  openly.  But  concerning  the  word  that
thou  spakest :  I  am  come  to  bring  fire  upon  the  earth,  and  let  it
burn  so  much  as  I  please :  in  this  thou  hast  spoken  of  the
mystery  of  Baptism  in  the  world,  and  let  it  burn  as  much  as
thou  pleasest  for  to  consume  all  the  sins  of  the  soul,  that  it  may
purge  them  away.  And  again  thou  hast  shewn  the  same  forth
openly,  saying  :  I  have  a  baptism  wherewith  I  will  baptise,  and
how  shall  I  endure  until  it  be  accomplished?  The  which  is
this  ;  Thou  wilt  not  tarry  in  the  world  until  the  baptisms  be
accomplished  to  purify  all  the  perfect  souls.  And  again  what
thou  spakest  unto  us  aforetime :  "  Do  ye  suppose  I  am  come  to
bring  peace  upon  earth,"  &c.  (302).  This  signifieth  the  mystery
of  Baptism  which  thou  hast  brought  into  the  world,  because  it
hath  brought  about  dissension  in  the  body  of  the  world,  because
it  hath  divided  the  Counterfeit  of  the  spirit,  the  Body,  and  the
Fate  thereof,  into  one  party,  and  the  Soul  and  the  Power  into  the
other  party.  The  same  is,  "  There  shall  be  three  against  two,  and
two  against  three."  And  when  Mary  had  spoken  these  things
the  Saviour  said  :  Well  done,  thou  Spiritual  One  in  the  pure
light,  this  is  the  interpretation  of  my  saying.

Then  Mary  went  on  and  said  :  Bear  with  me,  Lord,  whilst  I
yet  inquire  of  thee.  Lo !  we  know  now  fully  after  what  form


144


THE GNOSTICS AXD THEIR REMAINS.


Baptism  remitteth  sin.  Now  therefore  declare  unto  us  the
mystery  of  the  Three  Courts,  and  the  mystery  of  the  First
Mystery,  and  likewise  the  mystery  of  the  Ineffable  One;  in
what  form  do  these  also  remit  sin  ?  Do  they  remit  sin  in  the
form  of  baptism  or  not  ?  (3^3)  The  Saviour  answered  again  :
By  no  means ;  but  all  the  mysteries  of  the  Three  Courts  remit
in  the  soul,  and  in  all  the  regions  of  the  Rulers,  all  the  sins
that  the  soul  hath  committed  even  from  the  beginning.  They
remit  also  the  sins  that  the  soul  shall  have  committed  after
wards  up  to  the  time  that  each  one  of  the  mysteries  taketh  unto
itself,  the  time  whereof  I  will  declare  unto  you  hereafter.
Moreover  the  mystery  of  the  First  Mystery,  and  the  mysterv  of
the  Ineffable  One,  remit  unto  the  soul  in  all  the  regions  of  the
Rulers  all  the  sins  and  transgressions  that  it  hath  committed.
And  not  only  do  they  remit,  but  they  do  not  impute  sin*  to  the
soul,  from  henceforth  for  ever  by  reason  of  the  free- grace  of
the  mystery  and  the  exceeding  glory  of  the  same.  Then  said
the  Saviour  :  Do  ye  understand  all  that  I  have  said  unto  you  ?
Then  Mary  answered:  Lord,  I  have  caught  up  all  the  words
thou  hast  spoken.  Now  therefore  as  to  the  saying  that  all  the
mysteries  of  the  Three  Courts  remit  sins,  and  blot  out  iniquities.
Concerning  this  same  matter  hath  David  the  prophet  spoken,
saying :  "  Blessed  are  they  whose  sins  they  have  remitted,  and
whoso  iniquities  they  have  covered,"  and  as  to  thy  saying  that
the  mystery  of  the  First  Mystery,  and  the  mystery  of  the
Ineffable  One,  do  not  only  remit  all  sin  unto  the  soul  for  ever,
but  also  do  not  suffer  sin  to  be  imputed  unto  the  same  for  ever
and  ever,  by  reason  of  the  free-gift  of  the  great  mystery,  and
the  exceeding  glory  thereof;  concerning  this  same  matter  David
the  prophet  foretold,  saying  :  "  Blessed  are  they  unto  whom  the
Lord  will  not  impute  sin,"  which  signifieth  they  will  not  impute
sin  from  henceforth  unto  those  that  receive  the  mystery  of  the
First  Mystery  and  the  mystery  of  the  Ineffable  One.  Then
answered  the  Saviour :  Well  done,  thou  Spiritual  One,  this  is
the  interpretation  of  my  word.

(305)  Then  Mary  continued,  saying  : Lord,  if  a  man  shall

*  This  is  the  doctrine  that  "knowledge" renders  all  actions  free  from
infulness— as  held  by  the  Simonians.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIE REMAINS.  145

have  received  the  mystery  in  the  mystery  of  the  First  Mystery,
and  afterwards  shall  turn  back  and  sin,  and  again  shall  repent
and  pray  in  his  own  mystery,  shall  his  sin  be  remitted  to  him  or
not  ?  Then  answered  the  Saviour  ;  Whosoever  after  receiving
the  mystery  shall  again  sin  twelve  times,  and  again  repent
twelve  times,  and  then  shall  pray  in  his  own  mystery,  his  sin
shall  be  remitted  unto  him.  But  and  if,  after  these  twelve
times,  he  shall  turn  again  and  transgress,  then  of  a  truth  his
sin  shall  never  more  be  remitted,  so  that  he  may  turn  again
unto  his  own  mystery  whatsoever  it  be.  For  such  an  one  there
is  no  repentance,  unless  indeed  ho  hath  received  the  mystery  of
the  Ineifablo  One  that  remitteth  all  sins,  and  shall  remit  them
at  every  time.

Then  said  Mary  :  Lord,  those  who  have  received  the  mystery
of  the  First  Mystery,  and  then  have  turned  back  and  sinned,  if
such  without  having  repented  shall  depart  out  of  the  body,
shall  they  inherit  the  kingdom  or  not,  forasmuch  as  they  have
received  the  free  gift  of  that  mystery  ?  (306)  The  Saviour
answered  :  Of  such  the  judgment  shall  be  the  most  merciful
amongst  all  the  judgments,  for  their  dwelling  is  in  the  Middle
Gate*  of  the  Dragon  of  Outer  Darkness,  and  at  the  end|  of  all
those  that  be  in  torment :  because  such  an  one  hath  received
the  free  gift  of  the  mystery,  and  hath  not  remained  stead
fast  therein.  Then  said  Mary :  Such  as  have  received  the
mystery  of  the  Ineffable  One  and  then  shall  turn  back  and  sin,
but  afterwards  shall  repent  in  their  lifetime,  how  many  times
shall  their  sin  be  remitted  unto  them?  Then  answered  the
Saviour :  To  such  an  one,  not  only  if  he  turn  back  and  sin  once,
and  then  repent,  shall  his  sin  be  remitted,  but  even  if  he  doth
so  continually,  so  long  as  he  shall  repent  whilst  yet  alive,  not
being  in  hypocrisy,  and  shall  pray  according  to  his  own  mystery,
because  those  mysteries  are  merciful  and  remit  sin  at  every
time  (307).  Then  asked  Mary  :  But  if  such  an  one  shall
depart  out  of  the  body  before  he  hath  repented,  what  then  shall
happen  unto  him?  (307)  Then  answered  the  Saviour:  Of
such  an  one  the  judgment  shall  be  worse  than  of  any  other,  and

*  This  term  is  borrowed  from  the f  The  lost  place,  answering  to  the
ancient  Gates  of  the  Ainenti.  Limbo  of  the  medifcval  Hell.


146  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

exceeding  great;  for  even  if  those  souls  be  new  ones*  they
shall  not  return  unto  the  changes  of  the  earthly  bodies,  neither
shall  they  do  any  work,  but  they  shall  be  cast  out  into  the
uttermost  parts  of  the  Outer  Darkness,  and  shall  be  consumed  so
that  they  shall  not  exist  for  ever  and  ever.

(308)  To  this  declaration  Mary  refers  the  saying :  "  Salt  is
good,  but  if  the  salt  hath  lost  its  savour,"  &c.

The  following  extracts,  from  the  same  high  authority,  will
much  elucidate  the  pass-words  communicated  to  the  dying
believer,  which  form  so  important  a  feature  of  the  Gnostic
system.

Benefits  of  Initiation.— I  will  declare  unto  you  that  mystery,
which  is  this :  Whosoever  shall  have  received  that  One  Word,
when  he  shall  depart  out  of  the  body  of  the  Matter  of  the  Kulers,
there  shall  come  the  Contentious  Eeceivers  to  loosen  him  out  of
that  body,  which  same  Receivers  loosen  every  one  departing  out
of  the  body. And  when  they  shall  have  loosened  the  soul  that
hath  received  that  mystery  which  I  have  declared  unto  you,  in
that  very  moment  wherein  he  is  set  loose,  he  becometh  a  great
Hood  of  light  in  the  midst  of  them. And  the  Eeceivers  shall  fear
the  light  of  that  soul,  and  shall  tremble,  and  shall  cease  through
their  fear  of  the  great  light  which  they  behold. And  that  soul
shall  fly  up  aloft,  and  the  Eeceivers  shall  not  lay  hold  upon
him,  neither  shall  they  discern  by  what  way  he  is gone,  inas
much  as  he  is  become  a  great  Ray  of  Light,  and  flieth  up  aloft,
neither  is  there  any  Power  that  can  overtake  him,  nor  ever  come
nigh  unto  him  at  all  (228). But  he  passes  through  all  the
regions  of  the  Eulers,  and  also  the  regions  of  the  offspring  of
the  Light,  neither  doth  he  give-in  a  declaration  in  any  region,
nor  yet  a  defence  of  himself,t  nor  yet  the  pass-word  (or  symbol).
Neither  can  any  Power  of  them  all  draw  near  him,  but  all  the
regions  of  the  Eulers  and  of  the  offspring  of  the  Light  shall

*  That  is,  have  occupied  the  body  Egyptian  "  Kitual  of  the  Dead,"
for  the  first  time ;  not  souls  that  concerning  the  soul's  passage  on  its
after  punishment  for  their  sins  in  way  to  the  palace  of  Osiris  Socharis,
this  life,  have  been  placed  again  in  "  the  Occidental,"  through  the  One-
bodies  to  undergo  a  second  probation  and-twenty  Gates,  each  guarded  by
upon  earth.  its  own  ^enius>  and  eacn  requiring  a

f  All  this is  borrowed  from  the  separate  address.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  147

sing  hymns,  each  one  in  his  own  place,  fearing  the  flood  of  light
that  clotheth  that  soul,  until  he  shall  come  into  the  place  of  the
heirs  of  the  mystery  that  he  hath  received,  and  become  con
joined  with  the  members  of  the  same.  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,
lie  shall  be  in  all  the  regions  in  the  time  that  a  man  can  shoot
an  arrow.  Again  I  say  unto  you,  whosoever  shall  receive  that
mystery  and  make  himself  perfect  in  all  the  types  and  figures
thereof,  that  man  is  in  the  world,  but  he  is  more  excellent  than
the  angels,  and  shall  be  before  them  all ;  he  is  a  man  in  the
world,  but  he  is  better  than  the  archangels  and  shall  be  before
them  all  (229)  ;  he  is  higher  than  all  the  tyrants,  and  all  the
lords,  and  all  the  gods,  and  all  the  luminaries,  and  all  the  pure
ones,  and  all  the  triple  powers,  and  all  the  Primal  Fathers,
and  all  the  Unseen  Ones;  he  is  a  man  in  the  world,  but  he  is
more  excellent  than  the  great  unseen  Primal  Father,  and  shall
be  more  exalted  than  he,  and  above  all  those  pertaining  to  the
Middle-space,  and  above  all  the  emanations  of  the  Treasury  of
Light,  and  above  all  the  confusion,*  and  above  every  region  of
the  Treasure  of  Light ;  he  is  a  man  in  the  world,  but  he  shall
reign  with  me  (230)  in  my  kingdom  ;  he  is  a  man  in  the  world,
but  he  shall  be  a  king  in  the  Light ;  he  is  a  man  in  the  world,
but  he  is  not  of  the  world  ;  and  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  man
is  I,  and  I  am  that  man  ;  and  in  the  dissolution  of  the  world,  when
the  universe  shall  be  raised  up,  and  all  the  number  of  perfect
souls  shall  be  raised  up,  and  I  am  made  king  over  all  the  off
spring  of  the  Light,  and  when  I  am  made  king  over  the  seven
AMHN,f  and  the  Five  Trees,  and  the  Three  AMHN,  and  the
Nine  Keepers  ;  and  when  I  am  king  over  the  Boy  of  the  boy
which  be  the  Twin  Saviours,  and  over  the  Twelve  Saviours,  and
over  all  the  number  of  perfect  souls  which  have  received  the
mystery  of  Light,  then  whosoever  shall  have  received  the
mystery  of  the  Ineffable  One,  they  shall  be  joint  kings  with  mo
and  shall  sit  upon  my  right  hand  and  upon  my  left  hand  in  my
kingdom.  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  those  men  are  I,  and  I  am

*  The  Creation  of  the  Demiurgus,  f  Title probably borrowed from

in  which  the  Particle  of  the  Godhead  the  former  Amentt,  the  four  sons  of

is  mixed  up  and  lost  in  the  heap  of  Osiris,  and  keepers  of  Elysium
Matter.

L 2


148  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR KEMAINS.

those  men. For  this  cause  have  I  said to  you formerly,  ye
shall  sit  upon  your  thrones  on  my  right  hand  and  on  my  left
in  my  kingdom,  and ye  shall  reign  together  with  me  (231).
Therefore  I  did  not  refrain,  neither  was  I  abashed  to  call  you
my  brethren  and  my  fellows,  inasmuch  as ye  shall be  joint
kings  with  me  in  my  kingdom. These  things  therefore  I  Baid
unto  you,  knowing that  I  was  about  to give  unto you  the
mystery  of  the  Ineffable  One,  because  that  mystery  is  I,  and  I
am  that  mystery. Now  therefore  not  only  ye  shall  reign  with
me,  but  also  whatsoever  men  shall  have  received  that  mystery
they  shall  be  joint  kings  with  me in my  kingdom ; and  1
am they, and they are I. But  my throne shall be  more
exalted  than  theirs ;  and  inasmuch  as  ye  shall  receive  sorrows
in  this  world  beyond  all  other  men  whilst  ye  are  preaching  the
words  that  I  declare  unto  you,  therefore  your  thrones  shall  bo
next  to  my  throne  in  my  kingdom. For  this  cause  I  said  of  old
time,  in  the  place  where  I  shall  be,  my  twelve  ministers  shall
be  also  ;  but  Mary  Magdalene,  and  John  the  Virgin,  shall  be  the
most  excellent  amongst  my  disciples. And  all  men  that  shall
have  received  the  mystery  of  the  Ineffable  One  shall  be  upon
my  right  hand  and  upon  my  left,  for  I  am  they  and  they  are  I,
and  they  shall  be  equal  with  you  in  every  thing ;  but your
thrones  shall  be  more  exalted  than  theirs,  and  my  throne  shall
be  more exalted than  yours  (232). And  all  men  that  shall
find  out  the  Word  of  the  Ineffable  One,  verily  I  say  unto  you
all  the  men  that  shall  know  that  Word,  the  same  shall  under
stand  also  the  knowledge  of  all  the  words  that  I  have  spoken
unto you,  both in  their  depth  and  in  their  height,  in  their
length  and  in  their  breadth. And  what  things  I  have  not  told
you  those  I  will  tell  you  in  their  place  and  in  their  order  in  the
emanation  of  the  universe. Verily  I  say  unto  you,  they  shall
know  how  the  world  is  established,  and  after  what  form  those
that  pertain  unto  the  height  (highest  place)  be  made,  and  for
what  end  the  universe  was  created.

And  when  the  Saviour  had  said  these  things,  Mary  Magdalene
came  forward  and  said  :  Lord,  be  not  wroth  with  me  if  I
seek  out  everything  with  diligence.  Whether  is  the  Word  of
the  mystery  of  the  Ineffable  One,  one  thing,  and  the  Word  of


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  149

the  Knowledge  of  All,  another?  Then  the  Saviour  answered,
and  said:  The  Word  of  the  mystery  of  the  Ineffable  is  one
thing,  and  the  Word  of  the  Knowledge  of  All  is  another.  Then
said  Mary :  Suffer  me,  Lord,  to  ask  thee  yet  again  one  thing.
Unless  when  we  are  living  we  understand  the  knowledge  of  the
whole  Word  of  the  Ineffable  One,  we  shall  not  inherit  the  king
dom  of  Light?  (233).  Then  the  Saviour  answered,  and  said  :
Of  a  truth,  whosoever  shall  have  received  the  mystery  of  the
kingdom  of  Light,  the  same  shall  go  to  inherit  it  into  that
place  the  mystery  whereof  he  hath  received.  But  he  shall  not
obtain  the  knowledge  of  the  All,  wherefore  all  things  were  made,
except  he  shall  have  known  that  One  Word  of  the  Ineffable,  the
which  is  the  knowledge  of  all.  And  again,  there  is  no  way  of
knowing  that  One  Word  of  knowledge,  except  a  man  shall  have
first  received  the  mystery  of  the  Ineffable  One ;  but  every  man
shall  go  to  inherit  that  place  the  mystery  whereof  he  hath
received.  For  which  cause  I  said  to  you  formerly  :  "  He  that
believeth  a  prophet  shall  receive  a  prophet's  reward,  and  he
that  believeth  a  righteous  man  shall  receive  a  righteous  man's
reward,"  which  is  this  :  of  whatsoever  place  each  hath  received
the  mystery,  into  that  same  place  shall  he  go.  He  that  hath
received  a  humble  mystery,  the  same  shall  inherit  a  humble
place.  He  that  hath  received  an  excellent  mystery,  the  same
shall  inherit  an  exalted  place ;  and  every  one  shall  abide  in  his
own  place  in  the  light  of  my  kingdom,  and  every  one  shall
have  authority  over  the  Course  that  is  below  him,  but  over  that
which  is  above  himself  he  shall  not  have  authority,  but  shall
abide  in  his  inheritance  of  the  light  of  my  kingdom,  dwelling
in  a  great  light  unto  which  there  is  no  measure,  next  to  the
gods  and  to  the  Unseen  Ones,  and  he  shall  be  in  great  joy  and
gladness  (234).

Now  therefore  I  will  speak  with  you  touching  the  glory  of
those  also  that  shall  receive  the  mystery  of  the  Fiist  Mystery.
He  that  hath  received  the  same,  at  the  time  when  he  shall
depart  out  of  this  body  of  Matter,  the-  Contentious  Eeceiver  shall
come  that  they  may  take  his  soul  out  ol  the  body,  and  that  soul
shall  become  a  great  Kay  of  light  and  shall  fly  aloft  through  the
midst  of  them,  and  shall  pass  through  all  the  regions  and  ahull


150  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

not  give-in  any  declaration,  or  defence,  or  symbol,  token  (pass
word),  but  shall  pass  through  all,  that  he  may  come  and  reign
over  all  the  places  belonging  to  the  First  Saviour.  In  the  like
manner  he  that  hath  received  the  Second  Mystery  and  the  Third
and  Fourth  up  to  the  Twelfth*  (235),  that  soul  likewise  shall  pass
through  all  the  regions  without  giving  in  his  defence,  or  token,
and  shall  come  and  reign  over  all  the  places  belonging  to  the
Twelve  Saviours.  And  in  like  manner  those  receiving  the  second
mystery  shall  reign  over  the  places  of  the  Second  Saviour
amongst  the  heirs  of  light.  In  like  manner  those  receiving  the
third  and  the  fourth  up  to  the  twelfth,  shall  reign  over  the
regions  of  that  Saviour  whose  mystery  each  hath  received.  But
they  shall  not  be  equal  with  those  that  have  received  the
mystery  of  the  Ineffable  One,  but  shall  abide  in  the  Courses  of
the  Twelve  Saviours.

Then  Mary  answered,  saying :  Lord,  suffer  me  yet  again.
How  is  it  that  the  First  Mystery  hath  twelve  mysteries,  whereas
the  Ineffable  hath  but  one  ?  Jesus  answered :  Of  a  truth  He
hath  but  One,  but  that  mystery  maketh  three  others ;  the  mys
tery  is  indeed  one,  but  to  each  of  them  there  is  a  different
form,  and  moreover  it  maketh  five  mysteries.

As  for  the  First  Mystery,  when  thou  hast  performed  it  well
in  all  the  forms  thereof,  when  thou  departest  out  of  thy  body
thou  shalt  forthwith  become  a  great  Bay  of  light,  and  it  shall
traverse  all  the  regions  of  the  Eulers  and  all  the  regions  of
Light,  all  being  afraid  of  that  light  of  the  soul,  until  it  shall
come  into  its  own  kingdom.  As  for  the  Second  Mystery,  he  that
shall  perform  the  same  rightly  in  all  the  forms  thereof,  if  he  speak
it  over  the  head  of  a  man  departing  out  of  the  body,  and  into
Ms  two  ears,  that  man  departing  out  of  the  body  when  he  hath
received  the  mystery  a  second  time,  and  been  made  partaker  of
the  Word  of  Trutli^  that  man's  soul  shall  become,  when  it  leaveth
the  body,  a  great  flood  of  light,  so  as  to  traverse  all  the  regions
until  it  cometh  into  the  kingdom  of  that  mystery.  But  and  if

*  This  gradation  seems  borrowed  of  the  practice  of  the  Heracleonites

from  the  twelve  degrees  in  the  of  communicating  the  pass- word  to

Mithraic  initiation.  the  ear  of  the  dying  man.

t  This  is  what  Epiphanlns  relates


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  151

that  man  hath  not  received  that  mystery,  neither  hath  been
made  partaker  of  the  words  of  truth,  if  he  that  hath  performed
that  mystery  shall  speak  the  same  into  the  ears  of  him  who  is
departing  out  of  the  body,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  the  soul  of
that  man,  although  he  hath  not  received  the  mystery  of  Light
nor  partaken  of  the  words  of  truth,  shall  not  be  judged  in  the
places  of  the  Rulers,  neither  shall  it  be  punished  in  any  place,
neither  shall  the  fire  touch  it,  by  reason  of  the  mystery  of  the
Ineffable  which  goeth  along  with  it.  And  they  shall  hasten  to
deliver  that  soul  one  to  the  other,  and  shall  guide  it  Course  after
Course,  and  place  (239)  after  place,  until  they  bring  it  before  the
Virgin  of  Light :  for  all  the  regions  shall  fear  the  mystery  and
the  Mark*  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Ineffable  One  that  is  with  it.

And  when  they  have  brought  the  soul  unto  the  Virgin  of
Light,  she  shall  see  the  Mark  of  the  mystery  of  the  kingdom  of
the  Ineffable  One  which  is  with  it.  And  the  Virgin  of  Light
marvelleth  thereat,  and  she  judgeth  that  soul,  but  suffereth  him
not  to  be  brought  unto  the  light  until  he  hath  accomplished  the
ministry  of  the  light  of  that  mystery,  which  be  these  :  the
purification  of  the  renouncing  of  the  world  and  of  all  the  Matter
that  therein  is.  And  the  Virgin  of  Light  sealeth  him  with  a
special  seal,  which  is  this :  in  the  same  month  in  which  he  hath
departed  out  of  the  body,  she  will  cause  him  to  be  placed  in
another  body  that  shall  be  righteous,  and  shall  obtain  the
divinity  of  truth  and  the  high  mystery,  so  that  he  may  inherit
the  same,  and  also  inherit  the  Light  for  ever  and  ever.  This  is
the  grace  of  the  Second  Mystery  of  the  Ineffable  One.

As  touching  the  Third  Mystery  :  the  man  that  hath  performed
the  same  duly  in  all  the  forms  thereof  and  shall  name  that
mystery  over  the  head  of  one  departing  out  of  the  body  whether
ho  be  living  or  dead,  or  abiding  in  the  midst  of  the  torments  of  the
Rulers,-\  and  their  different  fires,  they  shall  make  haste  to  release

*  It  has  the  impression  of  the  royal  usage  alluded  to  by  Dante  in  his

seal  stamped  upon  it.  '  Vendetta  di  Dio  non  Teme  Suppe,'

t  Here  we  have  the  first  hint  of  refers  to  something  of  the  sort  done

masses  performed  for  the  dead.  A  to  appease  the  manes.  A  homicide

similar  idea  is  involved  in  the  who  had  eaten  sops  in  wine  upon

practice  mentioned  by  St.  Paul  of  the  grave  of  the  slain  man  was

being  "  baptized  for  the  sake  of  de-  thereby  freed  from  the  vendetta  of

ceased  persons."  A  singular  Italian  the  family.— (Purgat.  xxxiii.  35.)


152  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

that  man  out  of  them  all,  and  shall  bring  him  before  the  Virgin
of  Light,  who  shall  place  him  in  a  righteous  body  that  shall
inherit  the  light.

(243)  Moreover  in the  dissolution  of  the  Universe,  that  is,
when  the  number  of  perfect  souls  is  made  up,  and  the  mystery
is  accomplished  on account  of  which  the Universe  has  been
created,  then  I  will  spend  a  thousand  years,  according  to  the
years  of  light,  ruling  over  the  offspring  of  the  light,  and  over
the  number  of  the  perfect  souls  which  have  received  all  the
mysteries. Then  Mary  said,  Lord,  how  many  years in the
years  of  this  world  is  one  year  of  light? Jesus  answered,
One  day  of  light  is  one  thousand  years  of  this  world,  where
fore  thirty  and  six  myriads  and  a  half  of  the  years  of  the  world
make  one  year  of  light. I  shall therefore  reign  a  thousand
years  of  light,  being  king  in  the  middle  of  the  last  Parastates,*
being  king  over  all  the  offspring  of  light,  and over  all  the
number of  perfect  souls  that  have  received  the  mysteries  of
light. And  ye,  my  disciples,  and  each  one  that  hath  received
the  mysteries  of  the  Ineffable  One,  shall  be  upon  ray  right  hand
and  upon  my  left,  being  kings  together  with  me  in  my  kingdom.
And  those  likewise  that  receive  the  three  mysteries  of  the  five
mysteries  of  the  Ineffable  shall  be  kings  together  with  you  in
the  kingdom  of  light. But  they  shall  not  be  equal  with  you,
and  with  those  receiving  the  mystery  of  the  Ineffable  One,  for
they  shall  continue  kings  behind  you. And  those  receiving
the  five  mysteries  of  the Ineffable shall  remain behind  the
three  mysteries  being  kings  also. Likewise  those  receiving  the
twelve  mysteries  of  the  First  Mystery,  they  too  shall  abide  as
kings  behind  the  five  mysteries  of  the  Ineffable  One. And  they
also  are  kings  each  one  of  them  according  to  his  course,  and  all
receiving  in  the  mysteries  in  all  the  places  of  the  Court  of  the
Ineffable  One,  so  that  they  shall  be  kings  also*  but  come  after-
such  as  have  received  the  mystery  of  the  First  Mystery:  being
sent  forth  according  to  the  glory  of  each,  so  that  those  receiving
high  mysteries  shall  dwell  in  high  places,  but  those  receiving
humble  mysteries  shall  abide  in  humble  places.

*  The  deity  whose  place  is  next  to  the  Supreme  Light;  to  judge  from  the
primary  sense  of  the  word. .


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  1"»3

These  are  the  Three  Lots  of  the  Kingdom  of  Light,  and  the
mysteries  of  these  Three  Lots  of  Light  are  exceeding  great.  Ye
will  find  them  in  the  great  Second  Book  of  I EV ;  but  I  will  give
unto  you  and  declare  unto  you  the  mysteries  of  each  lot,  which
be  more  exalted  than  any  other  place  (246),  and  are  chief  both
as  to  place  and  as  to  order  :  the  which  also  lead  all  mankind
within,  into  lofty  places ;  according  to  the  court  belonging  to
their  inheritance,  so  that  ye  have  no  need  of  any  of  the  lower
mysteries,  but  ye  will  find  them  in  the  Second  Book  of  I  EV  which
Enoch  wrote  when  I  spoke  with  him  out  of  the  Tree  of  Know
ledge  and  out  of  the  Tree  of  Life  in  the  Paradise  of  Adam.

Now  therefore  after  I  shall,  have  declared  unto  you  all
Emanation,  I  will  give  and  I  will  tell  unto  you  the  Three  Lots
of  my  Kingdom  which  be  the  chief  of  all.

Inasmuch  as  Ordeals  and  Meritorious  Penances  held  so  important
a  place  in  the  Mithraic  ceremonial,  it  will  not  be  irrelevant  here
to  adduce  for  comparison  a  series  of  the  kind  as  excogitated  by
the  extravagant  imagination  of  the  Brahmins.  The  penances
of  the  demon  Taraka,  the  Tapa-asura,  by  means  whereof  he
constrained  Brahma  to  grant  him  whatever  he  chose  to  demand,
are  thus  enumerated,  each  stage  being  of  one  century's  dura
tion.  1.  He  stood  on  one  foot,  holding  up  the  other  with  both
hands  towards  heaven,  his  eyes  fixed  immovably  upon  the  sun.
2.  He  stood  on  one  great  toe.  3.  He  took  for  sustenance
nothing  but  water.  4.  He  lived  similarly  upon  air.  5.  He
remained  immersed  in  the  water.  6.  He  was  buried  in  the
earth,  continuing,  as  during  the  last  penance,  in  continued
adoration.  7.  He  performed  the  same  act  in  the  fire.  8.  He
stood  on  his  head  with  his  feet  upwards.  9.  He  stood  resting
on  one  hand.  10.  He  hung  by  his  hands  from  a  tree.  11.  He
hung  on  a  tree  by  his  feet,  with  his  head  downwards.  (The
twelfth  degree  Moor  has,  for  some  reason,  omitted.)

By  means  like  these,  termed  the  Yoy,  the  ascetic  Yogi  is
enabled  to  obtain  nine  seveial  gifts,  that  set  him  above  all  the
laws  of  Nature.  For  example,  he  may  expand  or  contract  his
body  to  any  size  he  pleases  ;  he  may  float  in  the  air  upon  a
sunbeam ;  he  may  exert  all  his  sense  at  an  infinite  distance
from  the  objects  of  them  ;  with  other  capabilities  of  like  kind.


154  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

And  with  respect  to  the  sixth  penance  of  Taraka,  this,  incredible
as  it  appears,  is  still  performed.  To  be  buried  alive  in  a  small
vault  covered  deep  with  earth  until  a  crop  of  grain,  sown  over
him  at  the  time  of  inhumation,  shall  be  ripe  for  cutting,  is  yet
esteemed  the  most  efficacious  of  good  works  for  extorting  from
heaven  the  blessing  most  desired  by  the  patient  or  his  employer
(the  doctrine  of  vicarious  atonement  being  most  thoroughly
Hindoo).  The  English  Resident  at  Eunjeet  Singh's  court  has
minutely  described  all  the  preparation  made  by  the  royal  proxy,
(whose  regular  trade  it  was  thus  to  die  for  others),  and  the
successful  completion  of  his  penance,  which  occupied  the  space
of  six  weeks.  The  Eesident  assisted  at  the  closing  and  the
opening  of  the  vault,  and  was  certain  that  no  deception  could
possibly  have  been  practised  by  the  Yogi.  The  blessing
aimed  at  was  the  gift  of  fecundity  for  a  favourite  queen  of
Kunjeet's.

The  "  Taurobolia,"  or  Baptism  of  Blood,  during  the  later  ages
of  the  Western  Empire,  held  the  foremost  place,  as  the  means
of  purification  from  sin,  however  atrocious.  Prudentius  has
left  a  minute  description  of  this  horrid  rite,  in  which  the  person
to  be  regenerated,  being  stripped  of  his  clothing,  descended  into
a  pit,  which  was  covered  with  planks  pierced  full  of  holes  ;  a
bull  was  slaughtered  upon  them,  whose  hot  blood,  streaming
down  through  these  apertures  (after  the  fashion  of  a  shower-
bath),  thoroughly  drenched  the  recipient  below.  The  selection
of  the  particular  victim  proves  this  ceremony  in  connection
with  the  Mithraica,  which  latter,  as  Justin  says,  had  a
"Baptism  for  the  remission  of  Sins";  and  the  Bull  being  in
that  religion  the  recognised  emblem  of  life,  his  blood  necessarily
constituted  the  most  effectual  laver  of  regeneration.  No  more
conclusive  evidence  of  the  value  then  attached  to  the  Taurobolia
can  be  adduced,  than  the  fact  mentioned  by  Lampridius  that
the  priest-emperor  Ileliogabalus  thought  it  necessary  to  submit
to  its  performance ;  and  a  pit,  constructed  for  the  purpose  as
late  as  the  fourth  century,  has  lately  been  discovered  within
the  sacred  precincts  of  the  Temple  at  Eleusis,  the  most  holy
spot  in  all  Greece.

The  subject  will  find  its  most  appropriate  conclusi-jn  in  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


155


list  of  "  Degrees  "  to  be  taken  in  the  Mysteries,  as  laid  down  by
M.  Lajard,  in  his  elaborate  treatise,  '  Le  Culte  do  Mithra,'*
These  degrees  were  divided  into  four  stages,  Terrestrial,  Aerial,
Igneous,  and  Divine,  each  consisting  of  three.  The  Terrestrial
comprised  the  Soldier,  the  Lion,  the  Bull.  The  Aerial,  the
Vulture,  the  Ostrich,  the  Eaven.  The  Igneous,  the  Gryphon,
the  Horse,  the  Sun.  The  Divine,  the  Eagle,  the  Sparrow- Hawk,
the  Father  of  fathers.  Lajard's  theory  is  best  elucidated  by
quoting  his  way  of  expounding  a  very  frequent  cylinder-subject.
He  finds  the  admission  to  the  degree  of  "  The  Soldier,"  in  the
group  where  a  man  is  seen  standing  before  a  "  hierophant,"  or
priest,  who  stands  on  the  back  of  a  bull  couchant  on  a  platform.
The  hierophant,  wearing  a  cap  tipped  by  a  crescent,  holds  out
to  the  neophyte  a  curved  sword,  symbol  of  admission  into  the
Order.  A  priestess  stands  apart,  separated  from  him  by  the
horn,  or  Tree  of  Life,  over  which  soars  the  emblem  of  the
Assyrian  Triad.  Her  cap  is  tipped  by  the  Sun-star,  but  she
also  wears  the  crescent,  to  show  the  hermaphrodite  nature  of
Mylitta !


*  Lajard  discovers  upon  the  Baity-
Ionian  cylinders  representations  of
admission  to  the  several  degrees,  of
which  they  were  given,  as  certificate
to  the  initiated :  and  accounts  for
their  enormous  extant  numbers  by
the  supposition  that  every  one,  upon


proceeding  to  a  higher  degree,  threw
away  the  cylinder  marking  the  pre
ceding  one.  But  the  complicated
system  of  the  Mithraici  was  evi
dently  the  creation  of  much  later
times,  and  of  a  religion  vainly  strug
gling  for  life.


FIG 5


156  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


ST.  AUGUSTINE  ON  GNOSTICISM.

The  transition  from  orthodoxy  to  Gnosticism,  in  its  last  and
mosi  elaborate  phase  is  well  pointed  out  by  the  following  re
miniscences  of  St.  Augustine,  describing  his  own  experiences.
In  his  eighteenth  or  nineteenth  year  he  had  begun  to  study
the  Scriptures,  to  satisfy  himself  as  to  the  truth  of  the  religion  in
which  he  had  been  brought  up.  "  Consequently  I  set  to  work
to  study  the  Holy  Scriptures,  in  order  that  I  might  discover
what  was  their  true  character.  And  lo  !  I  behold  a  thing
not  discovered  unto  the  proud,  nor  revealed  unto  babes;  but
humble  in  gait,  lofty  in  issue,  and  veiled  in  mysteries  ;  and  I  was
not  such  a  one  as  could  enter  therein,  neither  to  bow  down  my
neck  unto  the  steps  thereof.  For  I  did  not  think  then,  as  1
speak  now,  when  I  was  studying  Scripture,  but  it  seemed  to
me  unworthy  to  be  compared  with  the  sublimity  of  Cicero's
eloquence.  Nevertheless  that  Scripture  was  such  as  should
grow  up  together  with  babes,  but  I  .disdained  to  be  a  babe,  and
being  puffed  up  with  pride  I  fancied  myself  a  grown-up  man.
So  it  came  to  pass  that  I  fell  in  with  men  full  of  pride,  dotards,
too  carnal,  and  great  talkers,  in  whose  mouth  is  a  snare  of  the
Devil,  and  bird-lime  made  up  with  a  mixture  of  the  syllables  of
Thy  Name,  and  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  the  Paraclete's,
our  Comforter  the  Holy  Ghost.  All  these  names  did  not
proceed  out  of  their  mouth  except  as  far  as  the  sound  and  echo
of  the  tongue  go,  but  their  heart  was  utterly  void  of  truth.
And  they  used  to  repeat  '  Truth  and  Truth,'  and  so  did  they
repeat  her  name  to  me,  but  she  was  nowhere  amongst  them,  but
they  spoke  false  things,  not  only  concerning  thee  who  art  the
Truth  in  truth,  but  even  concerning  the  elements  of  this  world
of  ours,  thy  creation ;  concerning  which  even  the  philosophers,
who  declared  what  is  true,  I  ought  to  have  slighted  for  the  love
of  Thee,  0  my  Father,  the  Supreme  Good,  the  Beauty  of  all
things  beautiful.  0  Truth  !  Truth  !  how  inwardly  did  the
marrow  of  rny  soul  sigh  after  thee  even  then,  whilst  they  were


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


157


perpetually  dinning  thy  name  into  my  ears,  and  after  various
fashions  with  the  mere  voice,  and  with  many  and  huge  boohs  of
theirs.  And  these  were  the  dishes  upon  wliich  were  served  up
to  me  who  was  hungering  after  thee,  nothing  but  the  Sun  and
the  Moon,  thy  fair  works  indeed,  but  not  thyself,  and  not  even
the  first  amongst  thy  works.  For  thy  spiritual  works  are
before  those  corporeal  works,  however  splendid  and  heavenly
they  may  be.  But  even  for  those,  thy  higher  works,  I  hungered
and  thirsted  not,  but  for  thee  only,  0  Truth  !  wherein  there  is
no  change,  neither  shadow  of  turning.  And  again  there  were
set  before  me,  in  those  same  dishes,  splendid  phantoms,  than
which  it  were  even  better  to  love  the  Sun  himself,  for  he  was
true  as  far  as  regards  one's  eyes,  rather  than  to  love  those
fictions  whereby  the  soul  was  deceived  through  the  eyes.  And
yet  because  I  believed  them  to  be  Thee,  I  ate  thereof  though  not
greedily,  because  Thou  didst  not  taste  in  my  mouth  as  thou
really  art,  for  thou  wert  not  those  empty  fictions ;  neither
was  I  nourished  thereby,  but  rather  weakened.  Food  in  dreams
is  like  to  the  food  of  one  awake,  yet  the  sleepers  are  not  fed  by
the  same,  for  they  sleep  on  :  but  those  dishes  were  not  in  any
wise  like  unto  Thee  as  thou  now  hast  spoken  to  me,  &c."


FIG.  G.


158  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


THE  WORSHIP  OF  SERAPIS.

I. THE  FIGURED  REPRESENTATIONS  OF  SERAPIS.

The  next  great  series  of  monuments  to  be  considered  are
those  emanating  from  the  worship  of  Serapis,  that  mysterious
deity,  who,  under  his  varying  forms,  had,  during  the  second
and  third  centuries  of  our  era,  completely  usurped  the  sove
reignty  of  his  brother  Jupiter,  and  reduced  him  to  the  rank  of
a  mere  planetary  Genius.  Unlike  the  generality  of  the  deities
who  figure  upon  the  Gnostic  stones,  the  Alexandrian  Serapis
does  not  belong  to  the  primitive  mythology  of  Egypt.*  His
worship  may  be  said  to  be  only  coeval  with  the  rise  of  Alex
andria,  into  which  city  it  was  introduced  from  Sinope  by  the
first  Ptolemj7,  in  consequence  of  the  command  (and  repeated
threats,  in  case  of  neglect)  of  a  vision  which  had  appeared  to
him.  After  three  years  of  ineffectual  negotiation,  Ptolemy
at  last  obtained  the  god  from  Scythotherius,  king  of  Sinope ;
but  when  the  citizens  still  refused  to  part  with  their  idol,  a
report  was  spread,  that  it  had  spontaneously  found  its  way  from
the  temple  down  to  the  Egyptian  ships  lying  in  the  harbour.

The  prevalent  opinion  amongst  the  Greeks  was  that  the
figure  represented  Jupiter  Dis  (Aidoneus)  and  the  one  by  his
side,  Proserpine.  This  latter  the  envoys  were  ordered  by  the
same  divine  messenger,  to  leave  in  its  native  shrine.  Another
story,  also  mentioned  by  Tacitus,f  made  the  statue  to  have
been  brought  from  Seleucia  by  Ptolemy  III,  but  this  rested
on  slighter  authority.  It  is,  however,  a  curious  confirmation
of  this  last  tradition  that  Serapis  is  named  by  Plutarch
("  Alexander,")  as  the  chief  deity  of  Babylon  (Seleucia  in  later
times)  at  the  date  of  the  Macedonian  Conquest — a  proof  that

*  The  difference  between  him  and  f  Who  narrates  the  whole  affair  at

the  ancient  Theban  Serapia  (as  the  great  length — a  proof  of  the  influ-

Greeks translated his title "  Osor-  ence  of  the  religion  in  his  day — in  his

Api"),  shall  be  pointed  out  farther  History,  iv.  84.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  159

he  at  least  regarded  that  god  as  identical  with  Belus.  Now,  it
is  a  remarkable  coincidence  that  Ana,  the  First  Person  in  the
primitive  Chaldean  Triad,  is  likewise  "  King  of  the  Lower
World,"  and  that  his  symbol,  the  vertical  wedge,  stands  also  for
the  numeral  GO,  which  last  is  often  used  to  express  hiero-
glyphically  the  name  Ana.

It  was  Timotheus,  an  Athenian  Eumolpid,  and,  in  virtue  of
his  descent,  Diviner  to  the  king,  who  indicated  Pontus  as  the
residence  of  the  unknown  god,  whose  apparition  had  so  dis
quieted  the  monarch  by  commanding  himself  to  be  sent  for
without  declaring  whence.  The  figure,  seen  in  the  vision,  was
that  of  a  youth,  a  circumstance  that  tallies  ill  with  the  mature
majesty  of  the  great  god  of  Alexandria.*  But  the  Helios
Dionysos,  a  veritable  Christina,  who  graces  the  reverse  of  the
gold  medallion  of  Pharnaces  II,  coined  at  Sinope  in  the  follow
ing  century,  agrees  much  more  exactly  with  this  description  of
the  nocturnal  visitor.

Speedily  did  Serapis  become  the  sole  lord  of  his  new  home ;
and  speculations  as  to  his  true  nature  employed  the  ingenuity
of  the  philosophers  at  Alexandria,  down  to  the  times  when
they  were  superseded  by  the  discussions  on  the  doctrine  of
the  Trinity,  waged  with  equal  zeal  but  infinitely  worse  temper.
Every  conflicting  religion  strove  to  claim  him  as  the  grand
representative  of  their  own  doctrine.  Macrobius  has  pre
served  one  of  the  most  ingenious  of  these  interpretations,  as
made  by  the  '  Rationalists,'  a  party  so  strong  amongst  the  later
Greeks  (I.  20).  "  The  City  of  Alexandria  pays  an  almost
frantic  worship  to  Serapis  and  Isis,  nevertheless  they  show  that
all  this  veneration  is  merely  offered  to  the  Sun  under  that  name,
both  by  their  placing  the  corn-measure  upon  his  head,  and  by
accompanying  his  statue  with  the  figure  of  an  animal  having
three  heads  ;  of  these  heads,  the  middle  and  the  largest  one  is  a

*  The  great  god  of  Assyria,  Adad,  signify  their  influence  upon  the  earth,

"  The  One,"  the  oracle-giving  Jupiter  who  stood  before  him  in  the  figure  of

of  Heliopolis,  was  thus figured  in  Atergatis, the rays in her crown

his golden statue as a beardless  pointing upwards, to express the

youth,  brandishing  aloft  a  whip,  and  springing  up  of  her  gifts. She  was

holding  in  his  left  hand  the  thunder-  supported, like Cybele, upon the

bolt  and  wheat-ears. The  rays  crown-  backs  of  lions,
ing  his  head  pointed  downwards  to


160  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

lion's,  that  which  rises  on  the  right  is  a  dog's  in  a  peaceable  and
fawning  attitude ;  whilst  the  left  part  of  the  neck  terminates  in
that  of  a  ravening  wolf.  All  these  bestial  forms  are  connected
together  by  the  wreathed  body  of  a  serpent,  which  raises  its  head
up  towards  the  god's  right  hand,  on  which  side  the  monster  is
placed.  The  lion's  head  typifies  the  Present,  because  its  con
dition  between  the  Past  and  the  Future  is  strong  and  fervent.
The  Past  is  signified  by  the  wolfs  head,  because  the  memory
of  all  things  past  is  scratched  away  from  us  and  utterly  con
sumed.  The  emblem  of  the  fawning  dog  represents  the  Future,
the  domain  of  inconstant  and  flattering  hope.  But  whom
should  Past,  Present  and  Future  serve  except  their  Authors  ?
'His  head  crowned  with  the  calathus  typifies  the  height  of  the
planet  above  us,  also  his  all-powerful  capaciousness,  since  unto
him  all  things  earthly  do  return,  being  drawn  up  by  the  heat
he  emits.  Moreover  when  Nicocreon,  tyrant  of  Cyprus,  con
sulted  Serapis  as  to  which  of  the  gods  he  ought  to  be  accounted,
ho  received  the  following  response  : —

"  '  A  god  I  am,  such  as  I  show  to  thee,
The  starry  heavens  my  head ;  my  trunk  the  sea  ;
Earth  forms  my  feet;  mine  ears  the  air  supplies;
The  sun's  far-darting,  brilliant  rays  mine  eyes.'  "

From  all  this  it  is  evident  that  the  nature  of  Serapis  and  the
Sun  is  one  and  indivisible.  Again,  Isis  is  universally  worshipped
as  the  type  of  earth,  or  Nature  in  subjection  to  the  Sun.  For
this  cause  the  body  of  the  goddess  is  covered  with  continuous  rows
of  udders,  to  declare  that  the  universe  is  maintained  by  the  per
petual  nourishing  of  the  Earth  or  Nature."  This  last  curious
remark  shows  that  Macrobius  regarded  the  Alexandrian  Isis  as
the  same  with  the  Ephesian  Diana,  for  the  ancient  Isis  of  Egypt
had  only  the  usual  complement  of  breasts.  This  philosopher
had  started  with  the  axiom  (I.  17),  "  Omnes  deos  referri  ad
Solem,"  and  begins  by  demonstrating  from  the  various  epithets

*  I  cannot  help  suspecting  that  blem  of  the  air,  the  serpent,  accordin

this description  supplied Basilides  to  Herodotus,  was  the offspring  of

with the idea of his celebrated  earth, the  breast  of  man was the

Pantkeus,  the Abraxas-figure. The  Homeric  attribute  of  Neptune,
head  of  the  Irird  was  the  fittest  em-


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  ]61

of  Apollo,  that  Tie  was  the  same  god  with  the  one  styled  the  Sun.
He  then  proceeds  to  prove  the  same  of  Bacchus,  Hermes,
Aesculapius,  and  Hercules.  His  ingenious  explanation  of  the
serpent-entwined  rod  of  Hermes,  and  club  of  Aesculapius,  will  be
found  applied  further  on  to  the  elucidation  of  the  remarkable
symbol  on  the  reverse  of  all  the  Chnuphis  amulets.  After  this,
Macrobius  passes  in  review  the  attributes  and  legends  of  Adonis
and  Atys,  also  of  Osiris  and  Horus,  and  comes  to  the  same  con
clusion  concerning  the  real  nature  of  all  these  personages,  add
ing  parenthetically  a  very  fanciful  exposition  of  the  Signs  of
the  Zodiac,  as  being  merely  so  many  emblems  of  the  solar  in
fluence  in  the  several  regions  of  creation.  Nemesis,  Paris,
Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  finally  the  Assyrian  Adad,  are  all  reduced
by  him  to  the  same  signification.

This  brings  us  to  that  most  wondrous  identification  of  all,
which  Hadrian  mentions  in  a  letter  to  his  brother-in-law
Servianus,  preserved  by  the  historian  Vopiscus  in  his  Life  of  the
Tyrant  Saturninus.  "  Those  who  worship  Serapis  are  likewise
Christians;  even  those  who  style  themselves  the  bishops  of
Christ  are  devoted  to  Serapis.  The  very  Patriarch  himself,*
when  he  comes  to  Egypt,  is  forced  by  some  to  adore  Serapis,  by
others  to  worship  Christ.  There  is  but  one  God  for  them  all,
Him  do  the  Christians,  Him  do  the  Jews,  Him  do  the  Gentiles,
all  alike  worship."  Severus  Alexander,  too,  who  daily  paid  his
devotions  to  Christ  and  Abraham,  did  none  the  less  expend
large  sums  in  decorating  the  temples  of  Serapis  and  Isis  "  with
statues,  couches,  and  all  things  pertaining  to  their  Mysteries,"f
whilst  he  left  the  other  gods  of  Korne  to  take  care  of  them-


And  as  connected  with  the  same  subject,  it  may  be  here
observed  that  the  conventional  portrait  of  the  Saviour  is  in  all
probability  borrowed  from  the  head  of  Serapis,  so  full  of  grave
and  pensive  majesty.  Of  the  first  converts,  the  Jewish  foredilec-
tions  were  so  powerful  that  we  may  be  sure  that  no  attempt
was  made  to  portray  His  countenance  until  many  generations

*  The  Patriarch  of  Tiberias,  head  f  A  very  favourite  representation
of  the  Jewish  religion,  after  the  of  Isis  upon  our  talismans  shows  her
destruction  of  Jerusalem.  reclining  upon  a  couch.

M


162  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

after  all  who  had  beheld  it  on  earth  had  passed  away.* Never
theless,  the  importance  so  long  attached  to  the  pretended  letter  of
Len  tulus  to  the  emperor,  Tiberius,  describing  Christ's  personal
appearance, demands a notice in this place. Its monkish
Latinity  and  style  betray  it,  at  first  sight,  for  the  authorship
of  some mediaeval divine. Yet,  incredible as it may  seem,
even  a  learned  man  like  Grynaeus  has  been  so  besotted  through
hie  pious  longing  for  the  reality  of  such  a  record,  as  to  persuade
himself  that  Lentulus,  a  Eoman  Senator  and  an  eminent  his
torian,  could  have  written  in  the  exact  phrase  of  a  mendicant
friar. "  There  has appeared in  our  times,  and  still  lives,  a
Man  of  great  virtue,  named  Christ  Jesus,  who  is  called  by  the
Gentiles a Prophet of  Truth,  but  whom his own disciples
called  the  Son  of  God ;  raising  the  dead,  and  healing  diseases.
A  man  indeed  of  lofty  stature,  handsome,  having  a  venerable
countenance,  which  the  beholders  can  both  love  and  fear. His
hair verily  somewhat  wavy  and curling,  somewhat brightish
and  resplendent  in colour,  flowing  down  upon  his shoulders,
having  a  parting  in  the  middle  of  the  head  after  the  fashion
of  the  Nazarenes,  &c." (Grynaeus,  '  Orthodoxia  '  I.  p.  2.) This
forgery  reminds one of  Pliny's remark, "  Pariunt desideria
non  traditos  vultus,  sicutin  Homero  evenit." The  wish  is  father
to  the  image  of  the  venerated  object ;  and  the  conception  is  too
joyfully  accepted  by  the loving soul  for it to  trouble itself
overmuch in  scrutinizing  the  legitimacy  of  the  same  : for,  as
Martial  exclaims  with  full  truth  "  quis  enirn  darnnet  sua  vota
libenter?"

But  to  return  to  the  Egypt  of  the  times  of  Gnosticism.  In  the
very  focus  of  that  theosophy,  Alexandria,  the  syncretistic  sects
which  sprang  up  so  rankly  there  during  the  three  first  centuries
of  the  Eoman  empire,  had  good  grounds  for  making  out  Serapis
a  prototype  of  Christ,  considered  as  Lord  and  Maker  of  all,  and
Judge  of  the  quick  and  the  dead.  For  the  response  given  to
Nicocreon,  above  quoted,  evinces  that  the  philosophers  at  least
saw  in  Serapis  nothing  more  than  the  emblem  of  the  '  Anima

*  What  proves  the  ^ant  of  any  monuments  in  sculpture  or  painting,
real  authority  for  the  portraits  of  the  represent  him  as  youthful  and  beard-
Saviour  is  the  fact  that  the  earliest  Jess.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  163

Mundi,'  the  Spirit  of  whom  Nature universal  is  the  body,  for
they  held  the  doctrine  of

" the  one  harmonious  whole,

Whose  body  Nature  is,  and  God  the  soul."

So  that  by  an  easy  transition  Serapis  came  to  be  worshipped  as
the  embodiment  of  the  One  Supreme,  whose  representative  on
earth  was  Christ.

The  very  construction  of  the  grand  Colossus  of  Serapis  in
geniously  set  forth  these  ideas  of  his  character.  It  was  formed
out  of  plates  of  all  the  metals,  artfully  joined  together,  to  typify
the  harmonious  union  of  different  elements  in  the  fabric  of  the
universe,  the  "  moles  et  machina  mundi."  This  statue  was  placed
upon  the  summit  of  an  artificial  hill  (whose  vast  interior  was
divided  into  vaulted  halls,  containing  the  famous  library),  as
cended  by  a  flight  of  a  hundred  steps — a  style  of  building  totally
diverse  from  the  native  Egyptian  and  the  Grecian  model,  but
exactly  following  the  Indian  usage,  as  may  be  seen  by  the  grand
pagoda  of  Siva  at  Tanjore,  and  by  the  topes  and  dagolas  of
the  Buddhists.

The  remarkable  construction  of  this  Colossus  may  reasonably
be  supposed  to  have  suggested  to  the  Alexandrian  Jew,  who
completed  the  Book  of  Daniel,  the  notion  of  the  similarly  com
pacted  Image  which  figures  in  Nebuchadnezzar's  Dream.  That
his  description  of  the  latter  was  penned  long  after  the  coming
of  Serapis  into  that  city  is  manifest  from  the  minute  details
this  prophet  gives  concerning  the  constant  squabbles  going  on
between  Antiochus  Epiphanes  and  Ptolemy  Philometor,  his
nephew ;  together  with  the  final  intervention  of  the  Roman
Senate.  The  popular  belief  of  the  Alexandrians  (Christian  as
well  as  pagan)  was  that  the  profanation  of  this  statue  would  be
the  signal  for  heaven  and  earth  to  collapse  at  once  into  pristine
chaos — a  notion  bearing  clear  testimony  to  the  grand  idea
embodied  by  the  figure.  At  last,  however,  although  his  worship,
thus  defended  by  deep-rooted  fear,  had  been  tolerated  by  the
Christian  government  long  after  the  other  gods  of  Egypt
had  been  swept  away,  this  wonderful  Colossus  was  broken
down  by  "  that  perpetual  enemy  of  peace  and  virtue "  the

M  2


164  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Patriarch  Theophilus,  in  the  reign  of  Theodosius ;  and  its  muti
lated  trunk,  dragged  triumphantly  through  the  streets  "by  the
mob  of  rejoicing  fanatics,  was  ultimately  buried  in  the  Hippo
drome.

Like  that  of  Mithras,  the  worship  of  Serapis  was  widely
diffused  over  the  West.  A  very  curious  exemplification  of  this
is  to  be  found  in  Ammianus'  notice  that  Mederich,  king  of  the
Alemanni,  had,  when  detained  as  a  hostage  in  Gaul,  been  taught
certain  Greek  Mysteries,  and  for  that  reason  changed  the
name  of  his  son  Aganerich  into  Serapion.  But  Serapis  had  a
natural  claim  to  the  adoration  of  the  Gauls,  who,  as  Caesar  tells
us,  actually  boasted  of  descent  from  Dis  Pater.

The  new-comer  from  Sinope  does  not  seem  to  have  brought
his  name  with  him.  When  Ptolemy  consulted  his  own  priest
hood  upon  this  important  point,  Manetho  boldly  identified  the
Pontic  god  with  their  own  Osor-Apis,  chiefly  on  the  score  of  his
attribute  Cerberus,  which  he  considered  the  counterpart  of  the
hippopotamus-headed  Typhon  who  attends  Osor-Apis  in  his
character  of  sovereign  of  the  Lower  World.  This  deity  is  no
other  than  the  Bull  Apis,  who,  after  death,  assumes  the  figure  of
Osiris,  the  regular  form  of  Egyptian  apotheosis,  and  so  frequently
seen  applied  to  deceased  kings.  Osor-Apis,  as  he  now  becomes,
is  depicted  as  a  man  with  the  head  of  a  bull,  and  carrying  the
ensigns  by  which  we  usually  recognize  Osiris.  The  god  of
Alexandria  therefore  differs  in  form  as  widely  as  in  origin  from
the  original  patron  of  Thebes,  with  whom  he  has  no  other
affinity  than  in  name,  and  that  rests  only  on  the  arbitrary  inter
pretation  of  the  Egyptian  priests,  so  successful  in  persuading
the  Greeks  that  the  mythology  of  the  whole  world  was  but  a
plagiarism  from  their  own.

M.  Mariette  in  1860  excavated  the  Theban  Serapeum,  as  it
was  called  in  Koman  times,  with  its  long  avenue  of  sphinxes ;
he  also  discovered  the  catacombs  where  the  Apis  Bulls  were
deposited  after  death,  and  found  there  no  fewer  than  sixty,  two
of  their  mummies  yet  reposing  undisturbed.  It  is  amusing  to
notice  how  neatly  the  Greeks  turned  the  Coptic  Osor-Apis  into
the  more  euphonious  6


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  165


II. THE  PROBABLE  ORIGIN  OF  SERAPIS.

The  ancient  speculations  cited  in  the  preceding  chapter  are
all  baseless  theories,  due  to  the  ingenious  refinements  of  the
Alexandrian  literati,  and  springing  out  of  the  system  of
allegorical  interpretation  in  which  the  New  Platonists  so  much
delighted.  It  is  evident  that  upon  his  first  introduction  into
Egypt,  Serapis  was  regarded  by  the  Alexandrians  as  identical
with  Ai'doneus,  or  Dis,  the  Lord  of  the  Lower  World.  Now,  all
his  attributes  suggest  him  to  have  been  of  Indian  origin,  and  no
other  than  Yama,  "Lord  of  Hell,"  attended  by  his  dog
"  Barbara,"  the  spotted,  who  has  the  epithet  "  Trigira,"  three-
headed,  and  by  his  serpent  "  Qesha,"  called  "  Regent  of  Hades  ;  "
in  fact,  some  have  discovered  in  the  name  Serapis*  but  the
Grecian  form  of  Yama's  epithet,  "  Sraddha-deva,"  Lord  of  the
obsequies,  that  is,  of  the  funeral  sacrifices  offered  to  the  Pitris
or  Manes.  Yama  also  is  styled  "  Lord  of  souls,"  and  "  Judge  of
the  dead ;  "  another  office  assimilating  him  to  Serapis  in  the
character  under  which  the  latter  came  to  be  specially  regarded
— a  point,  moreover,  which  at  a  later  date  afforded  stronger
reasons  for  identifying  him  with  Christ.  A  plausible  etymology
of  the  name  Serapis  may  be  found  in  another  of  Yama's  epithets,
"  Asrik-pa  "  the  Blood-drinker.  This  explanation  is  confirmed  to
some  extent  by  the  ancient  tradition,  of  which  Homer  makes
such  fine  use  when  he  describes  Ulysses'  mode  of  evoking  the
ghosts,  and  their  eagerness  to  lap  up  the  life-blood  of  the
victim  (Od.  xi.  35)  : —

"  Seizing  the  victim  sheep  I  pierced  their  throats  ;
Flowed  the  black  blood,  and  filled  the  hollow  trench  ;
Then  from  the  abyss,  eager  their  thirst  to  slake,
Came  swarming  up  the  spirits  of  the  dead."

And connected with the same notion was the practice of
strewing  roses  over  the  graves  of  departed  friends —

"  Purpureos  spargam  flores  et  fungar  inani  munere,"
for (as Servius explains it) the red  colour of the flower

*  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  this  sound ;  and  which  suggested  to
name  under  which  the  god  was  wor-  Manetho  the  idea  of  identifying  him
shipped  at  iSinope  had  something  of  with  his  own  Osor-Api.


166  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

represented  blood,  and  thereby  served  as  a  substitute  for  the
living  victim.*

This  analogy  between  Yama  and  Serapis  may  be  further
extended  by  the  consideration  of  certain  other  points  con
nected  with  the  office  of  the  former  deity.  For  example,  unto
the  souls  of  the  righteous  he  appears  as  "  Dharma-raja,"  and
has  a  servant  "  Karma-la  "  (the  Hermes  Psychopompos  of  the
Greeks),  who  brings  them  into  his  presence  upon  a  self-moving
car.  But  unto  the  wicked  he  is  "  Yama,"  and  has  for  them
another  minister,  *•  Kash-Mala,"  who  drags  them  before  him
with  halters  round  their  necks,  over  rough  and  stony  places.
Other  titles  of  Yama  are  "Kritanta"  and  "Mrityu."  The
connection  of  the  latter  with  Mors  is  evident  enough,  making
it  a  fitting  appellation  for  Dis  (Ditis),  in  which  again  unmis
takably  lies  the  root  of  our  name  Death,  applied  to  the  same
Principle  of  Destruction.

Yama  as  "  Sraddha-deva,"  monarch  of  "  Patala  "  (the  infernal
regions),  has  for  consort  Bhavani,  who  hence  takes  the  title  of
"  Patala-devi,"  as  upon  Earth  she  is  "  Bhu-devi,"  in  heaven,
"  Swardevi."  Her  lord  owns,  besides  (Barbara,  another  dog
named  "  Qyama,"  the  Blade  One  (now  we  see  wherefore  the
mediaeval  familiar  spirits  like  Cornelius  Agrippa's  black
spaniel,  and  Faustus'  "  pudel "  chose  that  particular  figure),
whom  he  employs  as  the  minister  of  his  vengeance.  As  Judge
of  Souls  he  displays  two  faces,  the  one  benign,  the  other
terrific.  Another  of  his  titles  is  "  Kalantika,"  Time  as  the
Destroyer :  it  can  hardly  be  a  mere  accidental  coincidence  that
such  was  the  exact  name  given  to  the  head-dress  worn  by  the
Egyptian  priests  when  officiating — in  later  times  a  purple  cloth
covering  the  head,  and  falling  down  upon  the  neck,  surmounted
by  two  plumes.

*  One of the most frequented  flowers included. Another  well  in

places  of  pilgrimage  at  Benares is  the  same  city,  of  supreme  efficacy  for

the  "  Gyan  Bapi,"  "  Well  of  Know-  the  washing  away  of  all  sin,  is  the

ledge,"  in  the  depths  whereof  Siva  Manikarnika,  so  called  from  the  ear-

himself  resides. It  was  dug  by  the  ring  of  Mahadeva,  which  fell  into  it.

genius  Eishi, with  that  gud's  own  Vishnu  had  dug  this  well  with  his

trident,  to  relieve  the  world  after  P  rJiangra,  quoit,  and  filled  it  with  the

twelve  years'  drought. The  pilgrims  luminous  sweat  of  his  body,
throw  into  it  offerings  of  all  kinds.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  167

"  Kali-Bhavani,"  the  Destructive  Female  Principle  is  repre
sented*  in  this  character  with  a  visage  exactly  identical  with
the  most  ancient  type  of  the  Grecian  Gorgon — such  as  we  still
behold  it  guarding  the  Etruscan  sepulchres,  and  lowering
horrifically  upon  the  sacrilegious  intruder ;  as  in  that  notable
example  in  the  tomb  of  the  Volumni  at  Perugia,  where  it  forms
the  centrepiece  of  the  ceiling  of  the  grand  hall.  Formed  of  a
Tiger's  head  in  its  first  conception  by  the  excited  fancy  of
Hindoo  superstition,  the  Etruscan  demon  still  exhibits  the
same  protruded  tongue,  huge  tusks,  glaring  eyes,  wings  in
the  hair,  and  serpents  twining  about  the  throat.  Of  such
aspect  was  doubtless  that  "  Gorgon's  Head,  the  work  of  the
Cyclops,"  which  was  shown  to  Pausanias  as  the  most  notable
object  in  the  Argive  Acropolis — a  proof  that  the  earliest  essays
of  Pelasgic  art  had  been  made  in  realising  this  idea.  Again,  in
that  most  ancient  monument  of  Grecian  art,  the  Coffer  of
Cypselus  (made  before  B.C.  600),  the  same  traveller  states
(v.  19.),  "  Behind  Polynices  stands  a  female  figure,  having  tusks
as  savage  as  those  of  a  wild  beast,  and  the  nails  of  her  fingers
like  unto  talons :  the  inscription  above  her,  they  tell  you  means
Kvjp  (Fate)."  This  name  therefore  must  have  been  a  foreign
word,  translated  to  Pausanias  by  the  Custodian  of  the  Temple.
Plutarch  (Life  of  Aratus)  supplies  another  singular  illustration
of  the  Worship  of  these  terrific  idols  of  the  olden  time  in
the  most  polished  ages  of  Greece.  The  Artemis  of  Pellene  was
of  so  dreadful  an  aspect  that  none  dared  to  look  upon  her :  and
when  carried  in  procession,  her  sight  blasted  the  very  tree  and
crops  as  she  passed.  When  the  ^Etolians  were  actually  in
possession  of  and  plundering  the  town,  her  priestess,  by  bringing
this  image  out  from  the  shrine,  struck  them  with  such  terror
that  they  made  a  precipitate  retreat.  This  Artemis  conse
quently  must  have  been  a  veritable  Hecate,  a  true  Queen  of
Hell,  an  idol  moreover  of  wood,  goavov  (like  her  of  Ephesus),  other
wise  the  priestess  had  not  been  able  to  wield  it  so  effectually
to  scare  away  the  marauders.  Again,  the  recorded  dream  of
Cimon,  which  presaged  his  death,  was  that  a  black  bitch  bayed


Mure


Roth,  '  Zeitschrift  dor Morgenlandischen  Gcsollschaft,'  iv.  p.  425,  and
c  in  Koyal  Asiatic  Society's  Journal,  i.  p.  287.


168  THE GNOSTICS  AND THEIE REMAINS.

at  him  in  a  half-human  voice,  "  Come  to  me  ;  I  and  my  whelps
will  receive  thee  gladly."  The  Hellenic  gods,  now  and  then
shew  themselves  tinder  an  aspect  strangely  at  variance  with
their  usual  benevolent  and  jovial  character.  A  true  Siva  was
that  **  Dionysos  Omestes  "  (The  Cannibal),  unto  whom  Themi-
stocles,  forced  by  the  Diviners,  sacrificed  the  three  sons  of
Sandauce,"own  sister  to  Xerxes,  when  taken  prisoners  on  the
eve  of  the  Battle  of  Salamis.  It  must  be  remembered  that
tradition  made  Perseus  bring  back  the  Gorgon's  Head,  trophy
of  his  success,  from  Ethiopia,  a  synonym  at  first  for  the
remotest  East — it  being  only  in  Roman  times  that  "  Ethiopia  "
was  restricted  to  a  single  province  of  Africa.  The  liarpe  too,
the  weapon  lent  to  the  hero  by  Hermes,  is  from  its  form
no  other  than  the  ankusa,  elephant-hook,  which  is  carried  for
attribute  by  so  many  of  the  Hindoo  Deities.*  '  Sufficient  ex
planation  this  why  Persephone  (Destroying-slayer}  was  assigned
by  the  earliest  Greeks  as  Consort  to  Aidoneus ;  and  also  why
Ulysses,  on  his  visit  to  her  realms,  should  have  been  alarmed,

"  Lest  from  deep  Hell  Persephone  the  dread
Should  send  the  terror  of  the  Gorgon's  Head."

From  the  influence  of  this  terror  upon  the  otherwise  un
daunted  wanderer,  these  same  two  lines  came  to  be  considered
as  endued  with  a  wonderfully  strong  repellent  power,  for
Marcellus  Empiricus  prescribes  them  to  be  whispered  into  the
ear  of  any  one  choking  from  a  bone  or  other  matter  sticking  in
his  throat;  or  else  to  write  them  out  on  a  paper  to  be  tied
around  his  throat,  "  Which  will  be  equally  effectual."

Lucian  remarks  (' Philopatris, ')  that  the  reason  why  the
ancient  warriors  bore  the  Gorgon's  Head  upon  their  shields
was  because  it  served  for  an  amulet  against  dangers  of  every
sort;  on  the  same  account,  in  all  likelihood,  was  it  put  for
device  on  many  archaic  coinages ;  Populonia,  Paros,  &c.  For

*  The  Gorgon  of  the  gems  ('Ant.  of  "Keeper  of  the  Gate." Now  we

Gems,'  PI.  XX.,  4),  and  of  the  coin  see  why  her  head  decorated  the  pe-

of  Neapolis  is  regularly  to  be  seen,  to  diluents  of  temples  in  Greece  and

this  day,  sculptured  in  relief  upon  the  Rome,  and  formed  the  keystone  of

pillar  set  up  on  each  side  of  the  gates  triumphal  arches  even  in  the  time  of

of  Hindoo  temples,  as  I  am  informed  Constantino,  as  the  lately-discovered

by  our  great  oriental  archaeologist,  entrance  to  his  "  Forum  of  Taurus  "

Col.  Pearse. She  goes  by  the  name  convincingly  attests.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  169

what  could  be  more  effective  for  the  purpose  of  scaring  away  all
evil  spirits  than  the  visible  countenance  of  the  Queen  of  Hell  ?
Timomachus  the  painter  (contemporary  with  the  first  Caesar)
made  his  reputation  by  such  a  subject,  "  praecipue  tamen  ars  ei
favisse  in  Gorgone  visa  est,"  are  the  words  of  Pliny,  which
masterpiece  is  supposed  the  original  of  the  horrific  fresco  dis
covered  at  Pompeii,  the  finest  example  of  the  art  that  has
reached  our  times.  Many  centuries  after  the  fall  of  Paganism
did  this  image  retain  its  power;  Miinter  figures  (' Sinnbilder
der  Christen')  a  Gorgon's  Head  surrounded  by  the
phonetic  legend,  +  VOMEAAINHMEAAINOMENAOCOcJ>ICHAHeC
€K€OCA€ONBPVXHCeiK€OCAPNOCKVMHCH,  intended  for
—  Ytos  0eou  •  MeAau/r;  /xeAati/o/xeVr?,  cos  o<£ts  etAa  ^crv^J,  a>s
AeW  /fyvxrjo-ei,  /cat  a>s  dpi/os  /coi/tTJo-ei.  "  Black,  blackened
one,  as  a  serpent  thou  coilest  thyself  quietly,  thou  shalt  roar
like  a  lion,  thou  shalt  go  to  sleep  like  a  lamb !  "  The  same
inscription,  but  so  barbarously  spelt  as  to  be  unintelligible,
probably  forms  the  legend  upon  the  famous  Seal  of  St.  Serva-
tius,  preserved  in  Maestricht  Cathedral.  The  seal  is  alarge  disc
of  green  jasper,  engraved  on  both  sides,  and  is  attached  to  a
small  slab  of  porphyry,  traditionally  passing  for  the  Saint's
portable  altar.  Servatius  died  A.D.  389,  but  the  workmanship
of  his  seal  betokens  the  tenth  or  eleventh  century  for  its  origin.
An  important  evidence  of  the  veneration  of  the  Christian
Byzantines  for  their  guardian  demon  is  afforded  by  the  ex
humation  (Spring  of  1869)  in  the  Ahmedan,  Constantinople,
of  the  Colossal  Gorgonion,  six  feet  high  from  chin  to  brow,
carved  in  almost  full  relief  on  each  side  of  an  immense  marble
block,  which  once  formed  the  keystone  of  the  gateway  to
the  Forum  of  Constantine.  Though  the  execution  betrays  the
paralysis  of  the  Decline,  yet  the  general  effect  still  remains
grandiose  and  awe-inspiring.

Having  thus  traced  Bhavani  in  her  progress  from  Archaic
Greek  to  Byzantine  times,  let  us  observe  the  part  she  plays  in
the  superstitions  of  Imperial  Eome.  The  idea,  full  of  novel
horrors,  was  gladly  seized  by  the  extravagant  genius  of  Lucan*

*  Who  had  in  all  probability  learnt with  all  persons  making  pretensions
them  at  some  of  the  Mysteries,  all  of to  the  title  of  philosophers.
Asiatic  origin,  so  popular  in  his  times


170  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

to  animate  the  exorcisms  of  his  Thessalian sorceress Erictho
(Pharsalia,  vi.  695).

"  And  Chaos,  ever  seeking  to  enfold
Unnumbered  worlds  in  thy  confusion  old  :
And  Earth's  dull  god,  who  pining  still  beneath

Life's  lingering  burthen,  piriest  for  tardy  death.
*****

Tisiphone,  and  Thou  her  sister  fell,

Megaera,  thus  regardless  of  my  spell,

Why  haste  ye  not  with  sounding  scourge  to  chase

The  soul  accursed  through  hell's  void  formless  space?

Say,  must  I  call  you  by  the  names  your  right,

And  drag  the  hell-hounds  forth  to  th'  upj>er  light  ?

Midst  death  I'll  dog  your  steps  at  every  turn,

Chase  from  each  tomb,  and  drive  from  every  urn.

And  thou,  still  wont  with  visage  not  thine  own,

To  join  the  gods  round  the  celestial  throne,

Though  yet  thy  pallor  doth  the  truth  betray,

And  hint  the  horrors  of  thy  gloomy

Thee,  Hecate,  in  thy  true  form  I'll  show,

Nor  let  thee  change  the  face  thou  wearest  below.

I'll  tell  what  feasts  thy  lingering  steps  detain

In  earth's  deep  centre,  and  thy  will  enchain;

Tell  what  the  pleasures  that  thee  so  delight,

And  what  tie  binds  thee  to  the  King  of  Night ;

And  by  what  union  wert  thou  so  defiled,

Thy  very  mother  would  not  claim  her  child,

— I'll  burst  thy  caves,  the  world's  most  evil  Lord,

And  pour  the  sun  upon  thy  realms  abhorred,

Striking  thee  lifeless  by  the  sudden  day,

If  still  reluctant  my  behests  to  obey.

Or  must  I  call  Him  at  whose  whispered  Name

Earth  trembles  awestruck  through  her  inmost  frame  V

Who  views  the  Gorgon's  face  without  a  veil,

And  with  her  own  scourge  makes  Erinnys  quail ;

To  whom  the  abyss,  unseen  by  you,  is  given,

To  which  your  regions  are  the  upper  heaven,

Who  dares  the  oath  that  binds  all  gods  to  break,

And  marks  the  sanction  of  the  Stygian  lake  ?  '?

All  these  personifications  are  in  a  spirit  quite  foreign  to  that
of  Grecian  mythology,  but  thorougly  imbued  with  that  of  India.
Lucan's  Chaos  is  the  Hindoo  Destroyer,  the  Negro  giant,  "  Maha-
Pralaya,"  swallowing  up  the  gods  themselves  in  his  wide-gaping
jaws.  His  "  Hector  terrae  "  pining  for  the  promised  annihila
tion  that  is  so  long  in  coming,  finds  no  parallel  in  classical


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  171

religions,*  and  his  character  remains  to  mo  utterly  inexplicable.
His  Furies  "  hunting  souls  to  make  them  fly,"  instead  of  being
like  the  old  awful  Eumenides,  the  impartial  avengers  of  guilt,
are  mere  demons,  or  churchyard  ghouls.  But  his  Hecate  is
manifestly  Bhavani  herself;  her  "  facies  Erebi "  being  the
Gorgonian  aspect  which  the  latter  was  when  reigning  in
44  Yama-putri,"  but  which  she  puts  off  when  presiding  on
earth,  or  in  heaven ;  whilst  the  "  infernal  banquets  "  that  so
enchant  her  are  the  human  sacrifices  regularly  offered  up  by
Bhavaiii's  special  votaries,  the  Thugs.  In  the  first,  or  infernal
aspect,  a  true  "  facies  Erebi,"  she  is  depicted  wearing  a  neck
lace  of  human  skulls  and  grasping  in  each  hand  a  naked
victim  ready  to  be  devoured.  She  probably  still  shows  us  in
what  shape  the  Artemis  of  Pallene  appeared  to  scare  away  the
^Etolian  plunderers.  The  title  of  her  lord  "  pessimus  mundi
arbiter  "  is  far  more  applicable  to  the  Destroyer  Siva  than  to  the
inoffensive  Pluto  of  the  Greeks.  Unless  indeed  the  Neronean
poet  may  have  heard  something  of  the  Demiurgus  Ildabaoth,
"  Son  of  Darkness,  or  Erebus,"  existing  under  a  different  name
in  some  ancient  theogony.  The  Gnostics  did  not  invent — they
merely  borrowed  and  applied.

Bhavani,  in  her  character  of  "  Kali,"  is  sculptured  as  a
terminal  figure,  the  exact  counterpart  in  outline  of  the  Ephesian
Diana.  Even  the  stags,  those  remarkable  adjuncts  to  tho
shoulders  of  the  latter,  are  seen  in  a  similar  position  spinging
from  Kali's  hands.  The  multiplied  breasts  of  the  Ephesian
statue  were  also  given  to  the  Alexandrian  Isis,  who  is  allowed
by  Creuzer  and  the  rest  to  be  the  Hindoo  goddess  in  her
character  of  "  Parvati."  Now  this  remark  applies  only  to  her
statue  in  the  Serapeum,  not  to  those  belonging  to  the  ancient
Pharaonic  religion ;  and  Macrobius's  expressions  show  that  her
real  character  there  was  as  much  a  matter  of  dispute  as  that  of
her  companion,  Serapis.  Again,  Diana  as  Hecate  or  Proserpine,
belongs  to  the  infernal  world  over  which  she  rules  with  the
same  authority  as  Bhavani  over  Yama-Putri.  The  Ephesian

*  Unless,  perhaps,  obscurely  sha-  '•  Orcus  arid  Hades  and  the  dreaded

dowed  forth  by  Hesiod,  from  whom  Name

Milton drew  his grand  picture of  Of  Demogorgon."
Chaos,  on  whom  wait —


172  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

image,  made  of  cypress  wood,  had  "  fallen  down  from  heaven,"
which  only  means,  had  come  from  some  very  remote  and
unknown  source.


III. MONUMENTS  OF  THE  SERAPIS  WORSHIP.

Innumerable  are  the  statues,  bas-reliefs,  and  gems,  many  of
them  in  the  best  syle  of  Koman  art,  emanating  from  the
worship  of  Serapis ;  a  thing  not  to  be  wondered  at  in  the  case
of  a  divinity  whose  idea  involved  the  two  strongest  principles
that  actuate  the  conduct  of  mankind — the  love  of  riches  and  the
fear  of  death.  For  the  god  of  the  subterranean  world  was
necessarily  lord  also  of  its  treasures  ;  a  truth  expressed  by  the
dedication  to  Serapis  of  an  altar  as  "  lovi  custodi  et  genio
thesaurorum"  (Winckelmann,  'Pierres  Gravees  de  Stosch,'
p.  83).  And  similarly  the  older  Koman  Pluto  takes  the  title  of
"  Jupiter  Stygius  ;  "  but  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  idea  as
expanded  by  the  monotheistic  tendency  of  later  times  is  most
fully  manifested  by  the  invocation  (Raspe,  No.  1490)  €10  Z€YC
CAPAI1IC  AflON  ONOMA  CABAU)  cJ>U)C  ANATOAH  X0CON  "One
Jupiter,  Serapis,  Holy  Name,  Sabaoth,  the  Light,  the  Day-
spring,  the  Earth ! "

Talismanic  gems  very  commonly  bear  the  full  length  figure,
or  the  bust  of  Serapis,  with  the  legend  6IC  ©GOG  CAPAHIC
(often  abbreviated  into  €  •  0-  c),  "  There  is  but  one  God,  and  ho
is  Serapis:"  €IC  ZCON  ©6OC,  "The  One  Living  God."  Some
times  the  purpose  of  the  amulet  is  distinctly  expressed  by  the
inscription,  NIKAO  CAPAHIC  TON  <1>QONON,  "Baffle  the  Evil-
eye,  0  Serapis : "  or  in  the  curious  example  published  by
Caylus,  where  the  god  stands  between  Venus  and  Horus,  and
the  legend  KATA  XPHMATICMON  intimates  that  the  gem  had
been  "  so "  engraved  in  consequence  of  a  vision  or  other
divine  intimation.  Around  his  bust  on  a  jasper  (Praun)
appears  the  invocation,  convincing  proof  of  his  supposed
supremacy,  ct>YAACC€  AIA,  "  Protect  Jupiter,"  the  ancient
kin^  of  heaven  being  now  degraded  to  the  rank  of  an
astral  genius  and  benignant  horoscope.  Invocations  like  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIE REMAINS.  173

above  bear  the  unmistakable  stamp  of  the  age  when  the  old,
liberal,  mythology  of  the  West,  which  had  pictured  Heaven  as
a  well-ordered  monarchy  peopled  by  innumerable  deities,  each
one  having  his  own  proper  and  undisputed  position  therein,
was  fast  giving  place  to  the  gloomy  superstitions  of  Syria,
which  made  the  tutelary  divinity  of  each  nation  or  sect  the
sole  god  of  Heaven,  condemning  those  of  all  other  races  as  mere
deceivers  and  evil  spirits.

There  are,  however,  many  gems,  fine  both  as  to  material  and
workmanship,  which  give  us,  besides  Serapis,  the  primitive
Egyptian  gods  exactly  as  they  appear  in  the  most  ancient
monuments,  but  engraved  in  the  unmistakable  style  of  Roman
art.  Most  of  these  are  to  be  referred  to  the  efforts  of  Hadrian
to  resuscitate  the  forms  of  that  old  religion  whose  life  had  long
before  passed  away  in  this  equally  with  the  grander  department
of  sculpture.  Under  his  zealous  patronage,  the  religion  of  the
Pharaohs  blazed  up  for  a  moment  with  a  brilliant  but  factitious
lustre,  a  phenomenon  often  observed  to  precede  the  extinction
of  a  long  established  system.*  To  this  period  belongs  a
beautiful  sard  of  my  own,  which  represents  Serapis  enthroned
exactly  as  Macrobius  describes  him,  whilst  in  front  stands  Isis,
holding  in  one  hand  the  sistrum,  in  the  other  a  wheatsheaf,
with  the  legend,  HKYPIAGICIC  ATNH-t  "Immaculate  is  our
Lady  Isis !  "  This  address  is  couched  in  the  exact  words  applied
later  to  the  personage  who  succeeded  to  the  form,  titles,
symbols  and  ceremonies  of  Isis  with  even  less  variation  than
marked  the  other  interchange  alluded  to  above.  The  "Black
Virgins"  so  highly  venerated  in  certain  French  Cathedrals
during  the  long  night  of  the  Middle  Ages,  proved  when  at  last
examined  by  antiquarian  eyes  to  be  basalt  statues  of  the
Egyptian  goddess,  which  having  merely  changed  the  name,
continued  to  receive  more  than  pristine  adoration.  Her
devotees  carried  into  the  new  priesthood  the  ancient  badges  of
their  profession ;  "  the  obligation  to  celibacy,"  the  tonsure,  the

*  Sbering,  in  his 'Benares,'  ob-  throw  of Buddhism; and  yet  the

serves  that  the Hindoos are now  religion  itself  is  utterly  worn  out.

building  and  restoring  temples  every-  f  In  inscriptions  of  this  period  the

where  with  greater  zeal  and cost  long  I  is  usually  written  El.
than  at  ai/y  time  since  the  final  over-


174  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

bell,  and  the  surplice — omitting  unfortunately  the  frequent  and
complete  ablutions  enjoined  by  the  older  ritual.  The  holy  image
still  moves  in  procession  as  when  Juvenal  laughed  at  it  (vi.  530),
"  Escorted  by  the  tonsured,  surpliced,  train."  Even  her  proper
title  •'  Domina,"  exact  translation  of  the  Sanscrit  Isi,  survives
with  slight  change,  in  the  modern  "  Madonna  "  (Mater-Domina).
By  a  singular  permutation  of  meaning  the  flower  borne  in  the
hand  of  each,  the  lotus,  former  symbol  of  perfection  (because  in
leaf,  flower,  fruit,  it  gave  the  figure  of  the  Circle,  as  Jamblichus
explains  it),  and  therefore  of  fecundity,  is  now  interpreted
as  signifying  the  opposite  to  the  last — virginity  itself.  The
tinkling  sistrum,  so  well  pleasing  to  Egyptian  ears,  has  unluckily
found  a  substitute  in  that  most  hideous  of  all  noise-makers,  the
clangorous  bell.  But  this  latter  instrument  came  directly
from  the  Buddhistic  ritual  in  which  it  forms  as  essential  a  part
of  the  religion  as  it  did  in  Celtic  Christianity,  where  the  Holy
Bell  was  the  actual  object  of  worship  to  the  new  converts.  The
bell  in  its  present  form,  was  unknown  to  the  Greeks  and
Eomans :  its  normal  shape  is  Indian,  and  the  first  true  bell-
founders  were  the  Buddhist  Chinese.  Again  relic-worship  became,
after  the  third  century,  the  chief  form  of  Christianity  through
out  the  world ;  which  finds  its  parallel  in  the  fact  that  a  frag
ment  of  a  bone  of  a  Buddha  (that  is,  holy  man  in  whom  the
deity  had  dwelt  during  his  life)  is  actually  indispensable  for
the  consecration  of  a  dagobali,  or  temple  of  that  religion ;  equally
as  a  similar  particle  of  saintliness  is  a  sine  qua  non  for  the
setting-up  of  a  Eoman-Catholic  altar.

Very  curious  and  interesting  would  it  be  to  pursue  the
subject,  and  trace  how  much  of  Egyptian,  and  second-hand
Indian,  symbolism  has  passed  over  into  the  possession  of  a
church  that  would  be  beyond  measure  indignant  at  any  re
clamation  on  the  part  of  the  rightful  owners.  The  high  cap
and  hooked  staff  of  the  Pharaonic  god  become  the  mitre  and
crosier  of  the  bishop;  the  very  term,  Nun,  is  Coptic,  and  witk
its  present  meaning :  the  erected  oval  symbol  of  productive
Nature,  christened  into  the  Vesica  piscis,  becomes  the  proper
framework  for  pictures  of  the  Divinity  :  the  Crux  ansata,  that
very  expressive  emblem  of  the  union  of  the  Male  and  Female


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


175


Principles,  whence  comes  all  Life,  and  therefore  placed  as  the
symbol  of  Life  in  the  hands  of  gods,  now,  by  simple  inversion,
changes  into  the  orb  and  cross,  the  recognised  distinction  of
sovereignty.

But  to  give  a  last  glance  at  Serapis  and  his  attributes  :  his
bust  on  gems  is  often  accompanied  by -a  figure  resembling  a
short  truncheon  from  the  top  of  which  spring  three  leaves,  or
spikes.  Can  it  be  some  plant  sacred  to  the  god,  or  else  some
instrument  of  power  ? — certain  it  is  that  Iva,  Assyrian  god  of
Thunder,  carries  in  his  hand  a  fulmen  of  somewhat  similar  form
in  the  Ninivitish  sculptures.  A  dwarf  column,  supporting  a
globe,  a  corded  bale,  the  letter  M,*  are  all  frequently  to  be  seen
in  the  same  companionship.  Another  symbol  is  of  such  mighty
import  in  the  domains  of  the  Lord  of  Souls,  that  its  discussion
may  fairly  claim  to  itself  the  space  of  the  following  section.


*  Perhaps  the  Greek  numeral  =40,
which  was  the  number  sacred  to  the
Assyrian  Hoa,  god  of  Water.  A  con
jecture,  therefore,  may  be  hazarded


that  these  figures  symbolise  The
Four  Elements  under  the  protection
of  the  supreme  Lord,  Serapis.


FIG.  7.


176  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR  REMAINS.


THE CADUCEUS,  AND  ITS SYMBOLISM.

Macrobius  seems  to  afford  us  some  clue  for  solving  this
enigma  by  his  remarks  upon  the  true  universality  of  the  sun-
worship  under  different  names  (Sat.  i.  19).  "  That  under  the
form  of  Mercury  the  Sun  is  really  worshipped  is  evident
also  from  the  Caduceus  which  the  Egyptians  have  fashioned  in
the  shape  of  two  dragons  (asps),  male  and  female  joined  together,
and  consecrated  to  Mercury.  These  serpents  in  the  middle
parts  of  their  volume  are  tied  together  in  the  knot  called  the
4  Knot  of  Hercules ; '  whilst  their  upper  parts  bending  back
wards  in  a  circle,  by  pressing  their  mouths  together  as  if  kissing
complete  the  circumference  of  the  circle;  and  their  tails  are
carried  back  to  touch  the  staff  of  the  Caduceus ;  and  adorn  the
latter  with  wings  springing  out  of  the  same  part  of  the  staff.
The  meaning  of  the  Caduceus  with  reference  to  the  nativity  of
man,  technically  termed  his  genesis  (or  horoscope),  is  thus
explained  by  the  Egyptians :  they  teach  that  four  deities  preside
and  attend  at  man's  birth— the  Daimon  (his  genius),  Fortune,
Love,  and  Necessity.  By  the  two  first  of  these  they  hold  that
the  Sun  and  the  Moon  are  meant ;  because  the  Sun,  as  the
author  of  spirit,  heat,  and  light,  is  the  producer  and  guardian
of  human  life,  and  therefore  is  esteemed  the  Daimon  that  is  the
god  of  the  person  born.  The  Moon  is  the  Fortune,  because  she
is  the  president  over  our  bodies  which  are  the  sport  of  a  variety
of  accidents.  Love  is  signified  by  the  kissing  of  the  serpents  ;
Necessity,  by  the  knot  in  which  they  are  tied.  The  reason  for
adding  the  wings  has  been  fully  discussed  above.  For  a  symbol
of  this  nature  the  convolution  of  the  serpents  has  been  selected
in  preference  to  anything  else,  because  of  the  flexuosity  of  the
course  of  both  these  luminaries.  From  this  cause  it  conies,
that  the  serpent  is  attached  to  the  figures  both  of  Aesculapius
and  of  Hygiea,  because  these  deities  are  explained  as  expressing
the  nature  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon.  For  Aesculapius  is  the
health-giving  influence  proceeding  out  of  the  substance  of  the


THE CrNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  177

Sun,  that  benefits  the  souls  and  bodies  of  mortals.* Ilygieia
again  is  the  influence  of  the  nature  of  the  Moon,  by  which  the
bodies  of  things  animated  are  holpen,  being  strengthened  by
her  health-giving  sway. For  this  reason,  therefore,  the  figure
of  the  serpent  is  attached  to  the  statues  of  both  deities,  because
they  bring  it  about  that  our  bodies  strip  off,  as  it  were,  the
slough  of  their maladies,  and are restored to  their  pristine
vigour,  just as serpents renew their youth every year, by
casting  off  the  slough  of  old  age. And  the  figure  of  the  serpent  is
explained  as  an  emblem  of  the  Sun  himself  for  the  reason  that
the  Sun  is  perpetually  returning  out  of,  as  it  were,  the  old  age
of  his  lowest  setting,  up  to  his  full  meridian  height  as  if  to  the
vigour  of  youth. Moreover,  that the dragon is one  of  the
chiefest  emblems  of  the  Sim,  is  manifest  from  the  derivation  of
the  name,  it  being  so  called from  Sep/ceu/,  '  to  see.' For  the}'
teach that this serpent,  by  his  extremely  acute  and never-
sleeping  sight,  typifies  the  nature  of  the  luminary; and  on
this  account  the  guardianship  of  temples,  shrines,  oracles,  and
treasures  is  assigned  to  dragons. That  Aesculapius  is  the  same
with  Apollo  is  further  proved  by  this  fact,  not  merely  that  he
is  reputed  the  son  of  the  latter,  but  because  he  also  is  invested
with the privilege of  divination. For Apollodorus, in his
Treatise  on  Theology,  lays  down  that  Aesculapius  presides  over
augury  and  oracles. And  no  wonder;  seeing  that  the  sciences
of  medicine  and  of  divination  are  cognate  sciences  :  for  medicine
predicts  the  changes for  good  or  ill  about  to  succeed  in the
human  body. As  Hippocrates  hath  it,  the  physician  should  be
competent  to  predicate  of  his  patient  'both  his  present,  his
past  and  future  condition,'  which  is  the  same  thing  as  divination
which  foreknows,  as  Homer  says,

'The  things  tint  be,  that  shall  be,  and  that  were.'"

It  has  been  already  stated  how,  in  the  Mithraic  worship,  the
image,  surrounded  from  foot  to  head  by  the  spiral  convolutions
of  the  serpent,  had  become  the  established  emblem  of  the  deity
himself.  The  incidental  remark  in  the  above  citation,  that  the

*  Or  in  modern  scientific  phrase,  Aesculapius  is  but  another  name  for
electricity.


178


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


flexuous  motion  of  the  reptile  represented  to  the  Egyptians,  the
annual  course  of  the  sun,  affords  the  sufficient  reason  why  his
image  should  be  thus  encircled  by  so  significant  an  attribute.
Taking  therefore  into  account  the  fact  that  the  disputed  symbol
we  are  considering  was  by  its  nature  primarily  confined  to
talismans  designed  for  medical  agents,  there  is  at  once  sufficient
reason  to  suppose  it  connected  with  the  worship  of  Aesculapius ;
and  secondly,  as  it  always  appears  in  such  cases  in  company  with
the  Agathodaemon,  the  undoubted  emblem  of  the  Solar  god,  it
may  be  inferred  to  be  either  a  symbol  or  a  hieroglyphical
representation  in  little  of  the  same  type.  In  other  words,  the
figure  signifies  nothing  more  than  a  serpent-entwined  wand,
and  its  sense  only  contains  an  allusion  to  the  principal  visible
manifestation  of  the  nature  of  the  Sun.  But  this  point  must  be
left  for  fuller  examination  in  its  connexion  with  the  hitherto
unexplained  Sigil  which  invariably  makes  its  appearance  on  the
reverse  of  the  Chnuphis  talismans,  and  which  therefore  must
have  been  regarded  as  an  essential  element  in  their  potency.


FIG.  8.


THE ONOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  ]  79


DEATH,  AS  DEPICTED  IN  ANCIENT  ART.

The  King  of  the  Shades  has  formed  the  subject  of  the  pre
ceding  investigation.  The  natural  sequence  of  ideas  requires  us
to  consider  by  what  visible  form  ancient  imagination  expressed
the  direct  agency  of  his  power,  and  represented  to  the  eye  the
unwelcome  apparition  of  the  "  Satolles  Orel."

Mingling  among  the  Cupids,  whether  sculptured  or  glyptic,
and  easy  to  be  mistaken  for  one  of  the  sportive  group  by  the
casual  observer,  comes  the  most  popular  antique  embodiment  of
what  to  our  notions  is  the  most  discordant  of  all  ideas.  He  can
only  be  distinguished  from  the  God  of  Love  by  observing  his
pensive  attitude;  his  action  of  extinguishing  his  torch  either  by
striking  the  blazing  end  against  the  ground  or  by  trampling  it
out  with  the  foot ;  otherwise  he  leans  upon  it  inverted,  with
folded  wings,  and  arms  and  legs  crossed  in  the  attitude  of
profound  repose.  At  other  times  he  is  divested  of  wings,  to
typify  the  end  of  all  movement,  and  whilst  he  quenches  his
torch  with  one  hand,  he  holds  behind  him  with  the  other  the
large  hoop,  annus  (which  the  Grecian  'EvtWos  carries  before
him),  to  signify  that  for  his  victim  no  more  shall  the  year
roll  on.

To  understand  how  so  charming  a  type  came  to  be  appro
priated  to  such  a  signification,  it  is  necessary  to  cast  off  modern
associations,  and  to  recollect  that  to  the  ancient  mind,  arguing
merely  from  the  analogy  of  Nature,  death  presented  itself  as
merely  the  necessary  converse  of  birth,  and  consequently  carried
no  terror  in  the  thought—'-  nullique  ea  tristis  imago,"  as  Statius
happily  words  it.  For  it  implied  nothing  worse  than  the
return  to  the  state  of  unconsciousness,  such  as  was  before
Being  commenced  ;  or,  as  1'liny  clearly  puts  the  case,  "  Unto  all
the  state  of  being  after  the  last  day  as  the  same  as  it  was  before
the  first  day  of  life;  neither  is  there  any  more  sensation  in


N  2


180  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

either  body  or  soul  after  death  than  there  was  before  life."
On  this  account  the  mere  return,  as  Byron  hath  it —

"  To  be  the  nothing  that  I  was,
Ere  born  to  life  and  living  woe,"

inspired  no  fears  beyond  those  springing  from  the  natural
instinct  of  self-preservation.  Many  carried  this  indifference
to  the  opposite  extreme — exemplified  in  the  trite  story  of  the
Thracians  lamenting  on  the  occasion  of  a  birth,  and  rejoicing
on  that  of  a  death  in  the  family.  Pliny  boldly  declares  that
the  greatest  favour  Nature  has  bestowed  on  man  is  the  short
ness  of  his  span  of  life;  whilst  the  later  Platonists,  as  seen
in  that  curious  chapter  of  Macrobius,  "  On  the  descent  of  the
Soul,"  termed  the  being  born  into  this  world  "  spiritual
death,"  and  dying,  "spiritual  birth."  But  after  the  ancient
order  of  ideas  had  been  totally  revolutionised — when  the  death
of  the  body  came  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  punishment  of
Original  Sin,  and  as  the  infraction,  not  the  fulfilment  of  a
natural  law — the  notion  necessarily  assumed  a  more  horrific
aspect;  which  again  was  exaggerated  to  the  utmost  of  their
power  by  the  new  teachers,  for  it  supplied  them  with  the  most
potent  of  all  engines  for  the  subjugation  of  the  human  soul—
"  ^Eternas  qnoniam  pcenas  in  morte  timendum."  The  ancient
type,  therefore,  which  implied  nothing  but  peace  and  unbroken
repose,  was  therefore  at  once  discarded,  as  totally  inconsistent
with  the  altered  view  of  the  reality.  Add  to  this  the  fact  that
everything  in  the  shape  of  Cupid  had  been  forcibly  enrolled
amongst  the  Cherubim  and  Seraphim,  and  had  thereby  received
a  character  yet  more  foreign  to  that  of  the  newly-created  King
of  Terrors.

Hence  the  Christians  were  driven  to  seek  in  the  ancient
iconology  for  a  more  fitting  representation  of  the  offspring  and
avenger  of  transgression — something  that  should  be  equally
ghastly  and  terror-inspiring — and  such  a  representative  they
found  made  to  their  hand  in  the  former  way  of  picturing  a
Larva,  or  bad  man's  ghost.  This  had  always  been  depicted  as
a  skeleton,  and  such  a  figure  was  recommended  by  old  asso
ciation  to  their  minds  in  the  times  when  (as  Bottiger  phrases
it)  "the  Christians  creeping  forth  out  of  their  catacombs


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  181

substituted  for  the  Genius  with  inverted  torch,  the  skulls  and
mouldering  bones  of  their  own  martyrs."  And  that  the  larva
was  popularly  imagined  in  a  skeleton  form,  appears,  amongst
the  rest,  from  Ovid's  line  in  his  '  Ibis  '-

"  Insequar  atque  oculos  o.s.sea  larva  tuos."
"  Wheie'er  thou  turn'st  my  injured  shade  shall  rise,
And  flit,  a  fleshless  ghost  before  thine  eyes."

Seneca  also  laughs  at  the  vulgar  notion  of  "larva-forms,
frames  of  bare  bones  hanging  together ;  "  and  Trimalchio,  at
his  famous  dinner,  in  order  to  promote  conviviality,  throws
down  upon  the  table  a  silver  larva,  so  ingeniously  made  as  to
bound  about  on  the  board  with  every  limb  quivering,  whilst
the  host  hiccups  out  the  admonition —

"  Heu,  Heu,  DOS  miseros,  quam  totus  homuncio  nil  est,
Sic  erimus  cuncti,  postquam  nos  auferet  Orcus
Ergo  vivamus  dum  licet  esse  bene."

Such  a  larva  sometimes  makes  his  appearance  on  the  gem,
introduced  there  for  the  same  purpose — to  remind  his  wearer
of  the  shortness  of  life,  and  the  wisdom  of  making  the  best
use  of  the  portion  allotted  to  him — speaking,  mutely,  the  words
of  Virgil's  '  Copa  Syrisca  '-

"  Pone  ireniiii  et  talos,  pereat  qui  crastina  curat !
Mors  aurem  vellens ;  Vivite,  ait,  venio."

Thus  upon  one  gem  we  behold  him  holding  forth  in  his
bony  hand  the  lecythus  (long,  pointed  vase  of  oil),  that  regul  irly
accompanied  every  Greek  interment,  whilst  he  leans  with  his
elbow  against  a  huge  amphora  of  wine,  as  though  recommending
the  enjoyment  of  its  contents  whilst  yet  in  one's,  power.*
Another,  a  more  fanciful  composition,  depicts  Cupid  casting
the  light  of  his  torch  into  the  depths  of  an  immense  Corinthian
crater  out  of  which  a  skeleton  is  throwing  himself  headlong,
as  though  scared  away  by  the  hateful  glare — a  design  whoso
abstruse  meaning  may  perhaps  be  interpreted  by  the  foregoing

*  Exactly  the  same  lesson  is  taught a dauee of  skeletons. (Mein. Soc.
by a drinking-cup in the Orleans Antiq.  de  France,  vol.  xxxi.)
Museum,  the  dccoiHtion  of  which  i*«


182  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

remarks  ('Impronte  Gemmarie,'  ii.  10,  11).*  A  skeleton,  like
wise,  was  often  painted  on  the  wall  of  tombs ;  for  example,  in  that
pathetic  scene  at  Pompeii,  where  a  mother  is  represented  laying
a  mortuary  fillet  over  the  bones  of  her  child.  In  all  these
cases  the  form  is  merely  intended  to  symbolise  the  condition  of
death  by  placing  before  the  eye  the  body  as  deserted  by  life,
reduced  to  the  state  most  expressive  of  mortality  and  decay,
and  which  cannot  be  mistaken  for  one  of  sleep.  But  it  is  easy
to  perceive  how  ready  was  the  transition  from  the  hieroglyph
of  mortality  regarded  as  a  state  (especially  when  to  the  popular
mind  the  figure  also  represented  a  restless  and  malignant
spiritual  being)  to  the  adoption  of  the  same  inauspicious  shape
for  the  embodiment  of  the  idea  of  the  actual  principle  of
destruction.

But  to  return  to  antique  imagery  of  the  same  sense.  The
idea  of  death  i.s  ingeniously  and  curiously  expressed  in  a  fresco
decorating  the  lately  discovered  vault  of  Yincentius  and  Vibia,
in  the  Catacombs  of  Prretextatus,  Home.  In  the  scene  labelled
"  abreptio  Aribie  et  Discensio,"  the  messenger  of  Fate,  "  Mer-
curius,"  appears  placing  one  foot  ami  leading  the  way  into  a
huge  urn  laid  sideways  on  the  ground.  The  allusion  to  Orcus
in  the  name  of  such  a  vessel,  orca,  is  sufficiently  obvious,  and
in  fact  both  may  spring  from  the  same  root,  epKos,  inclosure,
prison.  But  the  most  common  type,  perpetually  repeated  on
sarcophagi  and  tablets,  is  the  Horse,  significant  of  departure,
looking  in  through  the  window  upon  a  party  carousing —
life's  festive  scene.  Yet  more  forcibly  is  the  same  notion
carried  out  in  an  Etruscan  sculpture  (figured  in  the  Revue
Archeologique,  1844),  where  the  angel  of  death,  Charun,  armed
as  usual  with  his  ponderous  mall,  actually  leads  this  horse
upon  which  sits  the  deceased  with  head  muffled  up,  "  capite
obnupto" — the  established  form  in  sentencing  a  criminal  to
execution.  The  same  reason,  probably,  made  the  horse's  hea  I

~*  Such a larva also points the  standing  before  him ;  at  his  t'eet  lies

moral  of  the  scene  embossed  upon  a  an  infant  in  swaddling-clothes.  These

lamp,  publishf  d  by  De  Witte  (Mem.  adjuncts  declare  the  subject  of  the

Soc.  Antiq.  de  France,  1871),  where  philosopher's meditations — the des-

:i  philosopher  seated,  and  grasping  a  tiny  of  Man  from  birtb  to  death,
scroll,  is apostrophising  a  skeleton


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  183

so  popular  a  subject  for  signet-gems;  it  served  there  for  a
memento-mori,  like  the  death's  heads  so  much  in  vogue  amongst
the  jewels  of  the  Cinque-cento  time,  although  the  antique
symbol  carried  with  it  a  widely  different  admonition.  The
same  notion  may  possibly  lie  at  the  bottom  of  that  immemorial
custom  in  South  Wales  of  the  mummers  carrying  the  skull  of  a
horse  in  their  Christmas  merry-makings.

Cognate  to  this  is  that  most  ancient  representation  of  the
conveyance  of  the  departed  soul  to  the  realms  of  bliss — imagined
as  some  happy  island  in  the  far  West — upon  a  fantastic
hippocampus,  in  figure  like  a  winged  sea-serpent,  and  who  later
became  the  Eornan  Capricornus,  "  Ruler  of  the  Hesperian
Wave  :  "  -

"  Thou,  for  thy  rule,  0  Capricorn  !  hast  won
All  that  extends  beneath  the  setting  sun,"

as  Manilius  defines  the  authority  of  that  amphibious  sign.  But
the  original  conception  is  often  engraved  upon  Phoenician
scarabic;  and  no  doubt  can  remain  as  to  its  intention,  since
Caylus  has  published  an  Etruscan  vase  (i.  pi.  32)  where  this
same  monster  is  painted  joyously  careering  over  the  sea,  whilst
on  its  other  side  stands  the  mourner,  prsefica,  chaunting  the
funeral  hymn  over  the  corpse  laid  out  upon  its  bier  of  bronze.

To  continue  within  the  earliest  portion  of  the  subject,  it
must  be  observed  that  in  the  most  ancient  monument  of  Greek
sculpture  whereof  any  account  remains — the  Coffer  of  Cypselus
(executed  earlier  than  600  B.C.) — Night  was  represented  carrying
in  her  arms  two  children,  alike  in  all  respects  save  colour ;  the
one  white,  the  other  black,  having  their  legs  crossed :  *  their
names  being  inscribed  over  them — Sleep  and  Death — for  their
mother  was  hastening  to  the  aid  of  the  expiring  Memnon.  Thus
it  is  manifest  that  from  the  very  dawn  of  pictorial  art  the
crossed  legs  were  the  accepted  emblem  of  the  most  profound
repose  ;  whilst  the  sluggard's  wish  for  "  a  little  more  folding  of

*  Steo-Tpa^eVous  rovs  TroSas. The  authority  of  tins  blunder,  Properties'

very  obvious  meaning  of  these  words  "  somnia rana"  have been turned

critics  have  contrived to misuuder-  into  " somnia  vara"  and  ever  since

stand,  and  to  render  as  "  distorte  1."  the  whole tribe  of  Dreams are  be-

Nor  is  this  all ;  entirely upon the  lievcd  to  walk  bandy-legged.


184  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

the  hands  in  slumber  "  bears  the  same  testimony  to  the  import  of
the  crossed  arms  of  the  Roman  Genius  who  leans  on  his  inverted
torch.  In  that  master-piece  of  Roman  chasing,  the  Pompeian
discus,  "  The  Death  of  Cleopatra,"  the  object  of  the  design  is
indicated  with  equal  truth  and  pathos  by  the  placing  of  the
beauteous  infant  genius  at  the  knee  of  the  dying  queen,  on
which  he  rests  his  elbow  to  form  a  support  for  his  head  as
though  dropping  off  into  a  gentle  slumber.  The  traditional
attitude*  retained  its  significance  well  understood  far  down
into  the  Middle  Ages  :  witness  so  many  cross-legged  effigies
of  warriors  resting  from  their  toils — who  for  that  sole  reason
popularly  pass  for  crusaders.

But  in  the  whole  long  catalogue  of  emblems,  not  one
expressed  the  distract  idea  so  definitely  as  that  most  frequently
employed  in  such  sense — the  Gorgon's  Head.  Accepting  the
explanation  already  offered  (p.  107),  that  at  its  origin  this
terrific  visage  was  designed  for  the  "  vera  effigies  "  of  the  Queen
of  the  dead,  it  was  the  most  speaking  emblem  of  her  office  that
could  possibly  be  chosen.  In  the  Heroic  ages  it  was  universally
painted,  or  embossed  upon  the  warrior's  shield  ;  and  with  the
progress  of  art,  cut  in  cameo,  became  the  regular  decoration  of
the  imperial  breastplate ;  t  in  which  post  it  served,  as  Lucian
remarks  ('Philopatris '),  "both  to  terrify  enemies  and  to  avert
all  danger  from  the  wearer,"  conveying  to  all  beholders  the
im  nace  of  death  exactly  as  now  by  an  undesigned  coincidence
does  the  death's  he,»d  and  cross-bones  painted  upon  the  pirate's
flag.  The  Byzantines,  in  the  true  spirit  of  their  gloomy  super
stition,  discarded  the  Pros-Italian  type  for  whose  beauty  they
had  lost  all  feeling,  and  reverted  to  the  image  invented  by  the
horror-loving  genius  of  Pelasgic  barbarism.  They  saw  in  it
the  most  faithful  representation  of  their  Motpa,  the  destroying
demon  or  glioul,  still  believed  by  the  Greek  peasant  to  haunt

*  The child's bkeb  tnn in the  Dum  vacat  hrec,  Caesar,  potent

Pompeian painting above quoted,  lorica  vocari,

similarly  folds  his  feet.  Pcctore  cum  sacro  sederit,  ^Kgis

t  Accipe  bell, gene  cruclum  thorac;i  erit.

Minervse,  'Mart.'  vii.  I.

Ip&a MedusffB quani timet ira
com  ?e.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  185

ruins  and  desolate  places.  That  the  figure  was  received  in
such  a  sense  into  Byzantine  symbolism,  the  examples  of
amulets  already  quoted  convincingly  declare.  From  Byzantine
the  Gorgon  passed  into  Gothic  art,  which  ever  revelling  in
grotesque  horror,  its  inspiring  genius  being  the  skeleton  which
intrudes  his  ghastliness  into  every  mode  of  ornamentation,  even
of  a  mirror-frame  (Lucrezia  Borgia's  for  example)  contrived  to
render  the  image  yet  more  terrible  by  converting  the  face  into
a  fleshless  skull,  and  substituting  for  the  hawk's  wings  lent
by  Hermes,  which  previously  impelled  its  flight,  the  skinny
pinions  of  her  own  congenial  and  much-loved  fowl,  ihe
sepulchre-haunting  bat.

But  of  all  these  emblems,  not  one  is  so  full  of  poetry  and
truth  as  the  device  of  the  Winged  Foot  crushing  the  Butterfly,
Life.  The  Foot,  chosen  probably  for  the  same  reason  as  the
Horse,  as  conveying  most  speakingly  the  notion  of  departure,
was  equally  accepted  as  the  emblem  of  death.  Horace's  simile
must  occur  to  every  reader  : —

"  Pallida  Mors  juquo  pulsat  jiedv  pauperum  tabernas
Regumque  turres."

On  this  account  the  Foot  became  the  peculiar  attribute  of
the  infernal  deities ;  and  the  figure  of  one  carved  in  stone  was
often  dedicated  in  the  temple  of  Serapis  * — apparently  as  an
ex  voto  commemorating  the  donor's  escape  from  the  very
threshold  of  his  dark  domain.  Singularly  related  to  this
custom  is  what  Moor  notices  of  the  pairs  of  feet  carved  in  stone
commonly  seen  in  the  vicinity  of  Hindoo  temples,  traditionally
said  to  be  memorials  of  suttees,  marking  the  spot  whence  the
devoted  widow  stepped  from  earth  upon  the  funeral  pile,  that
is  into  the  Gate  of  Heaven.

It  has  long  been  a  question  how  the  Grecian  Hades  ("  The
Invisible  One ")  and  the  Koinan  Pluto  were  depicted  in  a
bodily  form  as  they  were  originally  conceived — for  their
Egyptian  equivalent,  Serapis,  figures  much  more  frequently  in

*  A  colossal  example  of  the  fiuest  Commodus from that mint, which

workmanship  was  exhumed  at  Alex-  has for reverse a head of Serapis

andria  a  few  years  ago. It  may  have  placet  upon  a  foot  for  pedestal,  with

been  contemporary  with  the  coin  of  the  date  of  his  seventh  year.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

monuments  of  Imperial  date  than  either  of  his  brethren,  Jove
or  Neptune.  In  the  latter  style  he  is  regularly  sculptured  as
Plutus,  "Lord  of  Riches,"  seated  on  a  throne,  holding  a  cornucopia,
and  extending  with  his  right  hand  a  cluster  of  earth's  choicest
gifts.  But  under  what  form  the  primitive  Greeks  had
imagined  their  Aidoneus,  God  of  the  Shades,  before  Serapis  was
introduced  into  their  mythology,  is  a  question  that  has  never
been  satisfactorily  answered.  We  should  have  found  him  on
the  scarabeus  of  the  Etruscans  and  early  Italiotes,  had  not  a
long-enduring  respect  for  things  divine  (expressly  enjoined  by
Pythagoras)  prevented  their  placing  in  their  signets,  used  for
everyday  purposes,  the  actual  figures  of  the  gods,  whose  absence
they  supplied  by  their  well-known  attributes.  For  this  reason  a
popular  Etruscan  seal-device  is  Cerberus,  represented  sometimes
as  a  man  with  three  heads  of  a  dog,  but  more  commonly  in  the
shape  so  familiar  to  us  from  later  arts.  But  the  Egyptians  had
contrived  to  make  their  Guardian  of  the  Shades  much  more
formidable  in  aspect  by  equipping  him  with  the  heads  of  a  lion,
crocodile,  and  hippopotamus.  "We  are  also  certified  in  what
shape  the  Etruscans  imaged  their  god  of  the  lower  world,
Mantus;  for  he  is  painted  with  serpent  legs,  like  Typhon,
wielding  a  huge  butcher's  cleaver,  and  attended  by  Cerberus,
enthroned  upon  the  court  placed  below  the  niche  of  interment,
locidus,  in  the  Campana  tomb,  Cervetri.

The  "  Helmet  of  Hades"  is  named  by  Homer  (v.  845),  which
Pallas  puts  on  in  order  to  render  herself  invisible  to  Ares  ;
which  helmet  the  scholiast  explains  by  "  cloud  and  invisibility  "-
whence  it  seems  but  natural  to  infer  that,  as  this  deity  was
rendered  invisible  by  his  very  attiibute,  no  attempt  would  be
made  to  depict  his  personal  appearance.  A  figure  of  a  god  in
long  flowing  robes,  and  wielding  a  trident  wanting  one  of  its
prongs,  sometimes  painted  on  the  Nolan  vases,  has  been  taken  for
an  Aidoneus,  but  on  no  sufficient  grounds,  there  being  better
reason  to  consider  him  a  Poseidon  in  the  archaic  style.  The
epithet  "  Eenowned  for  horses "  is  given  to  the  f^ame  god
elsewhere  by  Homer  (v.  445),  allusive  doubtless  to  the  siviftness
of  the  Destroyer :  and  in  the  s  nne  title  may,  perchance,  lie  the
motive  which  made  the  Greeks  adopt  the  horse,  as  above  noticed,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIlt REMAINS.  187

for  the  commonest  symbol  of  his  power.  If  we  could  meet
with  any  genuine  antique  and  early  representation  of  the
Rape  of  Proserpine  it  would  at  once  decide  the  question  by
portraying  the  grim  Ravisher  himself;  but  the  inauspicious
nature  of  the  subject  (so  conspicuously  set  forth  in  Suetonius'
anecdote  of  the  ring  with  the  story  presented  by  Sporus  to  Nero
for  a  New  Year's  gift)  has  completely  excluded  it  from  the
artist's  repertory,  so  far  as  anything  now  remaining  informs
us.  Stosch's  Collection,  amongst  its  immense  varity  of  mytho
logical  designs,  contains  nothing  of  the  sort,  whilst  Kaspe
gives  for  its  representative  only  a  single  antique  paste  (and
that,  too,  of  very  dubious  attribution)  where  a  god  with  quiver
on  shoulder  is  carrying  off  a  Nymph  in  a  car  drawn  by  two
swans — attributes  properly  bespeaking  an  Apollo  ;  and  if  really
given  here  to  Pluto,  proving  the  work  to  belong  to  those  latter
times  of  Paganism  when  Hades,  Serapis,  Phoebus,  were  equally
interpreted  as  mere  titles  of  the  Solar  god.

As  for  the  Roman  Pluto,  or,  to  give  him  his  native  name,  Dis
(ditis,  from  the  same  root  as  death),  there  was  the  best  of  reasons
for  excluding  him  from  the  province  of  art  which  admitted
nought  that  was  hideous  or  of  evil  augury.  For  there  can  be
no  doubt,  that,  to  the  popular  imagination,  he  still  continued  the
Charun  *  whom  we  still  behold  lording  it  over  the  sepulchres  of
their  Etruscan  teachers  in  the  arts,  a  giant  of  horrid  aspect  with
pointed  ears,  and  tusky  grinning  jaws,  winged  buskins  011  legs,
extending  with  one  hand  a  hissing  serpent,  with  the  other
wielding  a  monstrous  mall.  It  was  probably  the  traditional
influence  of  the  idea  that  caused  the  ^ame  instrument,  mazza,
to  be  retained  at  Rome  for  the  execution  of  peculiarly  atrocious
criminals  down  to  the  recent  introduction  of  the  guillotine.

That  Pluto  was  really  so  personified  in  the  shows  of  the
Amphitheatre,  as  late  as  the  third  century,  may  be  gathered
from  the  remark  of  Tertullian  (Apol.  xxv.),  that,  "  amongst  the
other  scenic  cruelties  of  the  afternoon,  the  spectators  laughed  at
the  sight  of  Mercury  raising  the  dead  with  his  red-hot  wand
[applied  doubtless  to  the  feet  of  the  slaughtered  gladiators  to

.  *  As  Etriiriii  was  the  only  scho,>l  she  supplied  the  figures  equally  with
of  art  for  Koine  until  very  late  times,  the  iHanes  of  all  the  Roman  deities.


188  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

ascertain  if  life  still  lingered  within  them]  ;  whilst  the  *  Brother
of  Jupiter,'  armed  with  his  mall,  escorted  the  dead  bodies  of  the
combatant  "  [for  the  purpose  clearly  of  giving  them  the  coup  de
grace].  The  primitive  Etruscan  image  passed  down  into  the
belief  of  their  mediaeval  descendants,  for  Dante  brings  on  the
stage  : —

"  Charon,  demonic  con  occhi  di  bragia."
"  Charon,  a  devil  with  live-coals  jor  ey  s."

It  is  time  now  to  dismiss  the  Lord  of  the  Shades,  and  to
consider  by  what  Emblem  ancient  art  sought  to  express  the
Shade  itself,  the  disembodied  spirit.  The  Greeks  of  early  times
appropriately  painted  it  in  the  shape  of  a  bird  with  a  human
head,  as  on  that  beau'iful  vase,  "The  Death  of  Procris"  (British
Museum),  where  such  a  fowl  is  conspicuously  seen  winging  its
flight  from  the  mouth  of  the  wounded  Nymph.  The  celebrated
Orleans  (now  Russian)  scarabeus,  engraved  with  the  "  Death  of
Achilles,"  has  its  back  carved  into  the  same  creature,  tearing
her  breast  in  an  agony  of  despair.  This  expressive  type  was
riot,  however,  the  birth  of  Grecian  genius,  but  adopted,  without
alteration,  from  the  most  ancient  symbolism  of  Egypt.  In  the
"  Judgment  of  the  body  and  soul,"  regularly  painted  on  the
mummy-cases,  the  former,  depicted  as  a  mummy,  stands  before
Osiris,  "  Lord  of  the  West,"  to  answer  for  its  actions ;  whilst  the
soul,  in  shape  of  a  hawk,  with  human  head  and  wings  uplifted,
is  brought  before  the  same  god  under  another  form,  to  give
an  account  of  its  thoughts.  And  the  same  soul,  purified,  and
admitted  amongst  the  gods,  appears  as  before,  but  tranquilly
standing  with  a  golden  disk,  "  a  crown  of  glory,"  set  upon  her
head :  figures  of  the  last  kind  in  bronze  frequently  occurring
amongst  Egyptian  remains,  complimentary  mementoes  of
deceased  friends.  Again,  this  same  bird  is  often  found  painted
on  the  mummy-case  right  over  the  heart  (named  in  Coptic,  "  the
abode  of  the  soul "),  a  plain  proof  of  what  it  signifies  there ;
although  Father  Kifcher,  with  his  wonted  extravagance,  chose
to  explain  it  as  figuring  the  iynx,  the  bird  so  renowned  in  the
magical  operations  of  the  Greeks.  Again,  the  same  notion  is
expressed  by  the  simple  figure  of  a  bird  flying  away,  as  often  is
done  in  Etruscan  works,  where  the  subject  represented  is  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  189

death  of  a  hero.  Latest  of  all,  this  somewhat  grotesque
Egyptian  conception  was  modified  by  Grecian  culture  into  the
graceful  girl  with  butterfly  wings — the  well-known  Psyche —
and  such  a  form  is  seen  seated  upon  the  summit  of  Achilles'
tomb,  before  which  the  sacrifice  of  Polyxena  is  about  to  be
offered.  This  ancient  human-headed  Bird,  by  a  natural  tran
sition  of  ideas,  came  ultimately  to  be  applied  to  express  a
widely  different  meaning.  Instead  of  the  dead,  it  was  made  to
stand  for  the  destroyer ;  and  the  Syrens  are  always  painted  in
this  shape  whenever  their  interview  with  Ulysses  becomes  the
theme  of  ancient  art,  or  when  they  engage  in  their  unlucky
contest  with  the  Muses.  But  here,  for  the  sake  of  more  grace,
in  the  conformation  of  the  monster,  the  whole  of  the  female
bust  is  adapted  to  the  body  of  the  fowl.  Despite  their  beauty
and  melodiousness,  the  Syrens  were  considered  as  the  most
malignant  and  destructive  of  beings,  for  which  reason  the
Harpies  likewise  were  depicted  in  precisely  the  same  figure.
Although  identical  at  first,  the  more  refining  art  of  Koman
times  introduced  a  distinction  between  them  by  giving  to  the
Syrens  the  complete  bust,  to  the  Harpies  the  head  only  of  the
woman.  Inasmuch  as  the  name  signifies  "  Snatcher-away,"  the
Harpy  was  understood  to  embody  the  abstract  idea  of  death,
which  acceptation  explains  why  she  is  often  represented  armed
with  a  sword,  or  carrying  on  her  shoulder  the  funeral  lecytlius,
and  torch.  For  the  same  reason  the  Harpy  holds  a  conspicuous
place  in  the  decorations  of  many  ancient  tombs,  unlesss,  indeed,
the  emblem  may  have  been  used  there  in  its  Egyptian  sense.

In  what  shape  Death  was  personified  by  Euripides,  in  his
Alcestis,  cannot  be  made  out  from  the  insufficiency  of  data
afforded  by  the  lines  relating  to  his  appearance  on  the  stage.
It  is,  however,  plain  that  the  poet  brought  forward  ©cu/a-ros  in
a  bodily  form,  perhaps  considering  him  the  same  with  Aidoneus,
for  he  styles  him  "King  of  the  Dead;"  and  Macrobius,  speaking
of  the  same  event,  uses  for  his  name  the  Roman  equivalent,
"  Orcus."  All  that  can  be  gathered  from  the  incidental  allu
sions  of  the  other  dramatis  personse  to  this  apparition,  is  that  he
was  robed  in  black,  and  carried  a  sword,  wherewith  to  sever  a
lock  from  the  head  of  his  destined  victim,  and  so  devote  it  to


190


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


the  subterranean  gods.  It  is,  however,  possible  that  Euripides
brought  on  this  ©avaros  in  that  harpy  shape  which  sometimes  is
found  in  antique  art  where  the  bust  is  that  of  a  grim  aged
man,  in  place  of  the  smiling  female's,  and  who,  as  badge  of
office,  carries  a  naked  sword.  In'  such  a  form  the  Destroyer
must  have  flitted  before  the  eyes  of  Statius,  when  about  to  make
prey  of  the  young  and  beautiful  Glaucius  :  —

"  Snbitas  ininiica  levavit
Parca  manus  ;  quo  diva  feros  gravis  exuis  unrjues  ?  "

This  last  word  can  apply  to  nothing  but  the  Harpy,  of  whom
claws  were  the  distinctive  attribute  :  —


"  Unguibus  ire  parat  nummoa  raptura

Nevertheless,  a  representation  like this  had in  it  nothing
grotesque  or  offensive  to  the  Athenian  eye. Far  different  was
the  Pelasgic  K^,  likewise  robed  in  Hack  (according  to  Ilomer'd
normal epithet for her), in the form which the archaic
sculptor  had  given  her  upon  the  Coffer  of  Cypselus,  "  having
tusks  as  fierce  as  those  of  any  wild  beast." Such  a  conception
was  eagerly  embraced  by  the  gloomy  genius  of  the  Etruscans,
ever delighting in the monstrous and the horrible. She
therefore  figures  on  their  signets  in  a  form  to  be  described  in
the  very  words  of  Pausaiiias,  having  a  huge  Gorgonian  head,
grinning  jaws, arms wreathed with serpents, impelled by
quadruple  wings,  like  an  Assyrian  deity,  and  her  action  that  of
furious  baste. So,  doubtless,  appeared  the  Furies,  brought  on
the  stage  by  ^Eschylus,  when  the  horror  of  their  strange  aspect
struck  the  Athenian  audience  with  such  deadly  fright. For  his
purpose  he  must  have  revived  a  very  ancient  and  forgotten  type
of  the  idea,  for  the  paintings  on  the  vases  of  his  epoch  exhibit
the  Eumenides,  who  persecute  Orestes,  under  a  no  more  terrific
form  than  as  shadowy  old  women  brandishing  serpents  and
torches,  as  they  chase  their  victim  from  shrine  to  shrine.

*  The same picture must have  been in Horace's mind when he
uses  the  figure ....

"  Mors  atris  cireumvolat  alis."


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIK REMAINS.  191


TOMB-TREASURES.

Sorapis,  in  his  double  character  of  God  of  Death  and  God
of  Riches,  has  been  the  subject  of  preceding  chapters;  the
present  one  shall  be  devoted  to  the  consideration  of  the  most
striking  method  by  which  human  superstition  sought  to  turn
to  account  the  two  ideas.  To  propitiate  the  Manes  by  placing
his  most  valuable  or  beloved  effects  in  the  sepulchre  of  the
defunct,  dates  probably  from  the  very  institution  of  interment ;
but  the  account  now  to  be  cited  is  the  most  interesting  of  any
on  record,  owing  to  the  circumstances  of  the  time,  person,  and
place.  It  is  literally  translated  from  the  description  of  an
eye  witness,  the  earliest  of  Italian  antiquaries,  M.  L.  Fauno,
given  in  his  '  Antichita  de  Roma,'  p.  154,  published  1553.

"In  February,  1544,  in  the  Chapel  of  the  King  of  France,  which
is  now  being  built  in  St.  Peter's,  after  the  plan  of  Julius  II.,
the  workmen,  in  excavating,  came  upon  a  marble  coffin,  which,
from  the  things  found  therein,  was  clearly  known  to  be  the
tomb  of  Maria,  wife  of  the  Emperor  Honorius.  Of  the  body,
indeed,  there  was  nothing  left,  except  the  teeth,  the  hair,  and
the  two  leg-bones.  From  the  robes  which  were  interwoven
with  gold,  and  from  the  head-tire,  which  was  cloth  of  silk  and
gold,  there  was  extracted  by  smelting  more  than  forty  pounds
weight  of  the  purest  gold."  [Suecius  says  thirty-six,  but  makes
the  total  of  all  the  gold  found  to  amount  to  the  above  weight
when  they  weie  melted  down  by  order  of  Paul  III.,  to  be
applied  to  the  building  fund  of  the  Cathedral.]

"  Within  the  coffin  lay  a  silver  box,  one  and  a  half  foot  long
by  eight  inches  deep,  with  many  articles  inside,  the  which  we
shall  proceed  particularly  to  describe.  There  were  vases  and
different  things  in  rock  crystal,  thirty  in  all,  big  and  little  ;
amongst  which  were  two  cups,  as  it  were,  not  very  large,  the
one  round,  the  other  oval  shaped,  with  most  beautiful  figures
in  intaglio  of  middling  depth  (mezzo-cavo),  and  a  snail-shell
(nautilus),  likewise  in  crystal,  fitted  up  for  a  lamp  in  fine  gold,
with  which  in  the  first  place  the  mouth  of  the  shell  is  overlaid,
there  being  only  left  a  hole  for  pouring  in  the  oil ;  by  the  side


192  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

of  which  hole  is  fixeJ  &fly  of  gold  upon  a  pivot,  turning  back
wards  and  forwards,  for  the  purpose  of  closing  the  orifice.  In
the  same  way  is  also  made  a  nozzle  with  beak  (^jAppio)  for
holding  the  wick,  drawn  out  long  and  sharpened  with  the
greatest  elegance,  and  so  fastened  to  the  crystal  that  it  appears
all  one  piece  naturally.  The  cover  also  is  equally  well  made.
The  shape  of  the  shell  is  that  of  a  great  sea-shell,  encompassed
all  round  with  its  points,  which  in  this  vessel  are  polished  and
very  smooth,  so  excellently  wrought  is  the  crystal.  There  were
also  vases  and  various  articles  in  agate,  with  certain  little
animals,  eight  in  all,  and  amongst  them  two  very  beautiful
vases,  one  like  the  glass  ampullae,  made  big  and  squat  for
holding  oil  and  such  like  liquids,  so  worked,  so  beautiful,  and
thin  that  it  is  a  wonder  to  behold.  The  other  is  in  the  shape
of  those  ladles  with  long  handles  used  at  Rome  for  baling  water
out  of  cisterns,  and  is  supposed  to  be  a  vessel  used  by  the
ancients  in  their  sacrifices  [a  ligula  for  the  purpose  of  ladling
the  wine  out  of  the  great  standing  crater}.  Next  came  four
little  vessels  in  gold  of  different  kinds,  and  another  little  vessel
of  gold  with  a  cover  set  round  with  jewels.  A  little  gold  heart
that  had  been  a  pendant  with  jewels  set  in  it ;  a  buckle  of  gold
with  six  gems  of  different  kinds  set  in  it,  also  twenty-four
other  buckles  of  gold  of  various  patterns  with  little  gems  set
in  them ;  furthermore,  forty-eight  rings  and  hoops*  of  gold  of
different  shapes,  one  of  them  in  red  bone,  and  various  gems.
A  mouse  in  "  chelidonia,"  a  reddish  quartz,  is  also  specified  by
Suecius  [which  must  be  the  next  item],  also  three  little  animals
in  red  lone  ;  also  two  ear-drops  in  emerald  or  plasma  with  two
jacinths ;  four  small  crosses  with  red  and  green  stones ;  a
pendant  in  the  form  of  a  bunch  of  grapes,  made  of  purple
stones ;  eight  other  little  gold  pendants  of  different  sorts  with
gems  set  in  them.  The  remains  of  a  string  of  crepundia,  the
usual  decoration  of  little  children.  [Maria  had  died  at  the  age
of  four,  being  thus  early  betrothed  to  Honorius  by  his  father
the  all-powerful  Stilicho].  Three  little  gold  crosses  set  with
emeralds ;  a  piece  of  a  small  fine  necklace  with  certain  green

* Verglte :  "  verga,'' like  the French  verge,  signifies  a  plain  gold  wire
forming  a  ring  having  no  head.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  193

stones strung upon it. Another little gold necklace  with
twenty-four  beads  of  plasma. Another  necklace  with  twelve
heads  of  sapphire  cut  almond  shape. Another  little  necklace
of  gold  wire  folded  up  (raccolto),  but  broken  into  four  pieces.
Two  small  buttons  in  gold ;  fourteen  little  gold-wire  rings  like
those  of  a  coat  of  mail ;  three  more  crosses  with  some  emeralds,
and  a  round  gold  plate  like  an  Agnus  Dei,*  with  these  words
upon  it,  STILICHO  VI VAT. Two  bracelets  (maniche)  of  gold,  set
with  certain  red  and  green  stones. Two  large  pins  or  stiletti  for
the  hair,  one  in  gold  nearly  a  palm  (nine  inches)  long  inscribed
with  these  words,  DOMINVS HONORIVS  DOMINA  MARIA: the
other  in  silver  without  inscription. There  were  likewise  many
fragments  of  enamels  and  other  stones. Also  silver  nails  [their
heads]  partly  flat,  partly  in  relief,  which  had  fastened  down  a
cover  of  silver  upon  a  little  coffer. Also  a  small  plate  of  gold
with  these  words  written  or  rather  scratched  in  Greek,  MICHAEL-
GABRIEL- RAPHAEL- VRIEL-" [Laurentius Surius makes out
forty  gold  rings  set  with  precious  stones,  besides  an  emerald
set  in gold, engraved with a head supposed to be  that  of
Honorius,  which  was  valued  at  five  hundred  gold  ducats]. We
have  particularly  described  all  the  above-named  objects  because
Claudian,  a  poet  of  those  times,  declares  that  to  the  Empress
Maria  were  sent  similar  rare  presents  from  her  betrothed  ;  which
perhaps  may  have  formed the  greatest  part  of  these  things.
The  words  of  the  poet  are —

"  Jam  munera  nuptce

Prasparat,  et  pulchros  Marios  sed  luce  minores
Elicit  ornatus  :  quidquid  venerabilis  olini
Livia,  divorumque  nurus  gessere  superbaj." (x. 10-1.'}. )

This  account  enables  us  to  form  some  notion  of  the  treasures
deposited  to  a  greater  or  less  degree  in  all  the  tombs  of  important
personages,  but  more  especially  in  those  sumptuous  structures
raised  to  the  memory  of  the  dead  throughout  Asia  Minor.  The
same  fact  sufficiently  accounts  for  the  furious  onslaught  made
upon  the  tombs  all  over  the  Roman  world,  so  soon  as  the  change
of  religion  had  extinguished  the  old  veneration  for  the  Manes
and  the  things  consecrated  to  them— a  profanation,  and  a
*  A  disk  of  stamped  wax  about  three  inches  in  diameter.


0


194  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

destruction  of  works  of  art,  which  Gregorius  Theologus,  inspired
by  a  taste  and  good  feeling  very  surprising  in  a  Byzantine  saint,
has  attacked  in  one  hundred  and  eighty-two  very  interesting
and  often  poetical  epigrams.

The same  custom was kept  up  (although  we  can  hardly
suppose  with  any  lingering  belief  in  its  ancient  efficiency)  by
the  Merovingian  and  Carlovingian  successors  to  the  wealth  of
the  Western  Empire. The  learned  Canon  Chiflet  has  left  in
his  interesting  book,  '  Anastasis  Childerici  Kegis,'  a  complete
history  of  tomb-treasures,  serving  to  illustrate  his  account  of
that  of  Childeric  the  Frank,  accidentally  found  in  the  precincts
of  Tournay  Cathedral,  May  1654. The  deposit,  as  far  it  could
be  recovered  from  the  first  finders,  consisted  of  the  arms  of  the
king,  the  trappings  of  his  horse  (buried  with  him),  all  of  gold
encrusted  with  garnets,  his gold tablets and  writing-stylus,
abundance  of  golden-bees  originally  stretched  over  his  mantle
(which  gave  that  curious  idea  to  Napoleon  I.),  a  bull's  head  for  a
pendant  (the  primitive  Frankish  badge  of  sovereignty),  and
lastly,  a  viaticum  in  the  shape  of  one  hundred  Byzantine  solidi  of
contemporary  emperors,  and  as  many  denarii  of  several  and  much
earlier  Cajsars. The  canon,  by  zealous  perquisitions,  succeeded
in  recovering  all  these  articles,  including  the  most  important  of
all,  the royal signet  ring  of  massy  gold,  engraved  with  the
image  and  superscription  of  Childeric,  for  his  patron  the  Arch
duke  Leopold,  then  governor  of  the  Low  Countries. At  some
subsequent  period  the  most  important  of  these  relics  passed  into
the  collect]  on  of  the  Bibliotheque  Imperiale,  where  they  continued
in  all  due  honour  until  the  disastrous  robbery  of  1 808,  when  it
is  supposed,  with  too  much  probability,  that  they  were  melted
down  along  with  the  rest  of  the  booty  !


FIG.  1).


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  105


GNOSTIC  CONNECTION  WITH  SUPERSTITIOUS
PRACTICES.

I. THE  EVIL  EYE.

Serapis  we  have  seen,  in  one  of  his  representations  lately
noticed,  specially  invoked  to  defend  his  votary  against  the
Evil  Eye  under  its  abstract  title  of  00oW  A  glance  therefore
at  this  most  ancient  superstition  (which  still  nourishes  in  full
vigour  in  the  same  countries  that  gave  it  birth)  will  form  a
fitting  prelude  to  the  coming  section,  which  takes  for  subject
talismans  and  amulets  of  every  class.

The  belief  in  the  power  for  mischief  of  the  eye  of  an  envious
or  malignant  person  (to  counteract  which  was the principal
object  of  so  many  of  the  amulets  that  have  come  down  to  us)
was  universal  amongst  all  ancient  nations. It  is  needless  to
bring  forward  classic  writers  to support  this  statement ;  such
as  Apollonius  Rhodius,  where  he  skilfully  avails  himself  of  the
notion,  and  makes  Medea  by  her  basilisk  glance  alone  work  the
death  of  Talas,  the  Brazen  Man,  guardian  of  the  Cretan  shores ;
for  even  St.  Paul  (Rom.  i.  29)  sets  down  this  action  of  the  soul
working  through  the  eye  in  the  list  of  sins  of  the  deepest  dye.
But  the  actual  manner  of  operation  upon  the  sufferer  I  have
nowhere  found  explained  except  in  the  following  passage  from
Heliodorus  (*  ^Ethiopica,'  iii.  8),  and  which  therefore  deserves  to
be  inserted  at  length  in  this  prelude  to  the  subject. "  Tell  me,
my  good  Calasiris,  what  is  the  malady  that  has  attacked  your
daughter  ?  " "  You  ought  not  to  be  sui prised,"  I  replied,  "  if  at
the  time  when  she  was  heading  the  procession  in  the  sight  of  so
vast  an  assemblage  of  people,  she  had  drawn  upon  herself  some
envious  eye" Whereupon,  smiling  ironically,  "  Do  you  then,"
asked  he,  "  like  the  vulgar  in  general,  believe  in  the  reality  of
such  fascination  ? " "  As  much as  I do in any  other  fact,"
I  replied,  "and  the  thing  is  this  :  the  air  which  surrounds  us
passing  through  the  eyes,  as  it  were  through  a  strainer,  and

o  2


196  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

also  through  the  mouth,  the  teeth  and  the  other  passages,  into
the  inward  parts,  whilst  its  external  properties  make  their  way
in  together  with  it — whatever  be  its  quality  as  it  flows  in,  of
the  same  nature  is  the  effect  it  disseminates  in  the  recipient,  so
that  when  any  one  looks  upon  beauty  with  envy,  he  fills  the
circumambient  air  with  a  malignant  property,  and  diifuses  upon
his  neighbour  the  breath  issuing  from  himself,  all  impregnated
with  bitterness,  and  this,  being  as  it  is  of  a  most  subtile  nature,
penetrates  through  into  the  very  bone  and  marrow. Hence
envy  has  frequently  turned  itself  into  a  regular  disease,  and  has
received  the  distinctive  appellation  of  fascination (/foo-Kcma).
Consider also, my Charicles, how many people have been
infected  with  ophthalmia,  how  many  with  other  pestilential
diseases,  not  from  any  contact  with  those  so  affected,  or  from
sharing  the  same  bed  or  same  table,  but  merely  from  breathhig
the  same  air. Let  also  (and  above  all  the  rest),  the  origin  of
love  be  a  support  to  my  argument,  for  that  owes  its  first  origin
to  the  sight  which  shoots  like  arrows  the  passion  into  the  soul.
And  for  this  there  is  very  good  reason,  for  of  all  the  senses  and
passages  of  the  body,  the  sight  is  the  most  easily  excited,  and
the  most  inflammable,  and  consequently  the  most  susceptible
with  regard  to  external  emanation,  in  consequence  of  its  own
natural  fiery  essence,  attracting to  itself  the  visits  of  love.
And if you  wish for a proof  drawn  from  Natural  History,
recorded  likewise  in  the  Sacred  Books,  the  bird,  the  yellow-
hammer,  cures  the  jaundice,  and  if  a  person  so  affected  shall  but
look  at  that  bird,  the  latter  at  once  tries  to  escape  and  shuts  its
eyes  ;  not  as  some  think,  because  it  begrudges  the  benefit  to  the
sick  man,  but  because,  if  looked  upon  by  men,  it  is  forced  by  its
nature  to  attract  his  disease  into  its  own  body,  like  an  exhala
tion,  and  therefore  shuns  the  glance  as  much  as  a  blow. And
amongst  serpents,  the  basilisk,  doth  not  he,  as  you  may  have
heard,  kill  and  blast  whatever  conies  in  his  way  by  means  of
his  eyes  and  his  breath  alone  ? And  if  some  give  the  stroke  of
the  Evil  Eye  even  to  those  they  love  and  are  well  disposed
towards,  you  must  not  be  surprised,  for  people  of  an  envious
disposition  act  not  as  they  loish,  but  as  their  Nature  compels
them  to  do."


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  197


II.  ON  A  CERAUNIA  OF  JADE  CONVERTED  INTO  A  GNOSTIC
TALISMAN.

Few  relics  of  antiquity  combine  in  one  so  many  and  so
widely  differing  points  of  interest,  with  respect  to  the  material,
the  strangely  dissimilar  uses  to  which  the  same  object  has  been
applied  in  two  opposite  phases  of  the  history  of  Man,  and,
above  all,  the  curious  superstitions  engendered  by  its  peculiar
form,  as  does  the  stone  brought  under  the  notice  of  the  Archaeo
logical  Institute  by  General  Lefroy,  now  in  the  Woolwich
Repository.  The  kindness  of  that  gentleman  having  afforded  me
full  opportunity  for  the  careful  examination  of  this  interesting
monument,  I  proceed  to  embody,  in  as  succinct  a  form  as  their
multifarious  nature  will  permit,  the  observations  suggested
to  me  by  that  examination.

The  subject,  therefore,  of  this  section  is  a  small  stone  celt  of
the  common  pattern,  but  of  very  uncommon  material  (in  the
antique  class),  being  made,  not  of  flint,  but  of  dark-green  jade  or
nephrite,  2  in.  by  lj  in.  in  length  and  greatest  width;  and
brought,  there  is  reason  to  believe,  from  Egypt  many  years  ago,
by  Colonel  Milner,  aide-de-camp  to  Lord  J.  Bathurst  during
the  English  occupation  of  Sicily  in  1812.  Each  of  its  two  faces
is  occupied  by  a  Gnostic  formula,  engraved  with  much  neatness,
considering  the  excessive  hardness  of  the  material,  in  the  some
what  debased  Greek  character  that  was  current  at  Alexandria
during  the  third  and  fourth  centuries  of  our  era.

The  most  important  of  these  two  formulae  has  been  in°-e-
niously  forced  to  take  the  outline  of  a  wreath  composed  of
broad  leaves,  in  number/ow£eew(or  the  sacred  seven  duplicated),
and  doubtless  intended  for  those  of  the  "  Five  Trees "  that
figure  so  conspicuously  in  Gnostic  symbolism  ;  the  ends  being
tied  together  with  four  broad  ribbons.  This  is  a  design  of
which  no  other  example  has  ever  come  to  my  knowledge
amongst  the  innumerable  and  wondrously  varied  devices
excogitated  by  the  prolific  fancy  of  this  religion  of  mysteries.
Upon  the  four  ties  are  engraved  in  very  minute  letters  different
combinations  of  the  seven  Greek  vowels,  whilst  each  of  the


198  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

leaves  is  emblazoned  with  some  "  Holy  Name,"  of  which  many
can  be  easily  recognised  as  constantly  recurring  in  charms  of
this  class ;  others  are  disguised  by  a  novel  orthography  ;  whilst
a  few,  from  the  uncertain  forms  of  the  It-tiering,  defy  all
attempts  at  interpretation.

To  the  first  series  belong  ABPACA,  "  Abraxas,"  properly
an  epithet  of  the  sun,  but  designating  here  the  Supreme  Deity  ;
IAGOOYIE,  "  lao,  Jehovah  ;  "  ABAANA,  "  Thou  art  our  Father  !  "
TAMBPIHA,  a  curious  mode  of  spelling  "Gabriel,"  that  testifies
to  the  difficulty  ever  felt  by  the  Greeks  of  expressing  the
sound  of  our  B;  AKTNONBCx),  which  contains  the  Coptic  form
of  Anubis  ;  AAMNAMENEYC,  the  sun's  name  in  the  famous
"  ftphesian  Spell;  "  and,  most  interesting  of  all,  nCANTAPEOC,
who  can  be  no  other  than  the  IYANTA  of  the  Pistis- Sophia —
one  of  the  great  TpiSwa/xeis,  a  Power  from  whom  is  enthroned
in  the  planet  Mars.  To  the  uncertain  belong  COYMA,  probably
for  COYMAPTA,  a  name  occurring  elsewhere,  and  perhaps  cognate
to  the  Hindoo  Sumitri,  XOONONIXAP  which  may  be  intended  for
XAP-XNOYMIC,  a  common  epithet  of  the  AgathodaBinon  Serpent;
AEICUEHAANHC;  NEIXAPOnAHC  ;  the  two  last,  spells  un
explained  but  very  uncommon  ;  MONAPXOC  ;  whilst  AXAPCIC
and  the  rest  appear  here  for  the  first  time,  if  correctly  so
read.

The  other  face  is  covered  with  an  inscription,  cut  in  much
larger  letters,  and  in  eight  lines.  This  number  was  certainly
not  the  result  of  chance,  but  of  deep  design,  for  it  was  mystic
in  the  highest  degree,  representing — so  taught  the  profoundest
doctor  of  the  Gnosis,  Marcus — the  divine  Ogdoad,  which  was
the  daughter  of  the  Pythagorean  Tetrad,  the  mother  of  all
creation.*  The  lines  2,  4,  5,  consist  of  Greek  letters  used  as
numerals,  intermixed  with  siglce,  which,  from  their  constant
occurrence  upon  monuments  of  a  like  nature,  are  supposed,  with
good  reason,  to  be  symbols  of  the  planets.  The  numerals,  on
their  part,  probably  denote  various  deities,  for  the  Alexandrian
Gnosis  was  the  true  daughter  of  Magiism  ;  and  in  the  old
theology  oi  Chaldea  every  god  and  astral  genius  had  a  number
of  his  own,  and  which  often  stands  instead  of  his  proper
*  St.  Hippolytus,  Eefut.  Om.  Hseres.  vi.  50.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  199

name  in  dedicatory  inscriptions.*  Thus,  the  number  of  Hoa
(Neptune),  was  40  ;  of  Ana  (Pluto),  60  ;  of  Bel  (Jupiter),  50  ;
of  the  Sun,  20 ;  of  the  moon,  30  ;  of  the  Air,  10 ;  of  Nergal
(Mars),  12 ;  &o.

A  fragment  of  the  Pistis- Sophia^  supplied  the  "spiritual
man"  with  a  key  to  the  right  interpretation  of  similar  steno
graphy  in  his  own  creed.  "  These  be  the  Names  which  I  will
give  unto  thee,  even  from  the  Infinite  One  downwards.  Write
the  same  with  a  sign  (cypher),  so  that  the  sons  of  God  may
manifest  (understand  ?)  them  out  of  this  place.  This  is  the
name  of  the  Immortal  One,  AAA  (jL)U)U).:j:  And  this  is  the
name  of  the  Voice  whereby  the  Perfect  Man  is  moved,  TIT.
These  likewise  be  the  interpretations  of  the  names  of  the
Mysteries.  The  first  is  AAA,  and  the  interpretation  thereof  is
ct>4>4>.  The  second,  which  is  MMM,  or  which  is  CX)(JL)(JL),  the
interpretation  thereof  is  AAA.  The  third  is  YYT,  the  inter
pretation  thereof  is  OOO.  The  forth  is  <t>ct>4>,  the  interpretation
thereof  is  NNN.  The  fifth  AAA,  the  interpretation  thereof  is
AAA,  the  which  is  above  the  throne  of  AAA.  This  is  the  in
terpretation  of  the  second  AAAA,  namely,  AAAAAAAA  ;  the  same
is  the  interpretation  of  the  whole  Name."

Lines  7,  8,  are  made  up  of  vowels,  variously  combined,  and
shrouding  from  profane  eyes  the  Ineffable  Name  I  ATT  which,
as  we  are  informed  by  many  authorities  (the  most  ancient  and
trustworthy  being  Diodorus  Siculus),§  was  the  name  of  the  God  of
the  Jews ;  meaning  thereby  their  mode  of  writing  "  Jehovah  "  in
Greek  characters.

Line  3  consists  of  the  seven  vowels  placed  in  their  natural
order.  This  was  the  most  potent  of  all  the  spells  in  the
Gnostic  repertory;  and  its  importance  may  justify  the  ex-
tensiveness  of  the  following  extract  from  the  grand  text-book
of  this  theosophy,  which  sets  forth  its  hidden  sense  and
wondrous  efficacy.  The  primary  idea,  however,  was  far  from
abstruse,  if  we  accept  the  statement  of  the  writer  "  On  Interpre-

*  On  this  curious  subject,  see  J  That  is,  1000  and  800  tripled.

Kawlinson's  '  Ancient  Monarchies,'  The  next  numbers  are  10,000  tripled,
iii.  p.  466.  and  so  on.

t  Cap.  125.  §  '  Bibliotheca  Historica,'  i.  94.


200  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

tations,"  that  the  Egyptians  expressed  the  name  of  the  Supreme
God  by  the  seven  vowels  thus  arranged — IEHQOYA.*  But
this  single  mystery  was  soon  refined  upon,  and  made  the  basis
of  other  and  infinitely  deeper  mysteries.  In  an  inscription
found  at  Miletus  (published  by  Montfaucon),  the  Holy  IEOY-
AHHAEIOYn  is  besought  "to  protect  the  city  of  Miletus
and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  same ;  a  plain  proof  that  this
interminable  combination  only  expressed  the  name  of  some  one
divine  being.  Again,  the  Pistis-Sophia  perpetually  brings  in
IEOY  invariably  accompanied  with  the  epithet  of  "the  Primal
Man,"  «.e.,  He  after  whose  image  or  type  man  was  first  created.
But  in  the  fulness  of  time  the  semi-Pythagorean,  Marcus,  had
it  revealed  unto  him  that  the  seven  heavens  in  their  revelation
sounded  each  one  vowel  which,  all  combine'!  together,  formed  a
single  doxology,  "the  sound  whei'eof  being  carried  down  to
earth  becomes  the  creator  and  parent  of  all  things  that  be  on

earth."!

The  Greek  language  has  but  one  word  for  vowel  and  voice;
when  therefore,  "  the  seven  thunders  uttered  their  voices,"  the
seven  vowels,  it  is  meant,  echoed  through  the  vault  of  heaven,
and  composed  that  mystic  utterance  which  the  sainted  seer  was
forbidden  to  reveal  unto  mortals.  "  Seal  up  those  things  which
the  seven  thunders  uttered,  and  write  them  not. "if  With  the
best  reason,  then,  is  the  formula  inscribed  on  a  talisman  of
the  first  class,  for  hear  what  the  Pistis-Sophia  delivers  touching
its  potency. §  "  After  these  things  his  disciples  said  again  unto
him,  Kabbi,  reveal  unto  us  the  mysteries  of  the  Light  of  thy
Father,  forasmuch  as  we  have  heard  thee  saying  that  there  is
another  baptism  of  smoke,  and  another  baptism  o!  ihe  Spirit  of
Holy  Light,  and  moreover  an  unction  of  the  Spirit,  all  which
shall  bring  our  souls  into  the  treasurehouse  of  Light.  Declare
therefore  unto  us  the  mysteries  of  these  things,  so  that  we  also
may  inherit  the  kingdom  of  thy  Father.  Jesus  said  unto  them,
Do  ye  seek  after  these  mysteries  ?  No  mystery  is  more  excellent

*  This is in fact  a  very  correct  f  Hippolytus,  vi.  48.

representation,  if  we  give  each  vowel  J  Rev.  x.  4.

its  true  Greek  sound,  of  the  Hebrew  §  Pistis-Sophiu,  cap.  378.
pronunciation  of  the  word  Jehovah.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  20 1

than  they;  which  shall  bring  your  souls  unto  the  Light  of
Lights,  unto  the  place  of  Truth  and  Goodness,  unto  the  place
of  the  Holy  of  holies,  unto  the  place  where  is  neither  male  nor
female,  neither  form  in  that  place  but  Light,  everlasting,  not  to
be  uttered.  Nothing  therefore  is  more  excellent  than  the
mysteries  which  ye  seek  after,  saving  only  the  mystery  of  the
Seven  Vowels  and  their  forty  and  nine  Powers,  and  the  numbers
thereof.  And  no  name  is  more  excellent  than  all  these
(Vowels),*  a  Name  wherein  be  contained  all  Names  and  all
Lights  and  all  Powers.  Knowing  therefore  this  Name,  if  a  man
shall  have  departed  out  of  this  body  of  Matter,  no  smoke  (of  the
bottomless  pit),  neither  any  darkness,  nor  Euler  of  the  Sphere
of  Fate,|  nor  Angel,  nor  Power,  shall  be  able  to  hold  back  the
soul  that  knoweth  that  Name.  But  and  if,  after  he  shall  have
departed  out  of  this  world,  he  shall  utter  that  Name  unto  the
fire,  it  shall  be  quenched,  and  the  darkness  shall  flee  away.
And  if  he  shall  utter  that  Name  unto  the  devils  of  the  Outei
Darkness,  and  to  the  Powers  thereof,  they  shall  all  faint  away,
and  their  flame  shall  blaze  up,  so  that  they  shall  cry  aloud
'Thou  art  holy,  thou  art  holy,  0  Holy  One  of  all  holies!'
And  if  he  shall  utter  that  Name  unto  the  Takers-awav  for
condemnation,  and  their  Authorities,  and  all  their  Powers,  nay,
even  unto  Barbelo,J  and  the  Invisible  God,  and  the  three
Triple-powered  Gods,  so  soon  as  he  shall  have  uttered  that
Name  in  those  places,  they  shall  all  bo  shaken  and  thrown  one
upon  the  other,  so  that  they  shall  be  ready  to  melt  away  and
perish,  and  shall  cry  aloud,  '  0  Light  of  all  lights  that  art  in
the  Boundless  L?ght !  remember  us  also,  and  purify  us ! '  "
After  such  a  revelation  as  this,  we  need  seek  no  further  for  the
reason  of  the  frequent  occurrence  of  this  formula  upon  talismans
intended,  when  they  had  done  their  duty  in  this  world,  to
accompany  their  owner  into  the  tomb,  continuing  to  exert  there
a  protective  influence  of  a  yet  higher  order  than  in  life.

For  the  student  of  the  mineralogy  of  the  ancients  this  celt

*  Evidently  alluding  to  the  col-  released  from  the  body  in  which  they

location  of  the  vowels  on  our  talisman.  have  imprisoned  it.

t  The  twelve  Mons  of  the  Zodiac,  J  The  divine  mother  of  the  Saviour,

the  creators  of  the  human  soul,  which  and  one  of  the  three  "  Invisible  Gods  "

they  eagerly  seek  to  catch  when  cap.  351).


202  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

has  very  great  interest  in  point  of  material,  as  being  the  only
specimen  of  true  jade,  bearing  indisputable  marks  of  either
Greek  or  Eoman  workmanship,  that,  so  far  as  my  knowledge
extends,  has  ever  yet  been  brought  to  light.  This  ancient
neglect  of  the  material  is  truly  difficult  to  explain,  if  the  state
ment  of  a  very  good  authority,  Corsi,  be  indeed  correct,  that  the
sort  showing  the  deepest  green  is  found  in  Egypt.  The  known
predilection  of  the  Eomans  for  gems  of  that  colour,  would,  one
should  naturally  expect,  have  led  them  in  that  case  to  employ
the  stone  largely  in  ornamentation,  after  the  constant  fashion  of
the  Chinese,  and  to  value  it  as  a  harder  species  of  the  Smaragdus.
The  circumstances  under  which  this  relic  was  brought  to
England  render  it  more  than  probable  that  Egypt  was  the
place  where  it  was  found ;  a  supposition  corroborated  by  the
fine  quality  of  the  stone  exactly  agreeing  with  what  Corsi
remarks  of  the  Egyptian  kind.  That  Alexandria  was  the  place
where  the  inscription  was  added  upon  its  surface  can  admit  of
little  question ;  the  lettering  being  precisely  that  seen  upon
innumerable  other  monuments  which  can  with  certainty  be
assigned  to  the  same  grand  focus  of  Gnosticism.  In  addition  to
this,  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  in  the  third  or  fourth  centuries
a  lapidary  could  have  been  found  elsewhere  throughout  the
whole  KomanVEmpiie  capable  of  engraving  with  such  skill  as
the  minute  characters  within  the  wreath  evince,  upon  a
material  of  this,  almost  insuperable,  obduracy.  From  the  times
of  the  Ptolemies  down  to  the  Arab  conquest,  and  even  later,
Alexandria  was  the  seat  of  the  manufacture  of  vases  in  rock
crystal.  This  trade  served  to  keep  alive  the  expiring  Glyptic
art  for  the  only  purpose  for  which  its  productions  continued  to
be  demanded — the  manufacture  of  talismans,  consignments  of
which  must  have  been  regularly  shipped,  together  with  the
crystal- ware,*  to  Rome,  and  equally  to  the  other  important
cities  of  the  empire.

The primitive Egyptians, like the early Chaldeans,  used

stone  in  the  place  of  metal  for  their  cutting  instruments,  and

continued its use for making particular articles down into

historic  times. Herodotus  mentions  the  regular  employment  of

*  "  Duin  tibi Niliacus  portat  cryatallu  catajplua."— Mart.  xii.  72.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  20'5

the  "  Ethiopian  stone  "  sharpened,  for  a  dissect  ing-knife*  in  the
process  of  embalming,  and  similarly  for  pointing  the  arrowsf
carried  by  the  contingent  of  the  same  nation  in  the  army  of
Xerxes.  The  Alexandrian  citizen,  half-Jew  half-Greek,  who
had  the  good  fortune  to  pick  up  this  primaeval  implement,
doubtless  rejoiced  in  the  belief  that  he  had  gotten  a  "stone  of
virtue,"  most  potent  alike  from  substance,  figure,  and  nature,
and  therefore  proceeded  to  do  his  prize  due  honour  by  making
it  the  medium  of  his  most  accredited  spells — nay,  more,  by
inventing  a  new  formula  of  unusual  complication  and  pro
fundity  whereby  to  animate  its  inherent  powers.  As  regards
its  substance,  the  stone  probably  passed  then  for  a  smaragdus  of
exceptional  magnitude,  and  that  gem,  as  Pliny  records,  J  was
recommended  by  the  magi  as  the  proper  material  for  a  talisman
of  prodigious  efficacy,  which,  duly  engraved,  should  baffle
witchcraft,  give  success  at  court,  avert  hailstorms,  and  much
more  of  like  nature.  The  smaragdus  of  the  ancients  was  little
more  than  a  generic  designation  for  all  stones  of  a  green  colour,
and  the  entire  Gnostic  series  strikingly  demonstrates  that  this
hue  was  deemed  a  primary  requisite  in  a  talismanic  gem — the
almost  exclusive  material  of  the  class  being  the  green  jasper
and  the  plasma.

Again,  as  regards  figure,  this  celt  offered  in  its  triangular
outline,  that  most  sacred  of  all  emblems,  the  mystic  Delta,  the
form  that  signified  maternity,  and  was  the  hieroglyph  of  the
moon.  This  belief  is  mentioned  by  Plutarch,§  and  explains
why  the  triangle  so  often  accompanies  the  figure  of  the  sacred
baboon,  Luna's  special  attribute,  on  monuments,  where  also  it
is  sometimes  displayed  elevated  upon  a  column  with  that
animal  standing  before  it  in  the  attitude  of  adoration.

Lastly,  the  supposed  nature  of  this  gift  of  Fortune  was  not  of
Earth,  inasmuch  as  it  then  passed  for  a  holy  thing  that  "  had
fallen  down  from  Jupiter,"  being,  in  fact,  nothing  less  than  one
of  that  god's  own  thunderbolts.  A  notion  this  which  will

*  ii-  86.  the  equilateral  triangle  "  Athene  " —

t  vii.  69.  a  curious  confirmation  of  the  tradition

I  xxxvii.  40.  quoted by  Aristotle,  that  the  Attic

§  '  De Iside et Osiride,'  cap.  75.  goddess  was  one  and  the  same  with

He  adds  that  the  Pythagoreans  called  the  Moon.


204  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

doubtless  strike  the  modern  mind  as  so  strange,  or  rather  as  so
preposterous,  that  it  necessitates  my  giving  at  full  length  my
reasons  for  making  such  an  assertion.  And  in  truth  the  subject
is  well  worth  the  trouble  of  investigation,  seeing  that  the  same
superstition  will  be  found  to  extend  from  an  early  period  of
antiquity  down  into  the  popular  belief  of  our  own  times
throughout  a  large  extent  of  Europe.

It  is  in  accordance  with  this  notion  that  I  have  designated
this  celt  a  "ceraunia"  (thunderbolt-stone),  and  it  therefore
remains  for  me  to  adduce  my  reasons  for  giving  it  what  must
appear  to  most  people  so  unaccountable  and  highly  inappro
priate  an  appellation.  Sotacus,  who  is  quoted  elsewhere  by
Pliny  "  as  one  of  the  most  ancient  writers  on  mineralogy,"  is
cited  by  him*  "  as  making  two  other  kinds  of  the  ceraunia,  the
black  and  the  red,  resembling  axe-heads  in  shape.  Of  these,
such  as  be  black  and  round  are  sacred  things;  towns  and  fleets
can  be  captured  by  their  instrumentality.  The  latter  are  called
Bsetyli,  whilst  the  oblong  sort  are  the  Ceraunise.  Some  make
out  another  kind,  in  mighty  request  in  the  practices  of  the
magi,  inasmuch  as  it  is  only  to  be  found  in  places  that  have
been  struck  by  lightning."  One  would  have  been  utterly  at  a
loss  to  understand  what  the  old  Greek  had  been  speaking  about
in  the  chapter  thus  confusedly  condensed  by  the  later  Eoman
naturalist,  or  to  discover  any  resemblance  in  form  between  the
lightning-flash  and  an  axe-head,  had  it  not  been  for  the  popular
superstition  tint  has  prevailed  in  Germany  from  time  im
memorial  to  the  present  day,  and  of  which  full  particulars  are
given  by  Anselmus  Boetius  in  his  invaluable  repertory  of
medieval  lore  upon  all  such  matters,  written  at  the  beginning
of  the  seventeenth  century. |

Under  the  popular  names  of  "  Strahl-hammer,"  "  Donner-
pfeil,"  "  Donner-keil,"  "  Strahl-pfeil,"  "  Strahl-keil  "  (lightning-
hammer,  thunder-arrow  or  club,  lightning-arrow,  &c.),  and  the
Italian  "  Sagitta,"t  he  figures  stone  celts  and  hammers  of  five

*  xxxvii.  51.  lightning-niissila,  the  archer's  shaft

f  '  Gem.  et  Lapid.  Hist.'  ii.  cap.  being  expressed  by  the  Teutonic

261.  "  freceia,"  in  accordance  with  the

J"Saetta"  (a  vulgar  Italian  genius  of  the  language  which  reserves

execration),  is  now  restricted  to  the  the  old  Latin  terms for the  things


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  205

different,  but  all  common,  types ;  remarking  that  so  firm  was
the  belief  in  these  things  being  the  "actual  arrow  of  the
lightning  "  (ipsa  fulminis  sagitta),  that  should  any  one  attempt
to  controvert  it  he  would  be  taken  for  a  madman.  He  however
confesses  with  amusing  simplicity  that  the  substance  of  these
thunderbolts  is  exceedingly  like  the  common  flint  used  for
striking  fire  with;  nay,  more,  he  boldly  declares  he  should
agree  with  those  few  rationalists  who,  on  the  strength  of  their
resemblance  in  shape  to  the  tools  in  common  use,  pronounced
these  objects  to  be  merely  ordinary  iron  implements  that  had
got  petrified  by  long  continuance  in  the  earth,  had  it  not  been
for  the  testimony  of  the  most  respectable  witnes'ses  as  to  the
fact  of  their  being  discovered  in  places  just  seen  to  be  struck
witli  lightning.  Besides  quoting  some  fully  detailed  instances
from  Gesner,  he  adds  that  several  persons  had  assured  him  of
having  themselves  seen  these  stones  dug  up  in  places  where  the
lightning  had  fallen.  The  natural  philosophers  of  the  day
accounted  for  the  creation  of  such  substances  in  the  atmosphere
by  supposing  the  existence  of  a  vapour  charged  with  sulphureous
and  metallic  particles,  which  rising  above  a  certain  height
became  condensed  through  the  extreme  heat  of  the  sun,  and
assumed  a  wedge-like  form  in  consequence  of  the  escape  of  their
moisture,  and  the  gravitation  of  the  heavier  particles  towards
their  lower  end!  Notwithstanding  this  celestial  origin,  the
virtue  of  the  production  was  not  then  esteemed  of  a  pro
portionally  sublime  order,  extending  no  further  than  to  the
prevention  or  the  cure  of  ruptiires  in  children,  if  placed  upon
their  cradles ;  and  also  to  the  procuring  of  sleep  in  the  case  of
adults.  In  our  own  times  Justinus  Kerner  mentions*  the  same
names  for  stone  celts  as  universally  popular  amongst  the
German  boors;  but  they  are  now  chiefly  valued  for  their
efficacy  in  preserving  cattle  from  the  murrain,  and  consequently
the  finders  can  seldom  be  induced  to  part  with  them.


not  of  this  world, — using  those  of  the  peasantry to have this celestial

lingua  militaris for every-day  pur-  origin, and are highly valued as

poses. The  flint  arrow-heads  found  portable  "  light-conductors."
in  the  terra  marna  of  the  primaeval *  In  his  little  treatise  on  Amulets.
Umbrian  towns,  are  believed  by  the


206  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

It  must  not,  however,  be  supposed  that  Sotacus  picked  tip
this  strange  notion  from  the  Teutones  of  bis  own  age,  whose
very  existence  was  probably  unknown  to  him ;  his  informants
were  unquestionably  those  magi  cited  at  the  conclusion  of
Pliny's  extract.  The  Greek  mineralogist  had  lived  "  apud
Eegem,"  that  is,  at  the  court  of  the  King  of  Persia,  very  pro
bably  in  the  capacity  of  royal  physician,  like  his  countrymen
Democedes  and  Ctesias.  In  that  region  he  had  ample  oppor
tunities  of  seeing  stone  celts,  for  Rawlinson  observes  *  that
flint  axes  and  other  implements,  exactly  identical  with  the
European  in  workmanship,  are  common  in  all  the  most  ancient
mounds  of  Chaldsea,  those  sites  of  primeval  cities.  Such
elevations  above  the  dead  level  of  those  interminable  plains
were  necessarily  the  most  liable  to  be  lightning-struck ;  and
hence  probably  arose  the  idea  that  these  weird-looking  stones
('all  tradition  of  whose  proper  destination  had  long  since  died
out  amongst  the  iron-using  Persians)  were  the  actual  fiery  bolts
which  had  been  seen  to  bury  themselves  in  the  clay.  And
again,  to  revert  to  the  German  belief,  it  must  be  remembered
that  Thor,  the  Northern  Jupiter,  is  pictured  as  armed  with  a
huge  hammer  in  the  place  of  the  classical  thunderbolt.  The
type  of  the  god  had  been  conceived  in  the  far-remote  ages  when
the  stone -hammer  was  as  yet  the  most  effective  and  formidable
of  weapons,  and  was  preserved  unchanged  out  of  deference  to
antiquity,  after  the  true  meaning  of  the  attribute  was  entirely
forgotten.  Nevertheless,  his  worshippers,  accustomed  to  be
hold  the  hammer  in  the  hand  of  the  god  of  thunder, — vi/a/^pe/zeV^s
Zev's, — very  naturally  concluded  that  these  Grange  objects,  of
unknown  use,  found  from  time  to  time  deep  buried  in  the
earth,  were  the  actual  mis.siles  which  that  deity  had  discharged.
It  is  a  remarkable  proof  of  the  wide  diffusion  of  the  same  belief,
that  the  late  owner  of  the  relic  under  consideration,  habitually
spoke  of  it  as  a  *'  thunderstone," — a  name  he  could  only  have
learnt  from  the  Arabs  from  whom  it  was  procured,  seeing  that
no  such  notion  with  respect  to  celts  has  ever  been  current  in
this  country.  But  every  one  whose  memory  reaches  back  forty
years  or  more  may  recollect,  that  wheresoever  in  England  the
*  'Ancient  Monarchies,'  i.  p.  120.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  207

fossil  Belemnite  is  to  be  found,  it  was  implicitly  received  by  all,
except  the  few  pioneers  of  Geology  (a  word  then  almost  synony
mous  with  Atheism),  as  the  veritable  thunderbolt  shot  from
the  clouds,  and  by  that  appellation  was  it  universally  known.
I,  for  one,  can  recollect  stories,  quite  as  respectably  attested
as  those  Boetius  quotes  concerning  the  Ceraunise,  told  re
specting  the  discovery  of  new  fallen  belemnites  under  precisely
the  same  circumstances ;  and,  in  truth,  the  same  author  does
in  the  preceding  chapter  treat  at  length  of  the  Belemnites,
and  his  cuts  show  that  the  name  meant  then  what  it  does
at  present ;  but  he  assigns  to  the  missile  an  infernal  instead
of  a  celestial  source,  giving  the  vulgar  title  for  it  as  "  Alp-
schoss,"  (elfin-shot,)  which  he  classically  renders  into  "  dart
of  the  Incubus,"  stating  further  that  it  was  esteemed  (on
the  good  old  principle,  "  similia  similibus  curantur ")  of
mighty  efficacy  to  guard  the  sleeper  from  the  visits  of  that
much  dreaded  nocturnal  demon.  The  Prussian,  Saxon,  and
Spanish  physicians  employed  it,  powdered,  as  equally  efficacious
with  the  lapis  Judaicus,  in  the  treatment  of  the  calculus.  It  was
also  believed  a  specific  for  the  pleurisy  in  virtue  of  its  pointed
figure,  which  was  analogous  to  the  sharp  pains  of  that  disease,
for  so  taught  the  universally  accepted  "  Doctrine  of  Signa
tures."

The  Ceraunise  of  Sotacus,  however,  comprised,  besides  these
primitive  manufactures  of  man,  other  substances,  it  is  hard  to
say  whether  meteorites  or  fossils  ;  the  nature  of  which  remains
to  be  discussed.  Photius,*  after  quoting  the  paragraph,  "  I
beheld  the  Bsetylus  moving  through  the  air,  and  sometimes
wrapped  up  in  vestments,  sometimes  carried  in  the  hands  of
the  ministers,"  proceeds  to  give  a  summary  of  the  wondrous
tale  told  by  the  discoverer  of  the  prodigy — one  Eusebius  of
Emesa.  He  related  how  that,  being  seized  one  night  with  a
sudden  and  unaccountable  desire  to  visit  a  very  ancient  temple
of  Minerva,  situated  upon  a  mountain  at  some  distance  from  the
city,  he  started  off,  and  arriving  at  the  foot,  sat  down  to  rest
himself.  Suddenly  he  beheld  a  globe  of  fire  fall  down  from
heaven,  and  a  monstrous  lion  standing  by  the  same,  but  who
*  '  Bibliotheca,'  1063,  R.


208  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIE REMAINS.

immediately  vanished.  Running  to  pick  it  up  as  soon  as  the
fire  was  extinguished,  he  found  this  self-same  Bsetylus.  In
quiring  of  it  to  what  god  it  belonged,  the  thing  made  answer
that  he  came  from  the  Noble  One  (so  was  called  a  figure  of  a
lion  standing  in  the  temple  at  Heliopolis).  Eusebius  thereupon
ran  home  with  his  prize,  a  distance  of  210  stadia  (26  miles),
without  once  stopping,  being  quite  unable  to  control  the  im
petus  of  the  stone  !  He  described  it  as  "  of  a  whitish  colour,  a
perfect  sphere,  a  span  in  diameter,  but  sometimes  assuming  a
purple*  shade,  and  also  expanding  and  contracting  its  dimen
sions,  and  having  letters  painted  on  it  in  cinnabar,  of  which  he
gave  the  interpretation.  The  stone,  likewise,  if  struck  against
the  wall,  returned  answers  to  consultors  in  a  low  whistling
voice."  The  grain  of  truth  in  this  huge  heap  of  lies  is
obviously  enough  the  fact  that  Eusebius,  having  had  the  good
fortune  to  witness  the  descent  of  a  meteorite,  and  to  get  posses
sion  of  the  same,  told  all  these  fables  about  it  in  order  to  in
crease  the  credit  of  the  oracular  stone  (which  doubtless  brought
him  in  many  fees)  amongst  his  credulous  townsfolk.  Damasciusf
(whose  Life  of  Isidorus  Photius  is  here  being  epitomised)  adds,
that  this  philosopher  was  of  opinion  that  the  stone  was  the  abode
of  a  spirit,  though  not  one  of  the  mischievous  or  unclean  sort,
nor  yet  one  of  a  perfectly  immaterial  nature.  He  further
more  states  that  other  bsetyli  were  known,  dedicated  to  Saturn,
Jupiter,  and  the  Sun ;  and  moreover  that  Isidorus  and  himself
saw  many  of  such  bsetyli  or  bsetylla  upon  Mount  Libanus,  near
Heliopolis  in  Syria.

As  for  the  derivation  of  bsetylus,  the  one  proposed  by  the
Byzantine  Hesychius,  who  makes  it  come  from  bsete,  the  goat
skin  mantle,  wherein  Rhea  wrapped  up  the  stone  she  gave  old
Saturn  to  swallow,  instead  of  the  new-born  Jove,  cannot  be
considered  much  more  satisfactory  than  Bochart's,  who,  like  a
sound  divine,  discovers  in  it  a  reminiscence  of  the  stone  pillar
which  Jacob  set  up  at  Bethel,  and  piously  endeavours  to  force
Sancoriiathon,  who  speaks  of  the  "  living  "  stones,  the  bsethylia,  J

*  The  Greek  purple  included  every  J  "  Moreover  the  god  Uranus  de-
shade  from  crimson  to  violet.  vised  btethylia,  contriving  stones  that

t  A  stoic  philosopher  under  Justi-  moved  as  having  life."
nian.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  209

to confirm his interpretation by correcting his text into
"  anointed."

But  this  last  Ixtylm  is  beyond  all  question  the  same  thing
with  that  described  by  the  Pseudo-Orpheus,*  under  the  names
of  Sideritcs,  and  the  animated  Oritcs,  "  round,  black,  ponderous,
and  surrounded  with  deeply-graven  furrows."  In  the  first  of
these  epithets  may  easily  be  recognized  the  ferruginous  character
common  to  all  meteorites  (siderites  being  also  applied  to  the
loadstone),  whilst  the  second  (Orites)  seems  to  indicate  the
locality  where  they  most  abounded,  viz.,  Mount  Lebanon.

Sotacus'  notice,  indeed,  of  the  efficacy  of  the  Isetylm  in  pro
curing  success  in  seafights  and  sieges,  is  copiously  illustrated
by  the  succeeding  verses  of  the  same  mystic  poet,  who,  it  must
be  remembered,  can  claim  a  very  high  antiquity,  there  being
sufficient  grounds  for  identifying  him  with  Onomacritus,  a  con
temporary  of  Pisistratus,  in  the  sixth  century  before  our  era.
The diviner Helenus, according to him, had received this
oracular stone  from  Apollo, and  he  describes  the  rites, with
great  minuteness,  for  the  guidance  of  all  subsequent  possessors
of  such  a  treasure,  by  means  of  which  the  Trojan  woke  up  the
spirit  within  the  "  vocal  sphere." This  was  effected  by  dint  of
thrice  seven  days'  fasting  and  continence,  by  incantations  and
sacrifices  offered  to  the  stone,  and  by  bathing,  clothing,  and
nursing  it  like  an  infant. Through  its  aid,  when  at  length
rendered  instinct  with  life,  the  traitorous  seer  declared  to  the
Atridas the coming  downfall  of  Troy;  the  stone  uttering  its
responses  in  a  voice  resembling  the  feeble  wail  of  an  infant
desiring  the  breast. It  is  more  than  probable  that  Orphesius  in
describing the Orites,  had  in  view  the  Sdlagrdma, or  sacred
stone  of  Vishnu, still  employed  by  the  Brahmins in  all  pro
pitiatory  rites,  especially  in  those  performed  at  the  death-bed.
Sonnerat  describes  it  as  "  a  kind  of  ammonite,  round  or  oval  in
shape,  black,  and  very  ponderous." The  furrows  covering  its
surface  were  traced  by  Vishnu's  own  finger  ;  but  when  found
of a  violet  colour,  it  is  looked upon  with  horror,  as repre
senting  a  vindictive  avatar  of  the  god. The  possessor  keeps
it  wrapped  up  in  linen  garment  like  a  child,  and  often  bathes

*  Ai0i/ca,  355.


P


210  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

and  perfumes  it — precisely  the  rites  prescribed  by  our  poet  for
the  due  consultation  of  the  oracle  of  the  Siderites.

From  all  this  it  may  safely  be  deduced  that  the  "  stone  of
power,"  whether  bsetylus  or  orites,  was  in  most  cases nothing
more  than  a  fossil ;  either  a  ferruginous  nodule,  or  an  echinus
filled  with  iron  pyrites. Their  being  found  in  abundance  in  one
particular  locality,  precludes  the  idea  of  these at  least  being
meteorites,  which  latter,  besides,  never  assume  any  regular  form,
but  look  like  mere  fragments  of  iron  slag. This  explanation  is
strongly  supported  by  the  drawings  Boetius  gives*  of  what  was
then  called  the  "  Donner-stein,"  or  "  Wetter-stein,"  (thunder,  or
storm-stone,) and which he very plausibly identifies with
Pliny's  Brontias  "  that  got  into  the  head  of  the  tortoise  during
thunder-storms,"  and  which  is  described  in  another place  as
the  "  eye of  the  Indian  tortoise " that  conferred the  gift  of
prophecy. His carefully drawn figure of  this Donner-stein
(which  also  passed  for  the  "  grosser  Kroten-stein,"  bigger  toad-
stone),  shows  it  to  be  only  a  fossil  echinus  of  a  more  oMate  form
than  the  common  sort. The  regular  toadstone,  plentifully  to  be
seen in  medieval  rings,  was, on the other hand, the small
hollow  hemisphere,  the  fossil  tooth  of  an  extinct  fish,  found  in
the  greensand  formation. In  that  age the Donner-stein was
held  to  possess  all  the  many  virtues  of  the  Toadstone,  Belem-
nito,  and  Ovum Anguinum, in counteracting poison, giving
success in all enterprises, procuring sleep, and protection
against  danger  of  lightning. But  the  old  physician,  so  much
in  advance  of  his  times,  cannot  help  winding  up  the  list  of  its
virtues  with  the  hint,  "  Fides  saspe  veritate  major."

The  axe-heads  and  hammer-heads  of  stone,  known  to  us  by
the  general  designation  of  celts,  have,  until  recent  explorations,
been  regarded  as  comparatively  of  rare  'occurrence  amongst
ancient  relics  obtained  from  Eastern  lands  and  from  some  other
continental  countries.  Our  information,  however,  in  regard
to  objects  of  this  class  has  become  greatly  extended.  Mr.
James  Yates  published,  in  the  Archaeological  Journal,  ex
amples  of  stone  celts  from  Java ;  an  interesting  specimen
obtained  at  Sardis  is  figured,  vol.  xv.  p.  178,  and  some  others

*  ii.  cap.  26-i.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIK REMAINS.  211

were  found  by  Mr.  Layard  at  Nineveh.  The  occurrence  of
any  ornament  or  inscription  upon  such  objects  is  very  rare,
but  amongst  numerous  stone  implements  obtained  in  Greece
one  is  noticed  by  M.  de  Mortillet  (Materiaux  pour  1'Histoire
primitive  do  rilomme,  Jan.  1868,  p.  9),  of  which  he  had  re
ceived  from  Athens  a  drawing  and  an  estampage  ;  it  is  described
as  "une  hache  en  pierre  serpentineu.se,  sur  une  des  faces  de
laquello  on  a  grave  trois  personnages  et  une  inscription  en
caracteres  grecs.  L'ancien  outil  a  evidemment  ete,  beaucoup
plus  tard,  quand  on  a  eu  completement  oublie  son  usao-e
primitif,  transforme  en  talisman  ou  pierre  cabalistique."

At  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Antiquaries  of  the  North,  on
March  21st,  1853,  under  the  presidency  of  the  late  King  of  Den
mark,  several  recent  acquisitions  were  exhibited,  obtained  for  his
private  collection  at  Frederiksborg.  Amongst  these  there  was
an  axe-head  of  stone  (length  about  6J  inches),  perforated  with  a
hole  for  the  handle,  and  remarkable  as  bearing  on  one  of  its
sides  four  Eunic  characters,  that  appear  to  have  been  cut  upon
the  stone  at  some  period  more  recent  than  the  original  use  of
the  implement.  It  has  been  figured  in  the  Memoirs  of  the
Society,  1850-1860,  p.  28  ;  see  also  Antiquarisk  Tidsskrift,  1852-
1854,  pp.  258-266.  I  am  indebted  to  a  friend  well  skilled  in
Eunes  and  Scandinavian  archaeology,  Dr.  Charlton,  formerly
secretary  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries  of  Newcastle,  for  the
following  observations  on  this  interesting  relic.

"  The  first  letter  is  L,  and,  if  we  accept  the  idea  that  these
were  Eunes  of  Victory,  it  may  stand  for  the  initial  of  Loki ;
the  second  is  Th,  and  may  stand  for  Thor ;  the  third  0  for
Odin;  the  fourth,  Belgthor,  with  a  T  above  it,  may  refer  to
Belgthor's  friendship  and  alliance  with  Thor,  and  the  T  stands
for  Tyr.  We  may  imagine  the  names  of  the  Northern  gods  to
have  been  cut  on  this  stone  axe  to  give  it  victory  in  battle,
just  as  the  old  Germans  and  Saxons  cut  mystic  Eunes  on  their
swords,  a  practice  noticed  by  Haigh  in  his  '  Conquest  of  Britain
by  the  Saxons,'  p.  28,  pi.  1,  where  he  has  figured  amongst
various  examples  of  the  futhorc,  or  alphabet  of  Eunic  charac
ters,  one  inlaid  on  a  sword  or  knife  found  in  the  Thames,
and  now  in  the  British  Museum.  At  p.  51,  ibid.  pi.  iii.  fig.  20,
he  has  cited  also  the  Eunic  inscription  on  the  silver  pommel  of

P  2


212  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

a  sword  found  at  Gilton,  Kent,  formerly  in  the  collection  of  the
late  Mr.  Eolfe,  of  Sandwich,  and  subsequently  in  the  possession  of
Mr.  Joseph  Mayer.  This  relic  is  now  in  the  precious  museum
bestowed  by  his  generous  encouragement  of  archaeological  science
on  the  town  of  Liverpool.  The  interpretation  given  in  the
latter  instance  is  as  follows, — I  eke  victory  to  great  deeds.*

"  There  was  another  explanation  given  of  the  characters  on
the  Danish  stone  axe.  It  was  read — LUTHER,  o. — Ludr  owns
namely,  the  weapon  thus  inscribed."

In  the  ancient  Sagas,  as  remarked  in  Nilsson's  *  Primitive
Inhabitants  of  Scandinavia  '  (translation  by  Sir  John  Lubbock,
Bart,  p.  214J,  mention  occurs  of  amulets  designated  life-stones,
victory-stones,  &c.,  which  warriors  carried  about  with  them  in
battle  to  secure  victory.  A  curious  relation  is  cited  from  one
of  the  Sagas,  that  King  Kidung,  when  about  to  engage  in
conflict,  perceived  that  he  had  neglected  to  bring  a  precious
heir-loom,  a  .stone  that  possessed  the  virtue  of  ensuring  victory.
He  offered  the  hand  of  his  daughter,  with  a  third  part  of  his
kingdom,  to  him  who  should  bring  this  talisman  before  the
fight  commenced ;  and,  having  received  it,  he  won  the  battle.
In  another  narrative,  the  daughter  of  a  Scanian  warrior  steals
during  his  slumbers  the  stone  that  was  hung  on  his  neck,  and
gave  it  to  her  lover,  who  thus  became  the  victor.  Nilsson
observes  that  stones  are  found  in  museums,  for  instance  a
hammer-stone  with  a  loop,  that  appear  to  have  been  worn  thus
as  talismans  in  war.

It  is  perhaps  scarcely  necessary  to  advert  to  certain  axe-heads
of  stone,  in  their  general  form  similar  to  those  with  which  we
are  familiar  as  found  in  Europe  ;  upon  these  implements  are
engraved  rude  designs,  such  as  the  Jiuman  visage,  &c.  These
objects,  of  which  an  example  preserved  in  a  museum  at  Douai
has  been  much  cited,  may  be  "  victory-stones "  of  an  ancient
and  primitive  people,  but  they  are  now  recognised  as  of  Carib
origin,  and  not  European.

*  '  Archceologia,' vol.  xxxii.  p.  321.  antiquaries suggest, appended to

A  spear-head inscribed  with  Runes  sword-hilts  as  charms. One  of  these

is  noticed,  '  Journ.  Brit.  Arch.  Ass.,'  rings,  lately  found  at  Carlisle,  is  in

vol.  xxiii.  p.  387. There  exist  certain  possession  of  Mr.  Robert  Ferguson,  of

massive  rings  of  metal  inscribed  with  Morton,  near  that  city.
Runes,  that  may  have  been,  as  some


PART III.

ABRAXAS,  ABRAXASTER,  AND
ABRAXOID  GEMS.


THE CxNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  215


THE  AGATIIOD^EMON  WORSHIP

"  THERE  was  a  time  "  (says  M.  Matter  with  much  force)  "  when  it
was  from  Judaism,  especially  from  the  Kabbala,  and  the  system
of  Philo,  that  people  sought  to  derive  the  great  transition  of  the
human  mind  from  the  ancient  into  the  modern  world  :  a  revolu
tion  in  which  so  important  a  part  is  played  by  Gnosticism.  So
far  as  regards  the  explanation  of  the  writings  and  the  under
standing  of  the  views  given  by  Origen,  Irengeus,  and  the  other
Fathers  upon  Gnosticism,  the  Jewish  element  still  retains  its
ancient  pre-eminence  ;  but  in  the  case  of  the  tangible  monuments
come  down  to  us  from  the  Gnostics  themselves,  we  ought  hence
forth  to  be  fully  convinced  that  it  is  in  the  antiquities  of  Eyypt
we  must  look  for  our  chief  information :  and  if  the  ideas,
terminology,  and  symbols  of  Judaism  (that  is,  of  the  Kabbala)
have  lent  certain  doctrines  to  this  system,  yet  it  is  Egyptian  art
that  has  furnished  it  with  the  greatest  part  of  its  symbols."

This  grand  development  of  the  old  Wisdom  of  Egypt  in  a
new  phase  is  the  most  conspicuously  exhibited  in  that  very
numerous  class  of  engraved  gems  popularly  and  indiscriminately
called  Abraxas,  Basilidan,  and  Gnostic  stones,  almost  the  sole
production  of  the  expiring  Glyptic  Art  during  the  last  two
centuries  of  the  Western  Empire.  But,  contrary  to  the
generally  received  notion  concerning  their  nature,  a  careful,
study  of  their  numerous  subdivisions  has  fully  convinced  me
that  only  a  very  small  minority  amidst  their  multitude  present
any  traces  of  the  influence  of  Christian  doctrines  ;  being  for  the
most  part  the  fruit  of  religious  ideas  which  had  flourished  long
before  the  first  dawn  of  Christianity.  An  important  portion,
indeed,  originating  in  the  primitive  Egyptian  Mythology,  have
more  connexion  with  Magic  and  Medicine  than  with  any
religious  object ;  and  their  employment  as  talismans  establishes


216  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIli REMAINS.

for  them  a  higher  antiquity  than  belongs  to  the  real  "  Abraxas  "
gems,  the  date  of  whose  origin  is  historically  ascertained.  The
subject  therefore  will  be  more  conveniently  approached  by
considering  in  the  first  place  the  Agathodsemon,  Chnuphis,  or
Chneph  figures,  often  named  "  Dracontia,"  and  erroneously
attributed  to  the  Ophites  and  such-like  semi-Christian  sects,  as
their  actual  inventors.

It  cannot  however  be  denied,  that  although  these  last-named
sectaries  did  not  invent  this  emblem,  yet  that  they  generally
adopted  it  for  their  distinguishing  badge  or,  to  use  their  technical
word,  "  seal."  And  this  circumstance  leads  to  a  remark  which,
applying  to  all  talismans  alike,  may  aptly  serve  for  preface  to
the  following  dissertation  upon  their  several  classes.  In  the
primitive  Nature-worship  of  the  Old  World  all  religion  consisted
in  the  deification  of  the  great  visible  Powers  of  the  Universe*
The  Supremo  Beings  therefore  belonged  to  the  present  World,
consequently  all  the  blessings  they  could  confer  were  limited  to
this  life.  The  means,  of  whatever  kind,  supposed  to  secure  the
goodwill  of  these  Powers  had  for  object  tangible  blessings
alone— wealth,  peace,  long  life,  posterity— in  fact  all  those
rewards  promised  by  Moses  to  the  obedient  Israelites.  The
engraved  stones  under  consideration,  being  legacies  of  this
older  religion,  were  designed  to  secure  temporal  not  spiritual
benefits  to  the  wearers.  The  latter  were  not  even  dreamed  of
by  people  holding  the  belief  "  mors  ultima  linea  rerum  est."
This  fact  explains  why  so  many  of  the  Gnostic  gems  are  in
reality  no  more  than  medicinal  agents,  and  prescribed  by
physicians,  Heathen  and  Christian  alike,  in  their  regular
practice,  from  Nechepsos  down  to  Alexander  Trallianus.  On
the  other  hand  the  true  Gnostics,  whose  sole  profession  was
the  knowledge  of  the  other  world,  when  they  applied  to  the
doctrines  of  the  ancient  religion  the  same  method  of  interpre
tation  that  the  Kabbalists  had  used  for  Moses  and  the  Prophets
(of  which  the  Pistis- Sophia  has  left  us  such  ingenious  specimens),
subjected  all  the  productions  of  the  former  creed  to  the  same
Procrustean  torture,  and  consequently  availed  themselves  of
these  same  symbols — nay,  more,  continued  to  manufacture
them  in  their  own  sense  of  their  import.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  217

Tho  Agathodsemon —  "Good  Genius"  —  whose  very  name
furnishes  the  reason  why  he  should  be  chosen  to  figure  on  an
ornament  intended  to  defend  its  wearer  from  all  disease  and
mischance,  is  depicted  as  a  huge  serpent  having  the  head  of  a
lion,  surrounded  by  a  crown  of  seven  or  twelve  rays — components
conspicuously  announcing  that  he  is  the  embodiment  of  the
idea  of  the  Sun-god.  This  figure  is  usually  accompanied,  either
on  obverse  or  reverse,  with  its  proper  title,  written  variously
XNOTBIZ,  XNOT<t>II,  and  XNOTMIZ,  accordingly  as  the  engraver
fancied  ho  could  best  master  that  difficulty  to  the  Greek
mouth,  the  true  sound  of  our  letter  B.  This  name  Salmasius*
considers  as  a  rendering  of  the  Coptic  XNOTB,  gold;  and  hence
explains  another  title  which  sometimes  takes  its  place,  XOAXN-
OTBIZ,  as  '"  All-golden."  Jablonsky,  however,derives  the  word
more  plausibly  from  XNOTM,  good,  and  IZ,  spirit,  and  thus  makes
"  Agothodaemon  "  to  be  the  literal  translation  of  the  namc.t

This  last  had  become  in  the  third  century  the  popular  name
for  the  hooded  snake  of  Egypt.  Lampridius  has  "  Heliogabulus
^Egyptios  dracunculos  Romae  habuit,  quos  illi  Agatlwdsemonas
vocant."  This  kind  was  the  Uraeus,  to  be  seen  commonly  on
Egyptian  monuments,  whore  it  is  the  badge  of  royalty  placed
upon  the  head  of  the  sovereign.  It  is  the  hadji  hasher  of  the
modern  Arabs,  the  cobra  di  capello  of  the  Hindoos.  I  have  met
with  a  large  sard  engraved  in  the  late  Roman-Egyptian  style,
with  two  imperial  busts  regardant;  reverse,  the  Chnuphis
Serpent,  with  the  legend  in  Roman  letters  AGATHO DAEMON,
the  sole  instance  known  to  me  of  such  an  amulet  with  a  Latin
inscription:  but  which  goes  far  to  confirm  Jablonsky's  inter
pretation  of  the  Coptic  title.  In  classical  Greek  the  original
Chneph  becomes  Canopus  ;  hence  the  Canopic  vase  often  appears
between  two  serpents  for  heraldic  supporters.  But  in  those
lower  times,  so  fruitful  in  the  Chnuphis  talismans,  no  more
Canopic  vases  appear  on  gems.

*  He  has  treated  the  subject  at  (the  Sun)  designated  as  HFE"Tlie

some  length  in  that  learned  miscel-  Serpent "  par  eminence,  and  which

lany  of  his,  the  treatise  *  De  Anno  was  a  winged  serpent  bavin"  human

Climacterico.'  arms  and  feet.  He  is  thus"  painted

t  The  prototype  appears  to  have  on  mummy-cases  as  guardian  of  the

been  that  ancient  figure  of  Atmon  inmate.


218  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

The  ancient  Agathodsemon,  in  the  form  of  his  congener  the
Cobra,  still  haunts  the  precincts  of  the  Hindoo  temples,  as  of
old  the  shrines  of  Isis;  and  issues  from  his  hole  at  the  sound
of  a  fife  to  accept  the  oblation  of  milk  from  the  attendant  priest.
As  with  the  ancients  so  with  the  Hindoos,  he  is  the  special
keeper  of  concealed  treasure ;  and  when  a  zemindar  deposits  his
hoard  in  the  prepared  hiding-place,  he,  to  make  assurance
doubly  sure,  builds  up  a  serpent  therewith,  to  watch  over  the
gold.  Suetonius  records  that  Tiberius  had  a  most  appropriate  pet
in  a  "  serpens  draco  "  ;  but  having  found  it  one  day  devoured  by
a  swarm  of  ants,  the  suspicious  CaBsar  took  warning  from  its  fate
to  beware  of  the  force  of  a  multitude  of  feeble  individuals;  and
consequently  secured  his  person  against  all  danger  of  popular  out
break  by  shutting  himself  up  in  the  inaccessible  fastness  of  Capri.

But  to  return  to  the  type  of  the  Agathodaiiiion  upon  our
gems.  Over  the  seven  rays  of  the  lion's  crown,  and  correspond
ing  to  their  points,  stand  often  the  seven  vowels  of  the  Greek
alphabet,  AEHIOTQ,  testifying  the  Seven  Heavens;  a  mystery
whereof  notice  shall  be  taken  in  the  fitting  place.  The  reverse
of  such  gems  is  invariably  occupied  by  a  special  symbol
resembling  the  letter  S,  or  Z,  thrice  repeated,  or  the  convolu
tions  of  a  spiral  cord,  and  traversed  by  a  straight  rod  through
their  middle ;  a  symbol  for  which  many  and  the  most  whimsical
explanations  have  been  proposed.  Of  these  the  most  ingenious,
but  also  the  most  fanciful,  makes  it  represent  the  spinal  marrow
traversing  the  spine — certainly  an  apt  device  for  a  medicinal
talisman.  But  whatever  its  primary  meaning  it  was  probably
imported  in  its  present  shape  from  India  (that  true  fountain-
head  of  Gnostic  iconography).  It  is  to  be  seen  in  two  varieties,
upon  series  16  and  17  in  Plate  VII.  of  E.  Thomas'  admirable
Essay  on  the  Primitive  Coinage  of  India,  amongst  the  punch-
marks.

THE  CHNUPHIS  SERPENT.

A  Limoges  enamelled  plaque  of  the  twelfth  century  (in  the
collection  of  Mr.  Octavius  Morgan)  represents  on  its  one  half
"  Moyses  "  lifting  up  the  Brazen  Serpent  to  the  "  Filii  Israel."
On  the  other  half,  "  similis  Aaron "  is  seen  inscribing  with  a


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  219

reed  pen  the  mystic  Tau  Cross  upon  the  foreheads  of  the  elect.
The  first  of  these  tableaux  offers  the  most  extraordinary  feature
in  its  representation  of  the  serpent,  depicted  here  with  lion's
head  and  mane :  the  veritable  Agathodaemon  Chnuphis  of  our
Alexandrian  talismans.  The  preservation  of  this  form  to  so
late  a  period  fills  one  with  surprise  :  it  indicates  a  traditionary
belief  that  the  symbol  was  the  giver  of  life  and  health.  The
belief  must  have  come  down  from  the  times  when  the  Egyptian
talisman  was  commonly  worn,  in  the  way  Galen  mentions,  as  a
protection  to  the  chest.  The  Brazen  Serpent  of  Moses  and  the
Plasma  Agathoda3mon  of  King  Nechepsos  had  in  all  probability
one  and  the  same  origin,  giving  currency  to  those  little  ingots
which  formed  the  sole  money  of  the  Hindoos  before  the  esta
blishment  of  the  Macedonians  in  Bactria.  But  the  most  probable
solution  of  the  question  is  that  the  symbol  stealthily  represents
the  serpent-entwined  club  of  Aesculapius  (itself  so  hard  to  account
for),  or  the  wand  similarly  encircled,  which  was  the  badge  of
Egyptian  priesthood.  And  what  renders  this  conjecture  of  mine
almost  a  certainty  is  an  as  of  the  gens  Acilia,  bearing  for
obverse  the  head  of  Aesculapius,  for  reverse  a  wand  (not  the
usual  club)  placed  vertically  and  encircled  by  his  serpent  in
three  convolutions.  This  type,  if  slightly  defaced  by  wear,  would
become  identical  in  appearance  with  the  Chnuphis  symbol.
The  spiral  frequently  takes  the  form  of  the  letters  S  S  S  dis
connected,  traversed  by  a  straight  line.  The  curative  virtue
ascribed  to  the  sigil,  again,  tends  to  indicate  its  derivation  from
the  proper  badge  of  the  god  of  the  healing  art.  For  the  eminent
physician  Marcellus  Ernpiricus  (who  flourished  at  Bordeaux  in
Theodosius'  reign)  promises  wonderful  effects  in  the  cure  of
pleurisy  from  the  wearing  of  this  very  figure  engraved  upon  a
cerulean  Scythian  jasper.  Whether  this  promise  be  true  or  not,
marvellous  has  been  the  vitality  of  the  symbol  itself ;  for  re
duced  to  a  double  S  S  upon  a  bar,  it  became  a  favourite  device
in  the  times  of  chivalry,  being  taken  as  the  rebus  upon  the
word  Fermesse*  (SS  fermees)  and  the  emblem  of  constancy.
Hence  comes  it  that  this  ancient  Egyptian  symbol  now  adorns

*  This  sigla  ill  its  simplest  form, fusion over all the buildings of
>$, makes its appearance in pro- Henri  IV.,  where  it  is  popularly  ex-


220


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


the  Collar  of  the  Garter,  formerly  known  as  the  "  Collars  of  SS."
Meyrick's  derivation  of  the  name  from  the  initial  of  "  Souver
ayne,"  motto  of  Henry  IV.  when  Earl  of  Derby  (and  on  whoso
effigy  the  Collar  first  appears),  is  of  little  weight ;  for  that  king
was  long  posterior  to  the  institution  of  the  Order  and  its  in
signia.  Even  more  preposterous  is  Camden's  idea  that  the  name
originated  in  the  initials  of  Sanctus  Simo  Simplicius,  a  famous
Koinan  lawyer  ;  and  therefore  was  taken  for  badge  by  his  pro
fession — a  theory  which  assuredly  does  not  account  for  Henry's
queen,  Joan  of  Navarre,  being  similarly  decorated  with  her
husband  upon  their  monument.

That  the  Agathodaemon  sigil  was  not  only  pre-Christian,  but
ascended  to  the  remotest  antiquity  in  its  use  as  a  talisman,  plainly
appears  from  Galen's  notice  thereof  (De  Simp.  Med.  6  ix.).
"  Some  indeed  assert  that  a  virtue  of  this  kind  is  inherent  in
certain  stones,  such  as  it  is  certain  is  possessed  by  the  green  jasper,
which  benefits  the  chest  and  mouth  of  the  stomach,  when  tied
upon  them.  Some  indeed  set  the  stone  in  a  ring,  and  engrave
upon  it  a  serpent  with  head  crowned  with  rays,  according  to  the
directions  of  King  Nechepsos  in  his  thirteenth  book.  Of  this
material  I  have  had  much  experience,  having  made  a  necklace
out  of  stones  of  the  kind,  and  hung  it  about  the  patient's  neck,
descending  low  enough  to  touch  the  mouth  of  the  stomach,  and
they  proved  to  be  of  no  less  benefit  than  if  they  had  been  en
graved  in  the  manner  laid  down  by  King  Nechepsos."  This
treatise  by  Nechepsos  must  have  been  a  regular  Manual  for  the
use  of  Magicians,  for  Ausonius  mentions  its  author  as

"  Quique  magos  docuit  mysteria  vaiia  Nechepsi."
"  Xechepsos,  teacher  of  vain  Magic's  lore."


plained as relating to Gabrielle  cords — ('  Revue Numismatique '  for

d'Estrees, a rebus in its sound,  1856,  p.  276j.

"  S  pcrce  d'un  t rait." But  Longperier  "  Fermesse,  dout  1'Araour  point  uu

has  shown  that  the  same  figure  is  to  Chiffre  d'amour

be found  on  the  medals  of  Henri's  Commune  en  1'ecriture,  mais  rare

mother  and sister, and even upon  dans  le  coeur,

,.  T -in * n A j.  •  Mais  ainsi  que  la  lorrne  est  a  un

articles  made  for  Anne  of  Austria;  anj  mb  ^  deux

and  he  acquiesces  in  the  explanation  Le de'sir inc0nstant froiase et

given  in  the  text,  which is taken  brise  tes  uceuds,

from  an  old  book,  '  Lcs  Bigarrures,'  Ce pendant quo les mains ta

chap.  "  DCS  Rebus  de  la  Picardie,"  fcrmesse  figurent."

by  Etioime  Tabouret,  Sieur  des  Ac  '  Lov*  PaP°n»'  16th  centur>''


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  221

The  book,  perhaps  the  foundation  of  the  pretended  Evax,  was
the  first  source  of  the  notions  concerning  the  virtues  of  sigils
and  gems  preserved  to  us  in  the  medieval  "  Lapidaria."  Pliny
(vii.  50)  quotes  him  along  with  hi&  countryman  Petosiris  as  an
astrological  authority,  according  to  whose  rule  of  the  "  Tetarto-
morion "  (or  law  deduced  from  the  position  of  three  signs,
Trine)  the  possible  duration  of  human  life  in  the  region  of  Italy
extended  to  124  years.  And  before  dismissing  Nechepsos  and
his  book  it  may  be  as  well  to  add  here—for  the  fact  will  be  of
service  in  a  further  stage  of  this  inquiry — that  Pliny  mentions
(xxx.  2)  a  second  school  of  Magic,  "  but  more  recent  by  many
thousand  years "  than  Zoroaster's,  and  founded  by  the  Jews,
Moses,  lannes  and  Jotapes.  The  first  of  the  trio  may  be  the
Talmudist  to  whose  "  secret  volume  "  Juvenal  alludes —

"  Tradidit  arcane  quacunique  voluminc  Moses."

Although  the  Apostle  couples  lannes  along  with  lambrcs
amongst  the  Egyptian  opponents  of  the  Hebrew  legislator,
Juvenal  also  informs  us  that  the  nation  retained  even  in  his
times  their  ancient  fame  of  veracious  interpreters  of  dreams ;
nay,  more,  grown  "wiser  than  Daniel,"  they  even  produced
them  to  order —

"  Qualiacunque  voles  Judan  somnia  mittunt."
"The  Jew,  for  money,  sends  what  dreams  you  chooso."

Hippolytus  in  the  following  century  remarks  that  the  **  Sama
ritans,  or  "  Simonians,"  founded  by  the  first  preacher  of  the
Gnosis,  Simon  Magus  himself,  availed  themselves  of  this  power
in  order  to  plague  their  adversaries,  "sending  the  dream-
producing  demons  to  trouble  whomsoever  they  please."  The
medieval  name  for  engraved  gems  regarded  as  talismans,  viz.,
"  Pierres  d'Israel,"  is  better  founded  than  is  generally  supposed-
The  obvious  difficulty  that  graven  figures — nay,  more,  idols —
could  not  have  been  the  work  of  Jews,  is  answered  by  the
Kabbinical  gloss  upon  the  Second  Commandment,  which  allows
the  wearing  of  any  sort  of  design  cut  in  intaglio,  though
prohibiting  anything  of  the  sort  in  relief.


222  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

The  choice  of  the  green  jasper  (now  called  plasmcv*)  for  the
Agathodasinon  sigils  was  probably  dictated  by  the  resemblance
of  its  colour  to  that  of  the  sacred  Asp — green  banded  with
brown.  As  for  the  figure  itself,  a  very  ancient  testimony  as  to
its  nature  and  signification  is  aiforded  by  the  tradition  Eusebius
has  preserved  (I.  7)  :  "  The  serpent,  unless  injured  by  violence,
never  dies  naturally,  for  which  reason  the  Phoenicians  have
given  it  the  name  of  the  'Good  Genius,'  AgatJwdsemon.  For
the  same  cause  the  Egyptians  have  called  it  '  Cneph,'  and
given  to  it  the  head  of  a  hawk,  because  of  the  especial  swiftness
of  that  bird."  The  priest  of  Epeae,  entitled  "  Head-interpreter
of  sacred  things  and  Scribe,"  had  expounded  the  allegory  thus  :
"  The  most  divine  Nature  of  all  was  one  Serpent  having  the
face  of  a  hawk,  and  most  delightful  in  aspect,  for  when  he
opened  his  eyes  he  filled  all  the  places  of  his  native  region
with  light;  but  when  he  closed  them,  darkness  immediately
ensued."  The  serpent  on  our  gems,  however,  does  not  appear
invested  with  a  hawk's  head,  but  with  a  lion's  ;  for  which  reason
this  legend  applies  better  to  the  Abraxas-god,  occasionally
equipped  with  a  hawk's  or  lion's  head,  in  place  of  his  proper
one,  that  of  a  cock.  But  the  idea  is  certainly  embodied  in  that
common  design  upon  the  Mithraic  gems,  a  man  grasping  a
serpent,  of  which  the  radiated  head  points  at  his  eyes  and  seems
to  supply  them  with  light.  Furthermore,  the  meaning  of  the
figure  of  the  Agathodairnon  is  clearly  denoted  by  the  Chaldee
legend  frequently  accompanying  it.  C6M€C6IAAM,  "The  Ever
lasting  Sun,"  which  is  sometimes  followed  by  YG,  probably  used
as  sacred  numerals,  for  they  have  the  power  in  Greek  arith
metic  of  705.  This  same  legend  is  attached  to  a  classical
figure  of  Phcobus  (such  as  he  appears  on  the  coins  with  the
legend  SOLI  INVICTO  C  OMIT  I )  engraved  upon  a  yellow  jasper
in  the  Marlborough  Cabinet — a  fact  sufficiently  attesting  the
accuracy  of  the  interpretation  here  given  to  the  Chaldee
inscription.

Astrology  likewise  lent  its  aid  to  accrediting  the  virtues  of  the

*  The  green  jasper  of  the  moderns as  opaque,  dark-green,  and  specially
was  the  rnolochites  or  moloohas  of used  for  amulets,
the  ancients,  for Pliny  describes  it


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS  223

sigil.  That  great  authority  Hephaestion  (quoted  by  Salmasius,
i.e.)  observes  that  XNOTMIC  is  the  name  of  one  of  the
Decani,  or  three  chief  stars  in  Cancer ;  whilst  another  astrologer
laid  down  that  the  star  so  called  was  set  in  the  breast  of  Leo,
and/or  that  reason  was  efficacious  for  the  cure  of  all  diseases  in  the
chest  of  man.  And  in  fact  we  find  this  latter  dictum  con
firmed  by  the  prayer  <J>TAACC6  THH  CTOMAXON  HPOKAOT,
"  Keep  in  good  health  the  chest  of  Proclus,"  engraved  upon  the
back  of  one  of  these  very  Chnuphis  gems.  Others  of  the  same
kind  are  again  surrounded  by  a  long  Coptic  legend  often
arranged  in  the  outline  of  a  serpent,  varying  in  words,  but
always  terminating  in  the  epithet  riTANTUPHKTA  or  nAIKTA,
"  Breaker  "  or  "  Mocker  "  of  the  Giants— that  is,  of  the  evil  and
rebellious  Angels;  for  the  Grecian  fable  of  the  War  of  the
Giants  against  Jove  had  then  revived,  a  Zoroastrian  interpreta
tion  being  applied  to  the  rebellion  of  Ahriman  and  his  demons
against  Ormuzd  and  the  Ministers  of  Good.

The  method  of  employing  a  talisman  is  thus  prescribed
in  the  Magic  Papyrus,  §  9  :— "  A  Spell  of  Alloius  Crseonins,
spoken  to  the  Lamp,"  "  O^ap/xaxo)  rovvovpai  xprj  /uaXXov  SepKvo>v
i/a  lao  o-ov/Ai/^iow  o-ovjjujnqvis  o-wcrta  <riaa>i,  Thou  that  shakest
the  world!  Enter,  and  deliver  an  oracle  concerning  such
and  such  a  matter.  ®oto  KoroO  <f>0ovtj>vovv  vovefiov?)  €Trraa-7raxaTov.
The  engraved  stone  (A.y.)  Serapis  seated  in  front,  having  the
Egyptian  crown  (/WiAijZoi/)  ££,  and  upon  his  sceptre  an  ibis,
on  the  back  of  the  stone  the  Name ;  and  lock  it  up  and  keep
it  for  use.  Hold  in  thy  left  hand  the -ring,  and  in  thy  right
a  branch  of  olive  and  of  bay-tree,  waving  them  over  the  lamp,
repeating  all  the  while  the  spells  even  times.  And  having
drawn  the  ring  upon  the  proper  finger  of  thy  left  hand,  facing
and  being  inwards  (the  engraving),  stick  the  gem  against  thy
left  ear,  and  go  to  sleep,  without  returning  answer  to  any  one."
The  object  of  this  charm  was  (although  not  so  stated)  to
procure  prophetic  dreams,  which  are  actually  enumerated
amongst  the  effects  to  follow  from  the  use  of  the  one  that
stands  next  in  the  MS.

Although  the  original  intention  of  these  Chnuphis  sigils  was
unquestionably  the  one  pointed  out  in  the  preceding  pages,  yet


224  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

there  is  every  probability  from  the  nature  of  the  case  that  the
same  were  adopted  and  interpreted  in  a  spiritual  sense  by  the
numerous  and  influential  sect  that  first  assumed  the  title  of
"  Gnostics."  They  had  an  all-sufficient  reason  for  so  doing,  in
the  fundamental  doctrine  of  their  creed  The  well-informed
and  temperate  Hippolytus,  writing  at  the  most  flourishing
period  of  these  transitional  theosophies,  thus  opens  his  actual
'  Refutation  of  all  Heresies '  and  his  Fifth  Book  with  the
description  "  of  that  sect  which  hath  dared  to  boast  the  Serpent
as  the  author  of  their  religion,  as  they  prove  by  certain
arguments  wherewith  he  hath  inspired  them.  On  this  account
the  apostles  and  priests  of  this  creed  have  been  styled  '  Naaseni,'
from  '  Naas,'  the  Hebrew  word  for  serpent :  but  subsequently
they  entitled  themselves  '  The  Gnostics,'  because  they  alone
understood  the  deep  things  of  religion.  Out  of  this  sect  sprung
many  other  teachers,  who  by  diversifying  the  original  doctrines
through  inventions  of  their  own  became  the  founders  of  new
systems."  Further  on  he  has  a  passage  bearing  immediately
upon  this  subject.  "  This  Naas  is  the  only  thing  they  worship,
for  which  reason  they  are  called  '  Naaseni '  (i.e.  Ophites,  or
Serpent- worshippers).  From  this  same  word  Naas  they  pretend
that  all  the  temples  (vaoi*)  under  Heaven  derive  the  name.
And  unto  this  Naas  are  dedicated  every  rite,  ceremony,  mystery,
that  is ;  in  short,  not  one  rite  can  be  found  under  Heaven  into
which  this  Naas  doth  not  enter.  For  they  say  the  Serpent
signifies  the  element  Water ;  and  with  Thales  of  Miletus  contend
that  nothing  in  the  Universe  can  subsist  without  it,  whether  of
things  mortal  or  immortal,  animate  or  inanimate.  All  things
are  subject  unto  him  ;  and  he  is  good,  and  hath  all  good  things
within  himself  as  in  the  horn  of  a  unicorn,  so  that  he  imparts
beauty  and  perfection  unto  all  that  is,  inasmuch  as  he  pervades
all  things,  as  flowing  out  of  Eden,  and  divided  into  four
heads.  .  .  .  This  Naas  is  the  '  water  above  the  firmament,'  and
likewise  the  'living  water'  spoken  of  by  the  Saviour.  Unto
this  Water  all  Nature  is  drawn,  and  attracts  out  of  the  same
whatever  is  analogous  to  its  own  nature,  each  thing  after  its
own  kind,  with  more  avidity  than  the  loadstone  draws  the  iron,
Hie  ray  of  the  sea-hawk  gold,  or  amber  straws.  Then  they  go


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

on  to  boast :  Wo  are  the  Spiritual,  who  have  drawn  our  own
portion  out  of  the  living  water  of  the  Euphrates  that  flows
through  the  midst  of  Babylon  ;  and  who  have  entered  in  through
the  True  Gate,  the  which  is  Jesus  the  Blessed.  And  we  of  all
men  are  the  only  Christians,  in  the  Third  Gate  celebrating  the
Mystery,  being  anointed  with  the  ineffable  ointment  out  of  the
horn  like  David,  not  out  of  the  earthen  vessel  like  Saul  who
conversed  with  the  Evil  Spirit  of  carnal  concupiscence."

Euphrates,  a  more  recent  teacher  of  the  sect,  who  founded
the  branch  calling  themselves  "  Peratai,"  or  Fatalists,  has  a
passage  that  indicates  the  sense  in  which  his  followers  may
have  accepted  these  Clmuphis  gems.  "  To  them  therefore  of
the  Children  of  Israel  who  were  bitten  in  the  Wilderness  Moses
showed  the  True  and  Perfect  Serpent;  in  whom  whosoever
trusteth  he  shall  not  be  bitten  by  the  serpents  of  the  Wilderness,
that  is,  shall  not  be  hurt  by  the  Powers.  No  one  therefore  is
able  to  heal  and  to  save  them  that  be  gone  forth  out  of  Egypt,
that  is,  out  of  the  body  and  out  of  the  world,  save  that  Perfect,
Full  of  all  fulness,  Serpent.  In  Him  whosoever  putteth  his
trust,  that  man  perisheth  not  by  the  serpents  of  the  Wilderness,
that  is,  by  the  gods  of  the  nativity."

These  last  Powers,  whom  Euphrates  (a  pure  astrologer)  in
another  place  calls  the  "  gods  of  death,"  are  the  stars  of  the
horoscope,  "  which  impose  upon  all  that  be  born  the  fatal  yoko
of  the  changeful  nativity,"  that  is,  the  necessity  of  death,  the
necessary  consequence  of  birth,  a  doctrine  that  clearly  leads  to
the  efficacy  of  the  Serpent  sigil  as  a  talisman  to  protect  the
wearer  against  the  malign  influence  of  the  astral  genii.  The
Ophites,  in  fact,  were  the  legitimate  descendants  of  the  Bacchic
Mystae,  whose  religion  during  the  two  centuries  preceding  cm-
era  must  have  been  the  predominant  one  in  the  great  cities  of
Asia  Minor.  An  argument  derived  from  Numismatics  establishes
the  common  fact — the  coinage  of  the  chief  cities,  Ephesus,
Apamea,  Pergamus,  was  issued  chiefly  in  the  form  of  Cistophor),
having  for  obverse  the  Bacchic  Serpent  raising  himself  out  of
the  sacred  coffer;  for  reverse,  two  serpents  entwined  round
torches.


22(3  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIB REMAINS.

THE ABKAXAS.

I.  ABRAX ASTER,  OR  BORROWED  TYPES.

Bellermann  in  his  lucid  little  treatise,  *  Drei  Programmen
iiber  die  Abraxas-gemmen,'*  has  divided  his  subject  into  three
parts — the  true  Abraxas,  all  of  which  bear  the  Pantheon  com
monly  so  entitled,  whose  creation  is  assigned  to  Basilides  him
self  ;  the  Abraxastcr,  or  types  borrowed  from  the  old  religions,
but  adapted  by  the  Gnostic  semi-Christians  to  the  expression
of  their  own  new  ideas ;  and  Abraxoid,  which,  though  vulgarly
accounted  Basilidan  gems,  have  no  connection  at  all  with
Basilides'  own  doctrines,  but  owe  their  origin  entirely  to  the
astrologers  of  his  or  anterior  times.

The  Alraxaster  gems,  therefore,  on  account  of  this  priority  of
their  first  creation,  have  by  right  the  first  claim  to  be  con
sidered  ;  and  this  mode  of  treating  the  subject  possesses  the
additional  advantage  of  elucidating  the  sources  of  many  ideas
that  strike  us  as  so  extraordinary  in  the  Gnostic  creed.

The  strangely  heterogeneous  mixture  of  creeds  that  prevailed
over  the  Koman  Empire  during  the  two  centuries  between  the
reigns  of  Trojan  and  Constantino  is  exemplified  by  numerous
allusions  in  the  *  Historia  Augusta,'  equally  with  their  tangible
monuments,  which  are  the  subject  of  this  inquiry.  What  vast
encouragement  (little  enough  needed,  of  a  truth)  must  have
been  given  to  the  talisman-makers  by  the  accession  to  imperial
power  of  the  Syrian  priest  Heliogabalus  !  "  He  used  to  sacrifice
human  victims,  selecting  for  the  purpose,  throughout  all  Italy,
boys  of  noble  birth  and  conspicuous  beauty,  having  both
parents  living,  in  order  that  both  parties  might  feel  the  keener
anguish.  In  fact  Magicians  of  every  sort  attended  upon  him
and  practised  their  arts  every  day,  whilst  he  gave  them  every
encouragement,  and  returned  thanks  to  the  gods  for  his  having
met  with  their  especial  favourites,  at  the  same  time  that  he  was
prying  into  the  entrails  of  the  sacrificed  children,  and  torturing
the  victims  to  death,  after  the  rules  of  his  national  religion."

( Lamprulins.) And  yet  the  same  amusing  chronicler  puts  it

*  Berlin,  1820.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  227

down  amongst  tlio  accomplishments  of  his  model  Emperor,  Severus
Alexander,  cousin-german  to  the  monster  he  has  previously
portrayed — "  that  he  was  a  great  proficient  in  Judicial  Astrology
(ma thesis),  so  that  he  gave  permission  to  astrologers  to  profess
and  teach  that  science  publicly  at  Rome.  He  was  moreover
very  well  skilled  in  divination  by  victims  (Jiaruspicina) ;  also
an  excellent  diviner  by  birds  (ornitlwscopos),  so  far  as  even  to
surpass  the  Augurs  of  Spain  and  Pannonia."  This  same  "  every
way  accomplished  gentleman '  (to  use  the  Elizabethan  phrase)
set  up  the  statues  of  Abraham  and  Christ  side  by  side  with
Orpheus  and  Alexander  in  his  private  chapel  (Sacrarium) ;  whilst
his  mad  predecessor  had  conceived  the  grand  notion  of  found
ing  one  universal  syncretistic  religion ;  for  having  conveyed  to
Rome  his  Emesene  god  (the  aerolite),  he  built  for  him  a  temple  on
the  Palatine,  whither  he  transferred  the  Palladium,  Vesta's  fire,
the  Ancilia,  the  Cybele — in  short,  whatever  object  of  worship
was  most  sacred  to  the  Romans.  Nay,  more — he  talked  of
drawing  into  the  same  centre  the  "  religions  of  the  Jews  and
Samaritans  and  the  devotion  of  the  Christians,  in  order  that  his
deity,  Elagabal,  might  possess  the  mystery  of  every  other
creed." — (Heliogabalus,  3.)

Of  the  Abraxaster  class  the  figures  are  for  the  most  part
drawn  from  the  ancient  iconography  of  the  Egyptian  religion ;
but  they  were  adopted  in  a  more  spiritual  sense  by  the  newly-
arisen  sects,  holding  the  doctrines  of  Christianity  strangely
amalgamated  with  the  old  teachings  of  the  Mysteries.*

Of  all  these  borrowed  types  the  most  frequent  and  most  impor
tant  is  the  Jackal-headed  Anubis  (sometimes  double-headed,  the
human  being  superadded  to  his  own),  and  bearing  the  caduceus
of  Hermes  to  denote  his  office  of  conducting  souls,  not  as  of  yore
through  the  shades  of  the  lower  world,f  but  along  the  planetary
path  to  their  final  rest  in  the  Pleroma.  Thus  the  Gnostic

*  Many  of  the  actual  types— the  Hebrew inscriptions certify their

mummified  erect  Osiris,  the  reclining  authorship.

Isis,  the  Nile,  the  Horus  on  the  lotus-  t  In  the  paintings  on  the  mummy-
flower,  tho  Anuhis,  &c. — occur  on  case  of  Petemeuopt  (or  Ammonius),
the  contemporary  Alexandrian  coins;  Osiris  the  Occidental,  invoked  in  tho
they  therefore  can  only  be  accounted  papyrus  ritual  inclosed  with  the
Gnostic  productions  when  their  corpse,  is  seen  seated  on  his  throne  ;

Q  2


228  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Gospel,  "  Pistis-Sophia  "  (§  20),  describing  the  Saviour  after  re
ceiving  his  luminous  vestment,  inscribed  with  the  Five  words  of
power  and  with  the  names  of  all  the  Domination  to  be  encoun
tered  in  his  Ascension,  makes  him  come  first  to  the  Gate  of  the
firmament,  then  to  the  God  of  the  sphere,  then  to  the  Spheie
of  Fate,  and  lastly  to  the  Twelve  great  yEons :  all  which  Powers
when  they  beheld  their  own  names  written  upon  his  vesture
were  smitten  with  fear  and  began  to  sing  hymns  unto  him.

This  Anubis-Hermes  appears  sometimes  waving  a  palm-branch,
to  proclaim  his  victory  over  the  Powers  of  Evil ;  or  presiding
at  the psycliostasia  "weighing  of  the  soul,"  the  scene  commonly
pictured  in  the  Egyptian  Eitual  of  the  Dead.  In  the  latter
character  he  stands  here  for  Christ,  the  Judge  of  the  quick  and
the  dead ;  but  his  successor  in  mediaeval  art  is  the  Archangel
Michael,  who  holds  the  scales.  In  the  old  Greek  gems  Hermes
is  often  represented  as  bending  forward,  caduceus  in  hand,  and
by  its  mystic  virtue  assisting  a  soul  to  emerge  from  the  depths
of  the  earth — a  strange  coincidence  in  form,  probably  too  in
origin,  with  the  mediaeval  picture  of  the  Saviour  lifting  souls
out  of  Purgatory.  The  Zoroastrian  Hell,  a  burning  lake  of
molten  metal,  into  which,  on  the  Judgment-Day,  Ahriman  with
his  followers  were  to  be  cast,  had  for  object  the  ultimate
purification  and  restoration  to  their  pristine  state  of  the  con
demned — a  merciful  doctrine,  held  by  Origen,  and  partly
allowed  by  Jerome.

Hermes  in  this  particular  character  of  Psycliopotnpos  was
made  great  use  of  by  the  Naaseni  (Ophites)  as  the  prophetic
representative  of  the  Saviour  in  his  grandest  office.  They
interpreted  Hermes'  leading  souls  through  darkness  into
Elysium  as  Christ's  guiding  the  minds  of  the  enlightened  out
of  Ignorance  into  Knowledge,  in  their  special  sense  of  the  words.
As  may  well  be  supposed,  they  descanted  largely  upon  that


at  his  side,  his  wife  and  sister,  Isis.  functions equally in the supernal

In  front  stands  an  altar,  loaded  with  and infernal regions (the  place of

flowers,  fruits,  and  libations.  Anubis,  the  Four  Amenti),  presents  to  his  sire

recognisable by his  jackal's head  the defunct Petemenopt, swathed

crowned  with  the  pschent  (tall  cap),  in his sepulchral bandages, and

because, like the Hermes of the  holding  up  his  hands  in  the  attitude

Greeks, he discharges important  of  supplication.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  229

peculiar  symbol,  under  which  form  Hermes,  surnamed  Cyllenius,
was  worshipped.  Amongst  their  mystical  expositions  of  the
object  one  curious  fact  appears,  that  its  popular  name  was
aya@o(f>of)ov,  "  briiiger  of  good  luck,"  for  which  cause  it  was  set
up  at  cross-roads,  and  upon  house-tops.  But  as  regards  the
ancient  religion,  since  it  is  thus  made  out  that  this  attribute,
later  modified  into  a  Pillar,  stood  for  Cyllenius,  guide  of
departed  souls  (exactly  as  the  same  figure,  linyam,  represents
Siva,  Lord  of  the  dead  in  modern  Hinduism),  the  reason
becomes  obvious  why  its  sculptured  representations  should
have  been  the  earliest  form  of  monument  placed  over  the
departed.  The  monuments  secured  for  the  dweller  in  the
grave  the  perpetual  protection  of  the  Guide  and  Shepherd  of
souls  ;  a  colossal  phallus  crowns  to  this  day  the  summit  of  the
oldest  tomb,  the  date  of  which  is  historically  certain,  the
tumulus  of  the  Lydia  king,  Alyattes.  The  Asiatic  colonists
carried  with  them  into  Italy  the  same  belief  in  the  protective
virtues  of  the  symbol ;  carved  in  stone  it  regularly  surmounted
the  door  of  the  sepulchre.  One  lately  came  into  my  possession,
inscribed  around  with  the  name  and  patronymic  of  the  deceased
Etruscan,  whose  repose  it  had  so  long  guarded,  SVSES  FELVS
FENTV,  "  Suses,  son  of  Phintas."

This  double  character  of  Anubis  is  very  curiously  expressed
by  the  figure  upon  a  sard  belonging  to  myself,  which  to  the
casual  observer  presents  that  most  orthodox  of  types,  the  Good
Shepherd,  carrying  a  lamb  upon  his  shoulders,  leaning  upon  his
staff,  his  loins  bound  with  a  girdle  having  long  and  waving
ends.  But  upon  closer  examination  this  so  innocent  personage
resolves  himself  into  the  double-headed  god  of  Egypt,  the
lamb's  head  doing  duty  for  the  jackal's,  springing  from  the
same  shoulders  with  that  of  the  man,  whilst  the  floating  end  of
the  girdle  is  turned  into  the  bushy  tail  of  the  wolfish  beast,
and  the  "  latrator  Anubis  "  bursts  upon  our  astonished  eyes.
This  identification  of  character  in  Anubis  and  Christ  enables  us
rightly  to  understand  that  drawing,  the  discovery  of  which
created  such  a  sensation  at  Rome  a  few  years  back,  scratched
(graffito)  roughly  on  the  plaster  of  a  room  in  a  house  buried  (in
ancient  times)  under  the  extended  buildings  of  the  Palatine.


230  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIE REMAINS.

It  represents  this  same  jackal-headed  man  holding  in  front  of
him  a  Latin  Cross  with  his  outstretched  hands,  and  standing  on
a  pedestal,  in  front  of  his  worshipper,  who  makes  the  customary
form  of  adoration  by  raising  his  hand  to  his  lips,  and  who  has
expressed  the  object  of  his  handiwork  by  the  inscription
AAEZAMENOC  CeBGTE  0/EON.  In  reality  the  production  of
some  devout,  but  illiterate  Gnostic,  it  is  construed  by  its  present
owners*  into  a  shocking  heathen  blasphemy,  and  a  jibe  upon
the  good  Christian  Alexamenos,  because  they  mistake  the
jackal's  head  for  that  of  an  ass,  and  consequently  imagine  an
intentional  caricature  of  their  own  Crucifix.

The  discovery  of  this  picture  clearly  illustrates  a  passage  of
Tertullian  (Apol.  xvi.)  where  he  says  to  his  opponents  :  "  Like
many  others  you  have  dreamed  that  an  Ass's  Head  is  our  god.
But  a  new  version  of  our  god  has  lately  been  made  public  at
Kome,  ever  since  a  certain  hireling  convict  of  a  bullfighter  put
forth  a  picture  with  some  such  inscription  as  this,  '  the  god  of
tho  Christians  ONOKOIHTHZ.'  He  was  depicted  thus — with  the
ears  of  an  ass,  and  with  one  of  his  feet  hoofed,  holding  in  his
hand  a  book,  and  clothed  in  the  toga."  An  exact  description
this  of  the  Anubis  figured  by  Matter  (PL  ii.  c.  No.  1.),  save
that  instead  of  a  book  the  god  carries  a  cadceus  and  palm-
branch.  Tho  same  calumny  was  somewhat  later  transferred
by  the  Christians  themselves  to  the  account  of  the  Gnostics.
Not  being  acquainted  with  tho  Egyptian  beast,  they  mistook
(perhaps  intentionally)  the  head  of  the  jackal  for  that  of  the
ass,  which  in  truth  it  strongly  resembles  in  the  rude  drawing  of
our  gems.  Thus  we  find,  at  the  close  of  the  fourth  century,
Epiphanius  asserting  "  that  the  Gnostic  Sabaoth  has,  according
to  some,  the  face  of  an  Ass,  according  to  others,  that  of  a  Hog ;
on  which  latter  account  He  hath  forbidden  the  Jews  to  eat
swine's  flesh."  This  second  notion  was  a  very  ancient  one,
being  alluded  to  by  Petronius  in  *  Judaeus  licet  et  porcinum  numen
adoret."  Now  Sabaoth  being  held  by  the  Gnostics  as  the
national  god  of  the  Jews,  it  seems  probable  that  this  same
confusion  of  one  beast  with  the  other  was  the  real  source  of

*  Having  been  cut  from  the  wall  aud  deposited  in  the  museum  of  the
Collegio  Romano.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  231

the  opinion  so  prevalent  amongst  the  ancients,  and  quoted  by
Tacitus  (Hist.  v.  4).  "  The  sacred  object  so  zealously  guarded
from  profane  eyes  within  the  Sanctuary  at  Jerusalem  was  the
figure  of  the  wild  ass  by  whoso  guidance  they  had  relieved  their
thirst  and  their  distress,  Moses  having,  through  the  observation
of  the  movements  of  a  troop  of  these  animals,  discovered  the
spring,  the  waters  of  which  saved  his  followers  from  perishing
in  the  desert."  This  legend  was  furthermore  connected  with
the  belief  that  the  real  god  of  the  Jews  was  Bacchus,  for  the  ass
was  sacred  to  the  god  of  wine.  For  this  dedication  Pliny  finds
i  singular  reason  in  the  fact  that  the  ass  was  fond  of  fennel,  a
deadly  poison  to  all  other  quadrupeds,  but  a  plant  specially
consecrated  to  Bacchus  (xxxv.  1).  Again,  the  spurious  gospel
'  The  Genealogy  of  Mary  '  assigns  for  the  cause  of  the  death  of
Zacharias,  son  of  Barachias,  that  once  entering  the  Temple  he
beheld  standing  within  the  Sanctuary  a  man  with  the  face  of
an  ass,  and  when  he  was  rushing  out  to  cry  unto  the  people,
Woe  unto  you !  Whom  do  ye  worship  ?  he  was  smitten  with
dumbness  by  the  apparition.  But  afterwards,  when  he  had
recovered  his  speech,  and  revealed  what  he  had  seen  unto  the
Jews,  they  slew  him  for  a  blasphemer.  And  this  they  gave  as  a
reason  wherefore  the  High  Priest  had  bells  fastened  around  the
hem  of  his  garment,  in  order  that  this  monstrous  deity  might
by  their  tinkling  be  warned  of  the  approach  of  man,  and  so
have  the  time  to  conceal  himself.  This  wild  story  is  preserved
by  Epiphanius  alone,  for  the  original  work  is  entirely  lost.  It
was  ascribed  to  St.  Matthew,  and  was  taken  for  their  special
textbook  by  the  Collyridians,  who  got  their  name  from  their
custom  of  sacrificing  cakes  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  whom  they
pretended  was  also  born  of  a  virgin.  Faustus,  bishop  of  Eiez,
cites  this  same  gospel  concerning  the  parentage  of  Mary.  But
the  apocryphal  gospel,  '  The  Birth  of  Mary,'  still  extant,  is
of  a  totally  different  character,  being  a  mere  monkish  invention
of  the  most  orthodox  stupidity ;  and  which,  coupled  with  the
*  Protevangelion,'  became  the  source  of  all  the  medieval  pictures
and  sculptures  that  set  forth  the  history  of  the  Madonna.

To the same Egyptian family likewise belongs the boy
Harpocratcs  or  Horus  (the  vernal  Sun),  having  the  symbol  of


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR  .  REMAINS

fecundity  monstrously  exaggerated  and  seated  upon  the  lotus,
which  expressed  the  same  idea  by  its  abundant  seeds ;  and  also
Perfection  because  for  its  flower,  fruit,  bulb,  all  exhibit  the  form
of  the  circle,  as  lamblichus  observes.  Macrobius  too  remarks
that  Horus  is  the  Egyptian  equivalent  for  Apollo,  who  gave  his
name  to  the  twenty-four  hours  of  day  and  night :  and  this
acceptation  of  his  character  is  recorded  by  the  Alexandrian
plasma  (Vienna  Cabinet,  I.  39)  which  identifies  him  with  the
Grecian  Sun  god:  MEfAC  OOPOC  AnOAACON  APHOKPATHC
6TIAATOCTU)  cjjQPOTNTI.  He  often  appears  accompanied  by
Anubis  in  the  character -of  his  messenger.  Again,  Horus  is
seen  adored  by  the  kneeling  Cynocephalus  baboon,  the  animal
consecrated  to  Luna.  This  last  curious  animal  also  belonged
to  Thoth,  scribe  of  the  gods,  and  makes  a  favourite  Gnostic
device  performing  his  devotions  before  a  pillar  covered  all  over
with  inscriptions  and  supporting  a  triangle,  symbol  of  the  Moon
whose  influence  was  supposed  singularly  to  affect  his  constitu
tion.  This  pillar  clearly  enough  denotes  those  "  Pillars  of
Hermes,"  by  means  of  which  lamblichus  solved  all  the  ques
tions  propounded  to  him  by  Porphyrius  (Jam.  De  Mystcrieis,  II.).

To  make  the  allusion  more  certain,  these  beings  are  even
designated  in  the  spells  by  their  proper  name  of  "  Titans."
Kicoroni  has  given  in  his  Formse  No.  4  a  mould  for  casting  the
reverse  of  a  medalet,  of  the  3B  size,  bearing  the  Dioscuri
facing  each  other,  holding  their  spears  point  downwards,  in
token  of  amity,  in  their  left  hands  each  a  situla.  Behind,
vertically  CABACOT  in  two  lines  :  in  the  exergue  TITAN,  space
not  admitting  the  remainder  of  the  title— too  well-known  besides
to  require  more  than  such  a  reminiscence.

Horus  is  often  figured  sailing  through  the  heavens  in  the
sacred  boat,  the  Bans  steered  by  two  hawks ;  solar  emblems,
with  sun  and  moon  overhead,  and  taking  the  same  titles  I  AH,
ABAANA0ANAABA,  &c.,  as  the  great  Abiaxas-god  himself,
and  with  reason,  the  same  idea  being  couched  in  the  two
personifications.  Horus,  as  Heliodorus  records  (Mih.  ix.  22),
was  also  applied  to  the  Nile,  whose  Greek  name  NelAos  also
contained  the  mystic  solar  number  365 ;  this  voyager  in  the
baria  is  analogous  to  the  Hindoo  Nerjaiut,  the  child  floating


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  233

in  his  argah  leaf  upon  the  face  of  the  waters  having  his  whole
body  coloured  blue  (nila).  To  complete  the  resemblance  the
situla  regularly  carried  from  a  cord  in  the  hand  of  Anubis  is
the  very  lotah,  brass  drinking  cup,  of  the  modern  Brahmins.
Those  common  emblems,  the  baris  and  the  coiled  serpent,  have
their  Gnostic  meaning  fully  explained  by  a  remarkable  passage
in  the  Pistis-Sophia  (§  359).  "  And  the  disk  of  the  sun  was  a
Great  Dragon  whose  tail  was  in  his  mouth,  who  went  up  into
the  Seven  Powers  on  the  left  hand,  being  drawn  by  four  Powers
having  the  similitude  of  white  horses.  But  the  going  of  the
Moon  was  in  the  shape  of  a  boat,  the  rudder  whereof  showed  a
male  and  female  dragon  with  two  white  cows  drawing  the  same,
and  the  figure  of  a  child  on  the  stern  guiding  the  dragons,  who
drew  away  the  light  from  the  Rulers  (the  regular  synonym  in
the  book  fur  the  rebellious  ^Eons,  lords  of  the  Zodiac),  and  in
front  of  the  child  was  the  similitude  of  a  cat."

The  Regeneration  of  the  "  Spiritual  Man  "  occasionally  deco
rates  these  talismans,  being  symbolised  in  the  most  material
istic  manner  by  the  Solar  Lion  impregnating  a  naked  woman,
the  recognised  emblem  of  the  soul,  who,  "  quadrupeduin  ritu,"
submits  with  joy  to  the  vivifying  operation.  And  the  spiritual
man  thus  regenerate  is  again  depicted  under  the  form  of  a
human  outline  holding  up  by  the  neck  a  huge  serpent,  both  of
them  entirely  filled  up  with  inscribed  letters,  amongst  whicli
the  mystic  Seven  Vowels  largely  predominate.

Scaliger,  however,  as  cited  by  Salmasius  in  the  above-quoted
work,  takes  this  figure  to  be  the  representative  of  the  combined
365  JEons,  all  whose  names  are  supposed  to  be  condensed  within
his  outline — in  short  he  is  the  emblem  of  the  Pleroma,  and
stands  for  the  "  Adam-Kadmon  "  of  the  Kabbalists,  the  Primal
Man,  the  Ophite  Adamas,  after  whose  image  the  second  Adam
was  made.  Or  again,  this  same  combination  may  have  been
intended  to  display  the  Seven  Vowels,  with  their  forty  and  nine
Powers,  the  virtues  whereof  are  so  wondrously  exalted  by  the
inspired  writer  of  the  Pistis-Sophia  (§  378),  whose  words  are
cited  in  another  place.*  But  as  the  fact  bears  directly  upon  the

*  Goodwill's  '  Magic  Papyrus,'  terminating  in  several  vowel-com-
gives,  at  the  end  of  a  spell  (No.  1)  binatious,  these  directions  for  pro-


234  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

sigil  before  us,  it  may  be  mentioned  here  that  the  same  gospel
(358)  makes  the  Saviour  open  his  "Prayer"  with  the  ejaculation,
AEHIOTQIAnOA  IOJIA  ;  which,  as  enveloping  the  mystic  Name
of  God,  were  the  most  obvious  spell  to  be  selected  to  fill  up  so
important  a  talisman.  Neither  is  it  out  of  place  to  conclude
this  inquiry  with  the  notice  that  the  motto  of  the  mediaeval
House  of  Hapsburgh  was  the  Latin  vowels  A.E.I.O.V.  These
enigmatical  letters  were  interpreted  by  the  arrogance  of
succeeding  generations,  puffed  up  with  imperial  dignity,  into
the  initials  of  the  prophecy  "  Austriae  est  imperare  orbi  uni-
verso."  But  I  more  than  suspect  that  the  five  Latin  letters  were
adopted  by  some  illuminato  amongst  the  ancient  Dukes  (perhaps
acquired  during  his  alchemical  studies)  as  containing  the  same
transcendental  virtues  with  the  Gnostic  seven  of  the  Gieek
alphabet.

The  winged  goddesses  Athor  and  Sate,  representing  the  Eoman
Venus  and  Juno,  sometimes  are  found  accompanied  with  such
legends  as  makes  it  evident  they  too  had  been  pressed  into  the
Gnostic  service,  as  representatives  of  certain  amongst  the
feminine  .ZEons.*  But  another  shape  repeatedly  presents  his
monstrosity  to  our  astonished  gaze,  whose  true  character  almost
sets  conjecture  at  defiance,  but  evidently  the  offspring  of  very
diverse  ideas  most  strangely  commingled.  He  is  an  aged  man,
Priapean,  four-winged,  with  four  hands  grasping  as  many
sceptres ;  he  has  likewise  the  spreading  tail  of  the  vulture  and
stands  in  the  baris,  or  upon  the  coiled  serpent,  or  on  a  tree-
trunk,  horizontal,  whence  project  five  lopped  off  branches.
Some  potent  saviour  must  be  be,  for  he  is  addressed,  like
Abraxas  himself,  by  the  title  ABAANAOANAABA!  But  the
most  prominent  symbol  in  the  monstrous  collocation  suggests
an  explanation  of  its  hidden  meaning,  supplied  by  the  following


uounciug  each —  O,  in  the  same  manner  as  above

"  A,  with  the  mouth  opened,  rolled  said,

about  like  a  wave.  H,  with  gentleness  aspirated.

O,  in  a  short  manner  for  spiritual  T,  unto the  Shepherd  (Hermes),

threatcniugs.  as  if  it  were  long."

A  O,  unto  Earth,  Air,  Heaven.  *  Valeutinus  made his yEous  in

E,  after  the  fashion  of  the  cyiioce-  pairs,  male  and  female.
phulud.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS  235

exposition  of  Justinus,  that  wildest  teacher  in  all  the  Gnosis.
"  For  this  cause  said  he  unto  Eden,  Mother,  behold  thy  son !
meaning  his  animal  and  carnal  body.  He  himself,  however,
having  commended  his  spirit  into  the  Father's  hands,  ascended
up  unto  the  Good  One.  Now  this  Good  One  is  Priapus,  He  that
created  before  anything  existed.  On  this  account  he  is  called
Priapus  because  he  first  made  all  things  (eVptaTroto-c).*  For
this  reason  is  he  set  up  in  every  temple,  being  honoured  by  all
Nature,  and  likewise  in  the  roadways,  having  the  fruits  of
Autumn  hung  about  him,  that  is,  the  fruits  of  the  Creation
whereof  he  is  the  author,  inasmuch  as  he  first  made  the  Creation
which  before  was  not."

That  very  frequent  type,  a  mummy  swathed  in  the  coils  of  a
vast  serpent,  is  easily  explained  as  an  allusion  to  the  protection
in  the  next  world  of  the  ancient  agatho-demon,j"  or  the
spiritual  Naas  of  the  more  recent  Ophites.  The  same  belief
also  generated  that  more  graceful  allegory,  the  woman  en
throned  on  the  back  of  the  same  reptile,  like  the  Atergatis  of
Phoenicia.

Interesting  above  the  rest  for  the  part  it  played  in  mediaeval
superstition  is  the  Osiris,  or  old  man,  with  radiated  head,  a
terminal  figure  always  shown  in  front  face  with  arms  crossed  on
the  breast,  the  true  Bapliomet  of  the  Templars.  Sometimes  he
is  borne  aloft  upon  the  heads  of  four  Angels,  upon  whom  two
streams  pour  forth  from  his  sides.  This  group  has  been
explained  as  Ormuzd  borne  up  by  the  Four  Elements ;  although
it  may  possibly  refer  to  the  notion  the  prophet  Enoch  mentions
(xviii.  3)  "I  also  beheld  the  Four  Winds  which  bear  up  the
earth  and  the  firmament  of  heaven."  The  idea  in  truth  has
rather  an  Assyrian  than  Egyptian  cast,  for  in  Assyrian  works
Athor  (Mylitta)  often  appears  pouring  out  from  her  extended
arms  the  Waters  of  Life ;  and  again  the  Persian  female  Ized
Ardui&her  is  by  interpretation  "  The  giver  of  living  water."J

A curious specimen of  ancient  form, borrowed  in  a  more

*  That  is,  the  proper  symbol  of  J  At  Tarsus  (1863)  was  discovered
Priapus,  either  the  phallus  or  the  in  company  with  aurei  of  Sev.  Alex-
Egyptian  Tau.  ander  and  Gordian  III.,  a  talisman

f  The  HFE  painted  on  the  thus  described  by  Longpcriur :

niiunmy  cases  in  that  very  capacity.  "  Amulet  formed  of  lapis-lazuli,  set


236  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

spiritual  sense,  is  furnished  by  a  pretty  sard,  found  in  tho
Punjab  (Major  Pearise),  engraved  with  two  figures  of  the  Eoman
Providentia  facing  each  other,  in  the  field  between  them,
the  heads  of  Sol  and  Luna,  and  below  XAIA,  the  Hebrew
for  Life.

The  common  figure  0  may  be  explained  by  Eusebius's  de
scription  of  the  Egyptian  hieroglyph  for  the  world,  as  a  circle
coloured  sky-blue  and  besprinkled  with  flames,  in  the  centre  an
extended  serpent ;  the  whole  being  carelessly  imitated  by  the
letter  0  in  the  Diagramma  of  the  Ophites.

An  armed  man,  the  Mithraic  soldier,  one  of  the  figures
regularly  set  up  in  the  mystic  Cave  of  the  Solar  god,  often
decorates  a  talisman,  holding  a  spear  tipped  with  tho  head
of  a  cock,  a  mark  of  honour  granted  by  the  Persian  kings  to
distinguished  valour  (as  by  Artaxerxes  to  the  Carian  who  slew
Cyrus  the  Younger)  ;  or  else  grasping  a  serpent  in  each  hand.
A  sect  that  sprung  up  in  Egypt,  the  Phibionites,  took  the  title
•'  Militant,"  3rparta)ruco£  Another  figure,  the  three-headed
throe-bodied  god,  who,  standing  like  Priapus,  grasped  with  one
hand  the  symbols  of  fecundity,  with  the  other,  asps  and  scorpions,
must  be  the  visible  embodiment  of  the  Great  TpiSwa/xets,
who  figure  so  prominently  in  the  celestial  hierarchy  of  the
Pistis -Sophia.  The  Trees  sometimes  enlisted  in  the  Talismanic
corps  may  find  their  motive  in  the  "  Almond-tree "  of  the
Phrygian  Mysteries,  in  which  the  Naaseni  discovered  the  name
of  the  Great  Creator  of  All;  or  else  to  the  "Mystery  of  the
Five  Trees,"  mentioned  in  that  oft-quoted  revelation,  on  whose
true  nature  light  is  thrown  by  Justinus'  exposition  making  out


in  a  gold  frame  of  rude  workmansnip,  large  haematite  (Praun)  now  in  the

with  a  ring  for  suspension. The  two  British Museum. Montfaucon, pi.

faces  are  engraved in  intaglio,  and  clxi.  has  a  Venus  unveiling  inscribed

represent  an  ^Eon  with  four  wings  A  PGUP  I  OPACIC, "The  Vision  of

and  bird's  tail,  holding  two  spears;  Arori ;"  and  another  with  A  P  POOP  I  <J>

and  with  a  Venus  and  the  inscription  I  AC  1C,  and  on  the  field  CAN  KTA

(not reversed) APCx)PI OPACIC,  for  the  owner's  name. It  was  under

some  letters  of  which  are  concealed  such  a  form  as  this  that  the  Supreme

by the setting. Length,  0-0034 ;  Tetrad brought down Truth from

weight, 5 '20 grammes (=95 grs.  Heaven to display her beauty to

troy)." The same legend accoin-  Marcus  as  he  d<  scribes  in  his  '  lleve-

pauies  a  Venus  Amvlyorneiic  upon  a  latiou  '  (see  p.  218).


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  237

the  Trees  of  Paradise  to  bo  the  Angels  generated  between  the
Demiurgus  Elohim  and  his  daughter  Eden.*

There  is  a  sigil  of  this  class,  that  from  its  frequency  must
have  been  considered  of  peculiar  virtue.  It  represents  a  fish
with  immense  head  and  shoulders,  but  diminutive  body,  as  if
from  above  ;  the  reverse  of  the  stone  thus  inscribed  —


One  of  the  three  sacivd  fish  of  the  Nile  must  figure  here  ;  and
in  this  talismanic  character  passed,  with  an  appropriate
mystic  interpretation,  into  the  symbolism  of  the  Alexandrine
Christians.

II.  ABRAXOIDS,  OR  GEMS  CONFOUNDED  WITH  THE  TRUE  GNOSTIC.

Our  invaluable  and  most  charming  guide,  Ilippolytus,  when
describing  the  Astrotlicoscopi,  "  Seekers  of  God  in  the  stars,"
begins  with  a  simile  more  apposite  than  complimentary  to  the
fashion  which  then  prevailed  for  combining  astrology  with  every
species  of  religion.  He  compares  these  inquirers  to  that  silly
fowl  the  bustard,  which  suffers  itself  to  be  caught  by  the  follow
ing  device.  "  When  a  man  discovers  a  flock  he  begins  to  dance
and  make  grimaces  in  front  of  them,  The  birds  stand  motionless
staring  at  him  in  wonderment  until  his  confederate  steals  up  to
them  from  behind  and  knocks  them  on  the  head.  In  the  same
way  (adds  the  good  Saint,  evidently  much  refreshed  by  his  joke)
do  the  people  seduced  by  such  teachers  stare  up  at  the  stars,
until  at  last  they  find  themselves  hopelessly  caught  in  the  snare
of  the  heresy."  As  an  example  of  this  most  curious  system  of
theology  it  will  suffice  to  quote  their  exposition  of  the  doctrine  con
veyed  by  one  constellation  out  of  many.  "  Ophiuchus  represents
with  his  stars  a  man  on  his  knees,  in  appearance  oppressed  with

*  An  authentic  description  of  the  bearing  fruit  which  resembled  grapes

Tree  of  Knowledge  will  doubtless  be  extremely fine  ; and its fragrance

acceptable to  -  my readers. "  The  extended  to  a  considerable  distance.

Tree  of  Knowledge  also  was  there,  I  exclaimed  :  '  How  beautiful  is  this

(if  which  if  any  eats he  becomes  tree,  and  how  delightful is its  ap-

endowed  with  great  wisdom. It  was  pearance  !  '  "  —  (Book  of  Enoch,  xxxi.

like  a  species  of  the  tamarind-tree,  3-4).


238  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

fatigue,  a  posture  for  which  that  great  authority  in  Astrology,
Aratas,  is  at  a  loss  to  account.  But  rightly  understood,  he  is
Adam  engaged  in  watching  the  Dragon's  head  underneath  him,
which  is  biting  his  heel.  Over  his  head  are  seen  the  Lyre,  and
the  Crown.  The  Lyre  was  the  invention  of  the  infant  Hermes,
who  is  in  reality  the  Word  of  God  :  their  position  therefore
announces  that  whosoever  gives  heed  unto  the  Word,  he  shall
obtain  the  Crown ;  but  if  he  refuses  to  hearken  unto  the  Word,
he  shall  be  cast  down  below  with  the  Dragon."  In  another
place  Hippolytus  observes  :  "  The  doctrine  of  the  Chaldaians
concerning  trines,  quadrates,  benignant  and  malign  stars,
Euphrates  the  Peratist  applies  to  Christianity,  by  changing  the
concord  and  discord  of  the  stars  into  the  constitution  of  the
TEons,  the  transition  of  Good  Powers  into  Evil  ones,  and  the
harmony  of  their  respective  particles.  From  the  same  source
he  gets  his  «« Toparchs  "  and  "  Presidents,"  and  all  the  other
imagery  of  the  astrologers."

Such  being  the  nature  of  the  actual  foundations  of  Gnosticism,
no  wonder  that  it  should  so  frequently  be  impossible  to  decide
whether  a  talismanic  sigil  be  the  expression  of  some  semi-
Christian  tenet,  or  merely  the  imagined  similitude  of  some
astral  Power  whose  influence  was  thus  secured  for  the  wearer's
protection.  For  the  gods  of  Magianism,  the  religion  that  has
so  deeply  tinged  all  Gnostic  doctrines,  were  no  other  than  these
starry  Powers.  The  Agathodamion  himself  gave  his  name  to
one  of  the  three  Decani  of  Cancer,  as  Hephaestion  hath  already
informed  us.  The  very  title,  "  Decanus,"  Salmasius  with  some
reason  derives  from  the  Chaldee  Dekan,  "  inspector,"  and  thereby
makes  it  equivalent  to  the  Greek  "  Horoscopos,"  "  The  god
that  looks  down  upon  the  nativity."  The  common  Latin
derivation,  in  its  military  sense  of  "sergeant,"  Salmasius  rejects
as  foreign  to  the  idea  conveyed.  Again,  Charchnumis  is
named  as  the  First  Decanus  in  Leo,  and  this  title  actually
appears  around  a  serpent  with  human  and  radiated  head,  figured
by  Salmasius  in  the  same  chapter.  This  name  is  sometimes
written  XOAXNOTBIZ,  which  the  same  authority  explains  as
"  The  All-golden  One."

A  Greek  astrologer  quoted  without  name  by  Salmasius gives


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  239

this  curious  piece  of  information  :  "  There  are  appointed  in  each
one  of  the  Signs,  three  Decani  of  different  forms  ;  one  holding  an
axe,  the  others  represented  variously.  These  figures  engraved
in  rings  are  amulets  against  all  mischance."  As  Teucer  asserts,
with  other  great  astrologers  of  his  times :  "  This,  alas !  too
scanty  notice  of  their  attributes  shows  at  least  one  of  their
number  to  be  the  old  Babylonian  god  described  by  the  prophet
Raruch  ( Epistle  13,  14) — *  He  hath  a  sceptre  in  his  hand  like  a
man,  like  a  judge  of  the  kingdom — ho  hath  in  his  hand  a  sword
and  an  axe'  "  But  not  merely  the  Decani  of  the  Signs  were  thus
worn  in  rings,  but  equally  so  the  signs  themselves,  and  the  stars
rising  together  with  them,  technically  called  ot  TrapareAAovrc?.
Such  images  were  termed  oroi^eta,  whence  those  who  made  a
business  of  engraving  then  got  the  name  a-roLx^o^arLKOL.
They  performed  their  work  with  many  ceremonies,  and  always
under  the  inspection  of  the  particular  Decanus,  or  star,  whose
sigil  they  were  embodying,  On  this  account  Epiphaiiius  speaks
of  the  sun,  moon,  and  planets  as  oroi^eTa,  terming  /xop(£axreis  the
figures  of  the  constellations  formed  by  the  imaginary  collocation
of  the  stars.  The  same  writer  uses  the  expression,  "The  stars
that  be  vainly  imagined  in  the  shape  of  figures,  which  are
called  Signs  of  the  Zodiac."  As  Diodorus  distinguishes  between
planets  and  <rroix«a,  it  follows  that  the  term  was  equivalent
to  our  "  constellation."  All  this  evinces  that  the  Arabian
writers  were  correct  in  translating  o-Totxao/xariKot  by  "  talis
man-makers."  How  these  later  astrologers  thought  proper  to
portray  the  Ascendants  of  each  Sign  in  their  "  Table  of  the
Myriogeneses "  will  be  described  in  my  chapter  upon  Talis
mans.

A  curious  Praun  gem  represents  Mercury  enthroned  and
bearing  the  attributes  of  Jupiter,  with  the  strange  legend  EnnTA
(sic)  XPTZOZ,  which  has  been  absurdly  interpreted  as  referring  to
his  seven-stringed  lyre.  More  probably  was  the  gem  the  signet
of  some  "  Hebdomadarian  "  or  votary  of  the  Number  Seven  ;  a
sect  of  sufficient  importance  to  get  from  Hippolytus  a  separate
section  for  themselves  in  his  great  work.  The  identification  of
Hermes  with  the  Christian  Logos  was  one  grand  feature  in  the
doctrine  of  the  Naaseni,  so  lucidly  set  forth  by  that  learned


240  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Father.  Ho  was  of  opinion  that  this  Hebdomadarian  doctrine
(derived  from  ancient  Egyptian  philosophy)  was  the  true  source
of  every  form  of  Gnosticism.  This  potent  Numeral  is  illus
trated  by  another  device  of  frequent  occurrence  in  cameo,  the
Delphic  e  crowned  with  a  fillet,  and  below,  the  legend  XPTZOT-
This  can  be  no  other  than  that  most  holy  of  Numerals  the
Delphic  "Ei,  or  Five,  on  the  mystery  whereof  Plutarch  has  left  a
very  curious  dissertation  ;  and  it  represents  the  golden  figure  of
that  same  numeral  dedicated  by  Livia  Augusta  at  the  shrine
of  her  husband's  peculiar  patron.  And  similarly  the  gem  above
referred  to  exhibits  Hermes  invested  with  supreme  dominion,  and
accompanied  by  his  own  special  number,  "  testudo  resonare
septem*  callida  nervis  "— the  Magian  method  for  symbolizing
the  different  Powers  of  Heaven,  which  shall  be  explained  in  its
due  place,  when  we  come  to  treat  of  the  "  Seven  Voices."

The  oddest  adaptations  of  the  imagery  of  the  old  religions
mark  the  earliest  preaching  of  the  Gnosis.  its  first  apostle,
Simon  Magus,  who  passed  himself  off  upon  the  Samaritans  as
the  third  manifestation  of  the  Christ,  was  worshipped  as  late
as  Hippolytus'  times,  in  statues  made  in  the  form  of  Jupiter.
His  famous  concubine  Helena  (in  whom  Simon  has  discovered
the  Lost  Sheep  of  the  parable  whilst  carrying  on  her  profession
in  a  brothel  at  Tyre)  was  similarly  adored  under  the  forms  of
Minerva  and  the  Moon  (Hipp.  vi.  19).  The  main  doctrines  of
the  Naaseni  were  supported  by  ingenious  applications  of  the
symbolism  employed  in  the  Eleusinian,  Phrygian,  and  Samo-*
thracian  Mysteries,  of  which  Hyppolytus  has  given  a  full  and
very  interesting  account.

Phoenicia,  again,  furnished  our  talisman-makers  with  a  copious
repertory  in  the  exaggerated  symbolism  of  the  figures  whereby
their  priesthood  had  expressed  their  notions  of  the  Divine
Power.  "  Taut,  the  great  god  of  the  Phoenicians "  (says
Samoniathon),  "  in  order  to  express  the  character  of  Kronos,  made
his  image  with  four  eyes— two  in  front,  two  behind,  open  and
closed ;  also  with  four  wings — two  expanded  upwards,  two
folded  downwards.  The  eyes  denoted  that  the  godhead  sees

*  The  compound  'Eirrdxpvaos  is  'EirraxaA/cos,  the  place  in  the  wall  of
made  after  the  same  rule  as  the  Athens  where  Sulla  took  the  city.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  241

when  sleeping,  and  sleeps  when  waking ;  the  attitude  of  his
wings,  that  he  flies  in  resting,  and  rests  in  flying.  Upon  his
head  are  two  wings,  denoting  Reason  and  the  Senses."  -It  is
very  provoking  that  Diodorus  (xx.  1 9)  should  have  given  no
further  description  of  the  famous  Kronos,  Mdcarth,  of  Carthago
than  the  brief  remark  that  it  held  the  hands  open,  palm
upwards,  but  sloping  downwards,  so  that  the  child  sacrificed,
when  laid  upon  them,  should  roll  off  into  a  pit  of  fire  at  the
foot.*  When  Agathocles  was  pressing  hard  the  siege,  and
hope  was  almost  lost,  no  fewer  that  three  hundred  children  of
the  nobles  were  offered  to  Melcarth  at  one  and  the  same  time.

Inasmuch  as  the  genius  of  the  planet  Saturn,  or  Kronos,  was
held  by  the  Talmudists  to  be  good  and  pure,  contrary  to  those
of  the  other  planets,  the  Four-winged  image,  so  common  upon
Gnostic  gems,  may  reasonably  be  considered  as  a  copy  from  the
ancient  original,  devised  by  Taut.  Saturn,  the  solo  inspirer  of
the  Law  and  the  Prophets,  had  special  claims  to  the  veneration
of  the  Alexandrine  Kabbalists.  And  this  belief  explains  where
fore  Valentinus  fixed  upon  this  planet  for  the  abode  of
Ildabaoth,  the  Giver  of  the  Law  to  the  Children  of  Israel  in  the
Wilderness.

It  sounds  like  a  paradox  to  assert  that  our  "  Gnostic  "  gems
are  not  the  work  of  the  Gnostics ;  but  taking  that  appellation  in
its  strictest  sense,  the  thing  is  perfectly  true.  The  talismans
we  are  considering  never  exhibit  any  traces  of  that  admixture
of  Christian  and  Pagan  doctrines  which  properly  constitutes
the  Gnosis,  that  subject  of  the  descriptions  and  the  attacks  of
the  Fathers  of  the  Church.  Their  elements  are  drawn  from  the
ancient  religions  of  Babylon  and  Egypt,  mixed  at  times  with
the  formulae  of  the  Jewish  Kabbala.  The  "  Gnostic  "  stones  are
in  reality  the  paraphernalia  of  magicians  and  dealers  in  charms
(charm-doctors  in  modern  phrase),  and  only  belong  to  the
Ophites,  Valentinians,  and  other  subdivisions  of  the  Christian
Gnosis,  in  so  far  as  those  theosophists  were  especially  given  to

*  This  tradition was  verified  by  burnt  human  bones. The  discovery

N.  Davis,  who  in  excavating  the  ruins  is  well  described  in  his  section  "  Mo

of  the  temple  found,  at  a  great  depth,  loch  and  his  Victims."
a  thick  layer  of ashes  mingled  with


242  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

the  cultivation  of  the  Black  Art;  as  the  notices  above  cited
abundantly  declare.  This  delusive  study  prevailed  at  the
period  of  the  grand  development  of  Gnosticism  to  an  extent
which  no  one  can  credit  who  has  not  studied  the  historians  of
the  Later  Empire.  The  accusation  of  "  magical  practices "
proved  a  ready  weapon  for  destroying  an  obnoxious  individual
against  whom  no  tangible  crime  could  be  charged :  what
stronger  proof  of  this  than  its  being  effectually  employed  (as
Animian  tells  us)  to  expel  that  pattern  of  orthodoxy,  the  great
Athanasius,  from  the  patriarchal  throne  of  Alexandria  ?  The
same  historian  notices  that  under  the  timid  Valens  it  sufficed  to
establish  this  capital  charge  if  the  suspected  person  had
been  seen  walking  at  night-time  in  the  neighbourhood  of  any
cemetery,  where  he  might  possibly  have  gone  to  hold  conference
with  the  demons  of  the  dead.

But  to  exhibit  the  true  source  and  nature  of  these  "  Gnostic  "
inscriptions  I  shall  transcribe  a  spell  from  the  "  Magic  Papyrus,"
to  which  I  shall  have  occasion  frequently  to  refer.  The  author
of  this  wondrous  Manual  of  Necromancy  was  unmistakably  of
the  old  unmixed  Egyptian  religion,  and  very  probably  a
priest  of  Isis.  Nevertheless,  he  not  merely  employs  the  very
words  found  on  our  talismans,  but  even  the  same  peculiar
arrangement  of  them.  Any  one  desirous  of  preserving  so
valuable  a  charm  in  a  more  durable  material  than  papyrus  or
lead,  had  only  to  order  a  lapidary  to  copy  it  for  him  upon  a
jasper,  and  a  regular  "  Gnostic  "  monument  would  have  been
bequeathed  to  our  times.  The  maker  having  carefully  specified
the  virtues  of  composition,  gives  us  to  understand  the  value  of
similar  forms  still  existing  on  stones  :  VII.  "  Take  a  sheet  of
hieratic  paper,  or  a  leaden  plate,  and  an  iron  link  of  a  chain
(/cpi/cos),  and  place  the  link  upon  the  paper,  and  mark  both
inside  and  out  with  a  pen  the  form  of  the  link.  Then  having
described  the  circular  outline  of  the  link,  write  upon  the  same
outline,  inscribing  upon  the  paper  the  name  and  the  characters
on  the  outside,  and  inside  the  thing  which  you  wish  not  to
happen,  or  that  a  man's  mind  may  be  bound  so  as  not  to  do
such  and  such  a  thing.  Then  placing  the  link  upon  its  outline
which  you  have  made,  and  taking  up  the  parts  outside  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  243

outline,  sew  up  the  link  with  thread  so  as  to  completely  conceal
it,  piercing  through  the  characters  with  the  pen ;  and  when  you
wish  to  bend,  say — '  I  bend  such  a  one  not  to  speak  to  such  a
one,  let  him  not  resist,  lot  him  not  contradict,  let  him  not  be
able  to  look  me  into  the  face,  or  to  answer  me,  but  let  him  be
subject  unto  me  so  long  as  this  link  is  buried.  And  again  I
bind  his  mind,  his  senses,  his  desires,  his  actions,  that  he  may
be  sluggish  towards  all  men,  in  case  (a  certain  woman)  marries
such  a  one,'  or  else,  '  in  order  that  she  may  not  marry  such  and
such  a  one.'  Common  (i.e.,  to  be  said  in  Greek).

"  Then  taking  it  to  the  grave  of  one  untimely  deceased,  dig
four  fingers  deep,  and  put  it  in  and  say — « 0  departed  Spirit,
whosoever  thou  art,  them  art  this ;  I  deliver  unto  thee  such  a
one,  that  he  may  not  do  such  and  such  a  thing.'  Then  cover  it
up  and  depart.  And  you  will  do  this  best  when  the  moon  is  on
the  wane.  The  words  to  be  written  within  the  circle  are
these  :  APOAMA0PA6P6C  :  KITAAAX  •  6ZANTA  •  IAPOTNH  •  AKH  •
lACx)  •  AAPTNKU)  •  MANIHA  •  MH  nPAXGHTO)  TO  $  (Se«/a)
nPATMA  €<!>'  OCON  XPONON  K6XGOCTAI  O  KPIKOC  OTTOC
('Let  not  such  and  such  a  tiling  be  done  for  so  long  a  time  as  this
link  is  buried  ').  Bind  it  with  knots,  making  a  twist  of  them,  and
so  deposit  it.  The  link  may  also  be  cast  into  a  disused  well,  or
into  the  grave  of  one  dead  before  his  time.  And  after  the
characters,  write  also  these  words  below  the  link  as  a  plinth  (or
a  square)  :  APXOOA  AAIAAM  C6MeCIAAM<J>  AMMOOOPIOON  ICUAH
*90T©  €U)cDPH  O  MELICTOC  AAIMCUN  I A  CO  CABACO©  APBA0
lACx)  AAIAAM  OCOPNOct>PI  €MOPH  cJ>RH  cJ>©A  XPGOICx)  lACx)  BAB-
OTPH  0IMAM6N  cJ>RH  B€  NOTCI  CABAGU©  BAPBA0IAU)  QAXPA
OTX66©  eCOPNUXfrPI,  and  the  inscription  at  the  top  of  the
page,  which  also  you  must  place  within  it.

IA€U)BAcJ>P6N6MOTNO0IAAPIKPIct>lA6T€APIcJ>IKPAAI0ONct)TO
M€NP<l>ABA(jO€AI.

(This  spell  is  repeated  at  the  foot  of  the  page,  inscribed  in
one  continuous  circle,  to  show  that  it  reads  either  way.  It
occurs  also  on  a  gem  (Brit.  Mus.)  followed  by  AOTAI  XAPIN
lePWNIMA  nPOC  riANTAC,  "Give  to  Hieronima  favour  in
the  sight  of  all  men  "  :  and  also  on  another,  figured  by  Monl-
faucon,  II.  pi.  164— a  proof  of  the  importance  attached  to  it  at
the  time.)

R  2


244


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


"  And  the  same  arrangement  may  be  written  upon  a  leaden
plate  ;  and  having  put  the  link  within  it,  fold  it  over  and  seal
with  gypsum,  and  afterwards  the  base  beneath,  upon  which
IA600  as  before  directed,  and  also  these  words:  BAKAZTXTX
M6N6BA  IXTX  ABPACAZ  AT,  "  Prevent  such  and  such  a  thing."
But  in  the  original  the  Names  are  found  as  follows  :  AM4>OOA
AAIAAM  C€M€CIAAM  IA€(x)  AOBAKAZIXTX  APACAZAT  APXU)M
€AAX  M6N€CIAAM  IA6U)  OTU)  BAKAZIXTX  APACAZUTT,  "Pre
vent  such  and  such  a  thing."
KICNVB


AA|>H  D[>nMA

On  the  reverse  of  a  Chnuphis  plasma  (Lewis  Collection),
KICNVOaiid  NABIC  (prophet)  occur,  as  also  011  the  Bosanquet
gem.  The  last  words  may  be  corrupt  Greek,  "Restore  the
night  "  ;  the  object  of  the  talisman.


FIG.  10.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  245


III.  THE  TRUE  ABRAXAS  GEMS.

Having  in  the  preceding  sections  cleared  the  ground  of  the
innumerable  usurpers  of  the  title  "  Abraxas  gems,"  we  can  con
veniently  proceed  to  consider  the  wondrous  Sigil,  the  invention
whereof  is  universally  ascribed  to  Basilides  himself.  And  for
this  asumption  there  are  very  good  grounds,  for  it  is  certain
that  such  a  Sigil  never  occurs  executed  in  a  style  that  bespeaks
a  date  anterior  to  the  grand  heresiarch's,  the  first  years  of  the
second  century.

This  figure,  which  has  given  its  name  to  the  whole  family,  is
designed  to  represent  the  god  "  Abraxas,"  for  so  his  name  is
written  invariably  on  the  gems,  although  the  Latin  Fathers
to  suit  the  genius  of  their  own  language  have  transposed  the
final  letters.  The  etymology  and  value  of  the  name  require  a
whole  section  to  themselves,  so  deep  are  the  mysteries  that
they  contain.

The  purpose  of  the  composition  was  to  express  visibly,  and  at
once,  the  365  ^ons,  emanations  from  the  First  Cause,  whose
number  was  probably  first  suggested  by  its  own  numerical
signification,  and  consequently  the  figure  may  be  taken  as  a
speaking  type  of  the  Pleroma,  the  one  embracing  all  within
itself,  an  idea  fittingly  embodied  in  a  name  containing  the  sum
of  all  its  component  powers.  To  shadow  forth  therefore  this
grand  doctrine,  the  image  in  question  is  a  "  Paiitheus,"  or  com
bination  of  many  discordant  attributes  expressing  the  amalga
mation  of  many  different  ideas  in  one  and  the  same  figure.
Hence  he  is  depicted  with  the  head  of  a  cock,  sacred  to  Phoebus,
or  else  of  a  Lion,  symbol  of  Mithras  and  Belus;  his  body,
human  and  clad  in  armour,  indicates  his  guardian  power,  for  he
is  a  Virtue  Militant  "putting  on  the  whole  armour  of  God";  his
legs  are  the  sacred  asps,  types  of  the  Agathodeemon,  likewise
indicating  swiftness;  for  in  this  way,  says  Fausanias,  was  Boreas
pictured  upon  the  Coffer  of  Cypselus :  in  his  right  hand  ho
brandishes  a  scourge,  the  Egyptian  badge  of  sovereignty;  on


246  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

his  left  arm  a  shield,  usually  emblazoned  with  some  word  of
power,  declaring  his  perpetual  warfare  against  the  rebellious
Angels,  the  "  Gods  of  death."  Bellermann  has  proposed  with
much  ingenuity  an  interpretation  of  this  Pantheus  in  the  more
spiritual  sense  better  consonant  with  the  esoteric  teaching  of
its  inventor.  According  to  him,  the  whole  represents  the
Supreme  Being,  with  his  Five  great  Emanations,  each  one
pointed  out  by  means  of  an  expressive  emblem.  Thus,  from  the
human  body,  the  usual  form  assigned  to  the  Deity,  forasmuch
as  it  is  written  that  God  created  man  in  his  own  image,  issue
the  two  supporters,  Nous  and  Logos,  symbols  of  the  inner  sense
and  tho  quickening  understanding,  as  typified  by  the  serpents,
for  the  same  reason  that  had  induced  the  old  Greeks  to  assign
this  reptile  for  an  attribute  to  Pallas.  His  head — a  cock's —
represents  Phroncsis,  the  fowl  being  emblematical  of  foresight
and  vigilance.  His  two  hands  bear  the  badges  of  Sophia  and
Dynamis,  the  shield  of  Wisdom,  and  the  scourge  of  Power.

This  Pantheus  is  invariably  inscribed  with  his  proper  name,
IAO,  and  his  epithets,  ABPAZAZ  and  ZABAQ0,  and  often  accom
panied  with  invocations  such  as,  ZEMEZ  EIAAM,  "The  Eternal
Sun";  ABAANAOANAABA,  "Thou  art  our  Father"  (sometimes
curtailed,  but  generally  so  arranged  as  to  read  the  same  both
ways)  ;  or  AAONAI,  "  The  Lord."*

]n  all  this  a  further  relationship  to  the  ancient  idea  of  the
Sun-god  is  readily  to  be  discovered.  Phoebus,  as  the  god  of  day,
is  similarly  furnished  with  a  whip,  and  the  serpent,  according  to
the  Egyptians,  hieroglyphically  expressed  his  tortuous  course
through  the  Zodiac.  **  Adonai "  was  the  Syrian  title  of  the
Sun,  whence  Adonis  or  Thammuz  denoted  that  luminary  at  the
winter  solstice.  Moreover,  the  Gnostic  epithets  above  are  the
very  words  composing  that  "  short  prayer,"  from  the  use  of
which  at  all  sacrifices  Macrobius  (I.  23)  makes  out  that  the
influence  of  the  Sun  is  the  Power  supreme  over  all :  "  0  Sun,
Father  of  All,  Spirit  of  the  world,  Strength  of  the  world,
Light  of  the  world  !  "  But  the  God  adored  under  the  name  of

*  Besides  these  regular  titles,  Abraxas  figure  (John  Evans)  has
others  are  occasionally  used,  of  im-  over  his  head  BICTYC,  below  his
known  import.  Thus  a  well-engraved  feet  GICIT-


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  247

"  Abrasax  "  is  clearly  shown  by  the  Bosanquet  jasper  (more
particularly  described  elsewhere),  exhibiting  the  Fantheus  in
the  very  car,  and  attitude  of  Phoebus,  and  by  the  Alexandrian
coin  of  Hadrian  presenting  Serapis  similarly  engaged.  That
the  latter  was  the  Solar  deity,  all  mythologists  were  agreed  ;
and  this  identity  of  action  would  lead  one  to  suspect  that
"  Abrasax  "  was  no  more  than  the  mystic  name  of  the  tutelary
god  of  Alexandria.

The  older  Chnuphis  was  occasionally  (though  rarely)  erected
with  Abraxas  on  the  same  talisman  ;  an  example  of  which  is
offered  in  one  of  the  most  remarkable  of  the  class  ever  brought
under  my  notice.  It  was  brought  from  Bombay  by  a  Jew  (1874),
and  sold  to  M.  Gaston  Feuardent,  whence  it  came  into  the
possession  of  the  Rev.  S.  S.  Lewis.

Red  jasper  of  fine  quality,  Ijxli  inch,  with  figure  of
Abraxas,  holding  whip  and  shield,  engraved  in  unusually  good
stylo  upon  the  convex  face.  Round  the  edge,  beginning  over  the
head,  runs  continuously,

®ANA#3A AVAAI©
AEIVAV&AVIAHAI

at  the  back  of  the  head,  P  ;  under  beak,  I  ;  over  right  shoulder,
RA  (probably  nexus  of  ABA  AN)  ; across  the  field,  each  side  of

waist,

DAI/HHI  IHHMAD

Aain,  across  field  on  a  level  with  his  loins,  on  each  side,


(perhaps  Eoia,  "  The  Serpent,"  in  Syriac).

Between  the  serpent  legs,

AIIVIIMHV

On the other side, which is almost flat,  is the Chnuphis
Serpent,  erect,  with  the Seven  Vowels inserted between  the
rays  of  his  head. Across  the  middle  of  the  field,
HA  €IX ("Thy  God.")

Over  his  head,  three  scarabei  in  a  row;  to  the  right,  three
goats,  and  three  crocodiles  above  each  other;  to  the  left,  as
many  ibises  and  serpents  so  arranged.


248  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


GNOSTIC PLAQUE.

The  most  remarkable  specimen  of  the  class  known  to  me
was  obtained  (Jan.  1876)  from  Sambon,  a  noted  antiquario  at
Naples.  It  is  a  circular  bronze  disc,  2J  inches  (the  ancient
palmus)  in  diameter,  with  a  small  projection  to  top,  perforated
for  suspension.  The  surface  of  the  obverse  bears  a  genuine
patina,  and  the  characters  of  the  legend  have  the  true  antique
formation  ;  but,  for  reasons  hereafter  to  be  stated,  the  reverse
strikes  me  as  an  addition  of  later  times  —  not,  indeed,  a  forgery  to
entrap  the  antiquarian,  but  something  intended  in  all  good
faith  to  augment  the  virtues  of  the  original  talisman.

The  Abraxas-god,  advancing  to  the  right,  with  arms  extended
crucifix  fashion,  holding  sword  and  shield,  above  his  head  and
arms,


IA0 IAOO AAU)N
U)H  .


On  each  side  of  figure  —


HGO
MA
MOJ

CON  ce g  ^

BAA  ru  5  z

OA  #  <  3  °

N


ce

€P

c


The  whole  inclosed  within  a  coiled  serpent.

Reverse  :  King  with  hand  on  breast,  seated  on  throne,  seen
in  front-face. Over  his  head,


CAAOMCONOC
On  each  side  of  the  figure—

enHNA  ABO

CVMAHA  VAC

OCAAAM  MOTHE

AZABA  N€T6

M6AZA  K6N€
X  HH6

OYC  AAB

A


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  249

Under  the  footstool,  similarly  surrounded  by  the  coiled  serpent,

z  z  z

This  Solomon  is  a  truly  medieval  piece  of  drawing  ;  the  lettering,
too,  evidently  differs  from  that  of  the  obverse;  and  as  the
surface  of  the  plate  is  fresher  on  this  side,  it  is  probable  that
the  whole  has  been  added  upon  the  empty  back  of  the  original
plate.

Some  legends,  following  the  rule  of  the  famous  ABAA0ANAABA,
read  indifferently  from  either  end.  A  good  example  occurs  on
the  reverse  of  a  serapis,  carried  in  the  laris  between  Sol  and

Luna.

ALW

BA4>PEME
MOYNO0IAP


<J>€PKIPAN00N
YOM€N€P4>A


(Sard,  from  collection  of  Mr.  Webb  Ware,  Cork.)

Horus  seated  in  the  baris  ;  on  prow  and  poop  are  perched  the

sacred  birds; neatly  engraved  on  dark-green  jasper  (Pliny's

Molochites). On  the  reverse  —


XABPAX
4>N€CXHP
4>IXNOcl>NVPN
cfeMXMEMX


Amongst  the  various  contents  of  a  tomb  at  Saintes,  discovered
in  1885,  was  a  metal  ring  set  with  a  heliotrope  engraved  with
the  Agathodsemon,  furnished  with  a  human  trunk,  standing.
On  the  reverse  a  novel  formula  —


XAXXA

XIOVXIPO

VXAHA


Eucliael,  "  Spirit  of  God,"  is  known  as  the  name  of  an  angel  ;
but  the  other  words  defy  interpretation.

The  best  executed  of  such  talismans  known  to  me,  belongs
to  Mr.  Webb  Ware,  of  Cork.  It  is  an  elliptical  sard,  about
1  j  inches  long  and  wide  ;  engraved  very  neatly,  with  Scrapin


250  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

seated  on  the  Baris,  busts  of  Osiris  and  Isis  on  prow  and  poop  ;
above,  AAAA  ;  below,  BAIN. On  the  reverse,  finely  cut  —


BA<t»P6N€

MOYNO0IAAP

IKPIOct>IA€B€AI

4>IPKIPAN0ON

YOM€NeP4>A

KO6AI

There  is  no  distinction  between  A  and  A  in  the  original,
but  I  have  made  it  where  clearly  required.  The  AAAA  is  a
novelty  ;  but  many  words  in  the  long  formula  are  of  common
occurrence  in  other  gems.


IV.  THE  GOD  ABRAXAS  AS  DESCRIBED  BY  THE
CHRISTIAN  FATHERS.

That  the  Pantheus  upon  our  gems  was  really  intended  to
picture  forth  the  deity  styled  "  Abraxas  "  can  be  established
by  the  indirect  evidence  of  many  contemporary  writers.
Irenaeus  remarks  of  the  Basilidans,  that  "  they  use  images,
incantations,  and  all  other  things  pertaining  unto  Magic."
Further  on  (xxiii.)  he  adds  their  custom  of  giving  names  to
their  images  of  pretended  angels.  And,  what  bears  more
directly  on  the  subject,  Tertullian  (Apol.  xvi.),  after  laughing
at  the  god  of  the  heretics  as  "  biforme  numen  "  (evidently  in
reference  to  the  serpent  legs,  "biforrnes"  being  the  classical
synonym  for  the  Giants  similarly  equipped),  then  goes  on  to
say,  "  They  have  taken  unto  themselves  gods  with  wings,  or
with  heads  of  dogs  or  lions,  or  else  serpents  from  tlie  legs  down
wards"  Here  we  have  unmistakeable  reference  to  the  Magian,
Egyptian,  and  Mithraic  idols  so  common  upon  these  talismans,
and  in  the  last  words  to  the  serpent-legged  and  veritable
Abraxas-god.

Lastly,  Epiphanius,  after  stating  that  Basilides  had  taught
that  the  Supreme  Being — out  of  whom  proceeded  Mind,  Intelli
gence,  Providence,  Strength,  and  Wisdom — was  named  Abraxas,
proceeds  to  describe  in  what  manner  the  idea  was  embodied  by


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  251

the  heresiarch  :  "  Having  taken  their  vain  speculations,  he  and
his  followers  have  converted  them  into  a  peculiar  and  definite
form,  as  a  foundation  for  their  own  erroneous  idolatrous  and
fictitious  doctrines."  Further  on  he  adds :  "  With  respect
to  their  «  Kavlacav,'  what  person  with  any  understanding
would  not  laugh  at  their  converting  a  Hebrew  word  into  a
lodily  shape  in  order  to  represent  their  idol;  at  their  per
sonified  Principalities  ;  in  a  word,  at  their  fondness  for  images ;
whilst  through  these  fancies  they  sow  error  in  the  minds  of  the
ignorant  for  the  furtherance  of  their  disgraceful  arid  lying
trade  ? "  Then  proceeding,  it  would  appear,  to  the  analysis  of
the  figure  itself,  he  exclaims :  "  It  is  a  Spirit  of  deceit,  which,
like  the  playing  upon  a  pipe,  leads  the  ignorant  into  many  sins
against  the  Truth.  Yea,  even  his  legs  are  an  imitation  of  the
Serpent  through  whom  the  Evil  One  spake  and  deceived  Eve.
For  after  the  pattern  of  that  figure  hath  the  flute  been  invented
for  the  deceiving  of  mankind.  Observe  the  figure  that  the
player  makes  in  blowing  his  flute.  Doth  he  not  bend  himself
up  and  down  to  the  right  and  to  the  left,  like  unto  it  (the
serpent)?  These  forms  hath  the  Devil  used  to  support  his
blasphemy  against  heavenly  things,  to  destroy  with  destruction
things  upon  earth,  to  encompass  the  whole  world,  taking  cap
tive  right  and  left  all  such  as  lend  an  ear  to  his  seductions."


V.  "  ABRAXAS  " — ETYMOLOGY  OF.

Of  this  "Great  Name,"  many  etymologies  have  been  pro
posed.  Of  all  these  the  most  satisfactory  is  perhaps  the  one
offered  by  Eabbi  Abraham  Geiger,  making  it  the  Grecised
form  of  Ha-Brachah,  "The  Blessing."  For  there  is  good  reason
for  believing  that  the  Z  had  the  sound  of  SH,  which  explains
the  strange  metamorphoris  of  the  Persian  "  Artashir "  into
"  Artaxerxes."  By  the  same  rule  the  Kabbi  interprets  the
talismanic  EAZAI  as  representing  El-Chai,  "  The  Living  God."
The  same  interpretation  is  again  confirmed  by  the  true  solution
(so  long  sought  in  vain,  and  now  suggested  by  Mr.  W.  A.
Wright)  of  the  mighty  spell  abracadabra,  which  receives  a


252  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

most  fitting  sense  when  rendered  by  Ha-Brachah-dabarah,
"  Pronounce  the  Blessing,"  where  "  Blessing  "  stands  for  the
name  of  the  Blessed  One,  that  most  potent  of  exorcisms.

Another  derivation,  extremely  acute,  but  probably  untenable,
had  been  previously  offered  by  Bellermann  in  the  Coptic  com
pound  signifying  "  The  Blessed  Name,"  made  of  the  word  ab  or
o/,  "  let  it  be,"  Bali,  "  adore,"  and  Sax  for  Sadsh,  "  name."  This
formula  would  agree  in  a  remarkable  manner  with  the  regular
Jewish  synonym  for  the  Ineffable  Name  Jehovah,  viz.,  shem
Hamephorash,  "  The  Holy  Word  " ;  which  the  Rabbins  compress
into  "  The  Name  "  or  "  The  Word."  It  is,  besides,  a  singular
coincidence  that  the  Egyptian  word  Abrak  should  be  used  by
Moses  (Gen.  xli.  43),  where  Pharaoh  commands  that  Joseph
shall  ride  in  his  own  chariot,  and  that  they  shall  cry  before
him  Abrak,  "  kneel  down  !  "  where  the  Coptic  word  is  actually
retained  in  the  Hebrew  text,  and  not  rendered  by  an  equivalent
in  that  language.*  A  precedent  for  expressing  a  sacred  title
in  an  unknown  tongue  is  furnished  by  St.  John  (Rev.  xix.  12)  :
"  His  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  upon  his  head  were  many
crowns,  and  he  had  a  name  written  (upon  them)  that  no  man
knew  but  himself :  and  he  was  clothed  in  a  vesture  dipped  in
blood,  and  his  name  was  called  The  Word  of  God."  And
again  (iii.  12)  :  "  He  that  overcometh  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the
Temple  of  my  God,  and  he  shall  go  no  more  out,  and  I  will
write  upon  him  the  name  of  my  God,  and  the  name  of  the  City
of  my  God."

All  this  supplies  a  reason  for  the  occurrence  of  the  word
dbra  in  so  many  sacred  titles.  A  very  remarkable  instance  is  to
be  seen  in  the  wall-painting  of  the  tomb  of  Vincentius  and  Yibia,
in  the  Catacomb  of  Preetextatus  at  Eome.  Now  this  Vincentius
is  described  in  his  epitaph  as  priest  of  Sabazius,  a  title  connected
with  the  lao-worship ;  and  the  name  Abracura  is  inscribed
over  the  head  of  the  consort  of  Dispater,  the  two  Kulers  of  the
Shades  into  whose  presence  Vibia's  soul  is  ushered  by  Hermes.
In  the  first  title,  cur  a  is  plainly  the  Latinised  Kovprj  Virgin,

*  Sharpe,  however,  makes  Abrasax deity represented on the gein. —
si  pure  Egyptian  phrase,  signifying ('  Egypt.  Mythol.*  p.  xii.)
"  Hurt  me  not,"  as  addressed  to  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  253

the  regular  synonym  for  Proserpine,  whilst  Abra  seems  to  have
the  same  deeper  meaning  in  which  it  was  employed  by  the
talisman-makers.

The  efficacy  of  a  Mystic  Name  is  set  forth  in  the  Book  of  Enoch
(Ixviii.  19)  :  "  This  is  the  Number  of  the  Kesbal,  the  principal
part  of  the  oath  which  the  Most  High  dwelling  in  glory  revealed
unto  the  holy  ones.  Its  name  is  Beka:  He  spoke  to  holy
Michael  to  deliver  to  them  the  Secret  Name,  that  they  might
understand  that  secret  name  and  thus  remember  the  oath  ;  and
that  those  who  pointed  out  every  secret  thing  to  the  children
of  men  might  tremble  at  that  Name  and  oath.  This  is  the
power  of  that  oath,  for  powerful  is  it  and  strong.  And  he
established  the  oath  of  Abrac  by  the  instrumentality  of  the
holy  Michael.  These  are  the  secrets  of  this  oath,  and  by  it
were  they  confirmed.  Heaven  was  suspended  by  it  before
the  world  was  made  for  ever.  By  it  has  the  earth  been  framed
upon  the  flood,  whilst  from  the  concealed  parts  of  the  hills  the
agitated  waters  proceed  forth  from  the  creation  unto  the  end
of  the  world.  By  this  oath  the  sea  has  been  formed  and  the
foundation  of  it.  ...  By  this  oath  the  sun  and  moon  complete
their  progress,  never  swerving  from  the  command  given  to  them
for  ever  and  ever.  By  this  oath  the  stars  complete  their  progress.
And  when  their  names  are  called  they  return  an  answer  for
ever  and  ever  .  .  .  And  with  them  he  establishes  this  oath  by
wnich.  their  paths  are  preserved,  nor  does  their  progress  perish.
Great  was  their  joy."


VI.  ABRAXAS — ITS  NUMERICAL  FORCE.

To  find  out  some  deep  mystery  expressed  by  the  numerical
value  of  the  letters  in  a  name  is  the  grand  foundation  of  the
famous  science  of  the  Kabbala.  Although  the  Jewish  Talnmd-
ists  now  engross  all  the  honour  of  the  discovery,  it  is  but
consistent  with  the  known  character  of  that  very  uninventive
race  to  suspect  that  they  borrowed  the  first  notion  from  a
foreign  source— Chaldrca,  the  real  fountain-head  of  all  their
spiritual  knowledge.  The  earliest  instance  that  can  be  quoted


254  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

of  this  way  of  expressing  a  name  is  St.  John's  so  much  dis
cussed  "  Number  of  the  Beast,  "  employed  to  screen  from
vulgar  curiosity  some  dangerous  secret.  What  though  its
analysis  has  supplied  good  Protestants  like  Bishop  Newton
with  a  deadly  weapon  (in  their  own  eyes)  against  the  Pope,
after  the  sum  total  has  been  reduced  into  its  integrals  Aareivos ;
yet  a  prosaic  non-controversialist  will  be  more  inclined  to
suspect  that  the  Kabbalistic  number  shrouds  the  name  of  some
potentate  of  the  times  who  had  happened  to  make  himself
especially  formidable  to  the  beholder  of  the  Vision.*  But  the
titles  lao,  Abraxas,  and  the  like,  instead  of  being  recent  Gnostic
inventions,  were  in  all  likelihood  recognised  "  Holy  Names,"  and
borrowed  from  the  most  ancient  religions  of  the  East.  Pliny
must  be  alluding  to  something  of  the  sort  when  he  mentions
with  a  sneer  the  miraculous  powers  ascribed  by  the  Magi  to
amethysts  engraved  with  ihenames  of  the  Sun  and  Moon — names
certainly  from  the  nationality  of  his  authorities  not  inscribed
in  either  the  Greek  or  the  Latin  tongue.  In  the  "  Shemesh
Eilam,"  "  Adoiiai,"  "  Abraxas  "  of  these  talismans  we  may  rea
sonably  recognise  the  words  of  power  referred  to  by  the  great
naturalist.

The  Alexandrine  Greeks,  proceeding  upon  the  axiom  that
"  things  equal  to  the  same  thing  are  equal  to  one  another,"
spied  out  the  sacred  number  365  in  many  Holy  Names,  and
thus  proved  the  identity  of  the  several  personages,  so  denomi
nated,  with  one  another.  To  give  a  few  examples :  the  same
sum  is  obtained  by  adding  up  the  numerals  in  Mei#pas  and  in
A/fyao-a£  ;  and  whether  we  interpret  the  latter  as  "  Blessing  "
or  "  Holy  Word,"  both  are  equally  applicable  to  the  Persian
god.  Again,  the  Egyptians,  says  Heliodorus  (^Eth.  ix.  22),
discovered  the  same  value  in  NeiAos,  appellation  of  that  earliest
god  and  father  of  their  land,  entitled  in  their  hymns  Horus  also,
properly  the  name  of  the  Sun.j  In  the  new-coined  religions
of  Egypt,  other  and  stranger  mysteries  were  extracted  out  of

*  Who expressly tells us that  certain  person. The  Hebrew cha-

"  his  number is  the  number  of  a  racters  representing  "  Caesar  Nero  "

man"; that is, the sum of the  produce  by  addition  the  required  sum.

numerical  letters  in  the  name  of  a  f  Amongst the many  points of


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  255

sacred  names  by  following  the  old  process.  Kircher  publishes
a  gem  inscribed  XNOYMIZ  •  PI,  and  supposes,  with  much  apparent
reason,  the  last  syllable  to  be  added  in  order  to  make  up  a
sum  equivalent  to  xpurros  =  1480.  That  most  ingenious  of  the
Gnostics,  Marcus,  based  his  whole  system  upon  these  numerical
deductions.  According  to  him,  the  Saviour  calls  himself  A  and
fi,  because  these  letters  stand  for  801,  which  is  the  sum  of  those
in  Trepto-repa,  the  Dove,  assumed  in  virtue  thereof  for  the  vehicle
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  the  profoundest  mystery  that  rewarded
his  researches  is  the  fact,  certainly  a  very  curious  coincidence,
that  all  the  24  letters  of  the  Greek  alphabet  added  together  yield
the  exact  "  number  of  the  Name "  Lycrovs  =  888.  But  his  own
words  well  deserve  to  be  quoted  (Hip.  vi.  50)  :  "  Now  Jesus  had
this  ineffable  origin.  From  the  Mother  of  all  things  the  First
Tetrad,  proceeded  another  Tetrad,  and  there  was  an  Ogdoad,
whence  proceeded  the  Decad,  so  there  were  Eighteen."  The
Decad  therefore  having  come  together  with  the  Ogdoad,  after  that
it  had  decoupled  the  same,  produced  the  number  Eighty.  And
again  after  that  it  had  decoupled  the  Eighty  it  begot  the  number
which  is  Eight  hundred,  so  that  the  whole  number  of  the
letters  proceeding  from  the  Ogdoad  according  to  the  Decad  is
eight  hundred  and  eighty  and  eight — the  same  is  Jesus.  For
the  Name  Irjcrovs  by  the  value  of  its  letters  is  the  number  888.
And,  verily,  the  alphabet  of  the  Greeks  has  eight  monads,  and
eight  decads,  and  eight  hundreds,  producing  the  number  888,
which  is  made  up  by  all  the  numbers,  the  same  is  Jesus.  For
this  cause  doth  He  call  himself  A  and  fi,  to  set  forth  his
generation  from  the  All."  At  first  sight  it  will  strike  the
reader,  accustomed  only  to  Arabic  numerals,  as  a  work  of
incredible  laboriousness  to  discover  numerical  values,  so  aptly
tallying  in  different  words,  of  totally  different  components.
But  the  difficulty  was  in  truth  much  less  than  it  appears.  The
Greek,  accustomed  perpetually  to  use  the  letters  of  his  alphabet


close  connexion  between  Hindoo  and  sirnilis,"  observes  Pliny  (xxxv.  36),
Egyptian  Mythology  is  the  name  of  speaking  of  a  picture  by  Nealces  of  a
the  sacred  river,  so  nearly  re-  naval  battle  upon  that  river.  The
sembling  the  Sanscrit  nil,  "  blue,"  Arabs  still  distinguish  its  upper  con-
referring  to  the  remarkable  colour  of  fluents  as  the  Blue  and  the  White
its  waters.  "  In  Nilo  cujus  aquaiww  Nile.


256  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

indifferently  as  symbols  of  number  and  of  sounds,  perceived  the
two  forces  at  the  same  glance  in  every  word  that  caught  his
eye,  and  easily  estimated  the  total  value  of  each  proper  name,
more  especially  when  he  made  it  his  business  to  attend  to  such
coincidences.  The  same  operation  would  be  equally  familiar
to  ourselves  were  our  "Arabic"  numerals  exchanged  for  the
first  ten  letters  of  the  Eoman  alphabet,  instead  of  being  what
they  are,  the  ancient  Palmyrene  somewhat  modified  by  the
wear  of  ages  and  a  long  course  of  travel.

The  use  of  the  Numerical  Value  of  Names  is  remarkably  ex
emplified  by  a  Midrash,  which  makes  the  318  men  of  Abraham's
household,  with  whom  he  defeated  the  Five  Kings,  to  be  no
more  than  his  one  servant,  Eliezer,  the  numeral  letters  in  whose
name  exactly  make  up  that  sum — a  coincidence,  though  acci
dental,  truly  astonishing !

That  genuine  Gnostic,  Dante,  employs  with  great  effect
this  numerical  expression  of  a  Name  in  that  most  mystical
prophecy  with  which  his  '  Purgatorio '  closes  :—

"  Ch'  io  veggio  certamente,  e  perb  il  narro,
A  darne  tempo  gia  stelle  propinque,
Sicuro  d'  ogni  intoppo  e  d'  ogni  sbarro,
Nel  qual  un  Cinquecento-dieci-c-cinque,
Messo  di  Dio,  ancidera  la  fuia,
E  quel  gigante  che  con  lei  delinque."

(Canto  xxxiii.  40-45.)

The  interpretation  whereof  is  found  in  the  word  DVX  formed
out  of  the  Eoman  letters,  and  applying  to  the  "General"
of  the  Ghibelline  League,  from  whom  such  great  things  were
expected  by  the  poet  for  the  chastisement  of  the  Papacy  and
the  restoration  of  the  Imperial  power.


FIG.  11.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  257


THE  ABRAXAS  RELIGION.

That  most  philosophic  of  the  Fathers,  Hippolytus,  commences
his  account  of  the  systems  of  Basilides  and  his  successors  with
this  ingenious  and  appropriate  simile :  "  It  behoves  all  their
hearers,  as  they  see  that  the  doctrines  of  these  heretics  are  like
unto  a  sea  tossed  into  waves  by  tho  fury  of  the  winds,  to  sail  bv
them  without  heeding  them,  and  to  look  out  for  the  tranquil
harbour  for  themselves.  For  that  sea  of  theirs  is  both  full  of
monsters,  and  difficult  to  traverse,  and  may  be  likened  unto  the
Sicilian  wherein  are  the  fabled  Cyclops,  Charybdis  and  Scylla
•  .  .  and  the  rock  of  the  Syrens  which  the  Grecian  poets  tell
how  Ulysses  sailed  it  past  when  he  craftily  baffled  the  cruelty
of  those  inhospitable  monsters.  For  the  Syrens  singing  clear
and  musically  used  to  beguile  all  sailing  by,  through  the
sweetness  of  their  voice  seducing  them  to  come  to  land .  Ulysses
learning  this  is  said  to  have  stopped  with  wax  the  ears  of  his
crew,  and  having  tied  himself  fast  to  the  mast  in  this  way
sailed  past  the  Syrens  and  overheard  all  their  song.  Which
same  thing  it  is  my  advice  that  all  who  fall  in  with  these
seducers  should  do,  and  either  to  stop  his  ears,  on  account  of  his
own  weakness,  so  to  sail  by  unheeded  the  doctrines  of  heresies,
without  even  listening  to  things  too  easily  capable  of  seducing
him  by  their  sweetness,  like  the  melodious  Syrens'  song,  or  else
faithfully  binding  himself  fast  to  the  Tree  of  Christ  to  listen  to
them  without  being  shaken,  putting  his  trust  in  that  whereunto
he  hath  been  tied,  and  stand  fast  without  wavering."

The  Abraxas  Deity,  his  titles,  nature  and  form  already
having  been  discussed,  it  remains  now  to  give  a  sketch  of  his
great  Apostle  and  his  doctrines.  To  begin  with  the  earliest
notice  of  them —

Clemens  Alexandrinus  lived  in  the  same  city,  and  in  the
same  century,  with  Basilides,  the  reputed  founder  of  the
Abraxas  religion.  During  some  years  of  that  period  they  were
contemporaries,  and  it  is  more  than  probable  that  Clemens
was  personally  acquainted  with  Basilides — he  being  a  very
remarkable  personage  of  his  times.  On  this  account  Clemens'

s


258  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

testimony  to  the  character  of  the  Basilidan  doctrine  deserves
infinitely  more  reliance  than  the  statements  of  the  later
Fathers ;  whilst  at  the  same  time  he  passes  a  more  judicious,
and  also  a  more  favourable  judgment  upon  its  nature.  He
describes  the  system  as  consisting  in  a  constant  attention  to  the
soul,  and  intercourse  with  the  Deity  considered  as  the  fountain
of  universal  Love.  In  his  own  words,  "  The  Basilidan  doctrine
consists  of  two  parts ;  the  first  part  busies  itself  with  divine
things,  and  considers  what  is  the  First  Cause  through  which  all,
and  without  which  nothing  is  made ;  of  what  constitution  are  the
things  that  pervade,  or  include,  each  other :  the  forces  which
exist  in  Nature,  arid  unto  what  they  tend.  The  other  part
relates  to  things  human,  as  to  what  is  Man ;  what  things  be
consistent  or  inconsistent  with  his  Nature,  what  he  has  to  do
and  to  suffer.  In  this  department  Basilides  includes  Virtue  and
Vice;  what  is  Good,  what  is  Evil,  and  what  is  Indifferent."
In  short  we  are  here  reminded  of  a  description  of  a  Buddhist
missionary.  The  amiable  but  fanciful  Clemens,  whose  own
Christianity  was  no  more  than  a  graft  upon  the  congenial  stock
of  his  original  Platonism,  could  see  very  little  to  blame  in  the
transcendental  speculations  of  Basilides.  In  his  eyes  the  latter
was  not  a  heretic,  that  is,  an  innovator  upon  the  accepted
doctrines  of  the  Catholic  Church,  but  only  a  theosophic  specu
lator  who  sought  to  express  old  truths  by  new  formulae,  and
perhaps  to  combine  the  same  with  the  new  faith,  the  divine
authority  of  which  he  was  able  to  admit  without  renouncing
his  own  creed — precisely  as  is  the  case  with  the  learned
Hindoos  of  our  own  day.

But  far  different  is  the  picture  of  Basilides,  as  drawn  by  the
pen  of  bigoted  orthodoxy  in  the  two  next  centuries,  after  his
doctrines  had  been  taken  up  and  carried  out  to  monstrous
precision  by  the  swarms  of  semi-Christian  sects  that  sprung  up
in  the  very  bosom  of  the  Church.  These  notices  are  subjoined  in
chronological  order,  for  they  give  in  a  few  words  the  grand
features  of  the  perfected  system.  Hippolytus  has  left  an
excellent  analysis  of  the  Basilidan  doctrine,  well  deserving  of
caceful  study,  although  it  is  hard  to  see  how  it  bears  out  the
assertion  at  the  opening,  that  this  heretic  took  his  entire  system


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  259

ready  made  from  Aristotle,  with  his  genus,  species  and  individual,
but  pretended  to  have  received  the  same  from  St.  Matthew,  who
had  communicated  to  him  the  esoteric  doctrines  which  he  alone
had  received  from  Christ  when  on  earth.  The  philosophic
Bishop,  however,  is  mild  in  censure;  nay,  seems  rather  capti
vated  by  the  ingenuity  of  the  Alexandrine  mystic.  But
Tertullian,  with  no  sense  of  the  beauty  of  a  clover  piece  of
sophistry,  launches  out  like  a  true  African  barrister :  "  After
this,  Basilides  the  heretic  broke  loose.  Ho  asserted  that  there
was  a  Supreme  God  named  Abraxas,  by  whom  was  created
Mind  whom  the  Greeks  call  Nous.  From  Mind  proceeded  the
Word,  from  the  Word,  Providence;  from  Providence,  Virtue
and  Wisdom ;  from  these  two  again,  Virtues,  Principalities  and
Powers  were  made  ;  from  these  infinite  productions  and  emissions
of  Angels.  By  these  Angels  the  365  heavens  were  created.
Amongst  the  lowest  Angels,  indeed,  and  those  who  made  this
world,  he  sets  last  of  all  the  god  of  the  Jews,  whom  he  denies
to  be  God,  affirming  that  he  is  one  of  the  Angels."  Similarly
the  still  later  Jerome  has  (Amos  III.)  :  "  So  Basilides,  who  called
Almighty  God  by  the  portentous  name  of  Abraxas,  saying  that
the  same  word  according  to  Greek  numeration,  and  the  sum  of
his  annual  revolution,  are  contained  in  the  circle  of  the  Sun,
whom  the  heathen  taking  the  same  amount  but  expressed  in
different  numerical  letters  call  Mithras;  him  whom  the  simple
Iberians  worship  under  the  names  of  Balsamus  (Baal-samen,
"  Lord  of  heaven")  and  Barbelus  ("  Son  of  Baal ").  And  that  this
wondrous  title  Abraxas  had  long  before  been  applied  to  the
Sun-god  in  the  formula  of  The  Mysteries  may  be  inferred
from  various  incidental  allusions  of  ancient  writers.  Thus
Theosebius  the  philosopher  (says  Photius,  in  his  'Life  of
Isidorus ')  drove  a  devil  out  of  a  woman  by  merely  invoking
over  her  "  the  Eays  of  the  Sun,  and  the  Name  of  the  God  of  the
Plebrews."  The  same  explanation  is  much  supported  by  the
words  of  Augustine  :  "  Basilides  asserted  the  number  of  heavens
to  be  365,  the  number  of  the  days  in  the  year.  For  this
reason  he  used  to  glorify  a  Holy  Name,  as  it  were,  that  is  the
word  Abraxas,  the  letters  in  which,  taken  according  to  the
Greek  method  of  computation,  make  up  this  number."

s  2


260  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

The  Basil idan  doctrine  of  "  Emanation  "  was  greatly  refined
upon  by  Valentinus,  whose  muster-roll  of  the  celestial  hierarchy
shall  be  given  in  its  proper  place.  Suffice  it  here  to  observe  that
the  entire  theory  resembles  the  Brahminical ;  for  in  that  theogony
each  Manifestation  of  the  One  Supreme  Being,  regarded  by  the
vulgar  as  a  separate  self-existing  deity,  has  a  female  partner  the
exact  counterpart  of  himself,  through  whom,  as  through  an
instrument,  he  exerts  his  power — to  express  which  doctrine  this
other  half  is  styled  his  Durga,  "Active  Virtue."  This  last
name,  "Virtue,"  actually  figures  in  all  the  Gnostic  lists  of
Emanations ;  and  the  great  ^Eon,  Pistis- Sophia,  in  her  second
"  Confession  "  perpetually  upbraids  herself  for  having  quitted
her  male  2v?v^o?,  partner,  in  her  proper  habitation,  to  go  in
quest  of  the  Supernal  Light :  whilst  she  equally  reproaches
him  for  not  descending  into  Chaos  to  her  aid.  The  system  of
Dualism,  in  fact,  pervades  the  whole  of  that  wondrous  revelation.

Brahminical  inspiration  is  possible  in  many  other  points  of  the
doctrine  of  Basilides,  as  will  appear  by  the  following  extracts
from  Irenfeiis — whoso  judgment  was  not  warped,  like  that  of
Hippolytus,  by  the  mania  for  deriving  his  system  from  the
Aristotelian.  Basilides  (according  to  him)  lived  at  Alexandria
under  Trajan  and  Hadrian  (the  first  half  of  the  second  century),
and  commenced  life  as  a  student  of  the  Oriental  Gnosis — an
epithet  sufficiently  indicating  the  source  of  that  philosophy.
Being  converted  to  Christianity  he  attempted,  like  many  others,
to  combine  his  new  faith  with  his  old,  for  the  explanation  of
things  both  spiritual  and  natural.  To  do  this  he  invented  a
terminology  and  symbolism  of  his  own.  In  the  promulgation
of  his  peculiar  notions  concerning  God  and  the  Divine  attributes
—  the  Word,  the  Creation,  the  Emanation  of  spirits  and  worlds,
the  Architect  of  the  universe,  and  the  multifarious  forces  of
Nature — he  took  the  same  road  with  his  contemporary  Satur-
ninus  in  Syria.  His  system  was  a  combination  of  Christian,
Jewish,  Persian  and  Egyptian  notions,  but  the  entire  com
position  was  moulded  by  the  spirit  of  the  Oriental  Gnosis.
These  tenets  their  author  zealously  promulgated.  For  many
years  he  taught  in  the  school  of  Alexandria;  he  was  also  a
most  prolific  writer.  Clemens  says  he  published  twenty-four


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  261

volumes  of  "  interpretations  upon  the  Gospels,"  besides  "  Odes"
and  "Spiritual  Songs";  all  of  which  have  perished.  The
doctrines  he  thus  disseminated  his  contemporary  Irenseuw
represents  in  the  following  manner  :—

"  Basilides  in  order  to  invent  something  more  refined  and
plausible  in  the  Gnostic  speculative  philosophy  pushed  his
investigations  even  into  the  Infinite.  He  asserted  that  God,
the  uncreated  eternal  Father,  first  brought  forth  Nous  or  Mind  ;
and  Mind,  the  Logos,  Word  ;  this  in  turn,  Phronesis,  Intelligence  ;
whence  came  forth  Sophia,  Wisdom,  and  Dynamis,  Strength."
IreneBus  understands  Basilides  as  making  a  Quiuternion  of
Beings  or  Personal  Intelligences  external  to  the  Godhead  :  but
Bellermann  with  more  reason  takes  them  as  signifying  personi
fied  attributes  of  the  Supreme  forms  of  his  working  internally
and  externally.  According  to  this  explanation  Basilides  would
only  have  borrowed  his  system  from  the  Kabbala  ;  it  is  however
equally  likely  that  he  drew  the  whole  from  a  much  more  distant
source,  and  that  his  "  Uncreated  "  and  "  Quinterniou  "  stand  in
truth  for  the  First  Buddha  and  the  successive  Five.

"  When  the  uncreated  eternal  Father  beheld  the  corruption
of  mankind,  he  sent  his  Firstborn,  Nous,  into  the  world  in  the
form  of  Christ,  for  the  redeeming  of  all  that  believe  in  him  out
of  the  power  of  those  who  fabricated  the  world — namely,  the
Demiurgus  and  his  Six  sons,  the  planetary  Genii.  Nous
appeared  amongst  men  as  the  Man  Jesus,  and  wrought  miracles.
This  Christ  did  not  die  in  person,  but  Simon  the  Cy reman,  to
whom  he  lent  his  bodily  form,  suffered  in  his  stead  ;  inasmuch
as  the  Divine  Power,  the  Nous  of  the  Eternal  Father,  is  not
corporeal,  and  therefore  cannot  die.  Whoso  therefore  maintains
that  Christ  has  died  is  still  the  bondman  of  Ignorance,  but
whoso  denies  the  same,  he  is  a  freeman,  and  hath  understood  the
purpose  of  the  Father."  From  this  tenet  the  Basiiidans  got
the  opprobrious  title  of  "  Docetae  "  (Illusionists).  Similarly  the
pious  Brahmins  explain  away  all  such  of  their  legends  as  are
inconsistent  with  our  notions  of  divine  dignity  by  making  them
all  "Maya"  (illusion).  The  same  is  also  the  doctrine  of  the
Koran  (Cap.  iv.)  upon  this  point :  "  And  for  that  they  have
not  believed  upon  Jesus,  and  have  spoken  against  Mary  a


262  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

grievous  calumny,  and  have  said,  Verily  we  have  slain  Christ
Jesus,  the  Son  of  Mary,  the  apostle  of  God  ;  yet  they  slew  him
not,  neither  crucified  him,  but  he  was  represented  by  one  in  his
likeness  ;  and  verily  they  were  disagreed  concerning  him,  were
in  a  doubt  as  to  this  matter,  and  had  no  true  knowledge  thereof,
but  followed  only  an  uncertain  opinion.  They  did  not  really
kill  him,  but  God  took  him  up  unto  himself,  and  God  is  mighty
and  wise."

The  system  just  described  coincides  to  a  remarkable  degree
with  the  Brahniinical,  where  the  First  Principle  produces  in
succession  the  Five  Powers— Mahasiva,  Sadasiva,  Kudra,  Vishnu
and  Brahma— who  are  held  by  some  for  mere  attributes  of
the  Godhead  ;  by  others  are  taken  in  a  materialistic  sense  for
.Ether,  Air,  Fire,  Water,  Earth.  But  possibly,  as  Mosheim  so
long  ago  maintained,  the  whole  Gnostic  system  is  derived,  not
from  the  Kabbala,  nor  from  the  Greek  philosophy,  but  from  the
theosophy  of  the  Brahmins.

Another  circumstance  in  the  Basilidan  practice,  mentioned  by
Iveimeus,  will  receive  abundant  illustration  from  the  study  of
these  talismans. "  Furthermore  the  sect  have  invented  proper
names  for  these  Angels,  and  class  them  under  the  first,  second,
third heavens, and so on. Besides this, they endeavour to
explain  the  names,  origin,  powers,  and^Eons  of  their  pretended
oOo  heavens— similarly  they  give  its  own  name  to  the  terrestrial
sphere,  which  they  say  the  saviour  (whom  they  call  Kavlacav)
has visited, and then abandoned. Who understands this
rightly  and  knows  the  ^Eoiis  with  their  respective  names,  the
same  shall be  invisible  unto,  and  beyond  the  power  of,  those
zEons,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Saviour  Kavlacav  himself
was. As  the  Son  of  God  remained  unknown  in  the  World,  so
n. ust  also  the disciple of Basilides  remain unknown  to  the
rest  of  mankind,  as  they  know  all  this,  and  nevertheless  must
live  amongst  strangers,  therefore  must  they  conduct  themselves
towards  the  rest  of  the  world  as  beings  invisible  and  unknown.
Hence  their  motto, '  Learn  to  know  all,  but  keep  thyself  un
known,'— and  for  this  cause  they  are  accustomed  to  deny  the
fact  of  their  being  Basilidans. Neither  can  they  be  detected  as
Christian  heretics, because they assimilate  themselves  to  all


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  203

sects.  Their  secret  constitution  however  is  known  to  but  a  few,
perhaps  to  one  in  a  thousand  or  two  in  ten  thousand.  The
local  situation  of  their  365  heavens  they  parcel  out  just  like
land-surveyors.  Their  doctrine  is  contained  in  a  sacred  book,
and  likewise  in  Symbolic  Figures.  The  Supreme  Lord,  the  Head
of  all  things,  they  call  Abrasax,  which  name  contains  the
number  365."

So  much  virtue  being  involved  in  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the
names  of  the  ^Eons,  it  would  be  unpardonable  not  to  subjoin  them,
as  far  as  they  can  possibly  be  procured  at  present  and,  the  follow
ing  may  be  taken  for  their  most  authoritative  roll-call,  having
been  drawn  up  by  Valentinus  himself,  the  profoundest  doctor
of  the  Gnosis,  and  who  had  elaborated  to  the  highest  degree
the  system  first  sketched  out  by  Basilides. He  arranges  them
in pairs,  male  and female, in the order of  their successive
emanation from Bythos,  the pre-existing, eternal Principle.
The  number  of  pairs  is  fifteen,  or  the  sacred  number  Five  three
times  repeated. Their  names,  it  will  be  seen,  are  Hebrew  words,
the  va  preceding  some  of  the  female  powers  being  merely  the
copulative  "and." Matter  supposes  Valentinus  to  have  been
of  Jewish origin, although bo.rn at  Alexandria. Tertullian
states  that  he  was  first  of  all  a  Platonist,  then  a  convert to
Christianity,  but  having  been  disappointed  in  his  aspirations
to  a  bishopric  he  founded  a  religion  of  his  own.

1.  Ampsiu,  Ouraan  =  Depth,  Silence.

2.  Bucua,  Thurtun  =  Mind,  Truth.

3.  Ubucua,  Thardedia  =  Reason,  Life.

4.  Metaxas,  Artababa  —  Man,  Church.

r |  Udua,  Casten  /-, /. ,

5.  1_  =  Comforter,  Faith.
(  Udu,  Vacastene

6.  Amphian,  Essumen  —  Fatherly,  Hope.

7.  Vannanin,  Larner  =  Motherly,  Charity.

8.  Tarde,  Athames  =  Eternal,  Intelligence.

9.  Susua,  Allora  =  Light,  Beatitude.

10.  Bucidia,  Damadarah  =  Eucharistic,  Wisdom.

11.  Allora,  Damnio  =  Profundity,  Mixture.

12.  Oren,  Lamaspechs  =  Unfading,  Union.

13.  Amphiphuls,  Emphsboshbaud  =  Self-born,  Temperance.

14.  Assiouache,  Belin  =  Only  begotten,  Unity.

15.  Dexariche,  Massemo  =  Immovable,  Pleasure.

Epiphauius has  evidently copied  one  pair  (5)  twice  over*


204  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

misled  by  a  slight  difference  of  spelling,  and  thus  adds  one  pair
to  the  proper  fifteen.

It  will  be  very  instructive  to  compare  this  Valentinian
system  of  Emanation,  which  makes  all  to  proceed  in  pairs,  male
and  female,  out  of  the  First  Cause,  with  that  Indian  theosophy
Avhich  this  very  feature  indicates  as  its  real  source,  in  the  latter,
every  Principle  is  divided  into  a  male  and  female  Energy,  each
exactly  alike  the  other — "  the  same,  distinguished  by  their
sex  alone."  Each  deity  exerts  his  power  through  the  agency
of  his  female  Principle  or  Sacti,  which  in  turn  possesses  a  Vahan
"  vehicle,"  that  is  an  instrument  or  attribute,  which  is  fixed
and  represented  in  a  material  form.  Of  the  Persons  in  the
Supreme  Triad  the  Sactis  and  their  Vahans  *  are  :—

1.  Of  Brahma,  Saraswati,  goddess  of  harmony  and  the  arts  (the
Jewish  Wisdom^)  ;  her  vahan  is  a  swan,  or  goose. (Hence  Juno's
Capitoline  bird,  afterwards  explained  by  an  historical  fiction.)

2.  Of  Vishnu,  Lakshmi,  goddess  of  Prosperity,  she  has  the
title  of  Kamala,  "  lotus-bearer ;  "  her  vahan  is  Garuda,  the  man-
eagle. Vishnu  in  one  Avatar  takes  the  name  "  Varaha,"  and
his  consort  "  Vanihi,"  in  which  case  her  vahan  is  a  buffalo.

3.  Of  Siva,  the  Changer  or  Destroyer,  the  Sacti  is  Bhavani,
goddess  of  fecundity,  and  consequently  of  death,  for  the  first  im
plies  the  second  "Nascentes  morimur,  finisque  ab  origine  pendet."

Nothing  perishes,  things  only  take  a  new  form  called  by  the
ignorant  Death.  (Compare  the  title  "  Gods  of  death,"  which
the  Ophites  were  so  fond  of  giving  to  the  "  Gods  of  the
Nativity,"  the  astral  genii  ruling  the  horoscope).  Bhavani's
appropriate  vehicles  are  the  Bull,  emblem  of  generation,  and
the  Tiger,  of  destruction.

And  before  going  further  I  cannot  resist  observing  how  these
names  and  symbols  manifest  the  far-spreading  influence  of  the
nations  they  embody.  The  Sassanian  queens  in  their  gem

*  It might even be suggested  Elders  had  their  prototypes  in  the

that  Indian  influence  shines  through  Saints  to  the  same number  of  the

the whole  Apocalypse. The  Four  Buddhist  theology ;  the  "  sea  of  glass

Beasts  (borrowed  it  is  true  from  the  or  crystal "  is  the  vast  crystal  block

First  Vision  of  Ezekiel) are  these  suspended  in  the  highest  heaven,  the

Vahans,  ministers  of  the  Divine  Will.  shrine  of  the Supreme Being  ;  ab-

Later times assigned each to an  sjrption  into  whom  is  the  true  object

evangelist. The Foui'-and-twenty  of  the  believer.


THE GNOSTICS AND THETR REMAINS.  265

portraits  generally  bear  the  lotus  in  the  hand,*  **  Varanes  "  is
a  common  name  for  the  kings  of  that  line,  and  the  Brahminic
Bull,  the  commonest  of  all  signet  devices  with  their  subjects.
But  as  the  dominions  of  the  later  Persian  kings  extended  as
far  as  the  Indus,  Hindoo  princesses  doubtless  entered  their
harems  and  communicated  their  own  religion  to  their  children.
Again,  many  of  these  Sanscrit  titles  bear  a  resemblance,
certainly  not  accidental,  to  words  frequently  occurring  in  the
Gnostic  inscriptions.  Thus,  "  Sumitri,"  wife  of  Vishnu  in  his
seventh  Avatar  may  explain  ^v^apra  ;  and  "  Natha,"  a  title
of  Vishnu  and  Crishna,  the  equally  common  Navrtra ;  "  Isa,"
lord,  feminine,  "Isi,"  lady,  is  perhaps  even  the  origin  of
Isis  ;  and  "  Nila,"  dark-blue,  and  epithet  of  Parvati,  is  more
appropriately  transferred  to  Father  Nilus.  Vishnu  in  infancy
as  Narayana  floating  in  his  "  Vat,"  leaf  boat  over  the  face  of  the
waters,  and  coloured  all  over  blue,  may  be  compared  to  the  child
Horns  wafted  in  the  baris.  The  ra<  >st  ancient  of  all  creeds  having,
as  above  shown,  made  the  lotus  the  symbol  of  Plenty,  the
reason  becomes  obvious  for  the  introduction  of  its  seed-vessels,
always  mistaken  for  poppyheads,  amongst  the  wheatears  in
the  cornucopia  of  Ceres.

The  above  quoted  ^v^apra  seems  to  have  been  applied  by
the  Gnostics  to  the  Sun-god,  for  Montfancon  gives  (PL  157)
a  figure  of  Sol  so  inscribed,  with  ^€pov(3i  on  the  reverse,  a
manifest  invocation  to  all  the  angelic  host.  And  as  the  pro
tection  of  this  celestial  hierarchy  is  so  perpetually  sought  by
our  talisman-makers  in  their  "  voluntary  humility  and  wor-
"  shipping  of  angels,"  I  subjoin  the  names  of  the  Hindoo  Guardians
of  the  "  Jehabs,"  quarters  of  the  world,  which  may  perhaps  lurk
in  their  Grecised  form  amongst  these  interminable  strings  of

titles.

E.  Indra.  N.W.  Vayu.

S.E.  Agni.  N.  Kuvera.

S.  Yama.  N.E.  Jsaua.

S.W.  Nirriti.  Above.  Brahma.

W.  Varuna.  Below.  Xaga.
Of  the  centre,  Kudra.


*  In  the  character  of  Kaiii.ila,  as  the  later  Greek,  aud  the  Roman  ladies  in
that  of  Isis.


206  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR llEMAINS.


THE  INEFFABLE  NAME  IN  THE  HINDOO  FOEM.

We  have  already  heen  how  inportant  a  part  the  notion  of  an
"  Ineffable  Name,"  denoting  the  inconceivable  Supreme,  plays
in  the  machinery  of  the  Gnosis,  and  here  again  the  original  idea
is  to  be  found  fully  developed  in  the  practice  of  the  Brahmins.
This  awful  name  emblazoned  in  three  Sanscrit  letters  within  a
cartouche  formed  by  a  coiled  serpent  (that  normal  inclosure  for
a  Holy  Name  in  Gnostic  art)  *  is  fittingly  borne  up  by  the
elephant  headed  Ganesa,  god  of  Wisdom.  The  word  being
triliteral  is  rather  AUM  than  OM,  as  usually  written  in  English.
It  is  never  to  be  uttered  aloud,  but  only  mentally  by  the  devout.
Of  the  characters,  A  signifies  the  Creator,  U  the  Preserver,  M
the  Destroyer ;  that  is,  the  Triad  Brahma- Vishnu-Siva.  "  If
pronounced  aloud,  the  sound  much  resembles  Amen  as  drawled  out
by  a  country  parish  clerk.  In  fact  it  is  used  for  "  Augiekar,"
So  Le  it !  in  token  of  approbation  (**  Moor,  Hindoo  Pantheon). f
And  here  a  very  curious  analogy  is  to  be  pointed  out  in  the
assertion  of  the  Talmudists  that  the  word  Amen  if  shouted  aloud
is  of  power  to  open  the  gates  of  Heaven.  In  the  Pistis-Sophia
the  "  Three  Ainen,"  and  again  the  "  Four  Amen,"  are  repeatedly
mentioned  amongst  the  other  Mysteries  revealed  by  the  Saviour
in  his  esoteric  teaching.  On  this  account  the  word  may  be

*  As the Pistis-Sophia informs  and  that  the whole  life  of  man  is

us,  "  the  disk  of  the  sim  was  a  great  not  sufficient to measure its  depth

dragon  having  his  tail  in  Irs  mouth,"  and  extent.  Knox  ('  Overland  through

the  meaning  of  this  figure  whereon  Asia ')  describes  the  ruined  "  Monas-

the  sacred  word  is  emblazoned be-  tery  of  Eternal  Eepose,"  built  at  the

comes  sufficiently  obvious.  junction of the Augoou with the

tOMMANIPADHVM  "  Glorifi-  Amoor  by  an  emperor  of  the  Yuen

cation  of  the  Deity,"  is  the  Thibetian  dynasty  to  commemorate  his  visit  to

Confession of Faith, engraved on  that  region. On  the  summit  of  the

stone tablets set up everywhere  cliff  are  three  columns,  5  to  8  feet

over  the  country; and  everlastingly  high  of  marble  granite,  and  porphyry

chanted  by  the  Lamas as  they  tell  and granite, bearing inscriptions

their  beads. (Cooper's  'Travels  of  a  commemorating  this  foundation,  and

Pioneer,'  p.  208).  Hue  mentions  that  also  this  formula in  Chinese,  Mon-

tho  Lamns assert  that  the doctrine  golian  and  Thibetan,
contained  in  these  words  id  immense,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  207

suspected  to  have  some  connexion  with  the  Hindoo  Sacred
Name,  unless  indeed  Valentinus  had  got  it  nearer  home,
from  the  four  "  Amenti,"  guardians  of  the  dead,  and  sons  of
Osiris.  The  common  explanation  that  "  Amen  "  signifies  Truth
in  some  Eastern  dialect,  does  not  seem  to  rest  on  good  founda
tion.  The  Kabbalist  Marcus  discovered  a  great  mystery  in
Ajar/i/,  taken  numerically,  the  number  Ninety-nine  became
formed  by  the  union  of  the  Eleven  and  the  Nine  and  therefore
set  forth  by  the  parables  of  the  piece  of  silver,  and  the  ninety
and  nine  sheep,  "  which  is  the  reason  why  we  use  '  amen  '  in
prayers."

Other  Hindoo  titles  of  the  Deity  are  "  Tat "  and  "  Sat "  =  Virtue.
These  are  recognisable  in  the  Egyptian  gods  Tat  or  Hermes,
and  Sate,  Truths.  It  is  likewise  more  than  probable  that  the
mighty  AUM  itself  often  lies  enshrouded  amidst  the  lines  of
vowels  filling  our  talismans.  Certainly  the  Praun  calcedony
(No.  517)  bearing  011  one  side  the  Delphic  Apollo  in  a  good
style  of  art,  or  the  other  (by  a  later  hand)  a  man  dancing  with
his  apron  filled  with  fruits,  presents  in  its  legend  Trupo-Traiooo
aov/j,  oA.et,  the  Sanscrit  triliteral  in  the  only  form  in  which
Greek  characters  could  express  the  sound.

The  origin  of  this  Ineffable  Name  is  thus  related  (4  Inst.  Menu.'
ii.  370)  Brahma  milked  out  as  it  were  from  the  three  Vedas  the
letter  A,  the  letter  U,  and  the  letter  M ;  together  with  the  three
mysterious  words  "  Bhur,"  "  Bhavah,"  "  Swar,"  or  Earth,  Sky
and  Heaven.  From  the  three  Vedas  also  the  Lord  of  Creation,
incomprehensibly  exalted  successively  milked  out  the  three
Treasures  of  the  ineffable  text,  beginning  with  the  word  "  Tat,''
and  entitled  the  "  Savatri,"  or  Gayatri.  A  priest  who  shall  know
the  Veda,  and  pronounce  to  himself  both  morning  and  evening
that  syllable  and  that  holy  text  preceded  by  the  Three  words
shall  attain  that  sanctity  which  the  Veda  confers  :  and  a  "  twice
born  "  man  who  shall  a  thousand  times  repeat  those  Three  apart
from  the  multitude,  shall  be  released  in  a  month  even  from  a
great  offence,  as  a  snake  from  its  slough.  The  Three  great
immutable  words  preceded  by  the  Triliteral  syllable  and
followed  by  the  Gayatri  which  consists  of  three  measures,  must
be  considered  as  the  mouth,  or  principal  part  of  the  Veda."  In


268  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIK REMAINS.

this  doctrine  lies  the  very  origin  of  all  talismanic  inscriptions,
for  their  essence  is  the  stringing  together  of  sacred  names.  Nay
more,  the  actual  Three  words,  disguised  by  Coptic  pronunciation,
or  purposely  sealed  from  profane  eyes  by  a  duplication  of  vowels,
very  probably  exist  in  the  midst  of  certain  Gnostic  formula?.
In  the  spell  of  Battus,  hereafter  to  be  quoted,  words  of  the  same
senhe  as  the  Hindoo  Three  do  in  reality  occur.

The  Gayatii  or  holiest  verse  of  the  Vedas  is :  "  Let  us  adore
the  supremacy  of  the  Divine  Sun,  the  Godhead,  who  illuminates
all,  who  recreates  all,  from  whom  all  proceed,  unto  whom  all
must  return,  whom  we  invoke  to  direct  our  progress  aright  in
our  progress  towards  the  Holy  Seat."  Another  is ;  "  Earth,  Sky,
Heaven ;  Let  us  meditate  upon  that  most  excellent  Light  and
Power,  of  that  most  generous,  sportive,  and  resplendent  Sun,  that
it  may  guide  our  intellects."  In  all  this  there  is  something
that  irresistibly  reveals  the  Gnostic  invocations  whenever  they
can  be  interpreted,  and  the  "  Divine  Sun  "  finds  its  counterpart
in  the  "  Shemesh  Eilani "  so  perpetually  repeated.

This  Gayatri  is  contained  in  the  confession  of  faith  of  the
Brahmin.  "  This  new  and  excellent  praise  of  thee  O,  splendid
playful  Sun  (Pushan)  is  offered  by  us  to  thee.  Be  gratified
by  this  niy  speech:  approach  this  craving  mind  as  a  fond  man
seeks  a  woman.  May  that  Sun  who  contemplates  and  looks
into  all  worlds  be  our  Protector !  Let  us  meditate  on  the
adorable  light  of  the  Divine  Kuler  (Savitri) ;  may  it  guide  our
intellects.  Desirous  of  food  we  solicit  the  gift  of  the  splendid
Sun,  who  should  be  studioufly  worshipped.  Venerable  men,
guided  by  the  understanding,  salute  ihee,  Divine  Sun,  with
oblations  and  praise."

Moor  hereupon  makes  the  very  pertinent  remark:  -'It  is
difficult  to  conjecture  why  this  text  should  be  so  studiously  kept
secret,  for  its  exposition,  unconnected  with  any  idea  of  mystery,
and  affectation  of  profundity,  does  not  appear  likely  to  have  the
effect  so  dreaded  by  all  priests  of  guiding  the  intellect  of  man
kind  to  the  discovery  of  Truth."

As  already  remarked  our  Gnostic  formulae  when  expressed  in
Greek  have  a  spirit  and  a  rhythm  that  strikes  the  ear  as  the  echo
of  these  primitive  invocations;  witness  the  legend  upon  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  269

plasma  described  by  Creuzor  (Archool.  iii.  last  plate).  Within
the  serpent- formed  cartouche  is  an  inscription  of  many  lines,  the
first  half  an  undecypherable  medley  of  letters,  which  like  Marcus'
thirty  syllabic  appellation  of  the  Supreme  Tetrad,  must  express
the  name  of  the  Unknown  God,  who  in  the  following  portion  is
invoked  as :  "  The  Primal  Father,  incorporeal,  pervading  all
things,  self-existing,  the  seal  of  Solomon  :  "  then  come  more
mystic  epithets  ending  with  "  lion-headed,"  evidently  the
Mithrnic  figure  of  that  kind.  The  declaration  that  the  unknown
legend  is  the  "  Seal  of  Solomon  "  is  extremely  interesting,  as
showing  the  early  date  of  the  celebrity  attained  by  that  most
famous  of  talismans ;  which,  be  it  remembered,  was  reported  to
derive  its  virtue  from  the  mighty  throne  of  God  engraven  on
the  gem.

Many  further  analogies  between  the  two  theosophies  may  be
detected  in  the  Hindoo  forms  of  worship  published  by  Moor.
Of  the  Persons  in  the  Supreme  Triad,  P>rahma  represents  the
Creator,  Vishnu  the  Preserver,  and  Siva  the  Destroyer.  But
the  last  is  more  truly  the  Changer,  all  death  being  only  change.
Siva  therefore  in  one  of  his  characters  becomes  identified  with
Yama,  god  of  the  Shades.  Now,  seeing  that  the  first  two
Persons  are  symbolised  by  the  elements  Fire  and  Water,  the
analogy  of  the  Hellenic  Triad,  Zeus,  Poseidon,  Hades,  becomes
at  once  apparent.  Here  also  we  find  the  originals  of  the  "  Great
TpiSwa/x€t5,"  who  hold  so  high  a  place  in  the  hierarchy  of  the
Pistis-Sophia.

The  famous  Inscription  of  Buddha-Gaya,  Bengal,  dated  the
year  1005  of  the  era  of  Yikramaditya  (B.C.  57)  contains  this
remarkable  passage :  "  Amaradiva  [son  of  Sandracottus]  having
heard  this  voice  caused  an  image  of  the  Supreme  Spirit,  Buddha,
to  be  made;  and  he  worshipped  it,  according  to  the  law,  with
perfumes,  incense,  and  the  like,  and  he  thus  admired  [magnified]
the  Name  of  that  Supreme  Being,  an  Incarnation  of  a  portion
of  Vishnu.  Eeverence  be  unto  thee  in  the  form  of  Buddha  ;
reverence  be  unto  thee,  Lord  of  the  Earth !  Reverence  be  unto
thee  an  Incarnation  of  the  Deity,  and  the  Eternal  One;
Reverence  be  unto  thee  0  God,  in  the  form  of  the  God  of  Mercy,
the  Dispeller  of  pain  and  trouble,  the  Lord  of  all  things,  the


270  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Deity  who  overcomes  the  sins  of  the  Kali  yug  (Imn  Age),  the
Guardian  of  the  universe,  the  emblem  of  Mercy  towards  all  them
that  sue  thee — OM,  the  Possessor  of  all  things  in  vital  form,
Thou  art  Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Mahesa  (Siva) ;  Thou  art  the
Lord  of  the  universe  ;  Thou  art  the  proper  form  of  all  things,*
moveable  and  immoveable,  the  Possessor  of  the  whole.  And
thus  I  adore  thee.  Eeverence  be  unto  thee  the  Bestower  of
Salvation  ;  Eeverence  be  unto  thee  the  Destroyer  of  the  Evil
Spirit,  Kesi ;  f  0  Damadara  shew  me  favour  !  Thou  art  he  who
resteth  upon  the  face  of  the  Milky  Ocean,  and  who  lieth  upon
the  serpent  Sesha.  Thou  art  Trivikrama,  who  at  three  strides
encompasseth  the  earth ;  I  adore  thee,  who  art  celebrated  by  a
thousand  names,  and  under  various  forms,  in  the  shape  of
Buddha,  the  God  of  Mercy ;  be  propitious,  0  thou  Most  High !
Having  thus  worshipped  the  Guardian  of  mankind,  he  became
like  one  of  the  just.  He  joyfully  caused  a  holy  temple  to  be
built  of  a  wronderful  construction,  and  therein  were  set  up  the
Divine  Feet  of  Vishnu,  for  ever  Purifier  of  the  sins  of  mankind  ;
the  images  of  the  Pandus,  and  the  Descents  of  Vishnu  (Avatars)  ;
and  in  like  manner  of  Brahma  and  the  rest  of  the  divinities."
(Hind.  Panth.  p.  223.)

It  may  here  be  observed  how  extensively  this  symbol  of  the
Divine  Foot  has  pervaded  the  religions  of  the  West.  Feet  either
in  relief  or  in  cavo,  cut  in  stone,  are  common  about  Hindoo
temples  ;  according  to  tradition  they  are  memorials  of  suttees,
the  self-sacrificing  widow  having  mounted  from  that  stone  upon
the  pyre.  This  usage  supplies  the  connection  of  the  symbol
with  Serapis,  the  translated  Yama,  god  of  Hades.  Compare  the
colossal  Foot  dedicated  to  the  Serapis  of  Alexandria,  as  his  special
attribute,  and  recently  exhumed  from  the  ruins  of  his  temple.J
It  is  richly  sandalled,  and  on  the  top  sits  enthroned  the  god
himself,  with  his  attendants  Cerberus  and  the  Serpent,  Tricasa

*  Meaning  the  pre-existing  Type,  %  The  religious  importance  of  the

the  Platonic  Idea,  the  Persian  Fe-  s>  mbol  is  attested  by  an  Alexandrian

rouher,  the  Rabbinical  Adam-Karl-  coin  of  Commodus,  having  for  re-

mon — all  springing  from  this  source.  verse  this  same  Foot,  with  the  bust

f  This  explains  the  title  of  the  of  Serapis  placed  on  the  section  of

deity  so  often  put  on  our  talismans,  the  leg.  (Feuardent,  '  Egypie  An-

cienne,'  pi.  xxvii.)-


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  271

and  Scslia  in  Grecian  disguise.  The  same  Foot,  winged  and
girt  with  the  Serpent  placed  between  two  seated  lions,  is  cut  on
the  altar  inscribed  "  Deo  Sarapi  M.  Vibius  Onesimus  ex  visu  "
(Montfaucon,  pi.  122).  The  same  idea  produced  in  Ceylon  the
print  of  Adam's  foot  upon  the  summit  of  the  Peak,  bearing  his
name,  whence  he  had  ascended  to  his  Creator,  and  equally,
in  the  very  metropolis  of  Christianity,  that  of  Christ  himself
stamped  in  the  basalt  paving-stone  of  the  Via  Appia,  still
worshipped  in  the  church  and  entitled,  "  Domino  quo  vadis1'"

An  ancient  silver  plate,  found  in  a  pit  at  Islamabad,  at  the
northern  end  of  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  records  the  hallowing  of  the
site  of  a  projected  temple  there  in  the  deposit  in  that  pit  of  120
small  bronze  images  called  "  Tahmudas,"  twenty  of  larger  size,
"  Languda,"  one  large  in  stone,  "  Langudagari,"  and  a  brass
vessel  containing  two  of  the  bones  of  "  Thacur."  This  last  title,
"  Noble,"*  is  the  regular  style  of  a  god,  or  a  deified  mortal.
In  medieval  ecclesiastical  usage  (which  probably  still  continues)
it  was  indispensable  for  the  consecration  of  any  altar  in  a  church
that  a  relic  (bone)  of  some  Saint  should  have  been  deposited
under  its  base.  The  same  silver  plate  contains  this  account  of
the  birth  and  infancy  of  Buddha.  This  coincidence,  if  acci
dental  is  very  curious.  "  When  Buddha  Avatar  descended  from
the  region  of  souls,  and  entered  the  body  of  Mahamaya,  the
wife  of  Soontala  Danna,  Raja  of  Kailas,  her  womb  suddenly
assumed  the  appearance  of  clear  transparent  crystal  in  which
Buddha  appeared,  beautiful  as  a  flower,  kneeling,  and  reclining
on  his  hands.  \Vhen  born  he  had  on  his  head  two  feet,  and  on
his  hands  the  marks  of  wheels.  Brahma  attending  at  the
birth  received  the  infant  in  a  golden  vessel,  and  delivered  him
unto  Indra."

This  intimate  connection  of  the  theosophies  of  India  and
Greece  was  originally  (before  the  period  of  direct  commerce)
kept  up  through  the  medium  of  the  Persian  Magi,  as  the
classical  writers  themselves  show  by  casual  but  trustworthy
allusions.  Their  notices  were  till  lately  reckoned,  amongst  the
other  fictions  of  "  Graecia  Mendax,"  but  better  acquaintance
with  Sanscrit  and  Pehlevi  records  have  revealed  their  truth.
*  Exactly  answering  to  the  ancient  Dims,  the  Catholic  Saint.


272  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

For  it  is  now  accepted  as  certainly  proved  by  the  oldest
portions  of  the  Zendavesta  (the  "  Gathas,"  or  hymns)  that  the
primitive  religion  of  the  whole  Aryan  race,  previous  to  the
great  division,  was  a  simple  worship  of  the  Powers  of  Nature.
This  religion  was  reformed  by  Zoroaster,  who  retained  the
old  names  for  his  Angels,  but  superadded  the  idea  of  the  One
Supreme.

Ammian  in  his  account  of  Julian's  Persian  expedition,  gives
the  following  curious,  though  oddly  blundered,  details  upon
this  subject  (xxiii.  0).  "  In  these  tracts  are  situated  the  fertile
lands  of  the  Ma<ji  [in  Media],  concerning  whose  profession  and
pursuits,  since  we  have  come  upon  them,  it  will  be  fitting
to  give  here  some  brief  information.  Plato,  that  greatest
authority  upon  celebrated  doctrines,  states  that  the  Magian
religion,  known  by  this  mystic  name  of  '  Machagestia,'  is  the
most  uncorrupted  form  of  worship  in  things  divine.  To  the
philosophy  of  this  religion,  Zoroastres,  a  Bactrian,  in  primitive
times,  made  many  additions  drawn  from  the  Mysteries  of  the
Chaldeans,  as  did  still  later  Ilystaspes,  a  very  learned  prince,
father  of  Darius.  This  King  Hystaspes,  when  he  was  boldly
penetrating  into  the  unknown  regions  of  Upper  India,  had  come
upon  a  certain  wooded  solitude,  the  tranquil  silence  of  which
is  occupied  by  those  incomparable  sages,  the  Brachmans.
Instructed  by  their  teaching  in  the  science  of  the  motions  of
the  world  and  heavenly  bodies,  and  also  in  pure  religious  rites  as
far  as  he  was  able  to  gather  them — of  the  notions  thus  acquired
he  transfused  a  certain  proportion  into  the  creed  of  the  Magi.
The  latter  coupling  these  doctrines  with  their  own  peculiar
science  of  foretelling  the  future,  have  handed  down  the  whole
through  their  descendants  to  succeeding  ages.  Thenceforth,  in
the  course  of  many  generations  to  the  present  time,  a  multitude,
sprung  from  one  and  the  same  stock,  dedicates  itself  to  sacred
offices.  It  is  said  they  preserve  unextinguished  the  Sacred
Fire  which  first  of  all  fell  down  from  heaven,  a  portion  where
of  used  always  to  be  carried  before  the  kings  of  Asia  as  a  good
omen.  The  number  of  persons  so  descended  was  at  the  first
but  small,  and  they  were  exclusively  employed  by  the  Persian
kings  for  the  performance  of  religious  services.  It  was  con-


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  273

sidered  a  great  offence  to  approach  the  altar,  or  to  touch  the
sacrifice,  before  a  Magus,  after  reciting  the  appointed  prayers,
had poured upon  it  the  preliminary libation. But through
gradual  increase  they  are  grown  into  the  name  and  dimensions
of  a  distinct  people,  and  inhabit  villages  unprotected  by  walls,
being  allowed  to  follow  their  own  laws,  being  respected  on  ac
count  of  their  religious  character. It  was  from  this  race  of  men
that  the  seven,  as  ancient  history  records,  usurped  the  Persian
throne  upon  the  death  of  Cambyses,  and  were  crushed  by  the
conspiracy  of  that  Darius  who  gained  the  kingdom  through  the
neighing  of  his  horse." The  worthy,  but  pedantic  old  soldier,
in  his  anxiety  to  show  off  his  historical  reading,  has  committed
certain  very  ludicrous  blunders  in  this  account. The  father  of
Darius  was  no  "  ancient  king  of  Persia,"  but  merely  governor  of
that  province (eVapx°s) under Cambyses  (Her.  iii.  70). His
name,  derived  from  "  Gushtasp,"  the  planet  Venus,  was  doubt
less common enough  wherever Magism  was the established
religion. And  yet  more  ludicrously  does  Ammian  convert  the  one
Magian  usurper,  Smerdis,  into  seven,  the  actual  number  of  the
Persian  nobles  who  put  him  down. Nevertheless,  the  tradition
has  great  value,  as  proving  the  previous  existence  of  the  Magi
in  a  community  of  diviners  and  seers  (like  the  ancient  Jewish
fraternities,  "  Sons  of  the  Prophets,")  and  the  subsequent  modi
fication of  their  doctrines  by  the  importation  of  Brahminical
ideas,  following  upon  the  conquest  of  Indian  provinces. Such
being  the  case,  one  need  not  be  surprised  at  finding  Sassanian
kings  named  after  Hindoo  deities,  like  the  numerous Varancs
(from  "Varani,"  Vishnu's  title)  just as others of  their  line
assume  that  of  the  proper  Persian  god,  Ormuzd,  in  the  form  of
that  favourite  royal  appellation,  Hormisdas  (Ahoromasdi).


274  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIE REMAINS.


ABRAXAS-GEMS,  THEIR  MATERIALS,  WORKMAN
SHIP,  AND  NATURE.

Following  the  axiom,  "  that  the  body  is  more  than  the
raiment,"  the  foregoing  chapters  have  been  devoted  to  the
consideration  of  the  notions  which  our  talismans  have  invested
with  visible  form.  These  visible  forms,  therefore,  their
materials,  and  manufacture,  now  come  before  us  for  explanation
— a  wide  field  for  curious  research,  and  extending  into  many
diverse  regions  of  Archeology.

The  genuine  Abraxas-gems,  that  yet  fill  our  cabinets,  came
originally  for  the  most  part  out  of  Egypt ;  others,  as  their
differing  style  shows,  from  Asia ;  others  again  from  Syria,
where  many  Basilidans  had  established  themselves  at  an  early
period.  Amongst  these  philosophising  semi-Christian  sects  the
figure  of  Abraxas  was  held  in  high  esteem.  "  They  used  it
(says  Bellermann)  as  a  Teacher  in  doctrine,  in  obedience  to  whom
they  directed  their  transcendental  researches  and  mystic
instruction  ;  as  a  Token  and  a  Password  amongst  the  initiated,  to
show  that  they  belonged  to  the  same  fraternity ;  as  an  Amulet
and  a  Talisman,  and  lastly  as  a  Seal  to  their  documents."

Gnostic  intagli  are  almost  the  sole  productions  of  the  Glyptic
Art,  during  the  time  it  was  dying  out,  all  through  the  last  two
centuries  of  the  Western  Empire,  if  we  except  a  few  rude
figures  of  the  goddess  Roma,  Victories,  and  Eagles  made  for
legionary  rings.  As  may  easily  be  supposed  the  art  displayed
in  these  designs  is  at  its  lowest  ebb,  being  itself  a  degenerate
successor  to  the  debased  Egyptian  school  of  Alexandria.*  The

*  Their barbarism, however, is  so  rude  a  style  that  one  would  have

often  in  advance  of  that  of  their  real  placed  its  execution  three  centuries

period. A convincing example is  later,  but  for  the  company  in  which

the  one  found  in  the  great  treasure-  it was found. Another point ot

trove of Tarsus, where the latest  interest  was  its  retaining  the  original

coins  went  no  later  than  Gordiau  III.  setting — a  cable-mounted  frame,  with

It  was  a  black  hematite,  with  a  four-  loop,  of  massy gold — proof of the

winged,  sceptre-holding  ^Eon,  reverse  value placed upon its potency.

Venus  Anadyomene,  with  her  usual  (Franks  Collection.)
title  APU)PI<J>PACIC,  scratched  in


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIE REMAINS.  275

engraving  seems  to  have  been  entirely  executed  by  means  of  a
coarse  wheel,  like  that  characterising  the  Sassanian  stamp,  then
commonly  used  in  Persia,  a  country  which,  by  the  bye,  was  the
source  of  many  of  the ideas expressed in these figures and
inscriptions. The  choice  Indian  Sards,  Nicoli,  arid  Amethysts
which embellished earlier periods, are replaced by coarser
materials,  the  native  productions  of  the countries  which  had
engendered  the  new  creed,  the  Jasper  of  Egypt  dark  green,  or
sometimes  mottled  with  yellow  and  red,  the  Plasma,  usually  of
bad  quality,  passing from a dirty olive-green into common
Calcedony,  and  quite  as  abundantly  the  fibrous  Hematite  more
or  less  magnetic. Indeed  the  opaque  Jasper  and  the  Loadstone,
those  special  materials  for  signets  at  the  fountains  of  the  Magic
Art,  Egypt  and  Assyria,  had,  from  time  immemorial,  engrossed
the reputation of the most fitting vehicles for talismanic
figures. The former  was  Pliny's  Molochites,  "opaque,  and  of
the  colour  of  a mallow  leaf,  of  innate power as  an amulet
to protect children;" its black variety was his Antipatlics,
"  recommended  by  the  Magi  as  a  sure  defence  against  witch
craft of  every kind  ; "  whilst the ILematite is the Persian
Kamhahen,  perhaps  the  true  etymology  of  cameo,  a  word  that
came into  Europe  in the ages when every engraved stone
passed  for  a  talisman.

So  constant  is  this  rule  of  unmitigated  barbarism  that
Gnostic  types  when  found  well  executed  and  in  fine  stones,  as
sometimes  is  the  case,  will  on  examination  always  prove  to
emanate  from  the  Cinquecento  school,  a  period  when  anything
pertaining  to  Astrology  or  the  Kabala  was  reproduced  in  vast
abundance  under  the  impulse  of  the  revived  spirit  of  mystic
speculation.  To  this  and  the  following  century,  must  be
referred  the  authorship  of  those  large  jaspers,  not  unfrequent  in
Collections,  presenting  the  terminal  figure  of  Osiris,  the  field
occupied  with  astrological  cyphers  and  modem  Hebrew  letters.
Of  these  imitations,  betraying  themselves  by  their  own  excel
lence,  the  most  conspicuous  was  a  large  Amethyst,  obtained  by
me  at  Florence,  engraved  with  an  erect  figure  of  the  hawk-
headed  Phre,  Priapean,  holding  the  Cyiiophalus  upon  his
hand,  and  standing  on  the  coiled  serpent,  an  intaglio  in  the

T  2


276  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

best  Eoman  manner,  that  no  era  of  Gnosticism  had  been  capable
of  producing.*

Antique  pastes  with  subjects  do  not  exist,  and  for  a  very
sufficient  reason.  The  material  of  a  talisman  being  quite  as
essential  to  its  virtue  as  the  sigil  engraved  upon  it  ;  the  mystery
whereof  the  profound  Camillo  di  Leonardo  shall  hereafter  declare
in  his  own  words.  Again,  the  genuine  stones  were  in  them
selves  so  cheap,  and  the  work  upon  them  produced  so  expedi-
tiously  and  with  so  little  care,  as  to  leave  small  temptation  for
counterfeiting  them  in  a  baser  substance.  The  only  exception
that  has  come  under  my  notice  to  the  inferior  quality  of  the
stones  employed  by  the  Gnostic  engravers  is  the  singular
Garnet  tablet  of  the  Hertz  Cabinet,  of  which  a  description  will
be  given  in  its  proper  place,  when  we  come  to  treat  of  inscrip
tions.

The  Lettering  of  the  legenclsf  upon  these  talismans  has  u
peculiarity  of  execution  that  of  itself  serves  to  identify  almost
every  stone  belonging  to  the  Gnostic  series.  The  letters  are  all
formed  by  stralyld  lines,  the  ©,  O,  and  T_,  being  quite  square,
either  from  the  rudeness  of  the  instrument  employed  to  cut
them,  or  because  want  of  skill  prevented  the  engraver  from
attempting  curvilinear  characters,  to  do  which  neatly  requires
the  utmost  dexterity  and  long  practice,  being  in  fact  the  most
difficult  task  that  can  be  demanded  from  the  wheel.  For  it  was
with  this  newly  -in  vented  instrument,  as  the  equality  of  their
lines  demonstrates,  that  these  ill-shaped  characters  were  faintly

*  I had  long suspected that  the  t Stiechel explains the inscrip-

Cmquecento period  produced  much  tion upon  the shield borne by  an

Gnostic  work  iti  the  ruder  style,  and  Abraxas  figure,  written  thus, *^  X

at  length  have obtained proof  de-  I  AAV

monstrative of tLe truth of this  ™ ™ more than the customary


suspcon. Amongst a large  lot  of  f™»  *  that  position  the  fcame  lao

coarsely-cut  Gnostic  jaspers  of  very  ™th  the Sign o the  Cross thrice

recent work, my attention was  repeated (to make  up  the  mystic

caught by one (an inscription of  number> Seven> He 4uoteB ™

several lines)  cut upon  a  tablet of  support of this acute explanation

that  streaky  agaet  paste  so  popular  ? B™ PuUished by Matter,

at  that  period,  but  quite  unknown  to  Baring X4>ENECXH  W>IX, ex-

tho  ancients. The piece had been  Pressing  the  sound of  the  Hebrew

highly  polished  and  then  engraved  Peni  ze**  riPia  =

with  the  wheel  ;  the  design  probably  healed."
copied  from  a  genuine  stone.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  277

traced  upon  the  stone.  In  all  likelihood  the  same  artists  were
the  Alexandrian  glass-workers,  famed  long,  before  for  their
engraved  vases,  Martial's  "  tepido  toreumata  Nili,"  for  Pliny
uses  the  significant  expression,  "  vitrum,  aliud  torno  teritur,
aliud  argenti  more  caelatur,"  "  some  glass  vessels  are  cut  out  by
means  of  the  drill,  others  carved  in  relief  in  the  same  manner  as
silver  plate."  The  z  in  these  inscriptions  is  invariably  formed
by  drawing  a  short  line  across  the  diagonal  of  a  Z,  so  that  in
rude  work,  it  cannot  be  distinguished  from  the  latter  character.
These  inscriptions  are  often  found  superadded  upon  the  backs
of  gems  of  much  earlier  date,  evidently  for  the  purpose  of
converting  them  into  talismans.  Of  such  conversions  the  most
remarkable  known  to  me  are,  a  fine  cameo  (Marlborough
Cabinet)  a  bust  of  Commodus;  on  the  reverse  of  which  has
been  rudely  cut  the  Abraxas-god  surrounded  by  a  legend,
unintelligible  though  sounding  like  Greek  words.

AOYrENNAIOAEMENAIBAZIAIIKOZ

Another  cameo  (Royal  Cabinet)  with  the  helmeted  heads
regardant  of  Constantino's  two  elder  sons,  has  received  the  very

unorthodox  addition of  Anubis, also surrounded bv a lon<r

j  ' &

legend  in  huge  characters,  so  barbarous  as  to  defy  transcription.
A  third  (Devonshire  Parure,  No.  79),  a  fine  head  of  Hercules,
lapis  lazuli,  has  received  the  Gnostic  baptism  by  the  addition
on  the  back  of  a  scarabeus  -with  expanded  wings  (recognised
emblem  of  the  Creator),  and  the  word  of  power  ABPAZAZ .  The
extremely  debased  style  of  all  such  additions  plainly  indicates
a  period  long  posterior  to  that  of  the  originals;  whilst  the
position  they  occupy,  necessarily  concealed  when  in  use,  proves
that  the  whole  object  of  such  improvements  was  the  supernatural
protection  of  the  wearer.

The  finest  example  of  Gnostic  conversion  is  an  onyx  cameo
(Vienna  Cabinet),  representing  some  young  Caesar  under  the
form  of  Jupiter  Axur,  standing  in  front  face  with  the  thunder
bolt  in  his  left  hand,  his  right  resting  on  the  sceptre,  the  eegis
hangs  down  his  back  for  paludamentum,  at  his  feet  the  eagle
on  one  side  a  trophy  with  seated  captive,  hands  tied  behind ;  all
in  a  good  style  in  low  relief.  The  talisman-maker  has  cut  a


278  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

line  of  square  characters,  resembling  Palmyrene,  down  each  leg
from  hip  to  foot,  a  nimbus  of  the  same  round  his  head,  others  on
the  field :  and,  to  make  all  sure,  has  covered  the  back  of  the
gem  with  16  lines  in  the  same  abstruse  lettering.  It  is  care
fully  figured  in  Arneth's  '  Cameen  des  K.  K.  Cabinettes,'
(PI.  xviii.  2),  who  suggests  Julian  for  its  subject,  without  con
sidering  that  the  "  Philosopher  "  wore  a  long  beard  during  the
period  when  such  a  representation  of  him  as  this  was  permissible.
Besides,  for  the  two  centuries  before  Julian's  times,  Serapis  was
the  only  type  under  which  the  reigning  emperor  was  allowed
to  be  complimented,  the  old  Latin  '  Jovis  Axur '  having  grown
obsolete.  The  hero  of  this  apotheosis  is  much  more  probably
Titus,  or  even  his  brother.  The  cameo  is  of  respectable  dimen
sions,  being  2f  inches  high  by  2J  wide.

As  regards  the  history  of  Glyptics  these  inscribed  gems  have
a  value  of  their  own,  as  fixing  the  date  when  the  wheel  came
generally  into  use  in  the  engraver's  atelier ;  for  the  minute
and  elegant  lettering  of  earlier  times  will  be  found,  when
examined  with  the  microscope,  to  have  been  incised  in  the  gem
with  the  diamond  point,  whence  its  perfect  regularity  and
freedom.

Of  those  Gnostic  inscriptions  in  general,  Easpe  (Catalogue  of
Tassie's  Pastes,  p.  38)  has  given  accurate  transcripts,  from  an
immense  collection  belonging  to  every  shape  and  period  of
Gnosticism.  Chabouillet  has  more  recently  done  the  same  for
the  very  large  series  in  the  French  Cabinet,  in  his  valuable
'  Catalogue  des  Ctimees  de  la  Bib.  Imp.'  p.  282.  In  the  '  Gorla3
Dactyliotheca,'  (3rd  ed.  1G95),  Nos.  326-486  are  entirely
Gnostic  and  astrological  designs,  and  include  the  greater  part
of  those  first  published  by  Chiflct  in  his  'Macarii  Abraxas-
Proteus,'  ed.  1610.  whose  plates  were  re-engraved  for  the
purpose  on  a  reduced  scale,  but  with  large  additions,  apparently
made  by  the  learned  editor  of  the  work,  Gronovius.  But  the
most  extensive  series  of  actual  representations  of  the  whole
class  are  the  plates  to  the  Section  '  Les  Abraxas'  of  Mont-
faucon's  grand  work  '  L'Antiquite  expliquee.'  Many  of  his
examples  were  drawn  from  the  fine  Cabinet  of  gems  belonging
to  the  Library  of  St.  Geneviove,  besides  others,  and  very


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


279


interesting  specimens,  from  a  previous  work  by  Capello.*
Though  roughly  engraved,  they  seem  to  have  been  copied  with
laudablo  attention  to  accuracy.


*  Who  professes  to  copy  originals
iu  the  ancient  Cassel  Cabinet ;  al
though  many  of  his  types  are  so  un
paralleled  in  modern  collections  that
Matter  suspects  them  mere  creations
of  his  own  fancy.  But  examples  of


some  of  the  strangest  amongst  them
have  lately  corne  under  my  own
notice,  apparently  mediaeval  Arabic
talismans,  which  Capello,  very
pardonably,  mistook  for  remains  of
the  ancient  Gnostics.


FIG.  12.


280  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


LEGENDS  AND  EOKMUL7E.

Foremost  in  the  rank  of  Words  of  Power  stands  the  "  Mystery
of  the  Seven  Vowels,"  so  important  as  to  demand  a  separate
section  for  its  discussion  with  befitting  reverence.  Though
inferior  to  these,  great  no  doubt  was  the  virtue  of  those
interminable  strings  of  letters  that  fill  both  faces  of  many  a
Gnostic  stone — later  refinements  upon  the  celebrated  'E^eVta
rpa/A^ara,  as  Clemens  aptly  remarks.  Amongst  these  inter
minable  formula?  lurk,  no  doubt,  those  potent  spells  composed  by
Solomon  himself;  by  repeating  which  and  at  the  same  time
applying  to  the  sufferer's  nose  his  ring  (under  whose  gem  was
placed  the  herb  prescribed  by  the  same  oracle  of  wisdom)  the
Jew  Eleazar  drew  out  through  their  nostrils  the  devils  possess
ing  many  people,  in  the  presence  of  Vespasian,  his  tribunes  and
chief  officers.  The  sapient  Josephus  adds,  that  to  make  sure  of
the  exit  of  the  diabolical  occupant,  the  exorcist  commanded  him  to
overturn  in  his  flight  a  basin  of  water  placed  at  a  considerable
distance,  which  was  forthwith  done,  to  the  consternation  and
conviction  of  all  the  heathen  spectators.  The  Ephesian  Spell,
the  mystic  words  graven  on  the  zone  of  the  Great  Diana,  were
commonly  used  by  the  Magi  of  Plutarch's  times  for  the  same
purpose.

And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  such  invocations  were  often
efficacious.  Demoniacal  possession  was  nothing  more  than
epilepsy  (its  veiy  name,  signifying  possession,  being  derived
from  that  same  belief) ;  for  Galen,  after  rationally  discussing
the  natural  causes  of  the  malady,  remarks  that  the  vulgar
universally  attributed  it  to  the  agency  of  devils.  Now  our
experience  of  Mesmerism  (so  far  as  there  is  any  reality  in  that
pet  science  of  charlatans)  clearly  shows  what  inexplicable  effects
can  be  produced  upon  persons  labouring  under  nervous  derange
ment  by  words  of  command,  authoritatively  pronounced.  How
much  greater  the  effect  of  those  words  in  old  times,  when
uttered  in  an  unknown  tongue  by  a  person  of  imposing  presence,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  281

and  over  patients  already  filled  with  the  belief  of  his  power  to
relieve  them !  Hence  the  Casting-out  of  devils  became  the
grand  staple  of  their  trade  with  all  the  Thaumaturgists,  both
old  and  new,  of  the  ages  with  which  we  are  dealing.  That  the
cure  should  be  permanent  was  a  thing  perfectly  immaterial,  it
sufficed  the  exorcist's  purpose  if  the  manifestation  of  his  power
should  be  successful  for  the  moment,  to  the  edification  of  the
awestruck  crowd  of  believers,  and  to  the  confusion  of  the  few
nationalistic  doubters  amongst  the  crowd.

Such  spells  gave  power  likewise  over  demons  ranging  about
unconfined  in  fleshly  prison.  Eucrates,  in  Lucian's  amusing
4  Philopseudes,'  boasts  that  he  is  so  accustomed  to  meet  thousands
of  them  roving  about,  that  he  has  come  not  to  mind  them  at  all,
more  especially  since  "  The  Arabian  has  given  me  a  ring  made
out  of  the  nail  from  a  cross,  and  taught  me  the  spell  composed
of  many  Names"  The  last  remark  is  valuable  for  our  purpose :
it  proves  that  the  legends  in  an  unknown  tongue  on  our
talismans  are  sometimes  to  be  explained  from  the  Arabic,*  and
also  may  consist  of  strings  of  titles  of  the  one  deity  invoked.
Virgil's —

"  Crines  effusa  sacerdos

Ter  centum  tonat  ore  dcos,  Erebumque,  Ghaosque,
Tergeminamque  Hecaten,  tria  virgiuis  ora  Dianaj ; "

(/En.  iv.  510)—

distinctly  refers  to  the  same  superstition,  for  Servius  explains
these  " three  hundred  gods"  in  the  spells  of  Dido's  Massjlian
sorceress,  as  not  meaning  so  many  different  deities,  but  only  so
many  epithets  of  Hecate  herself;  whose  very  names  he,  for  the
same  reason,  fancifully  derives  from  the  numeral  e/carov.  The
same  idea  yet  survives  in  the  religious  exercise  of  the  devout
Moslem,  the  mental  repetition  and  reflection  upon  the  Ninety-
and-nine  Arabic  epithets  of  the  One  Almighty.

*  In  fact,  the  "  unknown  charac-  (therefore  long  anterior  to  Gnostic

ters" sometimes occurring in the  times), and neatly engraved Hini-

field of  these talismans  are  unmis-  yaritic  legends. This  character  is

takeably  Himyaritic  letters,  belong-  perfectly vertical, handsome, and

ing to that primitive alphabet of  well  denned  in  its  differences ;  it  is  a

Arabia. Osiander and Levy have  modification of  the  Palmyrene,  and

published gems bearing intagli,  of  the  parent  of  the  modern  Ethiopic.
good execution, of Persian deities


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

The  great  object  of  these  adjurations  was  to  address  the
Deity  by  the  names  under  which  he  was  known  to  all  the
nations  of  Earth ;  in  this  way  making  sure  of  addressing  him
by  the  appellation  wherein  he  most  delighted.  This  is  the
fundamental  principle  of,  and  sufficient  explanation  of,  the
entire  class  of  these  talismanic  legends ;  and  of  their  syncretism
No.  10  of  the  'Magic  Papyrus'  affords  a  most  valuable
illustration.  "  I  call  upon  thee  that  didst  create  the  Earth,  and
bones,  and  all  flesh,  and  all  spirit,  that  didst  establish  the  Sea,
and  that  shakest  the  Heavens,  that  didst  divide  the  Light  from
the  Darkness ;  Thou,  the  Great,  Directing  Mind,  that  disposest
all  things,  Eye  of  the  world  !  Genius  of  genii  (8ai>o>v  Sai/Wwv),
God  of  gods,  the  Lord  of  spirits,  IAO  OYHI,  hearken  unto
my  voice !  I  call  upon  Thee,  the  Master  of  the  gods,  0  loud
thundering  Zeus,  0  sovereign  Zeus,  Adonai !  Lord  I  AH  OYHE  !
I  am  he  that  calleth  upon  thee  in  the  Syrian  tongue,  the  great
God  Zaa\ar)p  !</>  <£ou ;  and  do  not  thou  disregard  my  voice  iii
the  Hebrew  language,  A/3\ava6ava\f3a  A/3pao-iAwa.  For  I  am
o-L\Oa>xuovx  /WAa/x,  /3/WaAw#  law  law  vtfiovO  (rapLoOap  fiuO  ap/3aO
law  Iaw<9  o-afiauO  Trayovpyj  payovpr)  ftapovx  ASwvat  EXwat  ta/fyaa/x
(3ap(3apavu  vav  <n0.  0  lofty-minded,  ever-living  Crown  of  the
world ;  containing  all,  Sie^o-a/m  er^  fiiov  =  a<f>rj  =  VOVOL  =
o-ttOv  =  X6t6w7)pvyX  OHAHHfiAI  A  fiHIAO  acnaA  o-aa^aXo-w
eO^ovp-rjo-ivi  crep.  Aav  \ov  Xovpiy^.  (This  spell)  looses  fetters,
causes  blindness  (i.e.  makes  one  invisible),  procures  dreams,
gives  favour,  for  whatsoever  purpose  thou  wishesi."

One  circumstance,  very  unaccountable,  connected  with  these
Inscriptions  is  wherefore  the  Pclilcvi  character,  the  national
writing  of  the  Magi  in  those  times,  should  never  be  used  in
formula  so  often  embodying  the  doctrines  of  that  profession.
Neither  are  any  complete  legends  to  be  found  written  in  Punic,
although  that  character  with  the  last  mentioned  was  at  the
time  universally  employed,  in  various  modifications,  all  over
Asia  and  Africa.  In  the  latter  country  Punic  was  not  super-
s  ided  by  Latin  until  a  very  late  period  of  the  Empire,  for  in  the
second  century  Apuleius  ('Apology ')  wishing  to  prove  the  neglect
of  his  stepson's  education  by  the  boy's  uncle  who  had  taken
charge  of  him  (the  family  belonged  to  the  large  city  Madaura  in


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  283

Numidia),  declares  that  though  arrived  at  the  age  of  sixteen
he  could  speak  nothing  but  Punic  and  the  little  Greek  he  had
picked  up  from  his  mother,  "  praeter  Punice,  et  siquid  ad  hue  a
matre  Graecissat."  "  And  some  years  later,  the  emperor  Severus,
a  descendant  of  Hannibal's,  had  to  blush  for  his  sister  when  she
came  from  his  native  place  Leptis  to  Court,  "vix  Latino
loquens."  It  is  true  the  characters  which  are  often  scattered
over  the  field  of  these  gems  have  much  the  look  of  Punic;
others  again  of  Palniyrene  Syriac  ;  whilst  some  are  obviously
the  same  with  the  strange  Nubian  characters  to  be  seen  in
abundance  graven  on  the  rocks  at  Silsilis,  upon  the  upper  Nile.
As  for  the  square  (modern)  Hebrew,  all  works  presenting  them
are  mere  fabrications  of  the  astrologers  and  Kosicrucians  of
the  16th  and  17th  centuries.  Hicroglyphical  writing,  though
naturally  to  be  looked  for  in  the  manufacture  of  A]exandria,
hardly  occurs  at  all ;  it  is  probable  that  even  its  modification
the  Demotic  had  long  before  been  superseded  (in  that  capital  at
least)  by  the  Greek  alphabet.  The  only  exception  known  to
me  is  the  agate  published  by  Caylus  ('  Eec.  d'Ant.'  viii.  pi,  8),
presenting  the  common  four-winged  Priapic  genius  in  the
sacred  boat,  the  reverse  bearing  a  long  vertical  line  of  neatly
cut  genuine  hieroglyphics.  The  Arabic  "  Kamar  "  Moon,  some
times  found  in  these  formulas,  illustrates  Pliny's  remark,
that  the  Magi  ordered  the  ^ame  of  the  Sun  or  Moon  to  be
engraved  on  emeralds  or  amethysts,  in  order  to  convert  them
into  amulets  against  witchcraft,  and  giving  success  at  Court.
An  emerald  (Praun)  of  very  bad  quality,  however,  inscribed
I  AH  ZABAjQO  ABPAZAZ,  may  represent  the  very  kind  of
amulet  alluded  to.  But  that  Alexandria  was  the  grand
fabrique  of  talismans  is  equally  apparent  to  the  mineralogist
from  the  materials,  as  to  the  archaeologist  from  the  lettering
employed  in  their  construction.  Nevertheless  it  still  remains
unexplained  why  the  Magi  should  not  have  written  their  own
spells  in  the  character  then  solely  current  in  the  vast  dominions
of  the  Sassanian  kings.

The  language  of  these  inscriptions  is  never  Latin,  rarely
Greek,  frequently  Syriac,  but  most  commonly  corrupt  Hebrew.
For  this  choice  the  sufficient  reason  is  given  by  lamblichus  in  a


284:  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

letter  to  Porphyrius,  where  he  expressly  states  that,  "  The  gods
are  well  pleased  with  prayers  addressed  unto  them  in  the  Egyptian
or  Assyrian  tongues,  as  being  ancient  and  cognate  languages  to
their  own,  and  moreover  those  in  which  prayer  was  first  made
unto  them  ;  and  therefore  they  have  stamped  as  sacred  the  entire
speech  of  those  holy  nations."  It  is  a  singular  coincidence  that
Justinus  Kerner,  in  his  extraordinary  work,  '  Die  Seherin  von
Prevorst '  (in  reading  which  one  continually  fluctuates  between
ihe  conviction  of  its  being  an  impudent  fiction,  and  the
uncomfortable  suspicion  that  it  may  be  a  revelation  of  the  pro-
foundest  tnith),  assigns  a  similar  reason  for  the  writing  used  by
the  visitant  from  the  spirit-world  so  greatly  resembling  Arabic,
''because  tliat  had  the  best  claim  to  be  considered  the  primitive
language  of  mankind."  This  "  Seer  "  was  a  peasant  girl,  worn
out  by  long  sickness  to  that  degree  as  to  belong  more  to  the  next
world  than  to  this.  Consequently  she  had  become  sensible  of  the
presence  of  spiritual  visitors,  and  acted  as  a  medium  of  com
munication  between  them  and  those  in  the  flesh.  Kerner,  a
physician,  took  her  into  his  own  house  the  better  to  observe
these  singular  phenomena,  and  kept  a  regular  diary  of  her  health
and  of  her  disclosures  during  several  months  until  her  death,
with  a  minuteness  of  which  only  a  German  is  capable.  He
writes  evidently  in  all  good  faith,  and,  amidst  heaps  of  nonsense,
puts  down  some  startling  occurrences  beyond  the  flights  of
forgery  and  confirmed  by  one's  own  experience.

But  as  concerns  the  "  Language  of  the  other  world,"  in  every
country  "  Omne  ignotum  pro  magninco "  has  ever  been  the
maxim  of  priestcraft,  the  soundness  of  which  has  been  demon
strated  by  the  experience  of  all  time.  More  particularly  does
this  apply  to  forms  of  prayer.  Thus  Orpheus  :

"  Then  whilst  the  cauldron  buhhlcs  o'er  the  flame,
Address  each  godhead  by  his  mystic  name ;
Full  well  th'  immortals  all  are  pleased  to  hear

'  Their  mystic  names  rise  in  the  muttered  prayer."

Of  such  mystic  invocations  it  will  be  advisable  to  adduce
examples  from  writers  contemporary  with  their  use,  before
proceeding  to  the  consideration  of  actual  remains  of  similar
nature.  Of  the  numerous  specimens  cited,  the  following  are  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  285

most  noteworthy.  The  '  Pistis-Sophia'  (§  358)  makes  the  Saviour
"  standing  upon  the  shore  of  the  sea,  the  ocean,  call  upon  God
with  this  prayer,  saying,  Hear  me,  0  Father,  thou  Father  of
all  fatherships,  Infinite  Light,  Ae^iovco  law  Awt  ana  if/LvuOep  Oeptvwi}/
Trayovprj  /x,€$/x,o/xaw0  V€i/ao/xa(ju$  /^apa^a^^a  Owfiappa-
popOKoOopa  leov  5a/3aa>$."  And  again  (§  375)
in  this  valuable  description  of  the  Gnostic  Sacrament :
"Then  said  Jesus,  bring  me  fire  and  vine-branches.  And  they
brought  them  unto  him,  and  he,  placing  upon  them  an  offer
ing,  set  two  vessels  of  wine,  the  one  on  the  right,  the  other
on  the  left  of  the  offering.  He  set  before  them  the  offering :
he  put  also  a  cup  of  water  before  the  vessel  of  wine  which  was
on  the  right  hand,  and  ho  set  a  cup  of  wine  before  the  vessel  of
wine  that  was  on  the  left ;  and  he  set  loaves  of  bread,  according
to  the  number  of  his  disciples  in  the  middle  between  the  cups.
He  set  likewise  a  cup  of  water  behind  the  loaves.  And  Jesus,
standing  before  the  offering,  made  all  the  disciples  to  stand
behind  him,  being  all  clothed  in  linen  garments,  having  all  of
them  in  their  hands  tlie  number*  of  the  Name  of  the  Father  of  the
Treasury  of  Light.  And  he  cried  aloud,  saying,  Hear  me,  O
Father,  Father  of  all  fatherships,  Boundless  Light,  law  louco  Iao>
acot  tola  i//i,vco$€p  Otpivwij/  i/a)i//i$ep  ve^o/xapa^a  L^ava^va^av  a/xav^i
of  heaven  !  lo-pat  a/x^i/  a/x^y  aovjSai  j3ai  aTnraar]  a^rjv  a^-rjv  Seppa
apat  arraoi  afjirjv  afjuqv  crao-apa-aprov  a/Jirjv  a/xr/i/  KovKia.fj.-rjv  (JLO.L
a.[uqv  Lai  LOLL  Tovair  a/JLyv  a^v  /xatv/xapt  fiapir)  /xapet  a/^v  a/x^v
Again  Irenasus  copies  out  a  formula  "  couched  in  Hebrew  words,
to  inspire  greater  awe  into  the  Gallic  neophyte  (at  Lugdunum),"
as  used  by  certain  Gnostics  there  in  administering  baptism  :
y8acrcre/xa  ^a/xocrcre  POL  cuavo/jia  jaaraSia  povaoa  Kovcrra  f3aj3a(£>op  KoAa-
X#ai,  "  I  invoke  Thee,  Supreme  over  every  virtue,  the  Light  of
the  Father  by  name,  the  Good  Spirit,  the  Life,  because  thou  hast
reigned  in  the  body."  Another  of  their  formulas  was — Meo-o-ia  ov
(j)ape-y  fa/xe/xi^ai/xev  ^aA-Saiar  pxxre/xeSia  aK0pai/at  i^aora  lrj(rov  Na£apta.
"  I  do  not  separate  the  Spirit,  the  Head,  and  the  Supercelestial

*  Meaning,  perhaps,  having  their  fingers  in  such  manner  as  to  indicate

lingers  arranged  so  as  to  cxpn  ss  this  his  own  numeral,  that  of  the  days  in

number  ;  for  Pliny  mentions  a  very  the  year.
old statue  of  Janus  displaying  the


286  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Virtue,  the  Merciful  One. May  I  prosper  in  thy  name,  0  Saviour
of  Truth."

But  as  regards  the  expression  of  divine  mysteries  by  means
of  letters  of  the  alphabet,  Marcus  stands  pre-eminently  first
amongst  the  Gnostics,  as  the  following  extracts  from  his
"  Eevelation  "  will  conclusively  attest.  "  The  supreme  Tetrad
came  down  unto  me  from  that  region  which  cannot  be  seen  nor
named,  in  a  female  form  because  the  world  would  have  been
unable  to  bear  their  appearing  in  a  male  figure,  and  revealed
to  me  the  generation  of  the  universe,  untold  before  either  to
gods  or  men.  When  first  the  Father,  the  Inconceivable,
Beingless,*  sexless,  began  to  be  in  labour  he  desired  that  his
Inemible  should  be  born,  and  his  invisible  should  be  clothed
with  form.  He  therefore  opened  his  mouth  and  uttered  the
Word  like  unto  himself.  This  word  standing  before  him
showed  that  he  was  manifesting  himself  as  the  form  or  type
of  the  Invisible  One.  Now  the  uttering  of  the  Name  came  to
pass  in  this  wise.  He  (the  Supreme)  spake  the  first  word  of
his  name,  the  which  is  a  syllable  of  four  letters.  He  then  added
the  second  syllable,  also  of  four  letters.  Then  the  third,  com
posed  of  ten  letters.  Finally  the  fourth,  made  up  of  twelve
letters.  Thus  the  utterance  of  the  whole  name  consists  of
thirty  letters,  and  of  four  syllables.  Each  letter  has  a  form-
pronunciation  and  writing  of  its  own,  but  neither  under
stands  nor  beholds  that  of  the  whole  Name ;  nay,  not  even  the
power  of  the  letter  standing  next  to  itself.  Now  these  sounds
united  make  up  the  Beingless  unbegotten  TEon,  and  these  are
the  Angels  that  always  behold  the  face  of  the  Father.  Thus
the  Father  knowing  himself  to  be  incomprehensible  gives  unto
each  of  the  letters,  called  ^Eons,  its  own  proper  sound,  inas-

*  The  Kabbalistic  "En-Soph." In  this existence perceptible, and to

this  boundlessness,  or  as  the  En-Soph,  render  himself  comprehensible, the

God  cannot  be  comprehended  by  the  En-Soph  had  to  become  active  and

intellect,  nor  described  by  words,  for  creative. But the  En-Soph  cannot

there is nothing  that  c,.n  grasp  or  be the direct Creator, for he has

define  Him  to  us;  and  as such  He  neither  will,  intention,  desire,  thought,

is a certain sense non-existent, in  language,  nor  action,  as  these  properly

because  as  far  as  our  minds  are  con-  imply limit, and belong to finite

corned  that  which  is  perfectly  incom-  brings, whereas the En-Soph is

prehensible  does  not  exist. To  make  Boundless."


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  287

much  as  none  of  them  singly  is  competent  to utter  the  entire
Name."*

The  substance  of  the  revelation  brought  down  to  Marcus  by
Truth  is  to  be  found  in  the  Kabbala,  which  makes  the  mystic
names  of  God  lo  consist  of  four,  twelve,  forty-two  and  seventy-
two  letters  respectively.  The  Kabbalists  go  so  far  as  to
assert  that  the  forty- two  victims  offered  by  Balaam  in  order
to  obtain  a  favourable  response,  were  consecrated  to  one  of
these  great  names.  If  indeed  Moses  was  learned  in  all  the
wisdom  of  the  Egyptians,  the  magic  virtues  of  numerals  would
have  formed  an  essential  part  of  his  learning,  as  we  see  from
the  doctrine  of  Pythagoras,  confessedly  derived  from  Egypt.
It  looks  very  much  like  as  if  the  framers  of  the  genealogy  of
Jesus  had  the  same  object  in  view,  when  they  forced  the
generations  to  the  required  number  by  omitting  three  of  the
kings  in  the  second  division,  being  able  to  deal  with  the  third
in  whatever  manner  they  pleased.  On  counting  the  number
of  the  vowels  that  evidently  have  some  deep  purpose  in  occurring
without  consonants  on  so  many  talismans  of  the  age  of  Marcus,
we  should,  I  expect,  often  find  it  tally  with  that  of  one  or  the
other  of  these  Holy  Names,  "f

A  subsequent  revelation  of  the  same  Tetrad  to  Marcus,
serves  to  account  for  the  frequent  appearance  of  the  naked
woman,  the  Venus  Anadyomene  of  earlier  times,  upon  Gnostic
monuments.  "  After  having  declared  these  things,  the  Tetrad
added:  I  will  shew  unto  thee  Truth,  whom  I  have  brought

*  This is a regular Talmudic  the  divine  name  offorty-tu-o  letters  is

notion as the Rabbins propound.  only communicated to such as  are

"  At  first  the  Name  of  twelve  letters  pious,  not  easily  provoked,  not  given

was  communicated  to  every  one ;  but  to  drinking,  and  are  not  self-opiuion-

wJien  the  profane  multiplied  it  was  ated. He  who  knows  that  name  and

only  communicated  to  the  most  pious  preserves it in purity, is beloved

of  the  priests,  and  these  pre-eminently  above,  cherished  below,  respected  by

pious  priests  absorbed  it  from  their  every  creature,  and  is  new  to  both

fellow-priests in the chant. It is  worlds."— (Babylon.  Mid.  71  a.),

recorded  that  Kabbi  Tarphon  said  :  f  This  explains  the  2evya  fiapcpap-

I  once  weut-up  the  orchestra  in  the  a^es,  "  those  who  stand  before  the

Temple after my maternal uncle,  Mount" so commonly following

and  bending  forward  my  ear to a  angelic  names  upon  our  talismans;

priest I heard how  he  absorbed  it  where  also  the  long  strings  of  letters

from  his  fellow-priests  in  the  chant.  may be designed to express their

K.  Jehudah  said  in  the  time  of  Rab  ^Eou  unbegotk-n.


288  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

down  from  the  celestial  mansions  that  thou  shouldest  behold
her  naked,  acknowledge  her  beauty,  hear  her  speaking,  and  be
astonished  at  her  wisdom.  Look  up  therefore  at  her  head  A
and  O,  at  her  neck  B  and  ^,  at  her  shoulders  with  her  hands
F  and  X,  at  her  breasts  A  and  P,  at  her  chest  E  and  Y,  at  her
back  Z  and  T,  at  her  belly  H  and  2,  at  her  thighs  ©  and  P,  at
her  knees  I  and  II,  at  her  legs  K  and  O,  at  her  ankles  A  and  a
at  her  feet  M  and  N.  This  is  the  body  of  Truth,  this  the  form
of  the  letters,  this  the  character  of  the  writing.  Whereupon
Truth  looked  upon  me  (Marcus)  and  opened  her  mouth,  and
littered  a  word,  and  that  word  became  a  Name,  a  name  which
we  know  and  speak — Christ  Jesus  :  and  having  named  him  she
held  her  peace."*

This  "  figure  of  Truth  "  is  made  up,  it  will  be  perceived,  by
taking  successive  pairs  of  letters  from  each  extremity  of  the
alphabet ;  perhaps,  thereby  constituting  them  male  and  female,
and  thus  making  them  types  of  so  many  .ZEons.  All  this
suggests  a  rational  question,  whether  the  primary  appli
cation  of  the  name  "  Logos  "  to  the  Divine  Emanation,  was
not  at  first  a  mere  interpretation  of  the  Kabbinical  Synonym
"  Name,  or  Word,"  the  respectful  substitute  for  the  ineffable
Name  Jehovah,  the  Sliem  Hale,  Kodesh;  and  that  later,  the
secondary  meaning  of  Logos,  "  Reason "  suggested  to  the
Platonising  Jews  of  Alexandria  its  analogy  to  their  own  Sophia-
Achamoth,  the  first-born  of  the  Supreme  Cause.  And  finally,
the  composition  of  this  Holy  Name,  extending  to  thirty  letters,
illustrates  the  purport  of  that  interminable  polysyllabic  title
which  runs  either  in  one  unbroken  circle,  or  sometimes  in  the
outline  of  an  erect  serpent,  around  the  margin  of  so  many
Gnostic  gems,  and  circumscribes  the  mystic  device  engraved  in
the  centre.  In  the  latter  arrangement  of  the  inscription,  one  is
tempted  to  recognise  that  "  Good  and  Perfect  Serpent  "  of  the

*  Similarly  in  the  Kabbalistic  dia-  the  union  of  the  whole  body. The

gram  of  the  Sephiroth,  the  Crown  is  Venus  Anadyomene so  often seen

the  head;  Wisdom,  the brain; In-  on our talismans was probably

telligence,  the  heart ;  Love,  the  right  adopted by the Gnostics in this

arm;  Gentleness,  the  left  arm;  Beauty,  spiritualised sense; and thereby

the  chest;  Firmness,  the  right  leg;  still continues to personify i the

Splendour,  the  left  leg  ;  Foundation,  virtue,  Truth.
the  genitals  ;  Kingdom,  or  Shckiiiah,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  289

Naaseni  —  that  Messias  whose  visible  type  in  the  heavens  their
eyes,  sharpened  by  faith,  discovered  and  adored  in  the  Constel
lation  Draco.

To  come  now  to  the  actual  remains  of  Gnostic  manufacture,
which  preserve  to  us  formula  of  the  nature  just  considered,  the
most  important,  to  judge  from  its  frequent  occurrence,  and  the
evident  care  bestowed  upon  its  engraving,  is  the  one  here
transcribed.  My  copy  is  taken  from  an  example  formerly  in
the  State  collection,  probaby  the  finest  talisman  known.  It
is  a  thick  plaque,  somewhat  heart-shaped,  of  dark  garnet,  2*  X  1  J
inches  in  its  greatest  dimensions,  bearing  on  the  one  side  14
lines,  on  the  other  11,  neatly  cut  in  the  Greek  character  in  the
third  century  but  making  no  distinction  between  the  A  and
the  A.

Obverse.  Reverse.

AT(jOCACAU)AAU)Ne  OITICCjOPOYAP

C€M€C€IAAMABPACAZ  IACjJP€Cx)HAc|>ON

C3ZYPPATHAKPAMMA  AIOJAIHTOC

KPAMMAKANAPICCCe  CUAIHMAOHAU)

rr6NBAAc|>APANrHC  €(jJA6YU)€YH

ACNIAMBCONAPOY  Cx)AI€Y€IHI6

ANTAMIYHHAN  AH€€6YCjO

MOPAPAXCIA  HACjJA€Y€U)


U)HAU)HNHct>!


6MHAIAOA
AHU)(x)(jd

€00  U)

Amongst  the  titles  on  the  obverse  several  familiar  names  may
be  detected,  such  as  Alon,  Sliemesli  Eilam,  Abrasax.  The  long
style  filling  the  fourth  line  is  clearly  the  correct  spelling  of  the
abbreviated  Agrammaeamereg  addressed  in  another  part  of  the
"  Prayers  of  the  Saviour,"  as  the  first  of  the  "  Invisible  Gods."
The  next  line  Shemgensalpharanges,  "  they  who  stand  before
the  mount  of  Paradise,"  can  be  no  other  than  the  ^Eons  just
described  by  Marcus  as  the  "  Angels  who  always  behold  the
Father's  face  "  :  whilst  in  this  Jewish  hierarchy  of  heaven  the
old  god  of  Egypt,  Anubis,  oddly  intrudes  himself  under  his
Coptic  title  of  Ambo.

*  Probably  meant  aAe^ere  ^ue  "  Defend  me  !  "  —  of  exactly  similar  sound
in  the  spoken  language.

U


290  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Both  inscriptions  agree  literally  with  those  upon  the  large
oval  calcedony  figured  by  Chiflet  (fig.  69)  except  the  addition
in  the  letter  of  a  few  words  inclosed  within  a  coiled  serpent
placed  at  the  top  of  the  obverse.  Out  of  these  inscriptions  his
friend  Wendelin,  by  taking  the  language  as  good  Greek,  had
contrived  to  elicit  a  most  orthodox  invocation  to  the  Trinity,
which  however  was  evidently  far  from  satisfactory  to  the
sceptical  and  more  sagacious  Canon.  Amongst  the  Townley
gems  is  a  large  sard,  agreeing  in  all  except  a  few  letters
with  Chiflet's  specimen  —  convincing  attestation  to  the  supposed
virtue  of  the  formula.  For  the  purpose  of  comparison  I  insert
another,  lately  discovered,  engraved  on  a  much  more  minute
scale  than  any  of  the  preceding  (Whelan's  copy).

ZZZ  OM€CU)TOYAP

TRY€  IA(x)P€OHAct>ON

#  #  A€OAIHTOC

ArCx)€ACAU)AACx)NC  U)AIMAU)HAO

COMeceiAAMABPAC  IU)AOYU)OVH

C3ZYPPAHAKPAMMA  (x)AIYHAHIC

KPAMMAKAMAPICCC6  AH€€6IYU)Y

rrONBAA^ABANTHC  HA(x)A€YCOJL

IM€CCIAAMCx)BHAM  TH6CU)IACC

.  .  .  €NIAMBU)NAPOY  U)HAU)HNIIVI

.  .  .  NTAMIXAHAA  HAU3YHAA6Y

____  MOPAXei^Y  CMHAIAOAY

.  .  .  PAB6T6MAI  .  .  .  IHHCi)U)U)YH
...ANCx)


Dark  red  agate,  1  X  £  in.  :  scut  me  by  Mr.  Whelan,  Nov.  25,  1881.

Doubtless  such  immense  and  overcharged  pieces  of  mystery
served  in  their  time  the  purpose  of  pocket  prayer  books,  out  of
which  the  owner  recited  the  due  invocations  at  the  sacred  rites.
To  some  such  manual  of  devotion,  the  pseudo-Orpheus  possibly
alludes  by

"  Prny,  with  the  flowered  Pet  races  in  thy  hand,
When  hecatombs  before  the  altar  stand."

The  Orientalist  desirous  of  exercising  his  ingenuity  upon
the  decyphering  of  these,  for  the  most  part  unexplained  monu
ments  will  find  an  immense  collection  of  them  in  Raspe  (Nos.
433-633)  copied  with  scrupulous  accuracy.  The  reason  he  thero
gives  for  the  attention  he  has  paid  to  a  class  previously  so


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  291

neglected  is  a  very  sound  one.  "  All  these  sects  have  evidently
borrowed  their  symbols,  and  probably  also  their  respective
explanations,  from  the  iconology  and  mysteries  of  the  Egyptians
and  other  nations  of  the  East.  If  as  regards  the  meaning  of
hieroglyphics  and  symbols  they  had  no  better  information,  the
'Gnostics  of  Egypt  and  Syria  had  at  least  national  tradition
to  depend  upon — a  point  assuredly  of  some  weight.  If
therefore  the  more  recent  sects  of  Gnostics  with  their  sym
bolical  learning  have  established  new  opinions  and  fresh  modifi
cations  of  religion  upon  the  basis  of  the  old,  we  are  not  there
fore  to  conclude  that  they  knew  nothing  about,  and  wantonly
gave  a  new  meaning  to,  the  symbols  which  they  thus  mis
applied.  This  is  the  only  rational  point  of  view  in  which  these
amulets  and  engravings  ought  to  be  studied."

Easpe's  collection  I  shall  now  proceed  to  supplement  by
copies  of  several  unpublished  examples — the  most  interesting  that
have  come  under  my  notice  in  a  long  course  of  study,  and  such
as  servo  best  to  illustrate  the  theories  proposed  in  the  foregoing
pages.  And  to  show  the  curious  and  puzzling  nature  of  the
whole  class,  they  often  present  the  critical  examiner  with  signs
and  siglee,  now  supposed  the  exclusive  property  of  national
religions,  the  most  diverse  from  one  another,  as  they  were
remote  from  the  recognised  metropolis  of  Gnosticism.  Inter
mingled  with  the  regular  Greek  characters  appear  strange
signs  analogous  in  form,  often  identical  with,  the  Caste-marks
of  the  Hindoos,  and  which  in  their  turn  became  the  parents  of
those  used  by  the  media) val  alchemists  and  Eosicrucians,  and
(during  the  same  ages)  of  the  true  professors  of  Masonry.  The
consideration  of  these  Sigla,  of  which  I  have  collected  a  lar^e
series  belonging  to  all  ages  and  countries,  has  proved  sufficiently
fruitful  to  supply  muter ials  for  a  separate  and  important  sub
division  of  this  Treatise.  One  example,  described  under  "  talis
mans  and  amulets,"  presents  unmistakeable  evidence  of  the  use
of  Runes  in  the  Alexandrine  studio,  whilst  another,  shortly  to
be  noticed,  demonstrates  that  the  Gnosis  may  dispute  with
Hibernia  her  supposed  peculiar  invention  of  the  mysterious
Ogliams.

A tablet of  aquamarine (?) communicated to me by  the

u  2


292  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Kev.  Grevillo  Chester,  bears the inscriptions in  well-formed
characters  —

Obverse.

.  .  .  IGPKP  ....

. -  BAGOPrOAGOPO

. .  AAXAMXABPAC . .

. .  HTAAOJNAICA . .

. .  AGOOAHAAYNA.

.  MICBOH06IM.

Reverse.

CABAOJeGOYGAHOJ
PMAPCABAOY^ei
OP0O0AYMA0IM
YXPCJOC6M6NOX


Extremity.
GAG00OY.

A  string  of  titles  ending  with  "  Lord  of  hosts  !  defend  me.


NeMONO0IAAP


IPAAINYOM6N€P4>A

BCx)€AIANA€IAY€6A

GOeiGOIAIAIANIN

NIHAZMKWAA

ZON

Sapphirine  calcedony,  the  size  of  a  pigeon's  egg.—  (Forman
Collection.)

The  concluding  word  <£v'Aa£ov,  "  Do  thou  protect,"  clearly
evinces  that  this  elegantly  engraved  invocation  was  ad
dressed  to  some  one  deity  rejoicing  in  many  titles,  and  styled
"  propitious  "  by  its  opening  iXew.

MIE1XAHA

TABPIHAVAc|>

AHAEEEENTE

NBAPANTH

NIAW

A  very  thick  stone  of  sapphirine  calcedony.  This  is  purely
Jewish,  perhaps  the  ware  of  some  "  Magna  sacerdos  arboris  "
sold  to  the  Roman  ladies,  for  it  puts  the  buyer  under  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  293

protection  of  the  Archangels  "  Michael,  Gabriel,  Raphael,  who
stand  before  the  Mount  of  Paradise  of  Jehovah."

A  remarkable  exemplification  of  the  mixture  of  two  opposing
creeds  is  found  in  the  OPGOPIOYO,  "Light  of  lights,''
accompanying  the  figure  of  a  globose  vase  with  bands  hanging
from  the  neck.  This  is  evidently  "  the  small  golden  vessel
shaped  like  a  cow's  udder,  containing  the  libations  of  milk "
mentioned  by  Apuleius  as  carried  in  the  Isiac  procession  by  the
same  official  who  bore  aloft  the  Hand  of  Justice.  The  gridiron-
like  object  often  laid  upon  it,  is  the  regular  Egyptian  door-key,
made  of  wood.  In  one  example  figured  by  Matter  (PL  vi.  6),
the  key  is  shown  of  the  regular  Roman  form  in  the  same
position,  which  places  the  meaning  of  the  more  usual  figure
entirely  out  of  doubt.  This  shows  the  reason  for  KXetSoO^os,
"  the  keybearer,"  being  a  priestly  title.

Other  types  purely  Egyptian,  offer  some  curious  improve
ments  upon  the  old  "  qualia  demens  ^Egyptus  portenta  colat."
For  example,  one  (Praun)  exhibits  Anubis,  but  now  equipped,
with  two  heads  and  four  hands  holding  torches  and  daggers ;
styled  on  the  reverse  HEPA-AMBO-YBAKA-KZIK-YK.  In
another  (Nelthropp)  the  Cat-headed  goddess,  Taf-Neith  stands
lotus-crowned,  and  is  addressed  as  KVXBA-KYXBA*-KAXYA-
BAZAKAX-KX.  Again  Anubis  with  the  superadded  heads
of  Pan  (Mendes}  and  a  cock  (Phre),  with  arms  outstretched
in  the  form  of  a  cross;  his  body  supported  upon  the  legs
of  an  ibis,  has  over  the  heads  respectively  written  the
initials  0,  l~l,  X.  On  the  reverse  AIHB-U)ncX— CVNO—
XPA.  But  the  most  curious  composition  of  this  nature
known  to  me  is  presented  by  a  large  elliptical  mottled  jasper,
measuring  1^+J  inch,  very  boldly  cut,  and  better  drawn
than  usual — apparently  a  Solar  talisman  (Mr.  Topham,  Eome).
The  obverse  shows  a  gryllas  in  the  outline  of  a  cock  having  the
head  of  Pan,  scorpions  for  tail-feathers,  and  the  whip  of  Sol
stuck  in  his  rump  to  complete  that  appendage,  standing  upon
a  serpent — overhead  are  the  sun-star  and  crescent,  on  his
back  rests  a  tailed  globe  (a  comet  ?)  in  front  A,  in  the  field
below  the  astral  siglce.  On  the  reverse,  or  (73?)  over
*  Chaldee,  "  The  Star,  the  Star."


294  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

the  Agathodaemon  serpent  uncoiled,  and  crawling,  a  star  and  A.
Below  the  serpent,  EAODT  HIHCx),  the  letters  inverted,  then
another  line  HIVOMCOI.  Below  this  again  the  triple  S
on  the  bar  that  always  accompanies  the  Agathodaimon,
IAHIEOJ-IEOVGOH,  reading  thus  in  the  impression.  In  the
last  word  "  the  Great  leou " — special  title  of  the  Supreme
Being  in  the  Pistis-Sophia  may  easily  be  detected ;  whilst  the
triple-headed  deity  previously  described,  very  probably  expresses
the  conception  of  those  mighty  TptSwa/xeis  $eoi,  who  play  so
important  a  part  in  the  theology  of  the  same  book  of  wonder.

The  following  examples  are  the  more  genuine  offspring  of  the
Kabbala,  consisting  of  letters  alone,  uncontaminated  by  the
presence  of  the  idols  of  Misraim.  First  for  beauty  of  material
and  engraving  stands  a  large  citrine  (occidental  topaz)  formerly
in  the  Praun  cabinet,  now  in  the  Gnostic  Series,  British  Museum.

On  one  side  is  an  oval  enclosing  HI  (perhaps  denoting  the
Ogdoad  and  Decad,  the  base  of  Marcus'  scheme  ;  see  Hep.  vi.  52)  ;
an  eye,  emblem  of  Osiris,  a  square  bisected,  and  A,  which
hist  letter  may  also  numerically  represent  the  Tetrad  of  the
same  Doctor.

The  other  face  of  the  gem  presents,

AMAPYCMMPIAGMIOYOO

POAACNABAPeeHIOYCx)

NABAPN6HIOYU)

ePeOPAYMOYCJ

ZATECCmOYGO

OPGPOXOPCeYU)

AXAHMAPeU)

The  next  is  a  legend  which,  with  trivial  variations,  frequently
occurs.  Cay lus  (VI.  PL  11)  gives  it  very  rudely  added,  upon
the  reverse  of  a  female  portrait.  The  present  copy  is  from  a
large  calccdony,  somewhat  coarsely  executed,  having  011  its
other  face  the  triple  S  and  bar  (Praun) —

CTOXBA0A
HMAAAXIC0OM

MAKOXyOX
A  B  PA  MM  AGO©  H
ABPAMMHA

The  Hebrew  Patriarch,  figures  in  this  legend,  and  in  many
more  of  the  same  kind,  as  the  divinely  inspired  founder  of  a


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  295

Gnosis,  a  reputation  he  enjoyed  even  amongst  the  heathen,  who
put  him  in  the  same  category  with  Orpheus,  first  iiistitutor  of
Mysteries.  "  Sov.  Alexander  in  larario  suo  —  omnes  sanctiores
in  quibus  Apollonium,  et  (quantum  scriptor  horum  temporum
dicit)  Christum,  Abrnham,  et  Orpheum,  et  ejusmodi  caiteros
habebat."  (Lampridius  29.)

To  the  same  family  belongs  a  yellow  jasper  (Maskelyne)  dis
playing  a  perforated  quatrefoil  over  the  name  lACx),  then  the
mystic  vowels  AEIHOYGOAI,  then  TABACx)0  («/c)  and  on  reverse
#  MIXAHA#.  The  quatrefoil  is  originally  the  symbol  of  Sitala,
the  Tenth  Trithakoor,  or  deified  Jaina  saint  ;  whence  it  found  its
way  along  with  the  other  Buddhistic  machinery,  into  Mediaeval
symbolism,  in  which  it  resembles  an  angel.*

Very  remarkable  on  account  of  its  adjuncts,  is  a  green  jasper
(Traun)  bearing  a  long  neatly-cut  legend,  the  central  portion  of
which  is  circumscribed  by  two  lines,  cut  by  short  strokes  at
different  angles,  exactly  after  the  fashion  of  the  Irish  Oghams.
In  the  latter,  as  is  well  known,  all  the  letters  of  the  liomaii
alphabet  are  represented  by  the  different  positions  of  very  short
lines  in  relation  to  one  continuous  line  in  the  middle  ;  and  it  is
impossible  to  imagine  any  other  purpose  subserved  by  the
similar  contrivance  on  our  talisman.  The  Ogham  is  supposed  to
be  an  invention  of  the  first  missionaries  to  Ireland,  it  was  used
as  late  as  the  Civil  War  by  Lord  Glamorgan  in  his  correspond
ence  with  Charles  I.  It  is,  however,  very  possible  that  the
monks  carried  this  simple  stenography  from  liome  to  their
Celtic  mission.  f

nYPOcox

KPHc|>O  XOYBY...

YMAPTA  AAIAAM

AP4>OY  0AA0AA  ANOX

Y06P  YY0A0O  MOYI

ct»OY0AI  POCIU)  YAAAA

ICx)
AY€ni0IAAKY0(jO


*  One of the heaviest charges  characters  that  came  to  their  kuow-

against  the  mediaeval Manichseans  ledge. Even  the  Ruiric  of  the  farthest

was  the  adoration  of  an  Octagon,  as  north  added  its  virtue  to  the  Praun

the  figure  of  God.  hepatic  amulet  to  be  fully  noticed  in

f  The talisman-makers loved to  its  proper  section.
press  into  their  service  all  the  strange


296  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

A  minute  figure  of  Abraxas,  green  jasper  (Praun)  takes  a  new
title  "  Abrachars "  in  the  invocation  ABPAXAPC-AfPAWA—
COAPIWNIE.

Thoth's  caduceus  within  a  wreath,  is  accompanied  by  the
legend  on  the  reverse  AKPICO<l>r  on  a  brown  calcedony  in  my
collection.

Of  all  Agathodsemon  talismans,  no  more  elegant  specimen
has  come  to  my  knowledge  than  a  large  emerald-like  plasma
(Bosanquet)  displaying  the  serpent  "the  Good  and  Perfect
One  "  erect  above  his  invariable  concomitant  sigla,  and  whom
the  reverse  propitiates  by  the  beautifully  cut  address  OCOP-
M6P<t>-<l>ePrAMAPA-ct>PIAYPIC-XNOYcl>IC-NABIC-KICNYe
True  green  jade,  very  convex  on  back  (Rev.  S.  S.  Lewis.)  In
the  field,  each  side  of  serpent  ICi)|^  .  --  101.  "  With  me,  with
me  !  "  in  pure  Chaldee.  Reverse  in  two  lines,  round  the  usual

symbol.

XNOYMICMAABeiCB€INY0eee
COPOOPMeP<t>6PrArBAPMA<i>PinYIPIPirZ

All  cut  with  unusual  precision  and  neatness  of  work.  The
legend  has  many  words  in  common  with  Mr.  Bosanquet's
plasma.

Jerome's  "Pater  Bromius  "  of  the  Mithraic  Cave  has  pro
bably  some  share  in  the  title  "  Sabbaoth,"  so  often  coupled  with
"  Adonai,"  for  Bacchus  rejoiced  in  the  epithet  "  Sabazius,"
derived  from  the  shout  "  Sabbaoi  "  raised  by  the  celebrants  of
his  Orgies— a  word  identical  with  the  Hebrew  "  Sabi  "  glory  !
Certain  sectaries  of  our  own  day  who  bellow  out  the  same  word
at  their  "  Revivals,"  are  little  aware  what  an  ancient  and
congenial  authority  they  have  for  their  vociferation.

"  Adonai,"  our  Lord,  is  converted  by  the  Greek  into  Adoneus,
a  synonym  for  Pluto,  and  Orpheus,  as  already  quoted,  points
out  the  identity  of  Bacchus,  Pluto,  and  Sol.  This  is  the  founda
tion  for  the  ancient  exposition  of  the  Syrian  rite,  the  Mourning
for  Adonis  ("  The  women  weeping  for  Tharnmuz ")  as  really
applying  to  the  sun's  loss  of  power  at  the  winter  quarter.
Adoneus  or  Aidoneus,  becoming  interpreted  according  to  Greek
etymology,  was  supposed  to  signify  him  "  that  walketh  unseen,"
whence  spring  the  "helmet  of  Adoneus,"  that  rendered  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  297

wearer  invisible ;  and Catullus's  application  of  tho  title  to  the
intrigue-loving  Caesar.

"  Perambulabit  omnium  cubilia
Ut  albulas  columbas  aut  Adoneus."

The  same  Adonis  had  the  name  "  Sal-Anbo  "  (which  often
occurs  in  Gnostic  legends)  as  appears  from  tho  statement  in
Lampridius,  "  that  Heliogabalus  exhibited  Salanbo  with  all  the
lamentation  and  tossing  of  head  proper  to  tho  Syrian  ceremony,''
— whereby  ho  gave  the  omen  of  his  own  impending  fate.

The  Delphic  E  has  already  been  noticed — but  its  importance
demands  further  particulars  of  its  history,  which  have  been
preserved  by  Plutarch  in  his  curious  treatise  upon  the  subject.
The  Greeks  with  their  usual  fondness  for  explaining  all
mysteries  rationistically,  considered  the  letter  as  the  simple
numeral,  Five,  set  up  in  the  Temple  to  denote  the  original  and
proper  number  of  the  far-famed  "  Wise  Men ; "  but  which  in
later  times  had  been  raised  to  seven,  by  the  addition  of  two
more  who  had  small  claims  to  the  honour.  The  legend  went
that  these  Five  Wise  Men,  to  commemorate  the  accidental  meeting
of  them  all  in  Delphi  at  the  same  festival,  had  dedicated  the
numeral  carved  in  wood,  which,  decaying  through  age,  tho
Corinthians  replaced  by  a  facsimile  in  bronze ;  which  last  was
finally  transmuted  by  Livia  Augusta  into  another  of  gold,  as
more  consistent  with  the  dignity  of  the  god  of  the  place,  whose
son  her  husband  claimed  to  be,  and  whose  received  image  ho
represented  in  his  features.

Others,  more  profoundly,  interpreted  the  letter  as  represent
ing  by  its  proper  sound  in  the  Greek  alphabet  tho  declaration
E!,  "  Thou  art "  as  addressed  to  the  Godhead — thus  making
it  equivalent  to  the  title  6  oil/,  "  the  living  God,"  so  frequently
given  to  Jehovah.

But  it  is  much  more  consistent  with  the  simplicity  of  antique
times,  to  understand'the  figure  as  merely  standing  for  the  number
Five,  a  number  sacred  for  itself,  not  for  its  reference  to  the  fabled
sages  of  a  later  period.  The  idea  of  its  virtue  may  have  come
from  an  Indian  source,  where  it  is  the  cause  of  the  five-headed
shape  assigned  to  Brahma.  From  India  it  would  find  its  way  to


298  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Delphi  in  company  with  the  Gorgon-heads,  themselves  masks
of  Bhavana  the  Destroyer,  which  guarded  the  actual  oracle — a
singular  connexion,  noticed  by  Euripides  in  his  '  Ion.'  But  it
should  be  remembered  that  the  Hyperboreans,  reputed  founders
of  the  Oracle,  were  placed  between  the  Caspian  and  the  frontiers
of  India.  The  Omphalos  itself  "  shaded  with  garlands,  and  en
compassed  with  Gorgoiis  "  was  no  other  than  the  Brahminical
Lingam,  as  its  figure  demonstrates,  whether  as  repictured  in
the  early  vase  paintings  when  embraced  by  Orestes  seeking
sanctuary  there  from  the  pursuing  Eumenides,  or  with  Apollo
seated  thereon,  stamped  on  the  money  of  the  Seleucidae — direct
descendants  of  the  god.  In  form  reduced  to  an  obtuse  cone,  the
emblem  had  nothing  obscene  in  appearance,  its  hidden  meaning
being  a  matter  of  revelation  to  the  initiated  few.  The  same
conically-shaped  stone  was  the  sole  representative  of  Venus
in  her  most  ancient  temples — Paphos  for  example.  Again  that
earliest  of  all  statues  of  Apollo,  the  Ainycla3an,  described  by
Pausanias,  was  a  veritable  Hindoo  Lat — a  bronze  column  50
cubits  high,  to  which  later  art  had  added  a  head,  hands  holding
bow  and  spear,  and  toes  (d/cpot  TroSes).  But  his  throne,  in  the
middle  of  which  the  idol  stood  erect,  was  an  after-thought  of
the  best  times  of  Greece,  covered  with  elaborate  figures  and
reliefs,  the  work  of  Bathyeles,  or  of  Myron,  with  his  scholars.

And  in  truth  this  very  lunar-shaped  6  seems  to  belong  to  the
same  class  of  Indian  importations,  and  to  have  been  originally
a  mere  Caste-mark — indeed,  if  placed  horizontally  u>,  it  becomes
ut  once  the  badge  of  the  sectaries  of  Vishnu.  What  strongly
confirms  this  explanation  is  the  fact,  that  this  symbol  had  been
consecrated  at  Delphi  many  centuries  before  that  shape  of  the
letter  came  into  the  Greek  alphabet — a  change  only  dating  from
the  age  of  Antony  and  Cleopatra,  upon  whose  medals,  struck  in
Asia  Minor,  the  lunar-shaped  6  is  first  observable.

In  the  earliest  dawn  of  Grecian  philosophy  we  find  Pytha
goras*  bull  i  ing  his  whole  system  upon  the  mystic  properties  of

*  Who  is  constantly  affirmed  to  manas, eoruni ergo Brackmamim

have  visited  India,  Apuleius  stating  Gymnosophistas adiisse."  —  ('  Flo-

of  him,  '•  Sed  nee  his  artibus  anirni  rida.')
expletum  mox  Chuldseas,  inde  Brach-


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  299

Numbers,  and  declared  by  tradition  to  have  been  taught  the
science  in  Egypt ;  nay  more,  Plato  himself  has  penned  in  his
Republic  a  certain  section  in  the  same  line,  worthy  of  any
Alexandrian  Kabbalist.  In  our  own  day,  with  the  Sikhs  to  hold
a  "  Punch,"  or  council  of  Five,  was  the  formal  mode  of  delibera
ting  upon  all  matters  of  State.  And  inasmuch  as  the  most
serious  things  have  a  ludicrous  side,  this  sacred  Numeral  only
preserves  its  reputation  amongst  ourselves  from  haying  given
the  name  to  the  well-known  beverage,  by  reason  of  the  five
ingredients  that  go  to  its  concoction— perhaps  too,  because  its
brewing  was  the  inevitable  result  of  the  coming  together  of
the  same  number  of  Englishmen  in  the  times  when  our  language
was  enriched  by  so  many  loans  from  the  Bindostanee.*

A  remarkable  feature  in  the  theogony  of  A^alentinus  is
curiously  illustrated  by  a  Praun  Calcedony,  elegantly  engraved,
and  mounted  in  a  gold  frame  by  some  later  Oriental  owner,
who  justly  deemed  the  gem  a  talisman  of  uncommon  power.
"  The  Father  at  last  sent  forth  a  mighty  /Eon,  called  the  Cross,
and  who  contained  within  himself  all  the  other  thirty  /Eons.
The  same  was  likewise  denominated  Terminus,  inasmuch  as  lie
served  for  Boundary  between  the  Fulness  (Pleroma)  and  the
Deficiency  (Hysteroma)"  Our  gem  presents  the  Egyptian  Tan,
as  a  Deus  Terminus,  topped  with  a  human  head,  and  surrounded
by  a  continuous  legend  composed  of  vowels  interspersed  with
rare  consonants;  probably  expressing  the  thirty  /Eons  con
tained  within  the  sigil's  self.  On  the  base  of  the  Terminus
is  the  legend  NIXAPOriAHC,  often  occurring  on  talismans.
The  same  words  are  found  at  the  foot  of  a  cruciform  trophy,
above  which  is  the  Christian  X  upon  a  stone  in  the  French
Cabinet  (No.  2222)  also  followed  by  IU)A  upon  the  back  of  a
gem  (silex)  published  in  the  '  Gottingische  Anzeiger,'  Nos.  35  a,  I,
which  clearly  emanates  from  Mithraic  notions,  for  it  represents
the  usual  lion-headed,  serpent-girt  man,  a  torch  in  one  hand,  in
the  other  a  sword,  serpent,  and  crown  of  victory,  soaring  aloft
from  the  back  of  a  lion,  under  which  lies  a  prostrate  corpse.

*  For  example  caste  and  dam.  The which ignorance softens  into  curse.
latter  is  the  probable  source  of  the Similarly  used  is  rap,  the  smallest  of
common  English  expression  that  em- the  Swiss  money,
phasises  the  small  value  of  a  thing,


300  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

A  very  curious  instance  of  the  employment  of  Gnostic  figures
in  the  art  of  Medicine  is  offered  by  the  stone  which  Matter  has
published  (PL  II.,  C.  4).  The  obverse  displays  the  Agatho-
dsemon  serpent  placed  between  Phre  (Sol)  and  a  female  in  the
act  of  adoration.  Overhead  are  the  mystic  Vowels ;  below  the
undershaped  vase,  already  noticed,  placed  upon  a  low  altar,
the  whole  encompassed  by  a  legend  in  some  unknown  tongue.
But  the  other  side  explains  in  lucid  Greek  the  object  of  the
composition.  TACCON  THN  MHTPAN  THC  A6INA  61C  TON
IAION  TOnONOTON  KYKAON  TOY  HAIOY,  "Place  the  womb
of  such  or  such  a  one  into  its  proper  region,  O,  the  circle  of  the
sun."  Matter,  in  his  explanation,  has  fallen  into  a  ludicrous
mistake,  by  interpreting  ^rpav  as  ^repa  he  converts  the
words  into  a  prayer  for  the  soul  of  the  mother  of  a  certain
Dina !  But  the  real  translation  shows  that  the  gem  was  made
for  any  purchaser,  to  be  worn  as  a  preservative  against  the
"  prolapsus  uteri,"  a  female  complaint  very  common  in  ancient
times,  owing  to  the  abuse  of  the  hot  bath,  so  relaxing  to  the
internal  muscles,  and  also  to  the  general  employment  of
"  abortiva,"  whenever  thought  desirable.  In  fact  the  very
definite  expression  of  the  object,  MHPIKON,  uterine,  is  found
on  other  gems,  and  places  the  correctness  of  the  attribution  of
the  former  one  quite  out  of  doubt.

The  "  circle  of  the  sun  "  means  the  navel,  which  marks  the
natural  position  of  the  organ  concerned,  for  the  navel  in  the
microcosm  was  supposed  to  concide  with  the  sun  in  the  universe.
This  idea  produced  the  far-famed  hallucination  of  the  Byzantine
anchorites,  respecting  the  mystical  Light  of  Tabor,  which  shone
upon  the  devotee  in  virtue  of  long-continued  fasting,  and
unintermitted  fixing  of  the  eyes  upon  the  region  of  the  navel,
whence  at  length  it  streamed  forth,  as  from  a  focus,  the  "  truo
creation  of  an  empty  brain  and  an  empty  stomach."*

*  A neatly  engraved  ring-stone,  names  can  be deciphered  on  these

hfematite, lately communicated to  talismans  they  are  always  those  of

me,  has  a  line of several  of the  women. A Praun gem, similarly

common  siglae,  followed  by  two  more  opening  with  a  line  of  siglae  and  the

containing IA(x> A  PI  HA BIKTO-  names  lao  and  Gabriel,  was  made

PIN  A,  "  Jehovah,  Lion  of  God  (pro-  for  a  certain  Sabinia  Quinta.
tect) Victorina!" When proper


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  301

Another  circumstance  bearing  upon  this  employment  of  the
sigil  is  that  Isis,  the  peculiar  goddess  of  maternity,  is  often
figured  in  Eoman  sculpture,  holding  up  in  her  hand  a  conical
object,  pouch  shaped,  exhibiting  a  triangular  orifice.  This
object  some  have  taken  for  the  Persia  plum;  much  more
probably  does  it  represent  the  organ  in  question,  the  most
natural  and  expressive  symbol  of  that  divinity's  peculiar
function.  In  her  mystic  coffer  were  carried  the  distinctive
marks  of  both  sexes,  the  lingam  and  yoni  of  the  Hindoos.  Their
Isis,  Parvati,  who  in  this  character  takes  the  name  of  Deva
"  the  goddess  "  pre-eminently,  bears  in  her  hand  for  distinctive
badge  the  yoni,  or  bhaga,  often  a  precious  stone  carved  into
that  shape.  Similarly  her  consort,  Siva,  carries  the  lingan  or
phallus.  For  example,  the  Nizam's  diamond,  the  largest  stone
of  its  kind  known  certainly  to  exist,  exhibits  evident  traces  of
the  native  lapidary's  clumsy  endeavours  to  reduce  the  native
crystal  to  the  proper  shape  for  the  hand  of  the  great  goddess.
Ugly  omen  to  happen  under  a  female  reign,  this  diamond  was
accidentally  broken  in  two  just  before  the  outbreak  of  the  Sepoy
re  volt.

Deva's  Mark,  as  borne  upon  their  foreheads  by  Parvati's
sectaries,  is  formed  by  three  strokes,  the  two  outside  white  or
yellow,  the  centre  always  red.  It  is  interpreted  as  represent
ing  the  womb,  methra,  of  Bhavani  (another  of  Parvati's  names)
out  of  which  proceeded  all  that  exists.  The  close  relationship
between  the  Egyptian  and  Hindoo  goddesses  cannot  fail  to
strike  the  observer  ;  Isis  carries  the  very  same  attributes  with
Parvati — the  kid  and  cobras — upon  the  talisman — published  by
Caylus  (IV.,  PI.  16).  But  the  Egyptian  goddess,  having  but
one  pair  of  hands,  is  forced  to  clasp  in  each  the  several  attributes
borne  singly  by  her  many-handed  Indian  prototype.

A  singular  union  of  two  contrary  deities  in  one  body,  is
presented  by  a  hematite  (Praun),  representing  Anubis,  who,
besides  his  proper  jackal's  head,  is  equipped  with  another,
nianed  on  the  neck,  and  unmistakably  that  of  an  ass;  as
Typhon,*  the  evil  one,  was  depicted ;  moreover,  one  of  the  feet,

*  The  ass  was  sacred  to  Typhon.  Egyptian  legend  that  this  deity  fled
Plutarch  (De  Iside,  31)  quotes  an  from  the  "  Battle  of  the  Gods  '  upon


302


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


too,  of  the  figure  is  clearly  hoofed,  so  as  to  leave  no  doubt  as  to
the  ownership  of  the  second  head.  The  same  discordance  of
characters  is  still  further  set  forth  by  what  he  bears  in  his
hands,  the  two  of  Anubis  holding  up  torches,  the  two  of  the
malignant  Typhon,  swords.  This  odd  combination  probably
expressed  the  same  idea  as  did  the  Anubis  seen  by  Apuleius,
who  exhibited  at  one  time  a  face  black  as  the  night,  at  another
golden  as  the  day,  in  order  to  express  his  functions  exercised
both  in  heaven  and  in  hell.  The  reverse  bears  an  inscription
containing  the  Coptic  name  of  the  god,  HE  PA— AM  BOO— YBAIA—
KZIK-A.


the  back  of  an  ass  for  over  sevun
days'  space  without  stopping,  until
he  came  into  Judrca,  where  he  begat
two  sons,  Ilierosolymus  aiid  Pala)s-


tinus.  Sir  G.  Wilkinson  has  met
(although  but  rarely)  with  the  figure
of  an  ass-headed  deity,  or  demon,  in
Egyptian  sculptures.


PART  IV.

THE  FIGURED  MONUMENTS  OF
GNOSTICISM.


TQI NIKQNTI AQZn AYTdl cJ>Al~EIN
AI~1O TOY MANNA TOY KEKPYMMENOY KAI
AOin AYTQ YHcUON AEYKHN KAI EHI
THN H^Hc^ON ONOMA KAINON TErPAMMEN
O OYAEIS EfNQ El MH O AAMBANQN.


THE  FIGURED  MONUMENTS  OF
GNOSTICISM.


GNOSTIC  SIGL^E,  SYMBOLS,  LEGENDS  EXPLAINED.

THE  inscriptions  in  Greek  characters  upon Gnostic  talismans
are  frequently  interspersed  with  mystic  figures,  formed  out  of
straight  lines  set  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  and  intermingled
with  dots. These  lines  Bellermann  plausibly  enough  supposes
to represent the "sacred lots," of  the same nature as the
celebrated  sortes  Antiates,  held  in  the  hands  of  the  much-con
sulted  Fortuna  of  Antium. In  their  usual  form  these  lots  were
only  little  sticks  and  balls,  taken  up  by  the  handful  from  an  urn,
and  thrown  at  random  on  the  ground. The  diviner  examined
the  patterns  thus  produced  by  their  casual  collocation, and
predicted  the  future  from  them  according  to  the  rules  of  his
art. Bellermann  goes  on  to  suppose  that  the  figures  on  our
talismans  represent  certain  configurations  of  the  lots,  regarded  as
peculiarly  lucky  to  the  consulter. This  explanation  is  supported
by  the  Geomancy  of  the  modern  Arabs,*  where  lines  drawn  at
haphazard  on  the  sand  by  a  stick  held  between  the  fingers  are
interpreted  by  persons  professing  that  method  of  divination.
Our  own  divination,  by  means of  tea-grounds,  is carried  on
upon  the  same  principle,  the  fortuitous  arrangement  of  the

*  "  Each tribe either found or  of  Hebal,  of  red  agate,  holding  in  his

introduced  in the Caaba their  do-  hand  seven  arrows,  without  heads  or

mestic worship; the temple was  feathers,  the  instruments  and  symbols

adorned  or  defiled  with  360  idols  of  of profane divination."— Gibbon,

men, eagles, lions, and  antelopes;  chap.  42.)
and  most  conspicuous  was  the  statue


306  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

particles  producing  to  the  experienced  eye  definite  pictures  and
letters  of  the  alphabet.

These  Siglse,  however,  may  possibly  have  had  another  origin.
The  regular  badge  of  the  Magus,  as  prescribed  in  the  Yendidad,
is  a  bundle  of  divining-rods — three,  seven,  or  nine  in  number.
Hence  the  rebuke  of  Hosea  :  "  My  people  ask  counsel  of  sticks,
and  their  staff  declareth  it  unto  them."  These  same  divining-
rods  placed  upon  the  altar  are  commonly  represented  upon  the
Magian  signets,  bearing  for  official  type  the  Mobed  at  his
devotions;  and  may  therefore  be  supposed  to  have  passed
down  to  the  talisman-makers  of  later  times.*

That  others  amongst  these  angular  forms  are  numerals  is
certain  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  and  from  Horapollo's
express  declaration  that  the  Egyptians  represented  10  by  the
figure  r,  and  100  by  the  same  four  times  repeated  in  the  form  of
a  square,  thus  £].  Ten  being  the  "  perfect  number  "  of  the  Valen-
tinian  creed  (whose  fountain-head  was  Alexandria),  its  frequent
appearance  amongst  the  religious  formulas  of  the  sect  is  naturally
to  bo  looked  for.  The  primitive  Egyptian  numerals  were  of
the  simplest  kind,  but  their  abbreviated  combinations  ultimately
became  distinct  symbols  for  the  different  days  of  the  month,
and  out  of  these  the  Arab  astrologers  concocted  their  own
system.  This  circumstance  affords  reason  for  another  solution—
that  some  of  these  sigla3  indicate  the  particular  days  connected
with  the  astrological  intention  of  the  talisman,  j

And  besides  all  these,  there  is  every  probability  that  these
sigla3  include  actual  cuneiform  letters,  belonging  to  the  Assyrian
alphabet,  but  their  forms  somewhat  corrupted  by  the  semi-

*  The  ancient  Teutons  practised  f  Some of these siglse may  be

the same method of divining fu-  recognised  in  the  inscriptions  in  an

ture  events. A  shoot  of  a  fruit  tree  unknown  character,  cut  in  the  hard

was cut into pieces, each being  sandstone  rock,  and  very  numerous

distinguished by certain marks,  about  Silsilis,  Upper  Nubia,  where

notis  quibusdam,  probably  meaning  they  accompany  figures  of  elephants,

"  Eunes." The  consulter  threw  them  giraffes,  and ostriches— all  animals

down  at  random on a  white  cloth,  long  since  extinct  in  that  country,

with  eyes  turned  to  heaven  he  took  Specimens  were  published by  Gre-

up  three  separately,  and  interpreted  ville  Chester  in  the  '  Archaeological

the  response  from  the  inscriptions  Journal'  for  1864,  p.  274.
upon  them, — (Tacitus.  Germ,  x.)


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  307

Greek  wizard,  who  employed  them  in  ignorance  of  their  true
nature.  The  Assyrian  language  being  considered  as  late  as
tho  times  of  lamblichus  peculiarly  grateful  to  the  heavenly
Powers,  what  more  reasonable  than  that  some  at  least  of  these
invocations  should  continue  to  be  couched  in  their  original
cyphers  ?  Be  it  remembered,  the  cuneiform  character  was  the
national  one  of  the  whole  Persian  empire  down  to  the  Macedonian
conquest,  and  must  have  been  preserved  in  religious  usages
long  after  that  event  by  the  Magi.  They,  at  least,  were  a  very
unlikely  class  to  trouble  themselves  about  the  Greek  alphabet
or  Greek  literature,  professing,  like  the  Talmudists,  a  pious
horror  for  both.  This  is  well  exemplified  on  the  restoration  of
the  native  dynasty  under  the  Sassanians ;  Greek,  employed  for
four  centuries  by  the  Parthian  line,  is  at  once  expelled  from
the  coins  by  the  Pehlevi  character,  true  daughter  of  the
primitive  cuneiform.  There  is  moreover  one  all-sufficient
reason  for  seeking  the  origin  of  these  inexplicable  siglse  at
Babylon :  they  constituted  a  religious  stenography.  The
Babylonians  "  attached  to  each  god  a  certain  numeral,  which  may
be  used  in  the  place  of  his  proper  emblem,  and  may  even  stand
for  his  name  in  an  inscription, "  (Eawlinson,  *  Anc.  Monarchies,'
iii.,  466).  To  give  those  of  the  principal  deities  :

First  Triad :  Ami  =  60 ;  Bel  =  50 ;  Hoa  =  40.

Second  Triad  :  Moon  =  30 ;  Sun  =  20 ;  Air  =  10.

Beltis,  or  Mylitta  =  15  ;  Nergal,  or  Mars  =  12  ;  Xiu,  or  Saturn  =  10.

Of  the  other  planets  the  numerals  have  not  been  discovered  ;  but
their  names  are,  Nebo,  Mercury;  Merodach,  Jupiter;  Ishtar, Venus.
The  great  gods  are  Ann,  Pluto  ;  Bel,  Jupiter ;  Hoa,  Neptune.
Their  consorts  are,  respectively,  Anat,  Beltis,  Davkana.  The
minor  gods  are,  Sin,  or  Hurke,  answering  to  the  later  Lunus
Deus ;  San,  the  Sun ;  Vid,  the  ^Ether.  Their  respective  consorts
are,  "  The  Great  Lady  ";  Gula,  or  Anahit ;  Tula,  or  Shula.  The
Pythagoreans  had  a  symbolism  of  the  same  nature,  denoting
Minerva  by  an  equilateral  triangle,  Apollo  by  unity ;  Strife,  by
the  numeral  two ;  Justice,  by  three,  and  the  Supreme  Being  by
four  (Plat.  De  Is.  et  Os.  75).*  I  find  a  very  strong  confirmation

*  In  the  Egyptian  Ritual  papyrus, Hermes  by is  mystic  name  of  the
Thoth  is  addressed  as  "  the  second god  A."

x  2


308  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

of  my  belief  that  the  Gnostic  Powers  were  similarly  designated
by  their  numerals,  in  Raspe's  gem,  No.  G01,  where  C€Nf€N  is
inscribed  in  the  exergue  under  a  serpent  coiled  into  a  cartouche
containing  several  of  the  siglse  under  consideration.  Now  this
legend  (to  be  explained  farther  on)  is,  when  written  in  full,
always  followed  by  the  names  of  the  Archangels,  whence  it
may  justly  be  inferred  the  same  names  are  still  here,  but
represented  in  their  mystic  form.*

"  The  Great  Names  "  constitute  the  very  essence  of  every
Gnostic  spell.  To  begin,  therefore,  with  their  consideration  is
obviously  the  most  appropriate  and  propitious  mode  of  ap
proaching  this  part  of  our  work — pandere  res  alta  terra  et
caligine  mersas.  There  are  three  titles  perpetually  occurring,
and  consequently  to  be  supposed  denoting  beings  of  the  highest
importance  in  the  Gnostic  hierarchy  of  heaven.  Their  meaning
was  unknown  until  the  fortunate  discovery  of  the  grand  Yalen-
tiriian  gospels.  The  Pistis-Sophia  informed  us  (§  361)  that  they
are  the  holy  Names  of  the  Three  TpiSura/Aeis,  who  are  lYANTAX-
AINXEOTX,  a  Power  emanating  from  whom  resides  in  the
planet  Mars;  BAINXGOCUX,!  in  Mercury;  and  niCTIC  CO<J>IA,
in  Verms.  Above  this  Triad  is  one  still  higher,  the  "  Three
Unseen  Gods,"  AT  PA  MM  AX  A  MA  PEP,  BAPBHAU)  (the  Heavenly
Mother  of  Jesus),  and  BAEAAH  (§  359).

The  "  Five  Words "  written  upon  the  shining  vesture
sent  down  to  Jesus  at  His  glorification  (§  16)  were  ZAMA

*  The  Turks  represent  tlie  Great  ning-swift-footed-one."  This  papy-

Nanie  AllaU  by  an  oval  crossed  rus,  now  in  the  British  Museum,

\\itli  intersecting  lines,  which  is  was  bought  of  Atanasi,  Swedish

often  seen  stamped  on  their  old  Consul  at  Alexandria :  who  sold

armour,  for  an  amulet.  Now  this  several  others  of  the  game  nature  to

very  mark  occurs  in  the  Gnostic  set,  the  Leyden  Library.  All  are  sup-

and  it  is  more  than  probable  that  its  posed  to  have  been  found  together

true  meaning  is  preserved  in  the  in  a  catacomb  at  Thebes,  and  to

Turkish  tradition.  have  formed  the  stock  of  some

f  In  Good  win's 'Ma  c  Papyrus'  magician  of  the  second  century  of  our

the  Serapean  Divination  (No.  1)  era,  as  the  handwriting  leads  us  to

names  this  Power:  "Appear  and  infer.  Goodwin  edited  the  Brit.

give  heed  unto  him  who  was  mani-  Museum  specimen  for  the  Cambridge

fested  before  Fire  and  Snow,  ~Qa.iv-  Antiquarian  Society  in  1852,  and

Xo>o>x,  for  Thou  art  he  that  did  enriched  it  with  notes  giving  in-

make  manifest  Light  and  Snow,  valuable  assistance  to  all  who  study

Terrible  -  eyed-thunderiug-and-light-  Gnostic  remains.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  309

ZAMA  WZZA  PAXAMA  U)ZAI  — "  The  robe,  the  glorious  robe
of  my  strength."  The  same  revelation  furthermore  imparts
to  the  faithful  the  mystic  names  of  the  planets.  "  Hearken
now,  I  will  tell  unto  you  the  Incorruptible  Names  of  the
Planets,  which  bo  CJPIMOTG,  Saturn;  MOTNIXOTAcJXjJP,
Mars;  TAP  RET  A  NOT*,  Mercury;  XU)!I,  Venus;  XU)NBAA,
Jupiter.  These  be  the  incorruptible  names  of  the  same "
(§  362).  Of  these,  the  names  from  each  Triad  are  to  be
recognised  upon  talismans,  BAINXU)U)Cx)X  most  commonly
of  all ;  but  no  example  of  these  planetary  appellations  has
hitherto  come  to  my  knowledge.

The  Naaseni  (says  Hippolytus)  taught  that  the  universe
could  not  hold  together  unless  the  names  of  the  Great  Ones
(TO,  peycQrf)  were  uttered.  These  were  KATAKAT,  ZATAAZAT,
ZEHZAP.  "  The  first  is  the  name  of  the  Adamas  who  is
above  ;  the  second,  of  him  who  is  below ;  the  third  of  the  Jordan
that  floweth  upwards."  "Above  are  Mariamne  the  Sought-
after,  and  Jothor  the  great  and  wise;  and  Sephora  she  that
seeth  ;  and  Moses."  According  to  the  text-book  of  another  sect,
the  Peratae,  XOOZZAP  is  the  Power  whom  the  ignorant  and
profane  call  Neptune:  KAP4>AKOZHMOXEP  is  the  Steward
of  the  East:  EKKABAKAPA  of  the  West;  called  by  the
vulgar  the  Curetes.  APIBA  is  the  Euler  of  the  Winds;  ZGOK-
AAM,  or  Osiris,  rules  the  twelve  hours  of  the  night ;  ENTCx),  or
Isis,  those  of  the  day  :  her  sign  is  the  Dog-star.  BHNA  is  Ceres,
or  the  Left-hand  Power  of  God,  presiding  over  nutrition  ;  MHN
is  the  Right-hand  Power  that  presides  over  the  fruits  of  the
earth.  In  the  same  doctrine,  chozzar,  called  by  the  ignorant
Neptune,  "  who  converts  into  a  sphere  the  dodecagonal  pyramid,
and  paints  with  many  colours  the  gate  of  that  pyramid,"  has
Five  Ministers,  ACT,  AOAI,  OTH,  OTHAB;  the  name  of  the
fifth  being  lost.  Hence  it  is  probable  that  the  strings
of  vowels,  so  often  found  on  these  stones,  may  contain  the
names  of  elementary  genii  similarly  expressed.

Origen  (viii.  58)  quotes  Celsus  to  the  effect,  that  the  Egyptians
made  six-and- thirty  (or  more)  demons  or  aetherial  powers  preside
over  the  several  parts  of  the  body,  giving  some  of  their  names,
Chumis,  Chuachumes,  Knat,  Sichat,  Bou,  Eroti,  Eribiou,


310  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Eomanor,  and  Eeianoor:  "Whoever  therefore  prefers  being
in  health  to  sickness,  and  happiness  to  trouble,  ought  to  pay
all  possible  honour  to  these  Powers."  Origen  therefore  accuses
Celsus  of  attempting  to  divert  men  from  the  worship  of  the  one
God  to  that  of  six-and-thirty  daemons,  only  known  to  Egyptian
magicians,  because  he  cannot  understand  how  "the  Name  of
Jesus,  pronounced  by  the  truly  faithful,"  can  cure  the  sick  and
those  possessed  by  devils ;  the  evidence  for  which  is  far  stronger
than  that  of  the  effect  of  the  names  of  Chnumis,  Sichat,  and  the
rest  of  the  Egyptian  catalogue.  In  another  place  (i.  22)  he
shows  it  was  not  Moses  only  that  knew  the  name  of  Abraham
and  his  friendship  with  God,  for  that  others  (pagans)  use  the
words  "the  God  of  Abraham"  when  they  are  driving  out
devils.  And  again  the  Egyptians  use  in  their  rites,  from  which
they  promise  wonderful  effects,  the  names  of  Abraham,  Isaac,
Jacob,  and  Israel.  Also  (iv.  33)  Origen  mentions  the  use  of
the  form  "  The  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  the  God  of
Jacob "  in  incantations,  and  that  the  same  is  often  to  be  met
with  in  books  of  Magic.  He  adds  that  the  formula  "  The  God
of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  who  didst  overwhelm  the
Egyptians  and  the  King  of  the  Egyptians  in  the  Eed  Sea,"
was  in  common  use  against  demons  and  the  Powers  of  Evil.
All  this  goes  to  prove  that  the  talismans  inscribed  with  the
name  of  Chnumis  and  the  other  thirty-five  daemons  named  (who
now  by  this  assistance  may  be  hereafter  recognised)  were  of  a
medicinal  character,  whereas  those  with  "Abraham,"  equally
common,  were  more  properly  of  the  nature  of  talismans.

In  the  Book  of  Enoch  the  Archangel  Uriel  gives  us  the
mystic  names  of  the  two  great  luminaries  :  "  The  names  of  the
Sun  are  these,  one  Aryares,  the  other  Tornas.  The  Moon  hath
four  names:  the  first,  Asonga;  the  second,  Ebla;  the  third,
Benase ;  and  the  fourth,  Erai."

The  Pistis-Sophia  (§  125)  furnishes  the  adept  with  the  key
to  the  most  important  of  the  numerical  cyphers.  "  These  be
the  Names  that  I  will  give  unto  thee,  even  from  the  Infinite
One  downwards.  Write  them  with  a  sign  (cypher?  )  that  the
sons  of  God  may  manifest  (understand  ?  )  them  out  of  this  place.
This  is  the  Name  of  the  Immortal  One,  AAA  UJUKD.  And  this


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  311

is  the  name  of  the  Voice  through  whoso  means  the  Perfect  Man  is
moved,  RT.  These  likewise  are  the  interpretations  of  the  names  of
the  Mysteries.  The  first  is  AAA,  the  interpretation  thereof  <£><!>*.
The  second  which  is  MMM,  or  which  is  U)CjOU) ;  the  interpreta
tion  whereof  is  AAA.  The  third  is  YTY,  the  interpretation
whereof  is  OOO.  The  fourth  is  <b<b<b,  the  interpretation  whereof
is  NNN.  The  fifth  is  AAA,  the  interpretation  whereof  is  AAA,
the  which  is  over  the  throne  AAA.  This  is  the  interpretation
of  the  second  AAAA,  which  is  AAAAAAAA,  and  the  same  is  the
interpretation  of  the  whole  Name."

To  pass  from  the  cyphers,  where  all  is  guess  work,  to  the
actual  inscriptions,  engraved  legibly  enough  in  the  Greek
character,  but  presenting  us  with  what  Jerome  aptly  terms
mere  "tormenta  verborum."  Many  of  the  more  common
formulas,  Bellermann,  by  the  aid  of  Hebrew,  Coptic,  and
Syriac,*  has  satisfactorily  explained ;  of  others  his  interpreta
tions  are  manifestly  absurd.  AMAPTEA  seems  to  be  the  Chaldee
Amarchel,  a  president.  ANOX  XOA  XNOTBIC,  "  I  am  All  the
Good  Spirit,  or  the  Universal  genius  of  good."  AIN  ©APPAI.
"  The  eye  shall  behold."  AAONAI  AANTAAA,  "  Lord  !  Thou  art
the  Lamb."f  XGJCA  MIAA000  exactly  represents  the  Hebrew
words  signifying  "  He  hath  seen  the  Pleroma."

AMAAXO

AMA9AZ

LZA!

is  rendered  by  Stiechel  "  Salama  zebaam  jatzael "  =  "  Peace  unto
the  army  of  these  "  (of  the  celestial  ^Eons)  !  This  agrees  with

*  Prof.  Stiechel,  in  his  essay  '  De  words  cJ>pACIC,  4>ACIC,  IACIC,

Gemma  Abraxea  nondum  edita,'  "  Declaration,"  "  Manifestation,"

Jeuae,  1848,  has  acutely  and  satis-  "  Healing,"  is  always  attached  to  a

factorily  elucidated  some  very  im-  figure  of  Venus  Anudyomeue,  and

portant  formula?,  giving  a  key  to  the  admits  of  the  translation  '•  Mountain

whole  class.  The  necessity  for  em-  of  Light."  The  Venus  therefor**

ploying  Oriental  languages  in  spells  seems  adopted  here  for  the  "  Virgin

is  curiously  illustrated  by  Hippolytus'  of  Light,"  who  holds  so  high  a  place

statement,  that  the  magicians  of  his  in  the  celestial  hierarchy  of  the

time  used  to  write  the  answers  to  Pistis-Sophia.  At  any  rate  the

the  questions  proposed  to  their  sense  of  APCOPI,  "Mountain  of

demons,  partly  in  Hebrew,  partly  in  Light,"  strongly  favours  this  accep-

Greek  letters.  tation.

t  AP  OJPI,  followed  by  the  Greek


312  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

the  benediction  pronounced  by  the  Marcosians  in  administering
the  holy  unction,  "  Peace  be  unto  all  upon  whom  this  holy
Name  rests !  "

Some  of  these  inscriptions  display  an  evident  affectation  of
obscurity  by  their  transposition  of  parts  of  the  same  word  from
one  line  to  another,  the  only  key  to  which  is  the  observing  the
different  sizes  of  the  characters  employed,  and  taking  those  of
the  same  size  as  belonging  to  the  "  disjecta  membra  "  of  the
same  word.  A  most  instructive  example  of  this  artifice  is
supplied  by  the  legend  cut  on  the  reverse  of  a  magnificent
Serapis  head  (Wood),  which  reads  thus :

IABATAOP

©ONATHCAAI

APBA0I

AAM

AU)

This  will  only  be  translatable  if  transposed  as  follows:  IABATAOP  .
0ONATHC  .  AAIAAM  .  APBA0  .  lACx).  "  Jehovah,  the  Pure  yEther,
the  Fire,*  for  ever,  the  Four,  lao,"  where  "  the  Four  "  signifies
the  Tetrad,  so  conspicuous  in  the  Theogony  of  Marcus.  This
legend  seems  much  of  the  same  nature  as  the  Greek  one  cut
on  a  piece  of  copper  (communicated  to  me  by  Prof.  Ch.
Babington)  :  6  Sia  TTOLVTWV  Novs,  cu$r/p,  Trvp,  Trvev^ta,  eAcoetv  eAweti/
(Elohim).  The  only  word  in  the  first  legend  not  reducible  to
Hebrew  is  Qovar,  but  it  seems  to  correspond  to  the  "./Ether  *'  of
the  copper  piece,  APAANA  ©AMAKA  ZAABANA  XAMKIM,  "Our
Light,  let  thy  goodness  grant  unto  us  a  full  lap  "  :  whence  the
object  of  such  a  talisman  would  seem  to  be  the  procuring  of
fecundity.j

ANAKAA  A  KA  A  AGO)  I  GO  I,  "Pursue  then  (my  foes)  unto
destruction,  0  Lord,"  is  found  very  appropriately  engraven  on
the  reverse  of  a  sphinx,  the  recognised  emblem  of  power  and
slaughter.

*  A  B  P A  M ,  which  often  occurs  in  f  H  C  represents  the  Hebrew  word

these  legends,  may  perhaps  refer  to  for  "  Fire  "  :  and  this  explanation  is

the  Kabbinical "  Seir-Anpen,"  the  confirmed by  the TO  <i>U)C  HYP

Primitive Man, made up of 213  4>AOH accompanying  a  figure  of

numbers,  the  numerical  value  of  the  Phre  on  a  gem  elucidated  by  Froeh-

Hebrew  letters  in  the  name.  ner  in  his  '  Byrsa,'  part  i.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  £13

BAPIA  ZAZTA  IAU),  "  Jehovah  the  Creator,  the  Destroyer.'
Chaldee  slightly  corrupted.

IA0AI,  "The  providence  of  God."

MAO  A  HE,  "  The  honour  of  God."

PEOTHAE,  "  The  will  of  God."

XCUMI,  "  The  power  of  God."

ZBU) "  Wisdom."

These  Coptic  words  thus  designate  the  Five  Emanations
from  the  Godhead  —  viz.,  Phronesis,  Logos,  Nous,  Dynamis,
Sophia.


''  enlightening  mine  eye,"


or


"  enlightening  me,"
Meireni  M'ireni

If  HNAMEPU)  and  MAPCOHNI  are  really  the  same,  it  will  be
conclusive  against  ii,  where  the  eni  is  an  affix.  The  form  then
might  be

TXID  iyy
enimeir.

Query  what  of  the  U)  ?

101  placed  on  each  side  of  the  Chnuphis  serpent  engraved
in  green  jade  (S.  S.  Lewis)  is  correct  Hebrew  for  k'  With  me,"
which  gives  an  appropriate  sense  if  understood  as  a  prayer  for
the  constant  presence  of  the  protecting  Spirit.

MEZ  XANAAU),*  "The  Messiah  be  propitious  unto  me."

MAPU)HNI,*  "  Enlighten  mine  eyes."

K  ATA  A  K  AT.  The  Basilidan  name  for  the  Saviour  is  written
by  Epiphanius  K  ATA  A  K  ATX,  who  ridicules  it  as  an  expression
taken  from  Isaiah  (xxviii.  10)  without  any  regard  to  the

*  The  Syrian  Alexander  Sevcrus  converted into "Maria." HNAM-

expresses  his  indignation  at  the  sight  EPU),  which  often  accompanies  the

of  a  certain  notorious  rogue,  Arabi-  figure  of  the  Cynocephalus,  seems  to

anus,  coming  to  Court,  by  exclaiming  be equivalent  to  the  phrase  in  the

"  O  Marna,  O  Jupiter,"  &c.,  where  text  :  and  as that  beast  belongs  to

his  native  "  Our  Lord  "  he  renders  Thoth,  god  of  Imoicledge,  this  inter-

by  "  Jupiter,"  for  the  benefit  of  his  pretation  has  at  least  appropriateness

Kornan hearers. This word the  in  its  favour.
monkish  transcribers  very  naturally


314


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


real  meaning  of  the  words.  Bellermann,  however,  thinks
he  has  found  a  more  sensible  derivation  for  the  title  in  Arabic,
signifying  "  Strength  upon  strength,"  that  is,  the  "  All-
powerful"  ;  or  else  in  the  Coptic  KAB,  "  a  lamp,"  and  so  implying
"  The  burning  and  the  shining  Light."

MOT0,  "Mother,"  Plutarch  informs  us  (De  Is.  et  Os.),  was  a
title  given  to  Isis.  This  word  contains  a  plain  allusion  to  the
earth,  "  lutum  Prometheum,"  whence  Man  was  taken.  MOT0
and  |  EOTA  are  translated  by  Sanconiathon  as  "  Hades  "  and
"  Only-begotten,"  the  offspring  of  the  Phoenician  Cronos.

MOOT  for  the  Coptic  NOTT,  "God."

MAI  MTM  TXATM  GDI,  "Being,  Fount,  Salvation,  Food,
lao  "  :  implying  that  lao  is  the  source,  food,  life,  and  salvation
of  the  soul.

OPOOPIOT0,  "  Light  of  Light."*

TAAA  APAIU)  OUAPAOPO  NTOKO  NBAI,  "Protector,  Creator,
rule,  speak,  0  Lord,"  is  a  very  common  formula.

ZEZEMEN  BAPANTHN  lACx),  written  with  many  variations,
and  followed  by  the  names  of  the  great  Angels,  has  been
ingeniously  deciphered  by  a  learned  Hebraist  (Rev.  E.  Sinker)
as  representing  the  sound  of  "  Shengab  hor  anje  Jehevoh,"
"  They  that  stand  before  the  Mountain  of  God/'  that  is,  the
Angels  of  the  Presence,  j

XAIA,  "  Life,"  is  seen  on  a  field  of  the  Eoman  gem  bearing  two
figures  of  Providentia,  with  the  Sun  and  Moon  on  the  field
overhead  (Major  Pearse).

Three  Greek  characters  often  occur  in  juxtaposition — viz.,  the
E  set  on  its  back,  a  vertical  line  crossed  by  two  horizontal
strokes,  and  Z.  They  stand  for  the  numerals  5,  3,  and  7,  the
Triad,  Pentad,  Ileptad — lucky  and  sacred  numbers  in  the
religious  notions  of  the  East.  For  the  same  reason  the  inscrip
tions  on  our  gems  will  be  found  to  be  arranged  for  the  most
part  in  either  three,  five,  or  seven  lines.  This  also  accounts  for
the  name  lao  being  often  written  with  its  elements  repeated

*  This  legend always goes  with  ye(y}&  apavynv  law.
the udder-shaped  vase  of  the  Isiac  » pjjy in 3J3G? '"I  'D  'J

rites.  fftyei/  flap  eV%€

t


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  315

COAIAOJ,*  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  the  venerated  numeral,  five.
And,  again,  by  introducing  another  vowel,  H,  the  Holy  Name  is
repeated  under  five  different  forms,  HAI.AIH.HICxJ.AIGO.IAU).

The  Priest  officiating,  commonly  figured  in  these  designs,  wears
upon  his  head  the  "  calantica,"  a  square  of  purple  cloth  whence
spring  two  flamingo  feathers ;  a  badge  which  made  Trrepo'^opos
a  synonym  for  the  Egyptian  priesthood.  The  staff  in  his
hand,  emblem  of  his  office,  has  the  serpent  coiled  five  times
about  it.  This  "  sceptrum  sacerdotal  e "  furnishes  the  true
explanation  of  the  meaning  of  many  ancient  insignia,  beginning
with  Moses'  wand,  then  the  club  of  ^Esculapius,  and  closing
with  its  derivative  the  rod  in  the  spiral  of  3SS  that  so
constantly  goes  with  the  Agathoda3mon  serpent  upon  the
Chnuphis  gems.

As  for  the  geometrical  figures  so  often  introduced,  they  may  be
supposed  to  have  had  much  the  same  import  here  as  in  the
formulas  of  the  Eosicrucians,  who  obtained  these  with  other
Gnostic  paraphernalia  probably  by  tradition  from  the  Arabs  ;
for  their  pretended  founder,  the  Great  Unknown  A.  S.,  is
declared  to  have  acquired  his  small  learning  at  the  College  of
Damascus.  In  their  system  the  Square  stands  for  the  Four
Elements  ;  the  Triangle  for  the  body,  the  spirit,  and  the  life  :
and  also  for  Sun,  Moon,  arid  Mercury.  The  last  Triad
Paracelsus  interprets  by  salt,  sulphur,  vmcltsilver — the  three
radical  forces  of  Nature  according  to  his  system.  The  PJiombus
represents  the  Orphic  Egg,  out  of  which  issued  the  whole
Creation.

Phoenician  Numerals  may,  from  the  very  nature  of  the  case,  be
looked  for  amongst  the  marks  that  cannot  be  referred  to  the
Greek  alphabet.  The  notation  was  simplicity  itself :  one  to  nine
being  expressed  by  vertical  strokes,  so  many  times  repeated  j
ten  by  a  horizontal  one ;  twenty  by  two  such  parallel  to
each  other,  sometimes  slightly  curving  together.  In  the

*  Stiechel  has  a  very  ingenious  I  EGO  AIM  =  vivit  existens.

explanation of  this permutation  of  AICOOVEV  —  isque  est  luo

vowels  ;  he  makes  it  express  different  A I  H  A  H I  (x)  H  =  existeus  vivit.

tenses  of  the  Hebrew  verb  to  exist,  OOAIHOYE  =  isque  lao
thus —


316  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Palmyrene notation  five  has  a  special  cypher,  a sloping  line
upon  which  in  the  middle  stands  another  at  right  angles.

It  was  to  be  expected  that  Samaritan  characters  should  make
their  appearance  upon  the  productions  of  a  religion  of  which  the
reputed  founder  was  a  Samaritan,  whose  professed  followers
also  formed  an  important  sect  as  late  as  the  times  of  Hippoly-
tus.  Stiechel  interprets  the  reverse  legend  on  his  above-quoted
gem  as  having  its  commencing  words  written  in  this  alphabet :
thus —

AV Z = qui  tenet.

VI  = signum  sat.

PAct>ACx) == ejus  sanat.
PPI~V<t>CjL) = exorcista  corpus.

TAB  PI  I = facilitates.

IHIAII = et  vitam.
III!  = fiat!  fiat!

He  also  points  out  that  the  important  word  "  Au(}i"  =  sign  or
token,  is  written  in  these  legends  in  four  different  ways :
0VO, EVO, EIW,  VIE.

It  is  possible  tliat  in  certain  legends  the  letters,  taken  in  an
order  known  to  one  having  the  key,  would  give  a  definite
meaning;  and  this  suspicion  is  supported  by  the  reversing  of
some  of  the  characters.  Certain  it  is  that  the  Donatists
adopted  such  a  device  in  order  to  disguise  their  proscribed
war-cry  from  the  victorious  Catholics.  A  door-lintel  at
Tebessa  exhibits  the  well-known  formula  thus —

VDES  DICA

EOLAY  £  SVM

a

to  be  read  by  the  brethren  "  Deo  laudes  dicamus." A  second
lintel  bears  the  same  in  monogram.

The  most  famous  spell  of  all,  ABRACADABRA,  is  first
mentioned  by  Serenus  Sammonicus,  the  most  learned  Roman
of  his  times,  and  physician  to  Caracalla,  to  whom  he  dedicated
his  poetical  '  Guide  to  Health,'  entitled  '  De  Medicina  prsecepta
saluberrima.'  This  work,  remarks  Spartian,  was  the  favourite
study  of  the  unfortunate  Cassar,  Geta,  for  attachment  to  whose
cause  this  true  son  of  Apollo  was  afterwards  put  to  death
by  the  imperial  fratricide.  Severus  Alexander  also,  "  who  had
known  and  loved  Serenus,"  greatly  admired  his  poetry,  putting


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIE REMAINS.  317

him  on  a  level  with  Horace,  as  Lampridius'  expressions  seem
to  intimate.  This  high  authority  orders  the  word  to  be  written
out  in  the  form  of  an  inverted  cone,  and  declares  it  of  virtue
against  all  diseases.

"  Thou  shalt  on  paper  write  the  spell  divine,
Abracadabra  called,  in  many  a  line;
Each  under  each  in  even  order  place,
But  the  last  letter  in  each  line  efface.
As  by  degrees  the  elements  grow  few
Still  take  away,  but  fix  the  residue,
Till  at  the  last  one  letter  stands  alone
And  the  whole  dwindles  to  a  tapering  cone.
Tie  this  about  the  neck  with  flaxen  string;
Mighty  the  good  'twill  to  the  patient  bring.
Its  wondrous  potency  shall  guard  his  head —
And  drive  disease  and  death  far  from  his  bed."

The  belief  in  the  virtue  of  this  recipe  flourished  through  the
Middle  Ages.  It  seems  alluded  to  in  the  •  Dialogue  on  Masonry,'
ascribed  by  Leland  to  Henry  VI. ;  for  amongst  "  the  things  that
Masons  conceal"  is  "  the  winrjynge  of  the  faculty e  of  Alrac  "  :
perhaps  signifying  the  possession  of  this  mystical  arrangement
of  letters :  unless,  indeed,  one  chooses  to  suspect  in  this
"facultye"  a  deeper  sense,  some  traditionary  knowledge  of  the
ancient  Abraxas  religion.  Again,  De  Foe  mentions  how  people
commonly  wore  the  word  written  in  the  manner  above  pre
scribed,  as  a  safeguard  against  infection  during  the  Great
Plague  of  London.

As  for  the  etymology  of  the  word,  the  most  satisfactory  yet
offered  is  the  compound  of  the  Hebrew  Ha-Braelmli,  "  blessing,"
and  Dobara,  "  speak  "  ;  meaning  the  "  Blessing  of  the  Mystic
Name  " — that  is,  utter  the  Tetragrammatou,  invoke  the  Holy
Name  of  Jehovah,  itself  the  mightiest  of  charms.*

It  is  very  remarkable,  considering  its  high  repute,  that  no
Gnostic  stone  bearing  such  an  inscription  should  be  known
to  exist.  On  the  other  hand  that  normal  address  to  lao,
ABAAN0AAABA,  "  Thou  art  our  Father!  "  is  so  found  on  talis-
manic  jaspers  arranged  in  the  exact  pattern  recommended  by

*  By  the  mere  utterance  whereof to  cast  out  devils  from  all  who  ap-
the  philosopher  Theosebius,  though plied  to  him  for  aid.
unacquainted  with  magic,  was  able


318  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Serenus  for  the  paper  spell,  and  probably  so  done  in  compliance
with  his  directions.  One  is  strongly  tempted  to  discover  in
this  same  Ha-Brachah  the  real  origin  of  the  equally  famous
title  "  Abraxas."  The  Greek  letters,  constantly  in  use  for
numerals,  at  once  presented  their  numeric  value  in  every  word
to  the  practised  eye  of  the  Kabalist.

The  celebrated  letter  of  Christ  to  Abgarus  was  (according  to
Cedrenus)  sealed  with  the  initials  of  the  seven  Hebrew  words,
whose  Greek  interpretation  was  ®co?  ®eo$ev  Oav^a  Otiov.
At  the  mere  sight  of  the  seal  the  king  was  healed  of  his
gout  and  of  his  black  leprosy,  all  but  a  slight  trace  upon
the  face  remaining  to  be  cleansed  by  the  waters  of  baptism.
Cedrenus'  Greek  reads  like  a  popular  formula,  and  may  serve  to
explain  the  legend  on  the  reverse  of  an  Abraxas  gem  in
my  possession,  IXOEOGOHIAIACx),  as  to  be  read  'I^o-ous  XpKrro?
@eos  CK  ©COT}  law,  "  Jesus  Christ,  God  of  God,  Jehovah."
This  inscription  encloses  the  letters  IH  placed  conspicuously
in  the  centre,  and  which  probably  represent,  as  nearly  as
the  t\vo  discordant  alphabets  allow,  the  Hebrew  letters  Jod,
He,  the  Kabalistic  name  of  the  Tikkan,  "  Express  Image,"  or
First  Emanation  of  the  Godhead.

The  Crescent  and  Seven  Stars,  amongst  which  are  scattered
the  mystical  Seven  Vowels,  has  for  reverse  this  formula  :  —


1A1IX3C13
OHTO93N

©HAATO

Its  first  line,  but  written  AX0IU)<t>l,  is  cut  in  beautiful
characters  on  the  reverse  of  a  caduceus  within  a  wreath.  Sinker
reads  it  as  >S>  ipy,  Essence,  Beauty:  probably  the  rest  arc
names  of  virtues.  It  is  inconceivable  that  the  Sephiroth  —
mightiest  spell  of  all—  should  be  omitted  in  these  gems.  It  is
made  up  of  the  Ten  attributes  of  Jehovah  —  viz.,  The  Crown,
Wisdom,  Prudence,  Security,  Magnificence,  Goodness,  Glory,
Victory,  Fortitude,  Kingdom.  There  is  consequently  a  pro
bability  that  these  Names  often  lurk  in  the  phonetic  Hebrew,
enveloping  all  in  darkness.  We  have  for  guide  the  analogy  of
the  present  Arab  talismans,  consisting  of  the  ninety-nine
epithets  of  Allah  written  on  a  scroll.


THE GNOSTICS AND THETR REMAINS.  319


THE NAME IAO.

Diodorus  Siculus,  when  enumerating  the  different  legislators
of  antiquity,  says,  "  Amongst  the  Jews  Moses  pretended  that
the  god  surnamed  lao  gave  him  his  laws  "  (i.  94).  And  this  is
elucidated  by  the  remark  of  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  that  the
Hebrew  Tetragrammaton,  or  Mystic  Name,  is  pronounced  IAOT-
and  signifies  "He  that  is  and  shall  be."  Theodoret  states  that
the  same  four  letters  were  pronounced  by  the  Samaritans  as
I  ABE  (Jave)  ;  by  the  Jews  as  I  AH.  Jerome  (upon  Psalm  viii.N-
says,  "  The  Name  of  the  Lord  "  amongst  the  Hebrews  is  of  four
letters,  lod,  He,  Van,  He,  which  is  properly  the  Name  of  God,
and  may  be  read  as  IAHO  (Idho)  (that  is  in  Latin  characters),
which  is  held  by  the  Jews  for  unutterable.  The  author  of  the
'  Treatise  on  Interpretations  '  says,  "  The  Egyptians  express
the  name  of  the  Supreme  Being  by  the  seven  Greek  vowels
IEHHOTA":*  which  sufficiently  explains  the  mighty  potency
ascribed  to  this  formula  by  the  inspired  author  of  the  '  Pistis-
Sophia,'  and  equally  so  its  frequent  appearance  upon  the
talismans  now  under  consideration,

Eabbi  Tarphon  (Tryphon),  who  could  remember  the  Second
Temple,  noticed  that  the  Ineffable  Name,  though  occurring  a
hundred  times  in  the  course  of  the  daily  service,  was  "  rather

*  According  to  the  Talmud,  the  Dante  alludes  to  a  curious  tradi-

Name  of  God,  which  was  communi-  tion  that  the  name  of  God,  revealed

cated  only  to  the  most  pious  of  the  to  Adam,  was  I,  which  succeeding

priesthood,  was  composed of  twelve times  changed  into  Eli:

letters. And  upon  our  talismans  the  «  pria  ch'  io  scendessi  all'  infernale

vowels  inclosing  I AO  are  often  found  ambascia,

repeated so as to make up that  I  s'appellava  in  terra  il somnio

number ;  whence  it  may  be  inferred  ~  Beue,

that  their  union  represents  the  same  fascia'61 ** ^'^ ^ ""

ineffable  sound.  In  the  same  passage  ELI  si  chiamo ;  poi,  e  cio  conviene,

mention  is  made  of  another  Name  of  Che 1'  uso dei mortali e come

God,  consisting  of  forty-two  letters,  fronda,

which  in  its  turn  may  serve  to  ac-  In  ramo,  die  sen  va,  ed  altra  viene."

count  for  the  lines  of  often-repeated  (  Parad-'  xxvi.  133).

vowels  similarly  to  be  met  with.


320  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

warbled  than  pronounced."  A  precious  hint  this,  as  indicating
how  the  Gnostic  strings  of  boneless  vowels  give  an  approxima
tion  to  the  audible  and  yet  unuttered  sound.  Since  the
destruction  of  the  Temple,  the  Name  has  never  been  heard  in
prayer,  or  pronounced  aloud.  It  is  communicated,  indeed,  to
every  Rabbi,  after  his  ordination,  but  not  in  full.  One  half  of  it
is  told ;  the  rest  he  is  left  to  make  out  for  himself.

The  first  idea  of  an  "  Ineffable  Name,"  and  all  its  inherent
virtues,  evidently  came  to  the  Egyptians  (from  whom  the  Jews
borrowed  it)  from  the  Hindoo  doctrine  respecting  the  title
AUM, — itself,  like  the  AIO,  trilateral — representing  the  Triad,
Brahma- Vishnu-Siva :  A  standing  for  the  Creator,  U  for  the
Preserver,  M  for  the  Destroyer.  The  connection  between
Indian  and  Egyptian  mythology  is  certain,  however  difficult  to
account  for,  the  names  of  the  principal  deities  in  the  latter
having  the  appearance  of  pure  Sanscrit.  Thus  Isis  signifies  in
that  tongue  the  Mistress  ;  Tat  and  Sat,  Virtue  and  Power  ;  Serapis,
Sripa,  the  Blood-drinker ;  Nila,  Blue-icatcr,  &c.  The  original
identity  of  the  two  religious  systems  no  one  can  doubt  who  has
intelligently  studied  the  monuments  of  each  :  but  which  country
instructed  the  other  ?

The  balance  of  probabilities  is  strongly  in  favour  of  India,
the  confinement  of  the  peculiar  system  within  the  narrow
limits  of  Egypt  betokening  an  importation  by  a  colony  from
some  very  remote  source.  Traces  of  a  very  ancient  intercourse
between  the  two  countries  are  discernible,  though  very  dimly,
in  history.  The  Periplus  of  the  Eed  Sea  mentions  that  as  late
as  Caesar's  time  the  townEndeemon  on  thatcoast  was  the  entrepot
where  the  Indian  and  Egyptian  traders  used  annually  to  meet.
In  prehistoric  times  therefore  it  is  conceivable  that  Brahminical
missionaries  may  have  laboured  amongst  the  aborigines  of  the
Valley  of  the  Nile.  This  religious  analogy  manifests  itself  in
the  meanest  details,  in  the  sacred  titles  as  well  as  attributes.
For  example,  as  the  Brahmins  teach  tint  each  of  the  letters
A,  U,  M  envelops  a  great  mystery,  so  does  the  Pistis-SopJiia
('Prayers  of  the  Saviour,'  §  358)  interpret  the  |,  A,  O,  as  the
summary  of  the  Gnostic,  or  Valentinian,  creed.  "  I  signifies  .
All  goctli  out ;  A,  All  returneth  within  ;  n,  There  sliall  be  an  end  of


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  321

ends  " :  thus  expressing  the  grand  doctrines  of  the  Emanation,
the  Return,  and  the  Annihilation,  or  rather  reabsorption,  of  the
Universe.*

To  turn  now  to  Greece — in  the  same  way  as  Abraxas  is  no
other  than  a  numerical  title  of  the  Solar  god,  so  does  loo
actually  make  its  appearance  as  an  epithet  of  the  same
divinity.  Macrobius  (Sat.  i.  18),  whilst  labouring  to  prove  that
the  Sun-worship  was  in  truth  the  sole  religion  of  Paganism,
under  whatever  name  it  was  disguised,  gives  a  notice  very
much  to  our  purpose.  The  Apollo  of  Claros,  when  consulted  as
to  the  true  nature  of  the  god  called  'laos,  gave  the  following
response  : —

"  The  sacred  things  ye  learn,  to  none  disclose,
A  little  falsehood  much  discretion  shows;
Regard  laos  as  supreme  above,
In  winter  Pluto,  in  spring's  opening  Jove,
Phoebus  through  blazing  summer  rules  the  day,
Whilst  autumn  owns  the  mild  laos'  f  sway."

Here  we  find  lao  expressly  recognised  as  the  title  of  the
Supreme  God  whose  physical  representative  is  the  Sun.  Again
we  have  Dionysos  or  Bacchus  added  to  the  list  by  Orpheus,  who
sings

"Jove,  Pluto,  Phoebus,  Bacchus,  all  are  One."

A  distinct  recognition  this  of  the  grand  principle  of  Brahmin  -
ism — that  all  the  different  deities  are  but  representations  of  the
different  attributes  of  the  One.  The  same  truth  is  curiously
expressed  upon  a  talisman  (Hertz  collection)  which  at  the
same  time  sets  forth  the  triune  nature  of  the  Supreme  Being
whose  visible  type  is  the  Sun.  It  is  a  heart-shaped  piece  of
basalt  engraved  with  seated  figures  of  Ammon  and  Ea  (the
Zeus  and  Helios  of  the  Greeks),  with  the  sacred  Asp  erect
between  them.  The  reverse  bears  the  invocation  neatly  cut
in  characters  of  the  third  century —

EIC BAIT  EIC  A0QP  MIA  TON BIA  EIC  AE  AXHPI
XAIPE  FIATEP  KOCMOT  XAIPE  TPIMOPOE  ©EOC
*  This  has  a  remarkable  analogy  f  a&fiv  'low,  where the epithet

with the  Brahminical  definition  of seems  suggested  by  the  name  Abraxas
God  as  "  the Self-existing,  Eternal, so  generally  coupled  with  it.
Supreme  Being,  who  is  the  Cause  of
everything, and into whom e very-
tiling  is  finally  absorbed"?


322  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

"There  is  One  Bait,  One  Athor,  their  power  is  one  and  the
same,  there  is  One  Achori. Hail  Father  of  the  universe,  hail
God  under  three forms  ! " Concerning the three figures a
word  is  necessary  in  explanation  of  their  titles. As  for the
hawk-head  Ea,  Horapollo  gives  for  reason  of  the  type  ;  "  The
hawk stands for the Supreme  Mind,  and  for  the  intelligent
soul. The  hawk  is  called  in  the  Egyptian  language  '  Baieth,'
from  ~bai  soul,  and  etli  heart,  which  organ they  consider the
seat  or  inclosure of  the  soul." A  sufficient  explanation  this
for  the  shape  in  which  the  talisman  is  formed. Achoreus,  the
virtuous priest-councillor of  the  last of  the Ptolemies (see
Lucan),  derives  his  name  from  the  sacred  serpent  here  invoked.
That  lews  was  recognised  by  the  Greeks  as  an  epithet  for
the Sun in the autumnal quarter has been shown from
Macrobius. The philosophical interpreters of the ancient
mythology  discovered  in  Dionysos  also  a mere  type  of  the  same
luminary. "  One  is  Zeus,  Hades,  Helios,  and  Dionysos." And
Serapis  is  substituted  for  the  last  in  an  oracle  quoted  by  Julian  :
nor  must  it  be  forgotten  that  the  main  object  of  Macrobius  in
the above-quoted dissertation is  to  prove,  that Serapis  is  a
representative of  the  various powers  of  the Solar deity  all
combined in one figure. Again, to the yame effect, comes
Virgil's  famous  apostrophe —

"  Yos,  0  clarissima  mundi,
Lumina  labentem  qui  ccelo  ducitis  annum,
Liber  et  alma  Ceres!"

where  "  Bacchus "  and  "  Ceres "  do  no  more  than  interpret
Osiris  and  Isis,  the  Sun  and  Moon.  Here  lies  the  reason  for
equipping  Bacchus  with  horns  in  some  of  his  statues.

"  Accedant  capiti  cornua  Bacchus  eris,"  ^ays  Sappho  to
Phaon.  For  in  Hebrew  a  radiated  and  a  horned  head  is  ex
pressed  by  the  same  word.  When  Moses  came  down  from  the
Mount,  "cornuta  erat  facies  ejus,"  according  to  the  version
of  the  Yulgate;  and  on  the  strength  of  this  mistranslation
Christian  art  hath  ever  graced  the  Jewish  lawgiver  with  these
appendages.

In  this  very  title  lao  undoubtedly  lies  the  origin  of  the
universal  persuasion  of  the  ancients  that  the  Jehovah  of  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  323

Jews — whose  name  was  thus  expressed  in  Greek  letters — was
no  other  than the  Egyptian  Bacchus. For  this  notion  they
found  strong  support  in  the Golden  Vine  which formed  the
sole  visible decoration  of  the  Temple  ; in  the  "  blowing  the
trumpets at the New Moon," and the custom of keeping
the Feast of Tabernacles in huts made of  leafy boughs,
accompanied  with  many  of  the  ceremonies  used  at  the  Grecian
Dionysia  : "  Quia  sacerdotes  eorum  tibia  tympanis  concinebant,
hedera  vinciebantur,  vitisque aurea templo reperta " (Tacit.
Hist.  v.  5.) This  opinion  as  to  the  real  nature  of  the  Jewish
worship  Tacitus  quotes  as  the  one  generally  held  by  the  learned
of  his  own  times,  although  he  cannot  bring  himself  to  accept
it  as  satisfactory — although  merely  on  the  grounds  that  the
gloomy  arid  unsocial  character  of  the  religion  seemed  to  dis
prove  its  relationship  to the merry  worship  of  the  "  god  of
wine," the only  character in  which the Romans  recognised
Bacchus. Nevertheless this ancient theory has found sup
porters in modern times, notably in the overlearned Dr.
Stanley, rector of St. George the Martyr, who (without
giving much scandal  to his  own  easy-going  generation)  ad
vocated  this  heterodox  opinion  in  an  elaborate  treatise  which
puts  to  shame  the  boldest  flights  of  the  '  Essays  and  Reviews,'
or  even the interpretations  of  our indiscreet apostle  to  the
Zulus. Ludicrously  enough,  the  German  Jews  still  celebrate
the  Feast  of  Purim,  and  the  Fall  of  Haman,  by  getting  as  royally
drunk  as  their  means  afford,  and  thus  to  the  present  day  do
their  best  to  perpetuate  the  old  Roman  aspersion. Amongst  the
later  Gnostics,  indeed,  some  rites  were  unmistakably  borrowed
from  the  Bacchanalia,  singularly  modified  by  Christian  doctrine.
Epiphanius relates (Ha3res.  xxxvii.)  how  that  "they  kept  a
tame  serpent  in  a  chest  or  sacred  ark,  and  piled  loaves  upon  a
table  before  the  same,  and  then  called  upon  the  serpent  to  come
forth. Whereupon, opening of himself  the ark, he would
come  forth,  mount  upon  the  table,  and  twine  about  the  loaves,
which they broke in pieces, and distributed amongst the
worshippers, calling this their 'Perfect Sacrifice'  and  their
*  Eucharist.' "

Another explanation as to the  true  character  of  the

Y  2


324  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

named  lao  must  not  be  passed  over  in  silence,  however  little
foundation  it  may  have  in  truth,  seeing  that  it  is  supported  by
the  authority  of  the  learned  historian  of  Gnosticism,  Jacques
Matter.  The  Moon  to  the  Egyptians,  as  to  the  Orientals  of
to-day,  was  of  the  masculine  gender,  and  was  designated  by  the
phonetic  name  Aali  or  loJi.  Thoth  was  sometimes  identified  with
this  deity;  and  therefore  Thoth's  emblem,  the  ibis,  accompanied
with  the  crescent,  bears  the  legend  loh,  "  because  (says  Plutarch)
Mercury  attends  the  Moon  in  her  journey  round  the  earth  in
the  same  way  as  Hercules  doth  the  Sun."  When  Thoth,  Tat,
appears  as  Mercury  he  has  the  head  of  an  ibis;  but  in  his
character  of  the  Moon-god,  or  Dens  Lumis,  he  shows  the  face  of
a  man  supporting  the  lunar  crescent  enclosing  the  sun's  disk
and  surmounted  by  a  double  plume.

Hence  came  the  notion  mentioned  by  Plutarch,  that  "  the
Egyptians  call  the  Moon  the  Mother  of  Creation,  and  say  it  is
of  both  sexes "  :  and  to  the  same  effect  Spartian  (Caracalla,
vii.)  explains  that  the  Egyptians  in  the  mysteries  (mystice)
call  the  Moon  a  male,  though  designating  it  a  female  in  ordinary
speech.  He  adds  that  the  people  of  Carrhal  (famed  for  its  great
temple  of  Deus  Lunus)  hold  that  "  whatsoever  man  thinks  the
moon  should  be  called  of  the  feminine  gender  shall  pass  his
life  a  slave  unto  women,  whereas  he  that  holds  it  to  be  a  male
deity  shall  rule  over  his  wife  and  be  secured  against  all  female
treachery."  A  very  sufficient  reason  this  for  the  fondness  of
Spartian' s  contemporaries  for  wearing  in  their  signet  rings  the
vcra  effigies  of  the  Carrhene  god,  a  youth  in  a  Phrygian  cap,
his  bust  supported  on  the  crescent  that  gives  his  name.  This
elegant  effeminate  lunar  genius  is  in  truth  no  other  than  the
modernized  and  tasteful  version  of  the  griin  old  Assyrian
"  Sin,"  pictured  in  the  Ninevitish  monuments  as  an  aged  man
leaning  on  his  staff  as  he  floats  through  the  heavens  on  the
crescent,  presenting  a  ludicrous  resemblance  to  our  popular  idea
of  the  "  Man  in  the  Moon."  A  blue  calcedony  in  my  possession
fully  illustrates  Plutarch's  title  of  "Mother  of  Creation."  It
exhibits  a  perfect  hermaphrodite  figure  wearing  the  Egyptian
head-dress,  and  squatting  down  so  as  more  clearly  to  display
its  bisexual  nature  :  below  creeps  a  snail  surmounted  by  a


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  325

butterfly,  the well-understood  emblems  of  laseiviousness  and
life,  the  fount  of  propagation.

All  this  brings  us  to  Matter's  theory  (based  on  a  statement
of  Origen's),  that  lao,  Adonai,  Sabaoth  signified  the  genii  of  the
Moon,  the  Sun,  and  the  Planets — being  far  inferior  in  power
and  even  antagonistic  to  Abraxas,  who  is  the  aetual  representative
of  the  Supreme  Source  of  Light.  Matter  therefore  explains  the
warlike  attitude  in  which  the  Abraxas-god  is  regularly  depicted
as  declaring  his  office  of  scaring  away  the  Adversary,  or
demon,  lao,  who  is  expressed  by  his  name  alone,  placed  in  the
lowest  part  of  the  scene,  to  denote  his  inferiority.  But  the
authority  of  the  monuments  themselves  is  more  than  sufficient
to  upset  such  an  interpretation  of  the  meaning  given  to  them
by  the  actual  manufacturers.  The  doctrine  mentioned  by
Origen  was,  it  cannot  be  denied,  that  of  the  more  recent  sect,
which  set  itself  above  all  old  Egyptian  or  Hebrew  tradition  :
but  it  most  assuredly  was  not  of  the  immense  body  of  primitive
Kabbalistic  Gnostics  who  excogitated  and  put  their  trust  in  the
sigils  that  they  have  bequeathed  to  us  in  such  fantastical
profusion.  These  talisman -makers  evidently  held  Thoth  and
Moses  in  equal  reverence  :  they  had  nothing  to  do  with  the
Valentinians,  who  had  an  obvious  motive  for  exalting  their
newly-invented  invisible  Tetrad,  by  so  immeasurably  degrading
below  it  the  most  venerated  names  of  the  old  religion.  The
Valentinians  were  Greeks  by  education,  really  drawing  their
inspiration  from  Pythagoras  and  Plato,  and  only  too  well
pleased  with  the  opportunity  of  venting  their  natural  spite
upon  the  most  cherished  ideas  of  the  Alexandrine  Kabbalists,
the  grand  fabricants  of  our  talismans,  those  veritable  "  Pierres
d'Israel."

The  Pistis-Soplda  continually  introduces,  as  a  most  important
actor  in  its  scenes  of  the  judgment  and  purification  of  the
soul,  "the  great  and  good  lao,  ruler  of  the  Middle  Sphere,"
who  when  he  looks  down  into  the  places  of  torment  causes  tho
souls  therein  imprisoned  to  be  set  at  liberty.  The  very
collocation  of  the  words  on  our  talismans  clearly  denotes  that
Adonai,  Sabaoth,  are  equally  with  Abraxas  the  titles  of  lao,  who
is  the  god  actually  represented  by  the  symbolical  figure  these


326  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

words  accompany.  What  else  would  be  the  motive  for  their
collocation  in  a  prayer  like  this  (on  a  gem  published  by  Matter
himself)—"  lao,  Abraxas,  Adonai,  Holy  Name,  Holy  Powers,*
defend  Vibia  Paulina  from  every  evil  spirit "  ?  And,  again,  these
same  names  perpetually  occur  united  together,  and  followed  by
the  address  ABAANA0ANAABA,  "  Thou  art  our  Father"  ;  CGM€C
6IAAM,  "Eternal  Sun";  a  mode  of  adoration  that  could  not
possibly  have  been  applied  to  beings  of  a  discordant,  much  less
of  an  antagonistic,  nature  to  each  other.  Besides,  if  Abraxas
were  the  opponent  and  ultimate  destroyer  of  lao,  it  would  have
been  absurd  to  put  the  names  of  the  two  in  such  close  union,
the  latter  even  taking  precedence;  each,  too,  being  equally
invoked  in  the  accompanying  prayer,  and  honoured  with  the
same  epithets  of  majesty.  Moreover  the  composite  figure,  or
Pantheus,  which,  as  all  writers  agree,  represents  the  actual  god
Abraxas,  is  much  more  frequently  inscribed  with  the  name  I  AGO
tli an  with  ABPACAZ  ;  and  nevertheless,  though  the  former  name
stands  alone,  it  is  followed  by  the  same  glorification,  "  Thou  art
our  Father,"  &c.,  as  when  the  two  names  are  engraved  in
juxtaposition.  It  is  moreover  quite  opposed  to  all  the  rules  oi
symbolism  to  represent  the  one  actor  in  a  scene  by  his  proper
figure  or  emblem,  and  to  indicate  the  other  by  the  simple  letters
of  his  name  :  and  equally  repugnant  to  common  sense  to  depict
the  figure  of  the  god  with  the  name  of  his  adversary  placed  in
the  most  conspicuous  portion  of  the  tableau.  The  absurdity  is
as  great  as  though  in  Christian  art  one  should  paint  a  Crucifix
with  Satan's  name  in  the  place  of  the  holy  I  .  N  .  R  .  I  ,  and
give  for  explanation  the  hostility  of  the  two  personages.  And
lastly,  it  has  been  already  shown  that  the  numerical  or  Kabbal-
istic  value  of  the  name  Abraxas  directly  refers  to  the  Persian
title  of  the  god,  "  Mithras,"  Euler  of  the  year,  worshipped  from
the  earliest  times  under  the  apellation  of  lao.  Matter  himself

*  A parallel to this form still  one  object  of  adoration  by  heaping

exists  m  the  Turkish  amulet  com-  upon  him  a  multitude of  honorific

posed  of  the  ninety-and-nine  epithets  titles  expressive  of  his  various  attri-

of  Allah written on a  paper,  and  butes. Amulets  of  this  and  various

believed to possess  wondrous pro-  other  kinds  are  regularly  sold  at  the

tcctive po\ver. The spirit of all  mosques.
Oriental religions is  to glorify  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  327

publishes  (PI.  iii.  2)  a  gem  that  should  have  convinced  him  of  his
error,  had  he  not  overlooked  the  force  of  its  legend.  The  type  is
Horus  seated  on  the  lotus,  inscribed  ABPACAZ  lACx) — an  address
exactly  parallel  to  the  so  frequent  EIC  ZETC  CAPAHI  on  the
contemporary  Heathen  gems  ;  and  therefore  only  to  be  trans
lated  by  "  Abraxas  is  the  One  Jehovah."

The  "  Great  Name  "  with  its  normal  titles  is  often  to  be  observed
interpolated  by  a  Gnostic  hand  upon  works  of  a  better  period
and  creed,  but  whose  subjects  were  fancied  analogous  to  the
ideas  conveyed  by  the  lao  Pantheus :  such  as  Phoebus  in
his  car,  the  Lion — House  of  the  Sun,  the  Sphinx  emblem  of
royalty,  and  the  Gorgon's  Head  of  the  Destructive  Force,  or  of
Providence.*  But  the  most  interesting  of  such  adopted  types
that  has  come  to  my  knowledge,  as  unmistakably  pointing  out
the  deity  really  understood  by  the  name  Abraxas,  is  a  work
discovered  by  myself  amongst  the  miscellanea  of  a  small  pri
vate  collection  (Bosanquet).  In  this  we  behold  the  familiar
Pantheus  with  head  of  cock,  cuirassed  body,  and  serpent-legs
brandishing  the  whip  and  driving  the  car  of  Sol,f  in  the
exact  attitude  of  its  proper  occupant,  Phoebus.  In  the  exergue
is  the  salutation  CABACx),  "  Glory  unto  th(  e  "  :  011  the  reverse,
in  a  cartouche  formed  by  a  coiled  asp — precisely  as  the  Hindoos
write  the  Ineffable  Name  AUM — are  engraved  the  titles  I  AGO
ABPACAZ,  attesting  that  one  deity  alone  is  meant,  and  that
one  to  be  the  Kuler  of  the  Sun.

*  The  holy  name  has  often  been  cited (section "Abraxas gems  ").

added  to  iutagli  of  a  foreign  nature  The god is  giving  the  benediction

merely  for  the  sake  of  turning  them  with his right hand, and  holds  a

into  talismans :  for  example,  on  the  sceptre in his left. Upon  another

reverse  of  a  heliotrope  with  Victory,  coin  of  the  same  emperor  and  mint

inscribing  a  shield  (K.  S.  Williams,  he is seated on the Earn,  clearly

Utica,  U.S.).  meaning  the  Sun  in  that sign,  and

f  Exactly  as  Serapis  (also  a  type  perhaps  having no  deeper  meaning

of  the  Sun-god)  makes  his  appear-  than the  date  of  the month  when

ance  upon an  Alexandrian coin  of  coined.
Hadrian's,  which has  been  already


328  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

ABRAXAS,  NEW  TYPE  OF.

A  most  singular  variation  upon  the  normal  type  of  the
Abraxas  pantheus  gives  him  the  head  of  Serapis  for  that  of  the
usual  cock.  In  the  field  between  the  serpents  are  the  genital
organs,  of  disproportionate  size,  represented  in  a  state  of  rest,
not  as  the  fascinum  properly  appear  on  amulets ;  and  unmis
takably  displaying  the  seal  of  circumcision.  This  circumstance
is  another  proof  to  be  added  to  all  those  previously  observed,
that  the  fabricators  of  this  class  of  talismans  were  the  Egyptian
Jews.  As  the  distinguishing  principle  of  the  Gnosis  in  all  its
forms  was  the  reprobation  of  the  "  doing  the  work  of  the
Demiurgus  " — that  is,  the  propagation  of  the  species — it  is
evident  that  the  object  of  this  symbolism  was  not  of  a  religious
kind.  It  is  probable  that  the  idea  was  to  produce  a  talisman  of
medicinal  use,  perhaps  for  the  cure  of  impotence  or  other
affections  of  the  parts  represented.  Of  medicinal  talismans,
expressing  their  purpose  by  the  legends  they  bear,  numerous
examples  have  been  already  published.  The  one  now  described
was  made  known  to  me  through  an  impression  brought  by
the  Eev.  S.  S.  Lewis  of  a  jasper  in  the  Bourgignon  collection
at  Rome.  Another  very  uncommon  subject  in  the  same
collection  is  a  skeleton  seated  on  a  throne,  holding  a  lance,  or
perhaps  sceptre.  Although  perfectly  corresponding  with  the
mediaeval  representation  of  Death,  yet  the  spirited  though  rude
extension  of  the  intaglio  is  that  of  the  earlier  Gnostic  period,
and  the  idea  intended  was  that  of  a  larva,  not  that  of  the
Destroying  Power.  In  the  Stosch  Cabinet  is  a  similar  figure
borne  along  in  a  car  by  steeds  as  fleshless  as  himself,  like
the  Wild  Hunter  of  the  German  legend.


FIG.  14.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  329


ORIGINAL  PURPOSE  OF THESE  FORMULAE.

The  interpretation  of  Gnostic  legends  and  the  nature  of  the
deity  to  whom  they  were  addressed  have  been  thus  far  the  sub
jects  of  our  inquiry :  the  next  step  is  to  search  contemporary
writers  for  information  as  to  the  special  purpose  for  which  the
talismans  so  enriched  were  originally  manufactured.  The
motive  for  placing  in  the  coffin  of  the  defunct  illuminate  these
"  words  of  power  "  graven  on  scrolls  of  lead,  plates  of  bronze,
the  gems  we  are  considering,  and  doubtless  to  an  infinitely
greater  extent  on  more  perishable  materials,  derives  much  light
from  the  description  Epiphanius  gives  (Hair,  xxxvi.)  of  the
ceremony  whereby  the  IIeracleonita3  prepared  their  dying
brother  for  the  next  world.  They  sprinkled  his  head  with  water
mingled  with  oil  and  opobalsamum,  repeating  at  the  same  time
the  form  of  words  used  by  the  Marcosians  in  baptism,  in  order
that  his  Inner  Man,  thus  provided,  might  escape  the  vigilance  of
the  Principalities  and  Powers  whose  domains  he  was  about  to
traverse,  and  mount  up  unseen  by  any  to  the  Pleroma  from  which
he  had  originally  descended.  Their  priests  therefore  instructed
the  dying  man  that  as  he  came  before  these  Powers  he  was
to  address  them  in  the  following  words  :  "  I,  the  son  from  the
Father,  the  Father  pre-existing  but  the  son  in  the  present  time,
am  come  to  behold  all  things  both  of  others  and  of  my  own,  and
things  not  altogether  of  others  but  belonging  unto  Achamoth
(Wisdom),  who  is  feminine  and  hath  created  them  for  herself.
But  I  declare  my  own  origin  from  the  Pre-existing  One,  and  I
am  going  back  unto  my  own  from  which  I  have  descended."
By  the  virtue  of  these  words  he  will  elude  the  Powers,  and  arrive
at  the  Demiurgus  in  the  eighth  sphere,  whom  again  he  must
thus  address :  "  I  am  a  precious  vessel,  superior  to  the  female
power  who  made  thee,  inasmuch  as  thy  mother  knoweth  not
her  own  origin,  whereas  I  know  myself,  and  I  know  whence  I
am ;  and  I  invoke  the  Incorruptible  Wisdom  who  is  in  the
father  and  in  the  mother  of  your  mother  that  hath  no  father,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

nay,  not  even  a  male  consort,  but  being  a  female  sprung  from
a  female  that  created  thee,  though  she  herself  knows  not  her
mother,  but  believes  herself  to  exist  alone.  But  I  invoke  the
mother."  At  this  address  the  Demiurgus  is  struck  with  con
fusion  (as  well  he  might  be),  and  forced  to  acknowledge  the
baseness  of  his  origin  :  whereupon  the  inner  man  of  the  Gnostic
casts  off  his  bondage  as  well  as  his  own  angel,  or  soul,
which  remains  with  the  Demiurgus  for  further  use,  and
ascends  still  higher  into  his  proper  place.  For  every  man  is
made  up  of  body,  soul,  and  inner  man,  this  last  being  the  more
spiritual  nature.  This  same  belief  was  the  popular  one  of  the
Jews,  as  appears  from  Rhoda's  exclamation  at  the  unhoped-for
reappearance  of  Peter,  whom  she  supposed  already  put  to  death.

The  Achamoth  here  mentioned  is  the  Sephandomad  of
Zoroaster,  the  Wisdom  of  the  later  Jews — so  fully  described  by
the  pseudo-Solomon  under  that  title  (vii.  25).  "  She  is  the
Spirit  of  the  virtue  of  God,  the  pure  emanation  of  the  brightness
of  the  Almighty,  the  brightness  of  the  eternal  Light,  the  mirror
without  spot  of  his  majesty,  the  image  of  his  goodness."  "  Wis
dom  hath  made  her  house  upon  seven  pillars."  The  naked  woman,
or  Venus  Anadyouieiie,  so  often  seen  on  these  gems,  is  the  same
idea  expressed  by  the  ancient  Greek  type.  One  given  by  Caylus
(*Reo.  d'Ant.'  vi.  PI.  21)  explains  its  destination  in  terms
sufficiently  clear,  despite  their  corrupt  Byzantine  orthography  :
IAU)  CABACx)  AAONAI  HKAI  EAAAZEIGON  TOT  TAPTAPOT
CKOTIN,  "Jehovah,  Sabaoth,  Lord,  come  and  deliver  me  from
the  darkness  of  Hell !  "

Could  the  long  legends  covering  so  many  of  these  jasper  tablets
be  interpreted,  most  probably  their  purport  would  be  found  of
the  same  nature  with  the  just-cited  Heracleonitan  passport  for
the  Pleroma :  it  were  but  a  natural  precaution  on  his  friends'
part  to  supply  the  deceased  brother  with  a  correct  copy  of  such
long-winded  involved  professions  of  faith,  and  which  otherwise
would  be  extremely  apt  to  escape  his  memory ;  the  more
especially  as  being  only  confided  to  him  by  his  spiritual  guides
when  he  was  already  at  the  last  gasp.

Of  the  practice  itself,  the  origin  undoubtedly  lay  in  the  very
ancient  Egyptian  rule  of  placing  in  the  mummy  cases  those


GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  331

elaborate  «*  Litanies  of  the  Dead  "  of  which  so  many  have  come
down  to  our  times  :*  papyrus  scrolls  containing  the  prayers  to
be  addressed  by  the  soul  to  each  god  whose  "  gate  "  it  has  to
traverse  on  its  way  to  final  rest.  To  prevent  mistakes,  the
portrait  of  each  deity  is  prefixed  to  the  column  of  prayers
due  to  him,  and  this  same  arrangement  is  found  in  the
leaden  scrolls  belonging  to  the  heterogeneous  doctrine  of  the
Gnostics.

The  same  custom  yet  holds  its  ground  in  India,  probably
its  pristine  source.  Tavernier  notices  that  the  Brahmins
placed  on  the  breast  of  the  corpse  seven  pieces  of  paper,
inscribed  with  the  prayers  to  be  uttered  by  the  soul  as  soon  as
released  from  its  corporeal  envelope  by  the  flames  of  the  funeral
pile.f

The  gem-talismans  that  remain  in  such  varied  abundance  are
themselves  recognised  in  the  few  surviving  writings  of  the
Gnostic  teachers.  The  Pistis-Soplda  is  full  of  allusions  to  the
Seals  and  Numbers  of  the  different  ^Eons  and  the  other  Powei  s,J
and  with  the  repeated  promise  of  the  Saviour  to  reveal  these
all  unto  his  hearers ;  a  promise  which,  unfortunately,  is  not
fulfilled  in  the  book  as  it  has  come  down  to  us.  Nevertheless
the  very  allusion  sufficiently  declares  the  sense  in  which  we  are
to  understand  the  C4>PAriC  so  frequently  to  be  seen  on
the  talismans.  The  motive  for  providing  the  defunct  believer

*  "  Papyri,  it  is  well  known,  were  excavating  in  Egypt ;  and  has  been
frequently  kept  in  readiness,  with  published  with  facsimile.  But  the
blank  spaces  for  the  names  and  finest  example  known  is  the  one
occupation  of  the  deceased :  the  preserved  in  the  Soane  Museum,
papyrus  in  fact  formed  part  of  the  hitherto  unpublished,
regular  funeral  appliances.  They  t  The  Lord  Taraka,  if  duly  pro-
were  of  three  classes,  namely  Ritual,  pitiated,  wyill  breathe  into  the  dying
Boolts  of  Transmigrations,  and  Solar  man's  ear  a  mantra  or  charm  of  such
Litanies,  or  descriptions  of  the  power  as  will  secure  him  a  safe
passage  of  the  soul  through  the  passage  to  heaven.
earth  in  the  solar  boat.  These  J  "  Then  they  bring  the  soul  before
highly  curious  MSS.  contain  minute  the  Virgin  of  Light,  and  it  showeth
descriptions  of  all  the  regions  through  unto  the  Virgin  her  own  seal,  her
which  the  soul  was  supposed  to  pass  own  form  of  defence,  &c."  This
after  death." — C.  \V.  Goodwin.  A  very  illustrative  portion  of  the  teach-
MS.  of  this  kind,  written  in  the  ing  of  Valentinus  is  found  in  the
fourth  century  before  our  era,  was  Pistis-Sophia.
found  by  the  Prince  of  \Vales  when


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

with  a  good  supply  of  these  imperishable  credentials  is
sufficiently  explained  by  the  "  Scheme  of  the  Ophites  "  (pub
lished  by  Origen),  which  details  the  prayers  to  be  addressed  to
the  Seven  Planetary  Powers  by  the  released  soul,  in  its  upward
flight.

The  prayer  to  Ildabaoth  contains  this  indication  :  "  0  princi
pal  Spirit  of  the  Pure  Intelligence,  Perfect  Work  in  the  eyes  of
the  Father  and  of  the  Son,  in  presenting  unto  thee  in  this  seal
the  sign  of  Life  open  the  gates  closed  by  thy  power  unto  the
world,  and  freely  traverse  thy  domain."

Again,  in  saluting  lao  (here  taken  from  the  Lunar  Genius)  :
'  Thou  that  presides!  over  the  Mysteries  of  the  Father  and  of
the  Son,  who  sliinest  in  the  night-time,  holding  the  second  rank,
(he  first  Lord  of  Death  !  in  presenting  thee  with  this  thine  own
symbol  swiftly  pass  through  thy  dominions."

To  Sabaoth  :  "  Receive  me,  on  beholding  this  pure  symbol
against  which  thy  Genius  cannot  prevail ;  it  is  made  after  the
image  of  the  type  ;  it  is  the  body  delivered  by  the  Pentad."

To  Orai  (Venus)  :  "  Let  me  pass,  for  thou  seest  the  symbol  of
thy  power  annihilated  by  the  sign  of  the  Tree  of  Life."  (Is
this  sign  the  Cross,  as  Matter  supposes,  or  the  actual  tree
occasionally  to  be  found  on  Gnostic  gems  ?)  And  it  must  be
remembered  that  the  primary  meaning  of  symbolum  is  the  im
pression  of  a  signet,  which  makes  it  more  probable  that  such  is
the  sense  in  which  the  word  is  used  in  all  these  passages.  It
may  further  be  conjectured  that  in  this  conversion  of  the
symbolum  into  a  passport  to  heaven  originated  the  theological
use  of  the  word  to  signify  a  creed  or  summary  of  the  articles  of
Faith.

This  same  service  of  talismans  in  the  next  world  is  clearly
recognised  in  the  Pistis-Sophia  (§  293),  where  Mary  Magdalene
gives  this  curious  version  of  the  business  of  the  tribute-penny  :
"  Thou  hast  said  that  the  soul  giveth  an  account  of  itself,  and
likewise  a  seal  unto  all  the  Rulers  that  be  in  the  regions  of  King
Adamas,  and  giveth  the  account  the  honour  and  the  glory  of  all
the  seals  belonging  unto  them,  and  also  the  hymns  of  the  king
dom  of  Light.  This  therefore  is  the  word  which  thou  spakest
\N  lien  the  stater  was  brought  unto  thee,  and  thou  sawcst  that  it


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  333

was  of  silver  and  likewise  of  copper.*  Thereupon  thou  didst  ask,
Whose  is  this  image  ?  and  they  answered,  Of  the  King.  Then
when  thou  sawest  that  it  was  of  silver  and  also  of  copper,  thou
saidest :  Give  the  part  which  is  the  King's  unto  the  King,  and
the  part  which  is  God's  unto  God.  The  which  mean eth  this:
After  that  the  soul  hath  received  the  Mystery  it  giveth  an
account  of  itself  unto  all  the  Eulers  and  unto  the  dominion  of
King  Adamas,  and  also  giveth  the  glory  unto  those  that  pertain
to  the  Light.  And  thy  saying  that  it  shone,  when  thou  sawest
it,  of  silver  and  copper,  it  is  the  image  and  likeness  of  the  soul.
The  power  of  the  Light  which  is  therein,  the  same  is  the  fine
silver :  but  the  Counterfeit  of  the  Spirit  (Conscience)  is  the  material
copper."

The  grand  doctrine  of  Gnosticism  was  this  :  The  soul  on  being
released  from  the  body  (its  prison-house  and  place  of  torment)
has  to  pass  through  the  regions  of  the  Seven  Powers ;  which  it
cannot do unless impregnated beforehand with knowledge:
otherwise  it  is  seized  upon  and  swallowed  by  the  dragon-formed
Euler of  this world, Satan  Ophiomorphos,  and voided  forth
through  his  tail  upon  earth  again,  where  it  animates  a  swine  or
some  such  beast,  and  repeats  its  career  once  more. But  should
it  be  filled  with  knoivledge,  it  eludes  the Seven  Powers,  and
tramples  upon  the  head  of  Sabaoth  ("  of  whom  they  say  he
hath  the  hair  of  a  woman  ")  and  mounts  up  unto  the  eighth
heaven,  the  abode  of  Barbelo,  the  Universal  Mother,  and  who
according  to  the  Pistis-Sophia  is  the  celestial  Mother  of  the
Saviour. Epiphanius  quotes  from  the  Gospel  of  Philip  another
formula, intended to extort a free passage from the same
Planetary Genii: "The Lord hath  revealed unto me what
words  the  soul  must  use  as  it  ascendeth  up  into  heaven,  and
how it must make answer  unto each one of the Celestial
Virtues. 'I  have  known  myself,  I  have  collected  myself  from
all  parts,  neither  have  I  begotten  sons  unto  the  Ruler  of  this
world,  but  I  have  plucked  up  the  roots,  and  gathered  together
the  scattered  members. I  know  thee  who  thou  art,  for  I  am

*  A curious remark, pointing tetradrachm  of  imperial  times  being
clearly  to Alexandria  as  the  place very  base  silver  indied.
where  this  Gospel  \vas  written,  its


334  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

on^  from  above.'  But  if  convicted  of  having  left  any  offspring
id pon  earth,  the  soul  is  detained  there  until  it  shall  have
collected  all  and  attracted  these  into  itself."

This  "  Self- Collection  "  was  only  to  be  effected  through  the  ob
servance  of  perpetual  chastity,  or  rather  (inevitable  compromise)
the  practice  of  the  various  unnatural  vices  that  regularly  spring
from  such  an  article  of  faith.  If  however  a  woman  of  the
congregation  should  through  want  of  precaution  allow  herself
to  become  pregnant,  the  Elders  produced  abortion,  took  the
foetus  and  pounded  it  up  in  a  mortar  along  with  honey,  pepper,
and  other  spices  and  perfumery.  Then  this  "  congregation  of
swine  and  dogs  "  assembled ;  and  every  one  dipping  his  finger
into  the  mess,  tasted  thereof.  This  they  called  their  Perfect
Passover,  saying  :  "  We  have  not  been  deceived  by  the  Ruler  of
concupiscence,  but  have  gathered  up  again  the  backsliding  of
our  brother."  The  very  plain-spoken  Epiphanius  gives  exact
particulars,  not  to  be  put  into  a  modern  tongue,  of  the  mode  in
which  the  faithful  observed  in  one  sense  their  vow  of  perpetual
chastity,  without  renouncing  the  joys  of  Venus.  This  he
illustrates  by  the  singular  explanation  then  current  of  the
ancient  myth  of  Saturn's  devouring  his  own  offspring,  against
which  interpretation  and  the  practice  thereon  founded,  even
Clemens  had  found  it  needful  to  warn  the  orthodox  two  centuries

before.

To  exemplify  the  punishment  ordained  for  having  done  the
work  of  the  Demiurgus  by  leaving  offspring  upon  earth,  the
Ophites  told  a  wild  legend  how  that  Elias  himself  was  turned
back  from  the  gates  of  heaven,  although  to  his  own  conscience  a
pure  virgin,  because  a  female  demon  had  gathered  up  of  his
seed  during  his  sleep,  and  formed  infants  therewith,  which  to
his  unutterable  confusion  she  then  and  there  produced  in
testimony  of  his  sin.  Hence  springs  the  medieval  notion  of  the
Succuboe,  nocturnal  temptresses  of  the  continent ;  although  these
were  supposed  to  do  the  work  of  their  father  the  Devil  in  a
different  way,  by  procuring  him  the  needful  supplies  for  his
amours  with  the  witches,  to  whom  he  stood  in  the  ex-officio
relation  of  paramour.

All  this  is  in  strict  accordance  with  what  is found in the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  3H5

fragments  of  the  "  Gospel  to  tho  Egyptians  "  ;  for  Clemens
(Stromata  iii.)  quotes  therefrom  this  dictum  of  the  Saviour's  :
"  When  Salome  asked  the  Lord  how  long  shall  Death  prevail?
He  answered  unto  her,  So  long  as  ye  women  do  bring  forth  chil
dren.  Wherefore  she  said,  Then  I  have  done  well  in  not  bearing
children,  seeing  that  there  is  no  necessity  for  generation.  To
which  the  Lord  answered,  Feed  upon  every  herb,  but  that
which  hath  bitterness,  eat  thou  not.  Again  when  Salome  asked
when  the  things  should  be  known  concerning  which  she  in
quired,  the  Lord  answered,  When  ye  shall  not  need  a  covering
for  your  nakedness  ;  when  the  two  shall  become  one,  the  male
with  the  female,  neither  male  nor  female."  It  is  to  these  over
strained  rules  of  morality  that  St.  Paul  alludes  when  he  ex
postulates  with  the  Colossians  (ii.  20)  asking  them,  "  Why  are
ye  subject  to  ordinances  (or  rather,  make  laws  for  yourselves
without  any  warrant),  namely,  touch  not  (women),  taste  not
(flesh),  handle  not  (things  unclean)."

From  the  consideration  of  the  value  and  use  of  these  Gnostic
Symbols  in  the  world  to  come,  we  are  naturally  led  to  inquire
in  what  manner  they  were  employed  by  their  owners  in  this.
The  meaning  of  the  word  itself  has  gone  through  many  tran
sitions.  "Symbolism"  properly  signified  the  contribution  of
each  member  towards  the  expenses  of  a  Greek  drinking-party.
For  this  purpose  each  pledged  his  signet-ring  to  the  caterer
and  afterwards  redeemed  it  by  paying  his  quota  of  the  bill.
For  this  reason  Plautus  transfers  the  name  of  symboluin  to  the
ring  itself.  The  signet  being  considered  the  most  trustworthy
of  all  credentials,  the  word  came  to  signify  any  token  serving
for  the  purpose  of  a  credential.  For  example,  Caylus  figures
(Rec.  V.  pi.  55),  a  bronze  right-hand,  the  natural  size,  inscribed
on  the  palm  ZTMBOAON  HPOZ  OTEAATNIOTZ,  "Credentials
to  the  Yelaunii"  (a  Gallic  tribe  whose  seat  was  round
Antibes).*  The  wrist  at  the  section  is  closed,  forming  a  base,

*  The  best,  as  well  as  the  most  two  fishes,  placed  side  by  side,  with

interesting  example  of  a  symbolism  a  palm-branch  between  them ;  the
extant,  is  the  one  figured  by  Caylus,  I

without  any  conception  of  its  value  reverse  is  inscribed  AA€A<t>OT.
(PI.  87,  i.)-  It  is  an  ivory  disk,  two

inches in diameter, engraved  with  The-well  known  emblems  show  this


336  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

so  that  the  hand  could  stand  upright  of  itself.  A  pair  of
clasped  hands,  symbol  of  faith  (still  called  in  Italy  fede\  was
the  common  present  from  one  nation  or  army  to  another  on
making  alliance :  "  Miserat  civitas  Lingonum  veteri  institute
dono  legionibus  dextras  hospitii  insigne"  (Tac.  Hist.  i.  54).
From  the  nature  of  the  case  such  presents  must  have  been
made  in  the  precious  metals,  and  consequently  none  have  been
preserved.  This  connexion  of  ideas  shows  plainly  why  in
ecclesiastical  language  symbolum  stands  for  a  profession  of
faith,  a  creed,  i.e.  gr.  "  Symbolum  Apostolicum."  And  so  "by
degrees  the  word  degenerated  into  its  present  sense  of  any
token  denoting  an  idea,  more  especially  a  religious  one.

Emblem  again  has  passed  through  equal  vicissitudes.  At
first,  a  little  silver  chasing,  intended  for  letting  into  plate  as
an  embellishment  of  the  surface — which  the  term  e/x^A^/xa
neatly  expresses — the  designs  being  always  mythological,  its
name  remained,  after  the  fashion  had  expired,  to  denote  any
representation  of  that  nature.  There  is,  however,  a  distinction
in  the  real  meaning  of  emblem  and  symbol ;  the  former  expressing
by  actual  representation,  the  latter  by  hieroglyphs,  the  idea
they  convey.  Thus  the  emblem  of  Victory  is  a  winged  female
holding  a  palm  ;  the  symbol  of  Victory  is  the  palm  by  itself.

The  BAMBINO — the  favourite  idol  of  the  women  of  Rome —
bears,  in  its  type  and  decoration,  the  most  convincing  of  all
testimony  as  to  the  real  source  of  the  religion  in  whose
pantheon  it  plays  so  prominent  a  part.  It  is  a  wooden  figure,
about  two  feet  high,  now  passing  for  the  vera  effigies  of  the
Infant  Jesus ;  but  to  any  eye  acquainted  with  Indian  art,  an
unmistakable  copy  of  the  Infant  Buddha.  The  figure,  in
almost  full  relief,  stands  in  front  face,  with  arms  crossed  on
the  breast,  and  holding  the  lotus  flower  in  the  one  hand,  in  the
regular  attitude  of  the  Hindoo  god.  But  the  most  striking
feature  in  the  design  is  the  shape  of  the  background,  which  has
no  prototype  in  Roman  art,  but  is  cut  into  the  so-called  "  pine-


ticket  to  have  been  the  pass  of  some  as  his  introduction  to  the  faithful  in
"  Brother  in  Christ  Jesus,"  in  the  whatever  part  he  might  require  their
primitive  ages  of  the  Church,  serving  help.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  337

apple  "  outline,  which  invariably  accompanies  the  sacred  images
of  India.  On  the  head  is  a  crown,  in  the  Oriental  style,  and
the  close-fitting  garment,  reaching  from  neck  to  ankle,  and  now
passing  for  the  swaddling-clothes  of  the  baby,  is  profusely
studded  with  precious  stones— the  offerings  of  a  later  time.  The
very  tradition  as  to  its  place  of  manufacture  supplies  an  inkling
of  the  truth  ;  for  it  is  said  to  be  the  work  of  a  monk  at
Jerusalem,  and  carved  out  of  one  of  the  sacred  olive-trees.  The
pious  artist  must  have  been  inspired  by  the  sight  of  the  Indian
prototype,  for  the  resemblance  is  far  too  close  to  be  accidental,  if
indeed,  the  whole  affair  be  not  another  instance  of  a  "  christened
Jove."

The  very  nature  of things renders it  a  necessity  for  the
members  of  every  secret  society  to  possess  means  for  mutual
recognition that shall escape the observation of the outer
world. The partakers of  the Eleusinian Mysteries,  appear,
from  certain  allusions  in  the  classics,  to  have  been  furnished
by  their  sponsors  with  something  of  the  kind. The  refusal
to  wear  a  garland  at  a  feast  was  accepted as the  «gn  of  a
Mithraic  brother. Certain  it  is  that  our  popular  notion  about
the  "Masonic Grip"  was equally  current as  applied  to  the
Gnostics  in  the  times  of  Epiphanius. "  On  the  arrival  of  any
stranger  belonging  to  the  same  sect,  they  have  a  sign  given  by
the  man  to  the  woman,  and  vice  versa. In  holding  out  the  hand
under  pretence  of  saluting  each  other,  they  feel  and  tickle  it
in  a  particular  manner,  underneath  the  palm,  and  by  that  means
discover  whether  the  new-comer  belongs  to  the  same  society.
Upon  this,  Lowever  poor  they  may  be,  they  serve  up  to  him  a
sumptuous feast,  with  abundance  of  meats  and  wine. And
after  they  are  well  filled  the  host  rises,  leaving  his  wife  behind,
bidding  her, '  Show  thy  charity  unto  this  our  brother,' "  &c.,
carrying  out  his  hospitality  to  an  extent  that  in our  selfish
times no one can expect to meet  with unless amongst  the
Esquimaux.

As  may  well  be  supposed,  these  symbola  are  Avidely  diffused  ;
for  Gnosticism  was  more  than  co-extensive  with  the  empire  of
Koine,  and  long  survived  her  fall.  Besides  our  guns,  plates  of
bronze  and  lead  (and  oven  of  gold  in  the  remarkable  example


338  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

found  near  Carnarvon),  and  rude  copper  medallions,  engraved
with  similar  devices,  are constantly  disinterred  from  ancient
cemeteries,  where  they  had  so  long  protected  the repose  of
their  original  possessors. Of  that  rarer  class,  the  medallions,
the  most  interesting known to me,  was  found  in  Provence
(Praun  Cabinet). It  shows  in  intaglio  the  Abraxas god,  for
reverse,  the  triple  Hecate,  executed  with  considerable  spirit:
types  well  illustrating  the  syncretistic  nature  of  the  creed  by
this union of  an ancient and a newly-devised type. The
sepulchre  of  Maria,  wife  of  the  most  orthodox  Honorius,  con
tained,  amongst  a  variety  of  amuletic  figures  (or  perhaps  toys —
little  animals,  mice,  &c.),  carved  in  crystal and  agate,  a  gold
plate,  inscribed  with  the  names  of  the  "Angels  of  the  Presence."
On  account  of  the great  interest of  this  discovery, I have
inserted  a  complete  translation of  Fauno's  account,  the  only
description ever  penned  of  the  rifling  of  an  imperial  tomb.
And  when  Bishop  Seffred's  coffin  (deceased  1159)  was  opened
in Chichester  Cathedral,  upon his  bony  finger still lay  the
episcopal  ring,  set  with  an  Abraxas  jasper,  no  doubt  recom
mended  to  him  in  life  and death  by  the  numerous  virtues  so
particularly  set  forth  by  Camillus  Leonardi. When  did  the
belief  in  the  virtue of these  talismans  really  expire? The
Young  Pretender,  with  the  superstition  inherent  in  his  family,
had  sought  to  enlist  in  his  service  the  mighty  Abraxas  himself
for  his  ill-starred expedition. In his baggage, captured at
Cullodcii  by  General  Belfort,  was found  a  bloodstone,  set  in
silver  as  a  pendant,  engraved  with  the  well-known  Pantheus.
and for reverse the naked Venus, Acliamotli, legend ATITA
(Figured  by  Walsh,  pi.  7).

Provence  is  yet  a  fruitful  source  of  these  interesting  memorials
of  the  wide-spread  theosophy.  Gnosticism  from  the  beginning
took  root  and  flourished  in  Southern  Gaul,  as  the  elaborate
treatise  of  Ireneeus  attacking  it,  as  no  newly-invented  thing,
very  clearly  demonstrates.  Its  success  was  probably  due  to  the
close  affinity  of  its  leading  doctrines  to  the  Mithraic  and  original
Druidical  systems  previously  reigning  there.  Later  still,  in  the
middle  of  the  fourth  century,  a  new  form  of  Gnosticism,  broached
by  Piriscllian,  Bishop  of  Avila,  who  was  put  to  death  for  his


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  339

pains  by  the  British  emperor  Magnus  Maximus.  Gibbon's  note
upon  the  unlucky  heresiarch  is  so  characteristic  of  his  style  that
I  cannot  forbear  quoting  it  :  "  The  bishopric  of  Avila  (in  Old
Castile)  is  now  worth  20,000  ducats  a  year,  and  is  therefore
much  less  likely  to  produce  the  author  of  a  new  heresy."  That
Spain  also  had,  long  before  Priscillian's  preaching,  received  and
warmly  embraced  that  of  Basilides,  although  so  far  removed
from  its  fountain-head,  is  apparent  from  a  passage  in  Jerome's
29th  letter  to  Theodora  :  "  Our  friend  Licinius,  when  that  most
foul  heresy  of  Basilides  was  raging  throughout  Spain,  and  like
a  pestilence  and  murrain  was  devastating  all  the  province
between  the  Pyrenees  and  the  Ocean,  held  fast  the  purity  of  the
Christian  faith,  far  from  receiving  Amargel,  Barbelo,  Abraxas,
Balsamus,  the  ridiculous  Leusiboras,  and  the  other  such-like
monstrosities."

That  Britain  had  to  some  extent  received  the  same  doctrines,
the  Carnarvon  gold  plaque  is  sufficient  evidence.  And  its
existence  throws  light  upon  the  singular  fact  mentioned  by
Matthew  Paris,  that  when  Eadred,  in  collecting  building
materials  for  Ins  conventual  church,  was  pulling  up  the  Roman
foundations  of  Verulamium,  he  came  upon  a  little  cupboard,
"  armariolum,"  in  the  thickness  of  an  immense  wall  containing
scrolls  in  an  unknown  tongue.  At  last  a  very  aged  monk,
Unwona  by  name,  made  them  out  to  be  written  in  the  ancient
British  language,  and  containing  invocations  to  the  gods  formerly
worshipped  in  the  place.  But  Verulamium  was  so  entirely
Roman,  as  far  as  its  public  edifices  were  concerned,  that  the
use  of  the  native  language  in  any  documents  accompanying  the
foundation  of  a  temple  is  in  the  highest  degree  improbable  ;  the
regular  Gnostic  Greek  would  be  equally  puzzling  to  the  old  Saxon
monk,  and  his  explanation  was  a  safe  cloak  for  his  ignorance.
The  late  period  of  the  Roman  occupation,  when  Gnosticism
most  flourished,  will  account  for  the  preservation  of  "  scrolls  "
(parchment  no  doubt)  through  the  few  centuries  intervening
before  the  abbotship  of  Eadred.

It  is  more  than  probable  that  such  doctrines  lurked  un
noticed  amongst  the  native  Gallo-Romans,  during  the  times  of
the  Arian  Gothic  kings,  and  did  no  more  than  revive  into  the

z  2


340


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


flourishing  Manicheism  of  the  Albigenses  in  the  twelfth
century.  The  fact  of  these  sectaries  having  received  the  same
share  of  persecution  from  Catholics  as  the  "Waldenses  them
selves  is  not  alone  sufficient  to  prove  them  equally  good
Protestants  with  the  latter;  though  that  is  now  taken  for
granted,  especially  by  expounders  of  the  Apocalypse,  when
hard  put  to  it  to  find  the  required  "  Two  Witnesses "  against
the  Scarlet  Lady.

Gnosticism  has  left  traces  of  itself,  whether  by  direct  or
indirect  descent  amongst  those  mysterious  sects  of  the  Libanus,
the  Druses  and  Anseyrets.  As  late  as  Justinian's  reign,  ac
cording  to  Procopius,  no  fewer  than  a  million  Polytheists,
Manicheans  and  Samaritans  (the  last  also  a  sect  of  Gnostics)*
were  exterminated  in  Syria  alone,  during  the  systematic  perse
cution,  so  long  carried  on  by  this  pedantic  bigot.  As  that
region  soon  afterwards  fell  under  the  more  tolerant  Caliphs,  who
never  troubled  themselves  about  the  religion  of  their  subjects,
provided  their  tribute  were  punctually  paid,  these  doctrines
may  very  well  have  come  down  in  some  sort  to  our  days,
considering  the  secluded  position  of  the  people  holding  them,
and  the  tenacity  of  life  possessed  by  every  well-defined  system
of  religious  ideas.

*  And  the  most  ancient  of  all,  for  they  claimed  Simon  Magus  for  their
founder.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  341


GNOSTIC  THEOGONY.

The  several  grades  in  the  Gnostic  Theogony,  through  all  of
which  the  soul  had  to  pass  before  it  could  attain  to  supreme
perfection,  are  briefly  set  before  us  in  this  passage  of  the  Pistis
Sophia  (247)  :—

"  And  when  the  Saviour  had  said  all  these  things  unto  His
disciples,  Andrew  came  forward  and  spoke  :  '  Lord,  be  not
wroth  with  me,  but  have  compassion  upon  me  and  reveal  the
mystery  of  the  word  which  I  will  ask  Thee,  otherwise  it  is  a
hard  thing  in  my  sight  and  I  understand  it  not.'  Then  the
Saviour  answered  and  said  unto  him :  4  Inquire  what  thou
wouldst  inquire  and  I  will  declare  the  same  unto  thee,  face
to  face,  and  without  a  parable.'  Then  Andrew  answered  and
said  :  '  Lord,  I  wonder  and  marvel  greatly  how  men  that  be
in  this  world,  when  they  are  departed  from  out  of  this  body
of  Matter,  and  have  gone  out  of  the  world,  how  shall  they
pass  through  these  .firmanents,  and  all  these  rulers,  and  lords,
and  gods,  and  all  these  Great  Invisible  Ones,  and  all  these
that  belong  to  the  Middle-space,  and  those  that  belong  to
the  place  of  them  upon  the  right  hand,  and  all  the  great
emanations  of  the  same,  so  that  they  may  come  within
(beyond)  them  all,  so  that  they  may  inherit  the  kingdom  of
Light?  This  business,  therefore,  Lord,  is  full  of  trouble  in  my
sight.'  When  Andrew  had  thus  spoken,  the  spirit  of  the
Saviour  was  moved  within  Him,  and  he  cried  out  and  said  :
'  How  long  shall  I  bear  with  you,  how  long  shall  I  suffer  you  !
Do  you  then  not  understand  at  all,  and  are  ye  still  ignorant  ?
Know  ye  not  and  do  ye  not  understand  that  ye  are  all  angels,
and  archangels,  and  rulers,  and  lords,  and  gods,  and  the  other
Powers,  and  the  glory  thereof;  you  from  yourselves  and  in
yourselves  in  turn,  proceeding  out  of  one  mass,  and  one
matter,  and  one  being,  and  all  proceeding  out  of  one  confusion.*

*  Kepacruos,  i.e.  the  mixture  of  which  it  was  the  object  of  the
the  Light  Divine  with  brute  Matter,  Saviour's  coming  to  rectify.


342  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS

And  by  the  commandment  of  the  First  Mystery  this  confusion
must  needs  be,  until  the  great  emanations  of  Light  and  the
glory  of  the  same  shall  have  cleansed  it;  and  they  shall
cleanse  it  not  of  themselves,  but  through  the  compulsion  of
the  Great  Ineffable  One.  And  they  have  not  received  torments,
neither  have  they  changed  their  places  at  all,  neither
have  they  despoiled  themselves,  nor  transformed  themselves
into  various  figures,  neither  have  they  been  in  the  last
affliction.  For  this  cause  chiefly  ye  are  the  dregs  of  the
Treasury -house,  and  ye  are  the  dregs  of  them  that  pertain  to
the  right  hand,  and  ye  are  the  dregs  of  the  great  Invisible
Ones,  and  of  all  the  Eulers,  and  in  a  word  ye  are  the  dregs  of
them  all.  And  ye  were  in  great  sorrows,  and  afflictions,  and
transformations,  and  in  sundry  shapes  of  this  world;  and  by
reason  of  these  sorrows,  ye  were  in  agony  and  fought  with
this  world  and  all  the  Matter  that  is  therein,  and  ye  did  not
slacken  your  hands  in  fighting  against  it  until  ye  had  found
out  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  Light,  which  rendered
you,  who  fought,  a  pure  Light,  and  ye  were  made  the  pure
Light.' "

All  which  implies  the  grand  idea  that  Man,  although  made
of  inferior,  though  cognate  stuff,  to  the  Angelic  Powers,  is
susceptible,  through  the  attainment  of  knowledge,  of  a  perfection
superior  to  theirs.


THE SCHEME OF THE OPHITES.

Gnostic  symbols,  with  their  uses  in  this  life  and  in  that  to
come  have  thus  far  been  the  subject  of  our  investigation  ;  which
naturally  leads  us  to  consider  the  ideas  that  their  devisers
entertained  of  the  constitution  of  the  next  world  and  of  the
nature  of  the  soul  itself.  As  to  the  former  of  these  deeply
interesting  questions,  the  Gnosis  specially  laboured  to  afford  the
exactest  information  to  its  disciples ;  and  in  this  class  the  one
preserved  by  Origen  (in  Celsum  vi.),  leaves  nothing  to  be
desired  in  point  of  fulness,  and  may  confidently  be  accepted  as
the  most  authoritative  of  all  such  celestial  cartes  de  route.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  343

This  learned  Father  had,  by  some  means  or  other,  become
possessed  of  a  parchment  chart  on  which  were  depicted  the
successive  stages  of  the  soul's  heavenward  journey,  with  the
several  Powers  *  it  must  encounter  in  its  flight,  and  the  proper
invocations  (specimens  of  which  I  have  already  given)
whereby  it  should  extort  permission  to  traverse  their  do
minions.  This  chart  was  known  to  the  faithful  as  the
"Schema,  or  Diagramma,  of  the  Ophites."  Amongst  these
invocations  the  one  addressed  to  lao,  genius  of  the  moon,  is
peculiarly  important  as  illustrating  the  use  of  the  most
numerous  class  of  the  talismans  we  are  considering.  "  0  thou
that  president  over  the  mysteries  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son,
lao  who  shinest  in  the  night,  who  holdest  the  second  place,  the
First  Lord  of  Death,  who  makest  part  of  that  which  is  without
God !  In  presenting  to  thee  thine  own  memorial  (or  likeness)
as  a  token  (or  passport)  I  swiftly  traverse  thy  domain  after
having  conquered  through  the  Word  of  Life  that  which  was
born  of  Thee."  The  MSS.  read  rov  I&LOV  VTTO  vovv  <™//,j3oAov,
which  has  no  meaning,  but  can  only  be  the  corruption  of
rryv  ISiav  vTrovo'iav,  a  word  often  used  by  Plutarch  in  the  sense  of
symbol.  Now  what  else  could  this  "  memorial  "  of  lao  be  but
his  own  image  engraved  in  gems?  This  deity  is  btyled  "  Lord
of  Death,"  because  the  moon  (Isis)  presides  over  the  birth,
development  and  change,  of  which  death  is  the  necessary  con
sequence,  of  things  terrestrial.

*  This  was  merely  an  adaptation  have  had  a  Chaldsoan  origin,  even
to  the  new  notions  of  the  sect  of  the  more  a.icient  than  the  Egyptian,
old  Egyptian  ritual  always  placed,  Lane-Fox  and  others  have  translated
entire  or  in  part,  within  the  mummy-  a  tahlet  giving  an  account  of  the
case,  and  entitled,  "  The  Book  of  descent  of  the  goddess  Ishtar  into
the  Gates,  concerning  the  manifesta-  Hades,  "  the  Land  of  no  Keturn."
tion  unto  the  Light."  These  Gates,  The  Lord  of  Earth  gives  her  a  green
leading  to  the  palace  of  Osiris,  were  bough  of  the  If  tree,  and  she  passes
one-aad-twenty  iu  number,  and  were  successively  through  the  Seven  Gates,
guarded  each  by  its  particular  deity,  surrendering  at  each  in  order,  her
to  be  duly  addressed  in  his  turn.  crown,  ear-rings,  head-jewels,  front-
The  papyrus  of  Petamenoph,  other-  lets,  finger  and  toe-rings,  and  neck-
wise  Ainmuiiius  (d.  under  Hadrian),  lace.  The  Lord  of  Hades  gives  her
has  been  admirably  explained  and  a  cup  of  the  Water  of  Life,  and  she
translated  by  Champollion,  and  pub-  returns,  receiving  back  her  jewels  in
lished  in  Caillaud's  'Voyage  a  the  same  order  in  which  she  gave
Meroe,'  iv.  p.  22.  Or  the  belief  may  them  up.


344


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


Of  the  theory  therein  embodied,  much  was  evidently  derived
from  the  same  source  as  the  Neo-Platonic  doctrine  concerning
the  planetary  origin  of  the  soul's  faculties,  which  shall  be  related
further  on.  The  chart  itself  was  founded  on  that  essential
doctrine  of  Gnosticism,  that  the  soul,  released  from  the  body,
mounted  upwards,  eager  for  absorption  into  the  Infinite  God
head,  or  "  Boundless  Light,"  that  summum  bonum  of  Oriental
aspiration  (the  Buddist  Nirwana  "  perfect  Repose,  the  Epicu
rean  Indolent  ia  ")  ;  but  on  its  way  WHS  obliged  to  traverse  the
successive  regions  of  the  planets,  each  ruled  by  its  presiding
genius.  These  genii  were  of  a  nature  somewhat  material,  and
therefore  malignant,  and  in  this  respect  corresponding  to  the
Seven  Devs,  Ahrimaii's  ministers,  who  according  to  Zoroaster
are  chained  each  to  his  own  planet.  To  obtain  the  indispensable
permission  of  transit,  a  different  adjuration  to  each  Power  was
required ;  all  which  have  been  already  given  from  Origen's
copy  of  the  Chart.  Their  names  were  put  down  therein,  as
Adonai,  genius  of  the  Sun,  lao  of  the  Moon,  Eloi  of  Jupiter.
Sabao  of  Mars,  Orai  of  Venus,  Astaphai  of  Mercury,  and
Ildabaoth  of  Saturn.*

All  these  names  are  to  be  read,  more  or  less  commonly,  upon
our  talismans,  although  probably  used  there  in  a  different  sense
from  that  accepted  by  the  author  of  the  Diairramma.  The
Jewish  angels  Michael,  Gabriel,  Surid,  Raphael,  Thantabaoth,
and  Erataoth,  were  likewise  inscribed  as  names  of  the  genii
presiding  over  the  constellations,  the  Bear,  Serpent,  Eagle,
Lion,  Dog,  Bull.  These  notions  are  manifestly  of  Magian
root,  acquired  by  the  Jews  during  the  long  period  that  their
country  was  a  province  of  the  Persian  Empire,  and  had  grown
into  an  essential  article  of  religion.

St.  Paul  found  it  needful  to  warn  his  flock  against  the
"  worshipping  of  Angels ;  "  nevertheless,  the  adoration  and  the
multiplication  of  their  names  went  on  augmenting  to  that
pitch,  that  a  Council  held  under  Pope  Zachary  reduced  them,  as
objects  of  worship  to  three  only,  Michael,  Gabriel,  Raphael.

*  The  Kitual  above  cited  contains  the  defunct  to  the  guardians  of  the
regularly  eight  invocations  addressed  same  numher  of  regions  over  whom
to  Thoth,  recommending  the  soul  of  he  is  the  president.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  345

This  retrenchment  of  the  heavenly  host  was  endorsed  by  a
capitulary  of  Charlemagne's  issued  from  Aix-la-Chapelle.  In
the  Diagram  under  consideration,  Michael  was  typified  by  a
lion,  Suriel  by  an  ox,  Raphael  by  a  serpent,  Gabriel  by  an
eagle,  Thantabaoth  by  a  bear,  Onioth  or  Zartaoth  by  an  ass.

The  reward  promised  to  the  Angel  of  the  Church  at  Thyatira
(Rev.  ii.  28),  "  And  I  will  give  him  the  Morning  Star,"
seems  to  be  connected  with  the  same  belief  in  the  Planetary
Presidents.  Dante,  in  his  Paradiso,  going  doubtless  upon
old  tradition,  makes  Mercury  the  abode  of  spirits  moved  to
glorious  deeds  in  life  by  the  love  of  fame;  Venus,  of  true
lovers  ;  Luna,  of  theologians;  Mars,  of  martyrs  for  the  Faith  ;
Jupiter  of  good  princes;  Saturn  of  such  as  have  led  a  con
templative  and  recluse  life.

The  above-quoted  names  of  the  Planetary  Genii  were  in  the
Jewish  religion  either  titles  and  attributes  of  the  Most  High,
or  else  of  his  chief  ministering  spirits ;  but  in  the  Gnostic
Scheme  they  had  been  degraded  from  their  high  estate,  and
reduced  into  secondary  deities  of  a  mixed  nature,  partaking
of  good  as  well  as  of  evil,  yet  all  equally  anxious  to  win  souls
from  Abraxas,  the  proper  lord  and  creator  of  the  universe.
The  only  explanation  for  such  a  misapplication  of  the  sacred
titles  is  a  very  brief  one;  these  semi-Buddhist  philosophers
who  found  the  root  of  all  evil  in  Matter,  and  consequently  in
the  material  creation,  employed  these  old  hallowed  names  to
denote  the  agents  of  the  Creator,  who  on  account  of  this  their
office  were  regarded  as  mere  demons ;  and  by  an  exactly  similar
process  they  are  found  misappropriating  the  most  sacred  names
of  the  Christian  revelation.  But  of  this  blasphemous  perversion
and  wanton  desecration  of  the  ancient  terminology  no  trace  is
to  be  discovered  upon  our  talismans,  their  makers  belonging  to
the  Kabbalistic  School  of  Alexandria,  which  reconciling  Moses
with  Zoroaster,  continued  to  employ  these  appellations  in
their  primary  time-honoured  sense.

The  source  of  this  notion  concerning  the  Planetary  Rulers
can  be  traced  very  far  back.  The  power  of  Ildabaoth,  or
Saturn,  and  his  sons  over  the  soul,  as  well  as  the  astrological
notion  about  the  influence  of  the  stars  over  man's  destiny,  are


316


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


clearly  part  and  parcel  of  what  the  Alexandrian  Platonists  had
taught  concerning  the  planetary  origin  of  the  soul  and  its
faculties,  thus  expounded  by  Macrobius  (Som.  Scip.  i.  12)  :
"  The  soul  on  its  descent  from  the  One  and  Indivisible  source
of  its  being  in  order  to  be  united  to  the  body,  passes  through
the  Milky  Way  into  the  Zodiac  at  their  intersection  in  Cancer
and  Capricorn,  called  the  Gates  of  the  Sun,  because  the  two
solstices  are  placed  in  these  signs.  Through  Cancer,  the  '  Gate
of  Man,'  the  soul  descends  upon  Earth,  the  which  is  spiritual
death.  Through  Capricorn,  the  '  Gate  of  the  Gods,'  it  reascends
up  into  heaven;  its  new  birth  taking  place  upon  its  release
from  the  body.  So  soon  as  the  soul  has  left  Cancer  and  the
Milky  Way,  it  begins  to  lose  its  divine  nature,  and  arriving
at  Leo  enters  upon  the  first  phase  of  its  future  condition  here
below.  During  its  downward  progress,  the  soul,  at  first  a
sphere  in  form,  is  elongated  into  a  cone,  and  now  begins  to  feel
the  influence  of  Matter,  so  that  on  joining  the  body  it  is
intoxicated  and  stupefied  by  the  novel  draught.  This  condition
is  typified  by  the  Crater  of  Bacchus  placed  in  the  heavens
between  Cancer  and  Leo.

"  The  soul  thus  descending,  as  it  passes  through  each  sphere
receives  successive  coatings,  as  it  were,  of  a  luminous  body,  and
is  furnished  at  the  same  time  with  the  several  faculties  it  has
ta  exercise  during  its  probation  upon  Earth.  Accordingly,  in
Saturn,  it  is  supplied  with  reason  and  intelligence ;  in  Jupiter,
with  the  power  of  action  ;  in  Mars,  with  the  irascible  principle  ;
in  the  Sun,  with  sensation  and  speculation  ;  in  Venus,  with
the  appetites;  in  Mercury,  with  the  means  of  declaring  and
expressing  thoughts  ;  in  the  Moon,  with  the  faculty  of  generating
and  augmenting  the  body."  Hence,  as  the  Planets  contain  all
the  elements  that,  so  to  speak,  make  up  the  Inner  Man,  the
genii,  their  rulers  ("  Lords  of  Death,"  as  Valentinus  calls  them),
exercise  their  tyranny  over  the  soul  through  the  medium  of
these  faculties,  so  long  as  the  soul  is  encrusted  with  their  con
tributions  during  its  imprisonment  in  the  body.

It  is  curious  to  compare  with  this  Grecian  theory  the
"  Doctrine  of  the  Servants,  of  Saturn,"  dwellers  in  the  farthest
North  (unmistakably  a  fragment  of  Druidical  lore),  preserved  to


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  347

us  by  Plutarch  in  his  treatise  'On  the  Face  in  the  Moon.'
They  taught  that  in  the  generation  of  man,  the  Earth  supplied
the  body,  the  Moon  the  i/^x>7,  the  Sun  the  vovs.  What  the
i//vx?7  is  to  the  body,  the  same  is  the  voCs  to  the  i//vx?J.  This
composite  nature  undergoes  a  double  death.  In  the  first,
Demetor,  whose  companion  is  the  Earthly,  or  Supernal,  Hermes,
forcibly  separates  the  i/^x??  (animal  soul)  from  the  body.  This
soul,  after  a  certain  penance  in  the  Middle  Sphere,  in  order  to
purify  it  from  the  pollution  of  the  flesh,  is  caught  up  into  the
Moon,  and  passes  through  the  Earth's  shadow  during  an  eclipse,
after  a  probation  proportionate  in  length  of  time  unto  its
deserts ;  whereas,  the  wicked,  if  they  try  to  enter  before  their
purification  be  completed,  are  scared  away  by  the  terrific  Face.
The  good  abide  in  the  Moon,  in  the  enjoyment  of  perfect
tranquillity,  and  becoming  Sat/xoi/e?  or  genii,  busy  themselves
with  the  regulation  of  human  affairs  upon  earth,  rendering
oracles  and  similar  services  to  mankind.  But  should  these
beatified  spirits  misconduct  themselves,  they  are  put  again  into
a  human  body,  and  sent  down  to  Earth.  (This  is  the  very
doctrine  of  Manes,  who  made  the  light  of  the  Moon  to  depend
upon  the  brightness  of  the  blessed  one  therein  resident;  a
theory  which  Epiphanius  triumphantly  overthrows  by  asking
how  the  luminary  was  supplied  during  the  eight  centuries
that  elapsed  between  the  Creation  and  the  death  of  Adam  ?)

But  after  a  certain  time,  the  i/o{k  aspires  to  reascend  to  its
fountain  head  the  Sun,  whereupon  Persephone,  with  her  col
league  the  Celestial  Hermes,  separates  it  with  gentleness  and  by
slow  degrees  from  the  grosser  i/^x7?-  This  is  the  Second  Death  :
the  vovs  flying  up  to  the  Sun,  but  the  i/a;x?/  remaining  in  the
Moon  in  a  dreamy  sort  of  existence,  until  gradually  absorbed
into  her  substance,  exactly  as  the  Earth  gradually  absorbs  into
herself  the  remains  of  the  body.  Calm  and  philosophic  souls
are  easily  absorbed ;  but  active,  passionate,  erotic  natures  with
great  difficulty  ;  they  wander  about  in  midspace,  divested  of
the  vows,  becoming  Tityi  and  Typlioncs  ;*  throwing  confusion

*  Names  of  the  chief  giants  who  as  that  in  the  Book  of  Enoch  :
warred  against  Jupiter.  The  legend  "  And  the  Giants  who  were  born  of
clearly  comes  from  the  same  source  the  spirit  and  of  flesh  shall  be  called


348  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

into  oracles,  as  the  so-called  Typhon  does  at  Delphi,  until  in
the  end  they  likewise  are  drawn  back  and  attracted  into  the
substance  of  the  Moon.

Justinus  Kerner,  in  his  treatise  '  Die  Seherin  von  Prevorst,'
improving  upon  the  old  notion,  most  ingeniously  anatomises
the  Inner  Man,  and  makes  him  to  consist  of  three  members,
Seele,  Nerven-Geist,  Geisi.  The  Nerven-Geist,  or  nervous
energy,  being  of  a  grosser  nature,  continues  united  with
the  Seele  after  its  separation  from  the  body,  rendering  it
capable  of  becoming  visible  to  the  living  in  the  form  of  an
apparition,  and  enabling  it  in  other  ways  to  affect  material
objects,  to  make  noises,  move  about  articles  of  furniture,  in
short,  to  commit  the  various  annoyances  comprehended  under
the  term  "  es  spukt."  And  here  be  it  observed  the  commonness
of  such  visitations  in  Germany  is  amusingly  exemplified  by  the
necessity  of  having  an  impersonal  verb  to  express  them  ;  just  as
we  say  "  it  rains,"  "  it  blows,"  so  do  the  more  sensitive  Germans
say  "  it  ghosts."  According  to  its  previous  training  in  life,  this
composite  being  requires  more  or  less  time  to  dissolve,  the
Seele  alone  being  immortal ;  and  consequently  the  Teutonic
spectres  as-ume  a  more  and  more  diminutive  form  as  their  time
of  probation  wears  away.  Analogous  to  this  is  Plato's  explana
tion  of  the  aclmoidedged  facts  of  spirits  haunting  tombs  :  having
been  immersed  during  her  union  with  the  body  in  gross  sensual
pleasures,  the  soul  becomes  equally  unable  and  unwilling  to
abandon  her  old  companion  and  dwelling-house  before  the  same
be  totally  consumed.

To  the  above-quoted  theories  explaining  the  nature  of  the
soul,  and  its  final  destination,  the  recent  discovery  of  that
precious  monument  of  Gnosticism,  the  Pistis-Sophia  enables  us  to
add  a  third,  infinitely  more  complete  in  all  its  details.  This  last


evil  spirits  upon  earth  ;  and  on  earth  shall  they  be  called. The  habitation

shall he their habitation. Evil  of  the  spirits  of  heaven  shall  be  in

spirits  shall  proceed  from  their  flesh  heaven,  but  upon  earth  shall  be  the

because they were created from  habitation  of  terrestrial  spirits  who

above ; from  the  holy  watchers  was  are born  on  earth. The spirits  of

their  beginning  and  primary  founda-  the  giants  shall  Le  like  clouds  which

tion. Evil  spirits  shall  they  be  upon  shall  oppress,  corrupt,  fall,  contend,

earth,  and  the  spirits  of  the  wicked  and  bruise  upon  earth." — (xv.  8.)


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  349

revelation  improves  upon  the  Neo-Platonic  doctrine  by  making
the  astral  genii  "the  Rulers  of  the  Sphere  "  (Zodiac)  create  the
soul  from  their  own  substance  "  out  of  the  tears  of  their  eyes
and  the  sweat  of  their  torment,"  animated  with  a  spark  of  that
Divine  Light  which  has  not  yet  been  totally  extracted  from
their  fuller  nature.  For  these  Zodiacal  Lords  evidently  answer
to  the  rebellious  Angels  of  the  Jews,  and  the  Seven  Devs  of  the
Magi,  in  fact  the  whole  treatise  represents  the  religious  ideas  of
the  latter,  more  closely  than  of  any  other  system.


THE CAUSE OF SIN.

(Pist.-Soph.  282).  "  And  when  the  Saviour  had  spoken  these
things,  he  continuing  in  his  discourse  said  unto  Mary  :  Now,
therefore  Mary,  hear  concerning  the  thing  whereof  thou  askest
of  me,  Who  is  it  that  constraineth  man  to  commit  sin?" Now
therefore  when  (the  parents)  have  begotten the  child,  when
there  exists  in  him  a  small  power,  and  a  small  soul,  and  a  small
"  counterfeit  of  the  spirit  "  (conscience)  ;*  in  a  word,  all  the  three
in  him  being  small  together. No  one of  them  understaiideth
anything  at  all,  whether  it  be  good  or  evil,  by  reason  of  the
weight  of  the  heavy  oblivion  (of  the  former  life)  that  holdeth
them  ;  the  body  likewise  being  small. And  the  child  eateth  of
the  meats  of  the  world  of  the  Eulers. And  the  soul  gathereth
to  itself  out  of  the  portion  of  the  soul  that  is  concealed  in  these
meats,  and  the  Counterfeit  of  the  spirit  gathereth  to  itself  out  of
the  portion  of  evil  that  resideth  in  the  meats  and  in  the  lusts
thereof;  the  body,  likewise,  gathereth  the  insensible  Matter  that
is  in  the  meats. But  the  Fate  herself  taketh  not  out  of  the
meats,  inasmuch  as  she  is  not  mixed  up  with  them,  but  in  what
shape  she  came  into  the  world,  in  the  same  she  continueth.  And
little  by  little,  the  power,  the  soul,  and  the  counterpart  of  the
spirit  grow  to  their  full  stature,  and  each  one  thereof  is  sensible
after  its  own  kind.f The  power  is  sensible  to  seek  after  the
Light  above  ;  the  soul  is  sensible  to  seek after  the  place  of
Righteousness of  the mixture, which same is  the place of

*  'AVTI/JH/J.O}'  TTvev/jLaros.  t  I.e.  adapted  by  its  constitution.


350  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

confusion ;  the  counterfeit  of  the  spirit  also  seeketh  after  all
wickedness  and  lusts  and  sins;  and  the  body  is  sensible to
nothing  save  how  it  may  draw  strength  out  of  Matter,  thus  the
three  are forthwith sensible,  each  one  according  to  its  own
nature,  and  the  contentious  ones  (epiSaioi)  also  send  ministers
who  shall  follow  them  in  order  to  bear  witness  against  all  the
eins  that  they  may  commit,  to  regulate the  manner  in  which
they  shall  punish  them  when  they  come  up  for  judgment,  the
counterfeit  of  the  spirit  also  thinks  upon  and  is  sensible  to  all
the  sins  and the evils that come near  to  that soul, which
proceedeth  from  the  Rulers  of  the Great  Fate,  and  bringeth
them  into  the  soul.* But  the  inner  power  seeketh  after  the
Place  of  Light,  and  all  the  godhead,  whilst  the  counterfeit  of
the  spirit  turneth  the  soul  awry,  and  constraineth  it  to  work  all
its  own  unlawful  deeds,  and  all  its  passions,  and  all  its  wicked
ness  continually  ;  and  it  abideth  a  different  creature  from the
soul,  and  is  an  enemy  to  the  soul,  and  causeth  it  to  commit  all
these  sins  and  wickednesses  ;  and  also  stirreth  up  the  ministers
of  contention,  to  bear  witness  against  the  sins  that  it  is  about  to
cause  the  soul  to  commit. And  it  cometh  to  pass  that  it  resteth
not  day  or  night,  and  it  troubleth  the  soul  in  dreams  and  iu  the
lusts  of  this  world,  and  maketh  it  to  lust  after  all  the  things  of
this  world  ;  in  a  word,  it  urireth the  soul  to  do  all  the  things

t5

that  the  Rulers  have  laid  before  it,  and  it  is  at  war  with  the
soul,  contriving  that  it  shall  do  the  things  it  would  not.  Now
therefore  tliis  is  the  enemy  of  the  soul  and  constraineth  it  to  do
all  kinds  of  sins  ;  and  when  it  conies  to  pass  that  the  time  of  that
man  is  accomplished,  then  cometh  his  Fate,  which  driveth  that
man  unto  the  death  appointed  him  by  the  Rulers,  and  by  means
of  the  bonds  wherewith  men  are  tied  by  Destiny.  Then  come  the
contentious  Receivers  to  conduct  that  soul  out  of  the  body;  and
after  that  these  Receivers  go  about  with  the  soul  through  all  the
regions  shewing  unto  it  the  ./Eons  of  the  world,f  whilst  the  coun
terfeit  of  the  spirit  and  fate  follow  after  that  soul :  but  the  power

*  The  Platonic  "divinso  particuU  earth,  according  to  Valentinus.

aurse"; the extrication of which  t  The  sense  seems  to  require  the

from the  confusion,  i^iy^a, was  the  translation,  "exhibit  the soul  unto

real  object  of Christ's  descent on  the  JEons."


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  351

that  was  in  it  goes  up  unto  the  Virgin  of  Light.  And  after  those
three  days  the  Receivers  lead  that  soul  down  from  above  into
the  hell  of  Chaos,  they  deliver  it  unto  the  tormentors  (and  the
Receivers  return  again  into  their  own  places),  who  punish  the
same  according  to  the  measure  of  its  sins  as  ordained  by  the
Archons  for  the  discharge  of  souls.  And  the  counterfeit  of  the
spirit  becomes  the  guard  over  the  soul,  appointed  over  it,
convicting  it,  in  one  place  of  punishment  after  the  other,  of  the
sins  which  it  hath  committed,  and  it  leadeth  the  soul  into  the
region  of  the  Archons  of  the  Middle  space.  And  when  it  hath
arrived  in  their  presence,  they  lead  it  unto  the  Mysteries  of  Fate,
and  if  they  find  them  not  (sealed  upon  the  soul),  they  seek  after
their  own  share ;  and  those  Archons  punish  the  soul  according
to  its  sins,  according  to  its  deserts ;  of  those  punishments  I  will
declare  the  form  unto  you  in  the  *  Emanation  of  the  Universe.'
But  after  it  has  come  to  pass  that  the  time  of  the  soul's  different
punishments  is  accomplished  in  the  prisons  of  the  Archons  of  the
Middle-space,  then  the  counterfeit  of  the  spirit  leadeth  the  soul
upwards  out  of  all  their  regions,  and  bringeth  it  before  the  light
of  the  Sun,  according  to  the  commandment  of  the  Primal  Man*
IEOT,  and  bringeth  it  before  the  judge,  the  Virgin  of  Light.
And  she  trieth  that  soul ;  and  in  case  she  shall  find  it  to  be
sinful,  she  planteth  within  the  same  (a  particle  of)  the  power  of
her  own  light,  according  unto  its  station  in  life,  its  body,  and  its
share  of  sensibility.  Then  the  Virgin  of  Light  putteth  her  seal
upon  that  soul  and  delivereth  it  unto  one  of  her  Receivers,  who
will  see  that  it  be  placed  in  a  body  befitting  the  sins  that  it
hath  committed  (in  a  former  life).  And  verily  I  say  unto  you
she  shall  not  let  the  soul  be  released  from  the  changes  of  its
bodies  (various  metempsychoses),  until  it  shall  have  accomplished
its  uttermost  cycle  in  the  shapes  whereof  it  may  be  deserving ;
of  all  which  I  will  tell  you  the  form,  and  likewise  the  form  of
the  several  bodies  into  which  they  shall  place  the  souls,
according  to  the  sins  of  each.

"  But  if  it  be  a  soul  that  hath  not  obeyed  the  counterfeit  of  the
spirit  in  all  its  doings,  but  is  righteous,  and  hath  received  the
mysteries  of  Light  that  be  in  the  First  Court,  or  those  that  be  in  the
*  The  Seir  Anpin  of  the  Eabbis.


352  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Second  Court,  or  those  in  the  Third  which  is  the  innermost  part
(adytum) — when  the  time  of  that  soul  in  the  body  is  accomplished,
and  when  the  counterfeit  of  the  spirit  followeth  after  that  soul,
together  with  fate,  whilst  the  soul  is  on  the  road  that  leadeth  on
high,  and  before  it  is  far  distant  therefrom,  it  uttereth  the
mystery  for  the  breaking  *  of  all  the  seals  and  all  the  bonds  of
the  counterfeit  of  the  spirit  wherewith  the  Archons  have  bound
it  unto  the  soul.  And  it  having  uttered  those  words,  the  bonds
of  the  counterfeit  of  the  spirit  are  loosed  so  that  it  ceaseth  to
persecute  that  soul,  and  lets  it  go  according  to  the  commandment
given  unto  it  by  the  Archons  of  the  Great  Fate,  who  said  unto
it :  Let  not  that  soul  go  free,  unless  it  shall  utter  unto  thee  the
mystery  for  the  breaking  of  the  bonds  wherewith  we  have
bound  thee  unto  it.  Thereupon  the  soul,  thus  set  free,  leaves
fate  behind  unto  the  Archons  of  the  way  of  the  Middle-space,
and  destroys  the  counterfeit  of  the  spirit  leaving  it  for  the
Archons  in  the  place  wherein  they  had  bound  it  (at  first)  unto
the  soul ;  and  in  that  moment  it  becometh  a  great  flood  of  light,
shining  exceedingly  ;  and  the  Receivers  who  had  fetched  it  out
of  the  body  are  afraid  of  that  light,  so  that  they  fall  down  upon
their  faces,  and  the  soul  is  made  as  it  were  a  wing  f  of  light,  and
passeth  through  all  the  regions  of  the  Archons,  and  through  all
the  courses  of  the  Light,  until  it  entereth  into  the  place  of  its
own  kingdom  for  which  it  hath  received  the  mystery.

"  But  if  it  be  a  soul  that  hath  received  the  mystery  in  the
First  Court,  which  is  the  outer  part,  and  after  receiving  and
performing  the  mystery  and  being  converted  shall  again  have
sinned,  and  when  its  time  in  the  body  is  accomplished,  and  the
Receivers  come  to  fetch  it,  and  the  counterfeit  of  the  spirit  and
fate  pursue  it  by  reason  of  the  seals  and  bonds  wherewith  it  hath
been  bound  together  with  them  by  the  Archons — then  if  the  soul
whilst  yet  in  the  way  of  its  pursuers  should  utter  the  mystery
that  breaketh  those  seals  and  bonds,  forthwith  they  are  all
loosed  and  the  counterfeit  of  the  spirit  ceases  to  follow  after  the

*  I.e.  the  formula,  perhaps  the  perhaps  to  the  ancient  emblem  of

"  mystery  of  the  seven  vowels,''  so  the  human-headed  bird  used  in  the

highly  lauded  elsewhere.  same  sense.

t  I.e.  a  winged  thing ; referring


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  353

soul.  And  the  soul  leaves  its  pursuers  behind,  for  none  of  them
have  their  own  power,  but  the  soul  keeps  its  own  power.  Then
the  Receivers  that  belong  to  the  mystery  which  the  soul  hath
received  come  and  snatch  it  away  from  the  contentious  Receivers,
and  these  return  to  do  the  business  of  the  Archons  in  the  occupa
tion  of  fetching  away  souls.  But  the  Receivers  of  the  soul,  who
pertain  to  the  Light,  themselves  become  a  wing  of  light  to  that
soul,  and  a  vesture  of  light  unto  it.  And  they  lead  it  not  into
Chaos,  because  it  is  not  lawful  to  lead  a  soul,  that  hath  obtained
the  mysteries,  into  Chaos ;  but  they  bring  it  into  the  road  of  the
Archons  of  the  Middle-space.  And  when  they  are  come  before
the  Archons  of  the  Middle-space,  the  Archons  depart  out  of  the
way  of  that  soul,  being  in  great  fear,  and  in  cruel  burning,  and
in  divers  shapes,  in  a  word  being  in  great  fear  unto  which  there
is  no  measure.  And  in  that  moment  the  soul  utters  the  mystery
ot  its  defence  before  them ;  and  they  fall  upon  their  faces  out  of
fear  of  the  mystery  and  of  the  defence  which  it  hath  uttered.
And  the  soul  leaves  with  them  their  fate*  saying  unto  them :  Take
to  yourselves  your  fate,  I  am  not  coming  into  your  place  from
henceforth,  I  am  made  a  stranger  unto  you  for  ever,  I  am  coming
into  the  place  of  my  own  inheritance.  And  after  the  soul  hath
said  this,  the  Receivers  of  the  Light  fly  away  with  it  on  high,  and
bring  it  before  the  ^Eons  of  Destiny,  giving  it  the  proper  speech
of  defence  for  the  place  and  the  seals  thereof,  and  the  soul  shews
to  them  the  counterfeit  of  the  spirit  and  utters  the  mystery  that
sundereth  the  bonds  wherewith  they  had  bound  them  both
together,  saying  to  them :  Take  to  yourselves  your  counterfeit
of  the  spirit,  henceforth  I  come  not  in  your  place,  I  am  made  a
stranger  unto  you  for  ever.  And  it  shews  them  the  seal  of  each
and  the  form  of  defence.  Then  the  Receivers  fly  away  with
the  soul  and  bring  it  through  all  the  JEons,  shewing  ths  seal,
and  the  defence,  in  all  the  regions  of  King  Adamas,  and  of  all
the  Rulers  of  the  places  of  the  left  hand  (which  defences  and
seals  I  will  declare  to  you  when  I  explain  to  you  the  emanation
of  the  mystery).  Then  they  bring  the  soul  before  the  Virgin
of  Light,  and  it  giveth  to  the  Virgin  her  own  seal,  defence,  and

*  Viz.,  the  separate  portion  of  its  composition implanted  in it by  these
Archons  at  its  birth.

2 A


354  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

the  glory  of  hymns,  and  the  Virgin  of  Light  with  the  seven
other  Virgins  examine  that  soul — all  of  them,  that  they  may  all
find  their  own  marks,  their  own  seals,  their  own  baptisms,  and
their  own  unctions  upon  it.  (292)  Then  the  Virgin  of  Light
sealeth  that  soul,  and  the  Receivers  of  Light  baptize  the  same
and  give  unto  it  the  spiritual  unction.  And  each  of  the  Virgins
of  Light  sealeth  it  with  her  own  seal.  Furthermore  the  Re
ceivers  deliver  it  over  to  the  great  Sabaoth,the  Good  One,  who
is  hard  by  the  gate  of  Life  in  the  region  of  those  pertaining
unto  the  right  hand,  whom  they  call  'the  Father';  and  the
soul  rendereth  unto  him  the  glory  of  his  hymns,  of  his  seals,
and  of  his  justification.  Then  the  great  good  Sabaoth  sealeth
it  with  his  own  seals,  and  the  soul  rendereth  the  knowledge,
and  the  glory  of  hymns,  and  the  seals  belonging  to  the  whole
region  of  those  that  pertain  unto  the  right  hand.  These  also
all  seal  it  with  their  own  seal ;  and  Melchisedek,  the  great
gatherer  of  Light — who  is  in  the  region  of  those  pertaining
to  the  right  hand— also  sealeth  that  soul.  Then  Melchisedek's
gatherers  also  seal  it  and  lead  it  into  the  Treasury  of  Light,  and
the  soul  rendereth  glory  and  honour  and  their  proper  seals  in
all  the  regions  of  Light.  Then  those  pertaining  to  all  the
regions  of  the  Treasury  of  Light  seal  it  with  their  own  seals,
and  so  it  entereth  into  the  place  of  its  inheritance."


STATE  AFTER  DEATH  OF  THE  UNINITIATED.

(261)  "  Then  stood  forth  Mary  and  said,  Lord,  as  concerning
just  men  and  perfect  in  all  righteousness  ;  such  a  man  in  whom
there  is  no  sin  at  all,  shall  they  torment  him  with  all  these
judgments  and  punishments,  or  shall  they  not  ?  Or  shall  they
carry  such  a  man  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  or  not  ?

"  The  Saviour  answered  and  said  unto  Mary,  The  just  man  per
fect  in  all  righteousness,  that  hath  never  committed  sin,  but  yet
hath  never  obtained  any  one  mystery  of  Light,  when  his  time
cometh  for  departing  out  of  the  body,  straightway  there  shall
come  for  him  the  Gatherers  belonging  to  that  one  of  the  great
Triple  Powers  who  is  the  greatest  amongst  them,  in  order  that


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  355

they  may  take  away  that  soul  from  the  Contentious  Gatherers,
and  during  three  days  they  shall  go  about  with  that  soul  amongst
all  the  creatures  of  the  world  (i.e.  throughout  all  creation).
After  the  three  days  they  shall  lead  him  down  into  Chaos,  so
that  they  may  deliver  him  out  of  *  all  the  punishments  there
in,  and  out  of  the  judgments,  and  they  shall  bring  him  unto  all
the  judgment-places,  but  no  flame  of  Chaos  shall  afflict  him
greatly ;  (2G2)  nevertheless  they  shall  in  some  wise  afflict  him
for  a  little  space,  but  speedily  shall  they  have  compassion  upon
him,  and  draw  him  up  out  of  Chaos  so  as  to  take  him  out  of  the
Road  of  the  Middle-space,  and  from  all  the  Rulers  thereof.
And  these  shall  not  punish  him  with  their  cruel  torments,  but
the  flame  of  their  regions  shall  afflict  him  in  some  measure;
and  after  they  have  brought  him  into  the  unmerciful  place
AXOANABAZ  they  shall  not  torment  him  with  the  cruel  torments
therein,  but  they  shall  keep  him  there  a  little  while,  and  afflict
him  in  some  measure  with  the  heat  of  the  torments  of  that
place.  But  they  shall  quickly  have  compassion  upon  him,  and
bring  him  forth  out  of  all  those  places,  neither  shall  they  lead
him  by  the  way  that  goeth  from  out  of  the  yEons,  for  fear  lest
the  Rulers  of  the  ^ons  should  hold  him  too  firmly,  but  they
shall  conduct  him  by  the  path  of  the  Sun's  light,  in  order  to
bring  him  before  the  Virgin  of  Light.  And  she  doth  try  that
soul  that  she  may  find  it  free  from  sin,  and  she  ordereth  it  not
to  be  carried  unto  the  Light  because  the  mark  of  the  Kingdom  of
Light  is  not  upon  it ;  but  she  sealeth  it  with  a  special  seal,  and
takes  care  that  it  be  put  into  a  body  of  righteousness  belonging
to  the  jEons.  (263)  This  man  will  be  good,  so  that  he  will
obtain  the  seals  of  the  mysteries  of  the  Light,  and  inherit
the  kingdom  for  ever  and  ever.

"  But  if  he  shall  have  sinned  once,  twice,  or  thrice,  they  shall
reject  that  soul,  sending  it  back  again  into  the  world  according
to  the  form  of  the  sins  that  it  may  have  committed  ;  the  form
whereof  I  will  declare  unto  you  hereafter.  But  verily,  verily
I  say  unto  you,  that  even  the  righteous  man  that  hath  committed
no  sin  at  all  cannot  be  brought  into  the  Kingdom  of  Light,
forasmuch  the  seal  of  the  mysteries  of  that  kingdom  is  not  found
*  Protect  him  against  any  suffering  from.


356  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

upon  him.  Once  for  all,  I  say  unto  you,  a  soul  cannot  be  brought
into  the  kingdom,  if  it  be  without  the  mysteries  of  the  Kingdom
of  Light."

FUTUKE  PUNISHMENTS.

The  Gnostics  did  not  fail,  after  the  example  of  their  orthodox
rivals,  to  employ  the  strongest  stimulants  of  terror  in  order
to  gain  converts,  as  is  forcibly  manifested  by  this  picture
of  the  varied  torments  of  the  world  to  come,  the  appointed
heritage  of  all  who  obtained  not  the  Gnosis  which  they  preached
('  Pistis-Sophia,'  255)  :—

"  And  Jesus  continuing  in  his  discourse  said  unto  the  disciples,
"When  I  shall  have  returned  into  the  Light,  preach  ye  unto  the
whole  world.  Say  unto  them,  Slacken  not  by  day  and  night
to  seek  until  ye  bhall  find  the  mysteries  of  the  Kingdom  of
Light,  that  shall  cleanse  you,  and  render  you  a  pure  light,
and  shall  bring  you  into  the  Kingdom  of  Light.  Say  unto
them,  Kenounce  the  world  and  all  the  Matter  which  is  therein,
and  all  the  cares  and  the  sins  thereof— in  a  word,  all  the
conversation  that  therein  is— that  ye  may  be  worthy  of  the
mysteries  of  Light,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  all  the  punish
ments  that  are  in  the  judgment-places.  Say  unto  them,
Kenounce  murmuring,  that  ye  may  be  worthy  of  the  mysteries
of  Light,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the  burning  of  the  Figure
of  the  Dog.  Say  unto  them,  Renounce  obedience  (to  the  world),
that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the  judgments  of  the  Figure  of  the
Dog.  Say  unto  them,  Renounce  invocation  (of  idols),  that  ye
may  be  worthy  of  the  mysteries  of  Light,  that  ye  may  be
saved  from  the  torments  of  Ariel.  Renounce  a  lying  tongue,
that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the  burning  rivers  of  the  Figure
of  the  Dog-shaped  one.  Rtnounce  false  witnessing,  that  ye
may  be  set  free,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the  same  rivers.
Renounce  boastings  and  pride,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the
burning  pits  of  Ariel.  Renounce  self-love,  that  ye  may  be  saved
from  the  judgments  of  Orcus*  Renounce  talkativeness,  that

*  These  regions  and  the  shapes  of gested  to  our  author  by  the  Egyptian
their  Rulers  seem  to  have  been  sug- mummy-case  paintings  of  the  Gates


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  357

ye  may  be  saved  from  the  fires  of  Orcus.  Renounce  unjust
judgments,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the  torments  that  be  in
Orcus.  Renounce  covetousness,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the
rivers  of  smoke  of  the  Dog-shaped.  Renounce  the  love  of  this
world,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the  pitched-coats  burning  of
the  Dog-shaped.  Renounce  robbery,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from
the  rivers  of  deceit  of  Ariel.  Renounce  evil  speaking,  that  ye
may  be  saved  from  the  torments  of  the  river  of  smoke.  Renounce
wickedness,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the  burning  seas  of  Ariel.
Renounce  unmercifulness,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the  judg
ments  of  the  Drag  on- shapes.  Renounce  anger,  that  ye  may  be
saved  from  the  rivers  of  smoke  of  the  Dragon-shapes.  Renounce
reviling,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  ihe  burning  seas  of  the
Dragon-shapes.  Renounce  robbery,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from
the  boiling  seas  of  the  same.  Renounce  thieving,  that  ye  may
be  saved  from  IlddbaotJi.  Renounce  backbiting,  that  ye  may  be
saved  from  the  burning  rivers  of  the  Lion-shaped  one.  Renounce
fighting  and  quarrelling,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the  boiling
rivers  of  Ildabaoth.  Renounce  stubbornriess,that  ye  may  be  saved
from  the  ministers  of  Ildabaoth  and  his  burning  seas.  Renounce
evil  deeds,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  all  the  devils  of  Ilda
baoth  and  from  all  his  punishments.  Renounce  de^perateness,
that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the  seas  of  boiling  pitch  of  Ilclabaoth.
Renounce  adultery,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the  seas  of
brimstone  and  pitch  of  the  Lion-shaped.  Renounce  murders,
that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the  Ruler  of  crocodiles,  which
is  the  first  creature  in  the  ice  that  is  in  the  Outer  Darkness.
Renounce  cruelty  and  ungodliness,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the
Rulers  of  the  Outer  Darkness.  Renounce  impiety,  that  ye  may  be
saved  from  weeping  and  the  gnashing  of  teeth.  Renounce  witch
craft,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  the  mighty  frost  and  hail
of  the  Outer  Darkness.  Renounce  blasphemy,  that  ye  may  be
saved  from  the  great  dragon  of  tne  Outer  Darkness.  Renounce


in  which  are  seated  so  many  genii  passage  through  which  on  his  way

with  heads  of  hawk,  baboon,  man,  to the judgment  seat Auubis is

crocodile,  lion,  jackal,  vulture,  win-  prayed  to  procure  for  the  defunct  in

nowiug-fan,  and  serpent ;  all  armed  the  papyrus-ritual  buried  with  him.
with  swords. These  were  the  Gates


358


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR, REMAINS.


false  doctrines,  that  ye  may  be  saved  from  all  the torments
of  the  great  dragon  of  the  Outer  Darkness.

"  Say  unto  them  that  teach  false  doctrines,  and  unto  every  one
that  is  taught  by  them,  Woe  unto  you ;  for,  unless  ye  repent
and  leave  your  error,  ye  shall  fall  into  the  torments  of  the  great
dragon  of  the  Outer  Darkness,  exceeding  cruel,  and  they  in  the
world  shall  not  redeem  you  out  of  them  for  ever  and  ever,  but
ye  shall  be  utterly  destroyed  unto  the  end.  Say  unto  them  that
slight  the  doctrine  of  truth  of  the  First  Mystery,  Woe  unto
you,  for  your  punishment  shall  be  evil  beyond  that  of  all  men  :
ye  shall  abide  in  the  great  frost,  ice,  and  hail  in  the  middle  of
the  dragon,  and  in  the  Outer  Darkness,  and  they  in  this  world
shall  not  redeem  you  from  this  hour  forth  for  ever,  but  ye  shall
be  in  that  place ;  and  in  the  dissolution  of  the  universe  ye  shall
be  consumed,  so  that  ye  shall  be  destroyed  for  ever."


FIG.  16.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  359


TAL1SMANIC  LEADEN  SCROLLS.

The  only  classical  notice  of  the  employment  of  these  engines
for  moving  the  invisible  world  (not,  however,  for  good,  but  for
evil)  is  to  bo  found  in  the  Annals  of  Tacitus  (ii.  09),  who  thus
enumerates  them  amongst  the  means,  real  or  imaginary,  where
by  Livia's  agent,  Piso,  occasioned,  or  aggravated,  the  final
illness  of  the  too  popular  Germanicus.  "  The  severity  of  the
attack  (a  fever)  was  heightened  by  the  suspicion  of  poison  on.
the  part  of  Piso  :  and  in  fact  there  were  discovered,  hidden  in
the  house-walls,  fragments  of  human  corpses,  spells  and  curses
and  the  name  of  Germanicus  engraved  upon  plates  of  lead ;
also  ashes  half-burnt  and  soaked  in  blood,  and  other  pieces  of
witchcraft  by  means  whereof  it  is  believed  that  souls  are  made
over  unto  the  Infernal  Gods."  A  very  remarkable  example
of  the  practice  of  this  malevolent  superstition  has  been
published  by  Visconti  (Op.  Var.  iii.  256).  It  is  a  sheet  of  lead
found,  folded  up,  within  a  tomb  opened  at  the  llippotade  Gate
of  Athens  ;  and  a  copy  of  which  he  had  received  from  M.  Fauvel.
The  inscription,  full  of  blunders  both  in  spelling  and  grammar,  is
arranged  in  ten  lines,  seemingly  meant  for  trochaic  tetrameters,
and  may  be  read  thus  :

1.  'Ep/Z^S1  X@OVLOS)  Fr/ KttTO^OS".

2.  KOL  TTpOS  TT)V 3>€p(T€<j)6vT]V.

3.  &epo~f(p6vri  KcrraSoi  Ae£t'a//.

4.  Trpos  TOVTOVS  annvTas.

5.  Kai  KXeoc^paSes.

G.  KfiTaoS)  irpos  TOVS  CIVTOVS  \oo~i.

7.  KCtl  Nav(3a.TT]v  xaraSco  Trpos  TOVS  CIVTOVS.

8.  T\r]Tr6\€[j.ov  KaraSco.

9.  KOI  TOVS  jj-fTa  KTT)O~LOV  aTravras*
10. xaraSw.*

"  Infernal  Hermes,  imprisoning  Earth,  and  also  Persephone !
1  lay  a  spell  upon  Dexias  before  all  these  deities,  also
upon  Cleophrades,  Naubates,  Ctesias  with  all  his  family."

*  KctTaSecns Ka.Td8eafj.os arc used Hebrew  "  Chabar,"  to  bewitch,  pro-
by Plato for witchcraft : and the perly  signifies  to  bind.


360  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

The  defunct  Athenian  must  assuredly  have  departed  this  liro
full  of  charity  towards  all  his  neighbours  to  have  taken  such
pains  to  carry  with  him  a  memorandum  so  expressive  of  his
wishes  on  their  behalf.  It  reminds  one  of  the  old  Monmouth
shire  farmer,  who  (as  tradition  tells),  dying  of  a  broken  heart,
ordered  the  bitterest  verses  of  the  "Cursing  Psalm"  to  be
engraved  upon  his  tombstone  for  the  benefit  of  his  enemy ;
as  it  may  yet  be  seen  at  Christchurch,  near  Caerleon,  Mon
mouthshire.  The  Verulamium  scrolls  (p.  339)  contained
invocations  of  the  opposite  character,  for  the  benefit  of  the
parties  named  therein.  Yet  another  variety  are  the  leaden
scrolls  found  numerously  in  the  lately  discovered  Demetrium
of  Cnidus.  Some  evidently  belong  to  a  kin-1  of  ordeal — the
accused  party  asking  to  be  ill-treated  by  Persephone  in  the
next  world,  if  guilty  of  such  or  >uch  a  charge ;  others  contain
similar  ill  wishes  against  individuals  therein  specified  who  have
injured  the  writers.  By  far  the  most  curious  of  these  relics  is
the  leaden  plate,  found  at  Bath  (1880),  engraved  with  four
lines  of  words  placed  in  their  proper  order,  but  spelt  back
wards  for  the  sake  of  disguise,  and  about  four  inches  square.
Jt  is  thus  read  by  Zangemeister  :

"  Qui  mihi  mantilium  iuvolavit
ftic  liquat  com  aqua  olla  .  .  .  ta
-Ni  qui  earn  salvavit  .  .  . vinna  vel
Exsupersus  Verrianus  Servianus
Itianus  Sagarbalis  Cubus
Minianus  cum  Sovina
Ceramanilli."

This  reading  is  not  satisfactory  in  many  places.  The  lost
object  is  written  MATHV,  MATEHV,  to  be  read  backwards,  like
all  the  rest,  and  therefore  bears  no  resemblance  to  "  mantelium."

The  malignity  of  the  Greek  character  is  exemplified  in
nothing  more  strongly  than  in  the  open  toleration  of  the  use
of  such  engines  of  spite.  In  the  great  Temple  of  Demeter  at
Cnidus,  Mr.  Newton  found  many  of  these  leaden  scrolls  invoking
the  vengeance  of  the  goddess  of  the  place,  her  daughter,  and  the
other  infernal  gods,  upon  individuals  specified  by  name.  It
will  be  remarked  that  this  "  dira  detestatio"  was  not  contingent
upon  the  refusal  of  a  just  demand,  as  in  the  case  of  the  worthy


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  361

Silurian  hereafter  to  be  mentioned  ;  but  were  the  means  of
revenge  resorted  to  by  persons  too  cowardly  to  use  those
supplied  by  nature,  or  probably  for  the  mere  sake  of  gratifying
spite.

As  a  Roman  pendant  to  this  Athenian  legacy  of  curses,  I
copy  the  leaden  scroll  found,  many  years  ago,  in  the  garden  of
the  Villa  Manenti,  upon  the  Via  Latina.  De  Rossi,  who  first
published  it  in  the  *  Bullettino  del  Iristit,  Arch.  Rom.'  fur  1852,
is  of  opinion  that  orthography  and  characters  indicate  the  date
of  the  last  century  of  the  Republic.  "  Quornodo  mortuos  qui
istic  sepultus  est  nee  loqui  nee  sermonaii  potest,  seic  Rhodine
apud  M.  Licinium  Faustum  mortua  sit,  nee  loqui  nee  serinonari
possit.  Ita  ut  mortuos  nee  ad  Deos  nee  ad  homines  acceptus
est,  ita  Khodine  apud  M.  Licinium  accepta  sit,  et  tan  turn  valeat
quantum  ille  mortuos  quei  istic  sepultus  e^t ;  Dite  Pater  !  Rho-
dinen  tibi  commendo  ut  semper  odio  sit  M.  Licinio  Fausto,
item  M.  Hedium  Ainphionein,  item  C.  Popillium  Apollonium,
item  Vennonia  Hermiona,  item  Sergia  Glycinna."  It  is  easy
to  construct  a  history  out  of  these  lines,  the  despairing  lover
dying  from  the  perfidy  of  the  fair  Rhodine,  who  has  jilted  him
for  the  noble  Licinius.  Faustus  prays  the  God  of  Hell  to  make
her  distasteful  to  her  possessor,  and  also  to  punish  her  aiders
and  abettors,  whose  Greek  cognomens  show  them  to  be  of  the
condition  of  freedmeu.

In  the  same  strain  we  have  the  commination,  sounding  to  us
so  jocular,  but  doubtless  in  its  own  time  intended  for  something
very  serious,  addressed  to  Nodens,  discovered  amidst  the  ruins
of  his  not  much  frequented  temple  in  L^dney  Park,  Gloucester
shire.  "  Devo  Nodenti  Silvianus  anilum  perdedit,  demediam  (sic)
partem  donavit  Nodenti  inter  quibus  nomen  Seniciani  nollis
permittas  sanitatem  donee  pei  ferat  usque  Templum  Nodentis."
Whereby  the  half-civilized  Silurian,  as  his  name  betrays,  in
artless  grammar  and  orthography,  beseeches  the  local  deity
never  to  allow  Senicianus  or  any  of  his  family  to  enjoy  health,
until  he  brings  back  the  ring,  the  loss  of  whii.-h  Silvianus
ascribes  to  him,  and  restores  it  to  the  rightful  owner  at  the
temple  of  Nodens  :  in  which  case  one  half  its  value  is  promised
to  the  god  for  his  assistance  in  recovering  the  stolen  property.


362  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

These  thank-offerings  to  "Neddyn  diw  "  (perhaps  identical
with  the  Etruscan  "  Nethunos ")  were  made  in  coppers,  the
very  "  stipes  "  out  of  which  the  tesselated  pavement  of  his
temple  was  paid  for,  as  the  inscription  thereon  yet  testifies.
They  were  found  plentifully  strewed  over  the  floor,  of  every
date  down  to  Honorius;  then  some  sudden  raid  of  barbarians
gave  the  whole  establishment  to  the  flames.

The  idea  of  "  binding  "  is  practically  carried  out  in  Spell  VII.
of  Atanasi's  '  Mag.  Papyrus,'  which  directs  you  to  lay  the  link
of  a  chain  (/cpc/cos)  upon  a  leaden  plate,  and  having  traced  its
outline,  to  write  thereon,  round  the  circumference,  the  common
Gnostic  legend  (reading  both  ways)  continuously  :

IAe(jJBAcJ>PeNeMOTNOOIAAPIKPIcJ>l
AeT€API4>IKPAAI0ONTOM6N€P4)ABAU)eAI

Within  the  circle  must  be  written  the  nature  of  the  thing  it
is  desired  to  prevent.  The  operation  is  entitled  the  "  Ring  of
Hermes."

The  link  was  then  to  be  folded  up  on  the  leaden  plate,  and
thrown  into  the  grave  of  one  dead  before  his  time,  or  else  into  a
disused  well.  After  the  formula  above  given  was  to  follow,  in
Greek,  "  Prevent  thou  such  and  such  a  person  from  doing  such
and  such  a  thing  " — a  proof  that  the  long  string  of  epithets
all  referred  to  the  same  Power.

We  now  come  to  relics  of  the  same  sort,  but  of  diverse  in
tention  ;  being  those  passports  to  eternal  bliss,  so  frequently
mentioned  in  the  course  of  the  preceding  dissertation.  Of  these
the  most  complete  example  is  the  Leaden  Book  formerly  be
longing  to  the  celebrated  Father  Kircher,  in  whose  collection  it
first  made  its  appearance,  but  concerning  the  provenance  of
which  nothing  is  known,  although  Matter  suspects  it  to  be  the
same  that  Montfaucon  gave  to  Cardinal  Bouillon,  who  died  at
Rome  in  1715.  But  this  identification  is  entirely  ungrounded,
as  shall  presently  be  shown.  The  same  writer  has  given
facsimiles,  in  his  '  Excursion  Gnostique,'  of  the  seven  pages
composing  the  book,  now  deposited  in  the  Museum  Kircheriaiium.
These  leaves  are  of  lead,  3x4  inches  square,  engraved  on
each  side,  with  a  religious  composition  for  heading,  under
which  are,  in  every  case,  five  lines  of  inscription,  that  mystic


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  363

number  having  doubtless  been  purposely  adopted  by  the
spell-maker.  These  lines  are  written  in  large  Greek  capitals,
square-shaped,  and  resembling  the  character  commonly  used
on  Gnostic  gems.  Intermixed  are  other  forms,  some  resem
bling  the  hieroglyphs  still  current  for  the  Signs  and  Planets;
others  Egyptian  Demotic  and  Pehlevi  letters.  The  language
does  not  appear  to  be  Coptic,  but  rather  some  Semitic  tongue,
many  words  being  composed  entirely  of  consonants,  showing
that  the  vowels  were  to  be  supplied  by  the  reader.  The  chief
interest,  however,  of  the  relic  lies  in  the  designs  heading  each
page,  in  which  we  recognise  the  usual  figures  of  Gnostic
iconology,  together  wdth  others  of  a  novel  character,  all  touched
in  with  a  free  and  bold  graver  with  the  fewest  possible  strokes.
The  purport  of  the  writing  underneath  may  be  conjectured,  011
the  authority  of  the  '  Litany  of  the  Dead  '*  and  the  '  Diagram  ma
of  the  Ophites,'  to  be  the  prayers  addressed  by  the  ascending
soul  to  these  particular  deities,  each  in  his  turn.  The  very
number  of  the  pages,  seven  in  all,  comes  to  support  this  ex
planation.  The  Astral  Presidents  to  be  propitiated  in  the
heavenward  journey  are  represented  in  the  following  manner  : —

1.  A  nude  female  figure,  in  which  the  navel  (the  "circle  of
the  Sun  ")  is  strongly  defined  :  she  makes  a  gesture  of  adoration
to a  genius in  a conical cap  and  short  tunic,  armed  with  a
trident,  Siva's  proper  weapon,  and consequently  appropriated
afterwards  by  the  medieval  l\uler  of  Tartarus.

Reverse.  Palm  within  a  circle  or  garland,  and  a  large  Caducous.

2.  Female  in  flowing  robes,  addressing  a  gigantic  fowl,  much
too  squat,  apparently,  in  its  proportions  for  the  ibis  of  Thoth :
perhaps  intended  for  the  yet  more  divine  bird,  the  phoenix.

*  In  the  pictures  to  which  the  dis-  Here  the  sun's  rays  cheer  his  steps,

embodied  spirit  "  before  his  journey  and  he  meets  amongst  other  wonders

addresses  his  prayers  to  the  various  the  head  of  Horus  rising  out  of  a

gods, and then enters upon his  lotus-flower, the god Pthah, the

labours. He  attacks  with  spear  in  phoanix,  his  own  soul  in  the  forai  of

hand  the  crocodiles,  lizards,  scorpions  a  bird  witli  a  human  head,  and  the

and  snakes which beset his path  ;  goddess  Isis  as  a  serpent  of  goodness,

and passing through these dark  The  soul  then  returns  to  the  mummy

regions he at length readies the  and puts life into its mouth."—

laud  of  the  Arnenti,  whose  goddess  (Sharpe,  '  Egypt.  Mytliol.,'  p.  65.)
is  a  hawk  standing upon  a  perch.


36  A  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Reverse.  Nude  female  adoring  a  certain  undefined  monster,
furnished  with  large  ears,  and  placed  upon  a  low  altar.  The
first  line  of  the  accompanying  prayer  seems  to  begin  with  the
Pehlevi  letters  equivalent  to  S,  P,  V.

3.  Horns, leaning upon an instrument of unknown use,
regarding  a  huge  tortoise,  better  drawn  than  the  rest,  which  is
crawling  towards  him.

Reverse.  Female  in  long  flowing  robes,  holding  up  her  hands
to  a  naked  child  (Horus  ?),  who  is  in  the  act  of  leaping  down  to
her  from  a  lofty  pedestal.

4.  Anubis  attired  in  a  short  mantle  (reminding  one  of  Me-
phistopheles)  attentively  contemplating  a  lofty  hill,  the  apex
whereof  has  the  form  of  an  eagle's  head.

Reverse.  Female  in  rags  leaning  on  a  staff  advancing  towards
another  richly  clothed  and  crowned,  who  lifts  up  her  hands  as
though  terrified  at  the  apparition.

5.  Abraxas  in  his  proper  form,  looking  towards  a  female  fully
draped,  who  offers  him  some  indistinct  symbol,  much  resembling
an  E  turned  upside  down. The  prayer  below  opens  with  the
word  lACx);  whence  it  may  be  fairly  conjectured  that  the  first
characters  in  each  of  the  other  pages  give  the  name  of  the  deity
pictured  above.

Reverse.  Frog  and  serpent  facing  each  other  :  ancient  em
blems  of  Spring,  but  probably  used  here  in  their  medieval  sense
as  types  of  the  Eesurrection  of  the  body.

6.  A  headless  man  with  rays  issuing  from  his  shoulders,  and
holding  out  a  torch,  appears  falling  backwards  with  affright  on
the  approach  of  a  winged  dragon.

Reverse.  A  squat  personage  with  radiated  crown  stands  in
front  face  in  the  attitude  of  the  Egyptian  Typhon.  On  the
other  side  stands  a  very  indistinct  figure,  resembling  a
Cupid,  having  square-cut  wings,  his  back  turned  to  the
spectator.

7.  Female  with  robe  flying  in  an  arch  over  her  head,  as  Iris
is  commonly  pictured,  extends  her  hand  to  an  approaching  bull :
the  drawing  of  the  latter  being  vastly  superior  to  any  of  the
other  figures. One  is  led  to  discover  in  this  group  Venus  and
her  tutelary  sign,  Taurus,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  365

Reverse.  Female  reclining  on  the  ground,  towards  whom
advances  a  large  bird,  seemingly  meant  for  a  pigeon.

In  the  sacred  animals  figuring  in  these  successive  scenes  it
is  impossible  to  avoid  discovering  an  allusion  to  the  forms  the
Gnostics  gave  to  the  planetary  Rulers.  A  legend  of  theirs
related  how  the  Saviour  in  his  descent  to  this  lower  world
escaped  the  vigilance  of  these  Powers  by  assuming  their  own
form  as  he  traversed  the  sphere  of  each,  whence  a  conjecture
may  be  hazarded  that  similar  metamorphoses  of  the  illumined
soul  are  hinted  at  in  these  inexplicable  pictures.

We  now  come  to  the  consideration  of  a  second  relic  of  the
same  kind,  known  as  "  Card.  Bouillon's  Leaden  Book."  How
Matter  could  have  supposed  this  to  be  the  same  with  Kircher's
(supposing  him  ever  to  have  compared  his  own  facsimiles  with
Montfaucon's)  is  a  thing  totally  beyond  my  comprehension.
For  Montfaucon,  in  his  Plate  187,  has  given  every  leaf  of  the
former,  apparently  copied  with  sufficient  fidelity :  the  pictures
on  which  I  shall  proceed  to  describe  for  the  purpose  of  com
parison  with  those  in  the  Kirch erian  volume  ;  for  the  general
analogy  in  the  designs  attests  the  similar  destination  of  both
monuments,  whilst  at  the  same  time  the  variation  in  details
proves  the  existence  of  two  distinct  specimens  of  this  interesting-
class.

The  leaves  within  the  two  covers,  connected  by  rings  secured
by  a  rod  passed  through  them,  are  only  six  in  number ;  whilst
the  inscriptions,  though  in  much  the  same  lettering  as  the
Kircherian  copy,  fill  only  four  lines  on  a  page,  and  only  four
pages  in  all :  the  other  eight  pages  having  pictures  alone.

Now  to  describe  these  pictures,  which  seem  in  better  drawin^
than  those  of  the  former  set.*  Page  1.  Man,  nude,  standing
up.  2.  Female  fully  draped,  walking.  3.  The  same  figure,
extending  one  hand.  4.  Anubis  in  a  short  mantle.  5.  The
usual  figure  of  the  Abraxas  god.  6.  Bird-headed  man  sur
rounded  with  rays  (Phre  ?).  7.  Bust  of  Serapis.  8.  Female
reclining.  9.  Terminal  figure  in  the  form  of  a  cross.  10.  Frog.
11.  Ibis,  or  Phoenix.  12.  Female  holding  above  her  head  a
star-spangled  veil.

*  The  improvement  is  probably  only  due  to  the  French  copyist.


366  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Montfaucon  supposes  all  these  figures  represent  the  genii  who
preside  over  the  hours  of  the  day — the  first  being  expressive  of
rising,  the  last  of  night ;  and  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  the
seventh  page  is  assigned  to  Serapis,  who  sometimes  receives  the
title  of  €7TTaypdfjifjiaro<5  Oe6<s.  But  in  his  Plate  188,  Montfaucon
copies  from  Bononi's  '  Museum  Kircherianum  '  another  leaden
book  "  found  in  a  sepulchre,"  which  actually  has  seven  pages,  and
two  figures  heading  each,  in  the  specimen  pages :  and  this  may
possibly  be  the  one  since  published  in  its  entirety  by  Matter  ;
although  at  present  the  leaves  are  separate,  not  connected  into
a  book,  which  may  be  the  result  of  accident  during  the  century
and  a  half  that  has  elapsed  since  it  was  first  noticed.

Another  discovery  of  the  same  nature  has  been  made  in  our
own  times,  and  investigated  with  the  greatest  care.  In  the  year
1852,  whilst  excavating  the  ruins  of  a  tomb  in  the  Vigna
Mariiii,  near  the  Porta  Pia,  a  marble  sarcophagus  was  brought
to  light,  ornamented  with  a  bas-relief  representing  either  the
Adoration  of  the  Magi,  or  else  the  prototype  of  that  scene,  the
"  Birth  of  the  New  Sun."  The  floor  of  the  tomb  was  paved
with  a  mosaic  equally  ambiguous  in  subject,  whether  a  Madonna
and  Child,  or,  what  the  concomitants  render  more  probable,
Isis  suckling  the  infant  Harpocrates.  Several  minor  sarcophagi
in  terra-cotta  surrounded  the  larger  one ;  and  in  these  were
found  many  leaden  plates,  rolled  up  into  scrolls,  not  bound -up
like  books.  Eleven  of  these  can  still  be  deciphered.  Matter
publishes  facsimiles  of  three  of  the  best  preserved,  but  none
of  them  present  any  legends  like  the  examples  above  described.

On  the  first  is  seen  Anubis  wearing  a  long  tunic  and  buskins,
and  holding  out  a  scroll ;  at  his  feet  are  two  female  busts :
below  all  are  two  serpents  entwined  about  the  same  object  as
in  the  second  scroll,  where  also  the  same  busts  appear,  viz.  a
corpse  swathed  up  like  a  mummy.  In  the  second  scroll  these
busts  are  set  on  each  side  of  the  Anubis,  a  large  figure  much
mutilated,  but  attired  as  above,  and  holding  out  a  cross,  the
*'  Sign  of  Life."  Under  his  feet  lies  the  corpse,  encircled  in  the
numerous  folds  of  a  huge  serpent,  the  Agathodaamon,  guardian
of  the  deceased.  And  this  last  type  supplies  the  motive  for  so
frequently  placing  upon  gems  the  serpent-girt  mummy.  In  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  367

olden  creed  the  serpent  watched  over  tombs  as  well  as  over
buried  treasure.  When  ^Eneas  is  offering  sacrifice  at  his  father's
grave  (v.  84) —

"Dixerat  haec;  adytis  cum  lubricus  anguis  ab  imis
Septem  ingens  gyros,  septena  volumina,  traxit,
Amplexus  placidc  tumulum,  laps  usque  per  anas  ;
Coeruleae  cui  terga  notae,  maculosus  et  auro
Squamam  incendebat  fulgor,  ecu  nubilus  arcus
Mille  jacit  varios  adverse  sole  colores.
Obstupuit  visu  ^Eneas. I  lie  agmine  longo
Tandem  inter  pateras,  et  loevia  pocula  serpcns,
Libavitque  dapes,  rursusque  innoxius  imo
Successit  tiunulo,  et  depasta  altaria  liquit.
Hoc  magis  inceptos  genitori  instaurat  honores;
Incertus  geniunine  loci  famulumve  parentis
Esse  putet."

In  the  third  scroll,  the  most  valuable  of  all,  the  same  Anubis
bears  on  his  arm  an  oblong  object,  perhaps  the  Koman  scutum,
held  so  as  to  convert  the  outline  of  the  figure  into  a  complete
Latin  cross. Across  this  shield  and  the  field run  a  number
of  Gnostic  symbols,  conspicuous  amongst  which  is  the  sigil  pre
scribed  by  Alexander  Trallianus  as  a  cure  for  the  colic. 0  0  0
Others  resemble  some  ordinary  Masons'  Marks. For  ex
ample,  an eight-armed cross, a circle, and  a square
cut  by  horizontal  and  vertical  lines :  at  the  god's  foot  is
a  rhomboid,  the  Egyptian  "  Egg  of  the  World,"  towards  which
crawls  a  serpent  coiled  into  a  circle. A  remarkable  addition  is
the  inscription  carved  over  the  tunic  in  semi-cursive  letters  :

K6BNT  €KBA

4>KTK  KCI

BK€  A

NcJ>  0
#

Under  the  pairs  of  busts  in  the  other  scrolls  is  the  letter  U),
repeated  seven  times  in  a  line :  reminding  one  of  the  "  Names,"
the  interpretation  whereof  has  been  already  given  from  the
Pistis-Sopliia  (p.  16).  Very  remarkable  also  is  the  line  of
characters,  apparently  Palmyrene,  upon  the  legs  of  the  first
Anubis.  As  for  the  figure  of  the  serpent,  supposing  these  talis
mans  to  emanate  not  from  the  Isiac  but  the  newer  Ophite


368  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

creed,  it  may  well  stand  for  that  "  True  and  perfect  Serpent "
who  "  leads  forth  the  souls  of  all  that  put  their  trust  in  him
out  of  the  Egypt  of  the  hody,  and  through  the  Red  Sea  of
Death  into  the  Land  of  Promise,  saving  them  on  their  way
from  the  serpents  of  the  Wilderness,  that  is,  from  the  Rulers  of
the  stars."

As  for  the  symbols  so  largely  used  here  and  in  other  Gnostic
monuments,  their  frequent  construction  out  of  lines  terminated
by  dots  or  heads  irresistibly  suggests  a  theory  for  their  origin.
In  this  respect,  and  in  general  form,  they  strikingly  resemble
certain  characters  in  the  oldest  Babylonian  alphabet.  This
alphabet,  simple  in  construction,  long  preceding  the  elaborate
nailhead,  is  allowed  to  have  been  pictorial,  i.e.  hieroglyphic,  in
its  nature.  It  is  very  conceivable  that,  revered  for  antiquity,
this  primitive  character  was  preserved  in  sacred  usages  long  after
it  had  grown  obsolete  in  common  life.  The  cuneiform  continued
the  national  alphabet  of  Persia  down  to  the  Macedonian  conquest,
and  doubtless  was  the  one  generally  employed  by  the  natives
(very  few  of  whom  probably  learnt  the  language  of  the  new
masters)  until  it  was  replaced  by  its  last  modification  the  early
IVhlevi.  And  as  for  the  primitive  hieroglyphic  letters,  it  was
natural  that  certain  of  their  forms,  expiessing  peculiarly  hacred
ideas  (as  the  $  signifying  "  God  "),  should  retain  a  mystic,  perhaps
thaumatui  gic,  value  in  the  practice  of  the  Magi  long  after  their
original  meaning  was  forgotten.  And  these  very  Magi  were
the  teachers  of  the  talisman-makers  of  Gnostic  times.*  This
explanation  is  strongly  supported  by  the  recent  discovery,  that
in  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  every  deity  has  a  certain  numeral
assigned  him,  which  said  numeral  frequently  stands  in  the
place  of  his  full  name.  For  example,  the  numei  al  for  Ann  (Pluto)
is  60 ;  for  Baal  (Jupiter)  50  ;  for  Hoa  (Neptune)  40  ;  the  same

*  This  conjecture  of  mine  has  at  last  Besides  these,  lie  recognises  at  least

been  verified  by  that  high  authority  three  out  of  the  Cypriote  syllabary  ;

in Assyrian literature, Professor  some  of  the  rest  remind  him  of  the

Sayce. He  finds  in  the  assemblage  cypher  alphabets  of  the  East  as  given

of  siglse  on  the  back  of  the  Mithraic  by  that  old  author  Ibn  Wahaby,  of

gem  (PI.  LI.  1)  the  regular  cuneiform  which Von Hammer  has  made  a

characters,  somewhat  depraved,  for  translation.
God,  and Heaven for BI and  El.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  369

rule  holding  good  for  the  sun,  moon,  and  planets.  Hence  is  it
more  than  probable '  that  our  Gnostic  talismans  exhibit  to  us
those  very  "  numeri  Babylonii "  which  Horace  dissuades  the  fair
Leuconoe  from  consulting  in  her  unadvised  desire  to  learn  the
Future.  Such  relics  of  old  Chaldean  lore  would,  it  may  well
be  supposed,  never  cease  to  be  reproduced  as  they  were  originally
shapen ;  the  current  Pehlevi  would  have  carried  on  its  face  too
recent  a  stamp  to  impose  upon  superstition.

All numerals  were at  first  letters of  an alphabet. Some
amongst  the  unknown  characters  and  "  Masons'  Marks  "  found
on  talismans  cannot  but  be  numerals,  considering  the  essential
part  the  properties  of  numbers  play  in  several  divisions  of  the
Gnostic  family. This notion  is  strongly  supported by  what
Hippol)  tus  (Egyptian  Theology)  says  of  a  certain  numeral,  lost  in
the  text,  but  from  a  subsequent  passage  clearly  the  Ten. "  Which
is  a  sacred  Number,  and  which  is  written  down  and  tied  about
the  necks  of  sick  people  as  a  means  of  cure. In  like  manner  a
certain  plant  which  terminates  in  the  same  number  (of  leaves)
being similarly  hung  around  the  patient produces  the same
effect,  in  consequence  of  the  virtue  of  that  Number. Moreover
a physician cures his patients when they amount to that
particular  number,  but  when  the  number  of  them  is  against
him  he  does  so  with  great  difficulty. The Egyptians  attend
much to such numerals, and calculate all similar matters
according  to  this  rule ; some  reckoning  by  the  vowels  alone,
others  by  all  the  letters  in  the  Word." The  plant  meant  may
have  been  the  Agnus  castus,  still  regarded  by  the  Turks  as  a
potent amulet,  and called  Kef  Marjam,  "  the  hand  of  Mary,"
on  account  of  its  digitate  form. The  same  hand  made  of  blue
glass  is  tied  round  children's  necks,  or  on  the  part  of  the  body
to be protected against  the  stroke  of  the  Evil-eye. Again,
that  important  sect  the  Marcosians  are  shown  by  Hippolytus
to  teach  no  better  doctrine  than  "  a  mere  patchwork  of  scraps,
stolen  from  the  notions  of  Astrology,  and  from  the  Pythagorean
art  of  numbers." In  their  theosophy  the  sacred  numerals  were
the  30,  the  sum  of  the  letters  constituting  the  Ineffable  Name,  and
the  constituents  of  the  same.  viz.  8,  10,  12  :  expressed  in  Greek
by H, I, I A  : or,  again,  by  an  intricate  combination  of  these

2  B


370  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

numerals  giving  the  sum  99,  written  in  Greek  p.  In  another
place  (iv.  51)  Hippolytus  observes  that  "  almost  every  heresy  is
indebted  to  the  science  of  arithmetic  for  its  invention  of  the
Hebdomads,  and  its  emanation  of  the  ^Eons;  although  the
different  teachers  divide  them  variously,  and  change  their  names,
doing  in  reality  nothing  more  :  in  all  which  way  of  proceeding
Pythagoras  is  their  true  master,  he  who  first  brought  with  him
out  of  Egypt  the  use  of  numbers  in  such  matters.''

The  so-called  "  Pythagorean  Numerals"  of  unknown  antiquity,
whether  or  not  due  to  the  Samian  sage,  are  said  to  be  preserved
to  us  by  Boethius,  "  the  last  of  the  Romans,"  in  his  treatise
on  Arithmetic.  That  they  would  be  the  true  parents  of  our
Arabic  numerals  is  at  once  apparent  by  inverting  the  figures
standing  for  1,  2,  5,  7,  9,  0.  Their  forms  look  like  certain
Palmyrene  letters  slightly  modified.  The  Palmyrene  is  a  very
ancient  Syriac  alphabet,  totally  different  in  origin  from  either
Punic  or  Pehlevi.  The  ancient  importance  of  this  character  is
apparent  from  what  Epiphanius  notices  (Haer.  Ixvi.).  "  Manes
divided  his  work  into  22  books,  being  the  number  of  the  letters
in  the  Syriac  alphabet.  For  most  of  the  Persians  use  the
Syriac  character  as  well  as  the  Persian,  just  as  with  us  many
nations,  although  having  a  national  alphabet  of  their  own,  yet
employ  the  Greek.  Others  again  pride  themselves  upon  using
the  most  cultivated  dialect,  viz.  that  current  in  Palmyra,  both
the  dialect  itself  and  its  letters ;  and  these  are  22  in  number."

In  this  affectation  of  the  learned  in  Persia,  a  sufficient  reason
presents  itself  for  the  occasional  appearance  of  Palmyrene  letters
in  spells  composed  and  sold  by  the  Magi  or  their  semi-Grecian
disciples  under  the  Roman  Empire.  The  practice  went  back
far  beyond  the  epoch  of  the  great  heresiarch,  for  many  Baby
lonian  cylinders  are  known  inscribed,  instead  of  the  cumbrous
cuneiform,  with  a  Semitic  lettering,  sometimes  more  resembling
the  Palmyrene  than  the  Punic.  And  even  when  the  Pehlevi
had  become  the  national  alphabet  of  Persia  there  was  very  good
reason  why  the  cultivators  of  polite  literature  should  prefer  the
Palmyrene  alphabet  for  its  superior  copiousness,  their  own
possessing  no  more  than  fifteen  distinct  characters.  And,  lastly,
the  remark  of  Epiphanius  deserves  attention  as  to  certain


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  371

Western  nations  then  possessing  alphabets  of  their  own :  for  it
proves,  contrary  to  the  received  opinion,  that  as  late  as  A.D.  400
they  had  not  all  been  superseded  by  the  Greek  or  the  Latin
letters  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  Roman  world.

The  curious  question  of  these  Numerals,  and  the  deep  ideas
involved  therein,  has  led  us  far  away  from  the  proper  object
of  this  chapter — sepulchral  scrolls. Their  use  was  carried  on
by  the  Christians  down  to  comparatively  recent  times. Fauno
describes  amongst  the  innumerable  bijoux  of  all  kinds  deposited
in  the  coffin*  of  the  infant  imperial  bride  Maria  Honorii "  a  small
plate  of  gold  on  which  were  written,  or  rather  scratched,  the
words,  in  Greek,  Michael,  Gabriel,  Raphael,  Uriel." And  the
Abbe  Cochet  has  figured  in  his  very  interesting  researches  f  in
the old  Norman  cemeteries  many  leaden  plates,  cross-shaped,
inscribed  with  prayers,  placed  regularly  upon  the  breast  of  the
buried  body. Out  of  four  examples  found  in  the  old  cemetery
of  Bouteilles,  Dieppe,  the  most  complete  formula,  written  in  a
character  that  cannot  be  later  than  the  thirteenth  century,  runs
as  follows  :  "  Dns  IHC  XPC  qui  dixit  discipulis  suis  quodcunque
ligaveritis  super  terrain erit  ligatum et  in  celis  quodcunque
solveritis super terram erit  solutum et in celis  de quorum
numero  licet  nos  indignos  nos  esse  voluit  ipse  te  absolvet  per
ministerium  nostrum  quodcunque  fecisti  cogitatione  locutione
negligenter atque necibus omnibus absolutum perducere
dignetur  in  regnum  celorum  qui  vivit  et  regnat  Deus  per  secula
saeculorum  amen. Omnipotens  Deus  misereatur  animo  Mesaline
condonet  peccata  tibi  preterita  presentia  et  futura  liberet  te  ab
orani  malo  conservet  et  confirmet  itinere  bono  et  perducat  te
Christus  films  Dei  ad  vitam  eternam  et  ad  sanctorum  consortium
absolutione et remissione penitentia tribuat tibi Masaline
omnipotens  plus  et  misericors  IHC  Amen." The  Abbe  states
that  it  is  still  the  custom  in  the  Russian  Church  for  the  papa  at
a  funeral,  after  reading  the  form  of  absolution,  to  place  the  paper
in  the  hand  of  the  corpse  to  accompany  him  into  the  grave.

The  remarkable  properties  of  Numerals  captivated  the  fancy

*  Discovered  Feb.,  1544,  in  digging  his '  Antichita di Roma,' p. 154

the  foundations  of  the  Chapel  of  the  published  1553.

Kings  of  France,  in  St.  Peter's,  Rome;  f  'Sepultures  Gauloises,' chap.xiil.
and  fully  described  by  M.  L.  Fauno  in


372  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

of  Man  as  Boon  as  the  science  of  arithmetic  was  invented.  From
their  powers  of  infinite  multiplication  the  ancients  gave  them
sexes  :  making  the  odd  the  males,  the  even  the  females  of  the
species.  This  assumption  plays  a  great  part  in  the  theosophy
of  Marcus.  From  this  idea,  the  next  step  was  a  very  easy  one

the  attribution  of  mystic  virtues  to  certain  combinations  of

numerals  that  produced  curious  results  by  their  addition.  Of
such,  the  most  striking  example  is  the  Magic  Square;  the
grand  mediaeval  charm  against  the  plague,  and  therefore  con
spicuous  in  Albert  Durer's  picture  of  '  Melancholy,'  where  the
dull  goddess  sits  in  gloomy  abstraction,  surrounded  by  the
emblems  of  all  the  arts  and  sciences.  This,  which  however

4  .  14  .  15  . 1
9  . 7  . 6  .  12

5  .  11  .  10  . 8
16  . 2  . 3  .  13

added,  gives  the  same  result,  viz.,  34.

The  celebrated  Caireen  magician  of  forty  years  ago,  em
ployed  a  diagram  constructed  on  the  same  principle,  but  with
different  numerals,  into  the  middle  of  which,  traced  on  a  sheet

4.9.2

3.5.7

8.1.6

of  paper,  he  poured  the  little  pool  of  ink  which  served  for  mirror
to  exhibit  the  spectres  of  the  persons  called  for  by  his  dupes.
And,  to  conclude  this  subject  in  an  appropriate  manner,  a
fifteenth  century  MS.  in  the  library  of  this  college,  amongst
a  number  of  charms,  gave  this  "  for  procuring  favour  with  all
men  ;  "  always  carry  about  you  written  down—
A.X.H.B.X.U.Y.III.K.O


FIG.  17.


PART  V.

TEMPLARS, ROSICRUCIANS, FREE
MASONS.

"  Inscriptiones  proptor  quas  vadimoniurn  deseri  possit :  at
cum  intraveris,  Di  Deaeque  1  quam  nihil  in  medio  invenies."
(Plin.  H.  N.  Praef.)


TEMPLARS, ROSICRUCIANS, FREE
MASONS.


PRESERVATION  OF  GNOSTIC  SYMBOLS  AMONGST
THE  FEEEMASONS.

AT  the  first  sight  it  is  absolutely  startling  to  recognise  so
many  Gnostic  (primarily  Indian)  symbols,  figuring  so  con
spicuously  amongst  the  insignia  and  illustrated  formula3  of  our
Freemasons,  and  that,  too,  apparently  in  their  original  sense
as  exponents  of  the  deepest  mysteries,  human  and  divine — a
circumstance  of  itself  lending  a  specious  colour  to  the  preten
sions  of  the  Order  to  the  most  venerable  antiquity.  "  In-
scriptiones  propter  quas  vadimonia  deseri  possint.  Sed  ubi
intraveris,  Dii  Deaeque  !  quam  nihil  in  medio  invenies,"  to  quote
old  Pliny's  words  in  speaking  of  the  charlatans  of  his  day.  For
the  pleasing  illusion  vanishes  when  we  come  to  investigate  the
line  of  their  descent ;  and  the  Fraternity,  though  claiming  them
as  its  own  legitimate  inheritance,  turns  out  at  the  end  a  mere
daw  in  borrowed  plumes.

To  begin  by  stating  these  claims,  as  recently  put  forward  by
one  of  their  most  zealous  and  pugnacious  defenders :  "  The
mere  title  may  be  comparatively  modern;  for  the  society  in
antediluvian  (!)  and  prehistorical  times  most  undoubtedly  was
not  called  Freemasonry.  But  the  thing  was  in  existence,  and
has  descended  to  our  own  day."  "  On  the  arrival  of  the  Eomans
in  Britain,  we  find  CaBsar  and  several  of  the  Roman  generals
who  succeeded  him  in  the  government  of  the  island  becoming
patrons  and  protectors  of  the  craft ;  but  there  is  no  information
to  be  found  in  regard  to  the  usages  and  customs  prevalent
among  them  at  that  time.  Their  lodges  and  conventions  were


376  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

regularly  held,  but  were  open  only  to  the  initiated  fellows.
There  is  enough  however  to  show  that  the  same  society  which
now  nourishes  everywhere  was  then  in  existence,  holding
lodges  and  conventions  and  having  its  initiated  fellows.  I  may
add,  that  a  regular  list  of  Grand  Masters  can  be  produced  quite
as  genuine  and  reliable  as  that  of  the  Archbishops  of  Canter
bury,  or  of  the  Kings  of  England.  If  that  in  itself  is  not
valid  evidence  enough  of  the  continued  existence  of  the  same
society  in  England  from  the  earliest  historical  period  down  to
the  present  date,  I  don't  know  what  would  be  admitted  as
sufficient  evidence."  "  Going  back  to  A.D.  300  we  find  the
Emperor  Carausius  supporting  it,  and  appointing  Albanus,  his
Steward,  Grand  Master.  This  was  none  other  than  the  famous
St.  Alban,  the  first  British  martyr,  who  was  born  at  Verulam,
now  St.  Albans,  in  Hertfordshire."*

The  above  is  an  unusually  brilliant  specimen  of  the  logic  of
the  Brotherhood,  that  assumes  in  every  notice  of  building  and
builders  to  be  found  in  antiquity  a  recognition  of  the  then
existence  of  their  own  society  exactly  as  at  present  constituted.
The  old  guild  of  ivorking-masons  seems  to  have  made  pretensions
of  the  same  nature  (if  we  allow  the  genuineness  of  the  supposed
Bodleian  MS.  copied  by  Locke)  ;  for  their  great  patron  Henry  VI.
informs  his  scholar  that  "  the  Mystery  was  first  brought  into
England  by  Peter  Gower  "  (Pythagoras) — a  corruption  of  the
name,  by  the  way  ;  plainly  betraying  that  he  had  obtained  this
piece  of  information  from  a  French  mouth,  probably  from  some
one  in  the  suite  of  his  queen.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  this  con
nexion  of  the  Father  of  Mathematics  with  the  building  trade
arose  from  the  study  of  that  science  by  the  Greek  and  Koman
architects  :  for  upon  the  vital  importance  of  a  knowledge  of
Mathematics  to  his  own  profession  Vitruvius  repeatedly  and
strongly  insists.  But  this  very  king,  whom  our  Freemasons
claim  as  their  chief  resuscitator,  furnishes  the  most  conclusive
evidence  against  the  reality  of  their  modern  pretensions.  By
the  advice  of  the  Bishop  of  Winchester,  better  known  as  Car
dinal  Beaufort,  he  passed  an  Act,  in  his  third  year,  forbidding

*  From  a  letter  published  in  the  by  John  Milner,  B.A.,  Chaplain  to
'Cork  Constitution,'  Jan.  15,  186G,  H. M.S.  Hector.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  377

Masons  to  hold  lodges  or  any  meetings  whatsoever,  which  pro
tection  is  clearly  directed  against  no  higher  things  than  mere
"  trade-union  "  proceedings.  But  at  a  later  period  he  showed
the  Masons  more  favour,  and  even  attended  their  meetings,  as
did  his  contemporary  James  I.  of  Scotland.  But  the  question
is  set  at  rest  by  the  language  of  the  Act  :*  "  First,  Whereas  by
the  assembling  congregations  and  confederacies  made  by  the
Masons  in  their  grand  chapters  and  assemblies  the  good  cause
and  effect  of  the  Statute  of  Labourers  be  openly  violated  and
broken,  in  subversion  of  the  law  and  to  the  great  damage  of
all  the  commons,  our  said  Lord  the  King  willing  in  this  case  to
provide  remedy  by  the  advice  and  assent  aforesaid,  and  at  the
special  request  of  the  said  commons,  hath  ordered  and  estab
lished,  that  such  chapiters  and  congregations  shall  not  be
hereafter  made,  they  that  cause  such  chapiters  and  congrega
tions  to  be  assembled  and  holden,  if  they  thereof  be  convict,
shall  be  judged  for  felons.  And  that  all  the  other  masons  that
come  to  such  chapiters  and  congregations,  be  punished  by
imprisonment  of  their  bodies,  and  make  fine  and  ransom  at  the
king's  will."

The  language  of  this  Act  is  sufficiently  conclusive,  but  for
accumulation  of  proofs,  I  shall  proceed  to  establish  the  same
position  by  giving  a  summary  of  the  oldest,  and  only  genuine
document  extant  on  the  subject  of  Masonry.  This  document  is
a  MS.  Bib.  Eeg.  17.  A.  I.  fif.  32,  written  in  a  hand  that  cannot
be  later  than  the  close  of  the  13th  century,  and  of  which  a  copy
has  been  published  by  J.  0.  Halliwell.  It  commences  with  a
history  of  Architecture  from  the  beginning,  and  of  the  intro
duction  of  the  art  into  England,  and  then  proceeds  to  give,  in
rhyme,  the  Rules  of  the  Craft,  conceived  in  precisely  the  same
business-like  spirit  as  those  of  a  Trades-Union.  The  preamble
is  :  "  Hie  incipiunt  Constitutiones  Artis  Geometricae  secunduni
Eiiclydem."f  Onca  upon  a  time  a  certain  king  and  his  nobles
had  such  large  families  as  to  be  unable  to  maintain  them
decently,  and  taking  counsel  together  devised  they  should  be

*  '  Statutes  at  Large,'  ed.  Keble,  densed  summary  of  the  sense  of  the
1695.  3  Hen.  VI.  cap.  1.  old  Mason's  rhymes,

t  What follows is a much eon-


378  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

taught  some  trade  whereby  to  live.  A  great  clerk  Euclyde
proposed  teaching  them  geometry,  called  Masonry,  the  most
honest  craft  of  all.  He  ordered  that  the  most  advanced  of  his
scholars  should  be  styled  Master  by  the  rest,  but  that  he  should
call  none  of  his  inferiors  either  subject  or  servant,  but  always  my
dear  brother.

"  In  this  manner  by  good  wit  and  Geometry,
Began  first  the  Craft  of  Masonry."

Euclyde  invented  and  taught  the  same  in  Egypt :  many
years  afterwards  it  was  brought  into  England  in  King  Athel-
stan's  time.  This  good  king  loved  the  Craft  and  built  many
towers,  halls,  bowers,  and  temples.  But  finding  out  many
defects  in  the  Craft  he  determined  to  reform  the  same  and
summoned  an  Assembly  of  all  the  masons  in  England  together
with  all  his  lords  and  commons,  and,

"  Fifteen  Articles  there  they  brought,
And  Fifteen  Points  there  they  wrote."

Art.  I.  The  master  must  be  just  and  true,  and  pay  his
fellows  according  to  the  price  of  provisions  :  neither  exact  more
from  his  employer  than  he  pays  his  men ;  nor  take  bribes  from
either  side.

II.  Every  master-mason  must  attend  the  general  congrega
tion  or  Assembly,  wherever  it  shall  be  held,  unless  hindered  by
sickness,  else  shall  he  be  accounted  disobedient  to  the  Craft  and
full  of  falseness.

III.  No  prentice  to  be  taken  for  less  than  seven  years,  for  in
less  time  he  cannot  learn  his  business  either  to  his  employer's
profit  or  to  his  own.

IV.  No  bondsman  may  be  taken  for  prentice. Otherwise  it
might  so  happen  that  his  lord  might  take  him  out  of  the  lodge
itself,  and  so  occasion  great  tumult,  for  all  the  masons  would
stand  together  by  their  fellow. The  prentice  must  therefore  be
taken  of  the  master's  own  degree; but  of  old times  it  was
ordained  he  should  be  of  gentle  blood,  and  even  great  lords'
sons  took  to  this  geometry.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  379

V.  The  prentice  must  be  of  lawful  birth,  and  sound  both  in

mind  and  body  :

"  For  an  imperfect  man  of  such  blood,
Should  do  the  Craft  but  little  good.
A  maimed  man  he  hath  no  might,
Ye  may  it  knowen  long  ere  night."

VI.  The  master  must  not  take  from  his  employer  the  same
pay  for  the  prentice  as  for  the  perfect  workman. Nevertheless,
before  the  prentice's  time  is  out,  as  he  increases  in  knowledge,
so  may  his  wages  be  proportionably  raised.

VII.  The  master  must  neither  for  love nor  money  clothe,
feed,  or  harbour  a  thief,  nor  a  homicide,  nor  one  of  bad  fame,
all  which  would  bring  the  Craft  to  shame.

VIII.  If  the  master  finds  any  of  his  men  incompetent  he  must
turn  him  off,  and  take  another  in  his  place,  "  as  such  a  hand
would  do  the  Craft  short  worship."

IX.  The  master  must  undertake  no  job  that  he  is  unable  to
finish,  and  must  see  that  he  lays  the  foundation  so  that  it  will
neither  give  nor  crack.

X.  No  master-mason  must  supplant  another  under  penalty  of
ten  pounds  unless  where  the  work  has  tumbled  down  through
the  incompetence  of  the  first builder. In  all  points of  this
"  curious  Craft "  masons  must  live  together  like  brethren.

XI.  No  mason  is  to  work  by  night  unless  for  the  sake  of
trying  experiments  for  amending  errors.

XII.  No  mason  must disparage the  work of  another,  but
rather  must  praise  the  same,  and  if  wrong,  privately  advise  him
how  to  aright  it.

XIII.  The prentice must be taught  every  branch of  the
business,  and  be  put  upon  work  suitable  to  his  ability.

XIV.  The  master must  take  no  prentices-,  unless  he  have
divers  jobs  in  hand,  in  order  to  teach  them  the  trade.

XV.  The  prentice  must be a friend  to  his master,  never
deceive him for the sake  of  another; neither  stand  by  his
fellows  in  a  wrong  cause,  nor  take  a  false  oath.

These  Fifteen  Points  were  likewise  ordained  at  the  aforesaid
Assembly  : —

I.  The  mason  must  love  God,  Holy  Church,  and  his  fellow-
masons,  wheresoever  he  may  go.


380  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

II.  The  mason  must  work  as  truly  as  he  can  upon  the  work
day,  and  so  deserve  his  pay  upon  the  holy  day.

III.  The  prentice  is  on  no  account to divulge any trade

secrets.

"This  Third  Point  it  must  be  special,
Let  the  prentice  know  it  well,
His  master's  counsel  he  keep  and  close,
And  his  fellows',  by  good  purpose;
The  secrets  of  the  chamber  he  tell  to  none,
Nor  in  the  lodge  whatever  is  done.
Whatever  thou  seest  or  nearest  them  do,
Tell  it  no  man  wherever  thou  go.
The  counsel  of  hall  and  eke  of  bower,
Keep  it  well  in  great  honour,
Lest  it  should  bring  thyself  to  blame,
And  bring  the  Craft  into  great  shame."

IV.  That no mason be false to the Craft nor maintain
his  cause  against  it :  neither  do  prejudice  to  master  nor  fellow,
and  that  the  prentice  stand  in  awe.

V.  The master must take his wages, whatever ordained
him,  without  disputing. The  master,  if  unable  to  find  them
work  as  before,  to  give  them  warning  in  the  forenoon.

VI.  If  any  dispute  or  quarrel  arise  amongst  the  masons,  the
master  must  make  them  put  off  the  settlement  thereof  until
the  next  holy  day  ;  and  not  allow  it  to  be  settled  upon  a  work
day,  lest  it  should  hinder  the  work  in  hand.

VII.  Not to lie with thy master's or fellow's wife or
concubine  under  penalty  of  serving another seven years of
prenticeship.

VIII.  If  thou  hast  taken  any  job  under  thy  master,  be  a
faithful  middleman  between  thy  master  and  thy  fellows.

IX.  When  the  fellows  have  a  common  chamber  then  they  must
take  the  stewardship  in  turns,  week  by  week. All  victuals  to
be  paid  for  as  received,  and  regular  accounts  to  be  kept  of  the
common  expenses.

"  Of  thy  fellows'  goods  that  thou  hast  spent,
When,  and  how,  and  to  what  end,
Such  accounts  thou  must  come  to
When  thy  fellows  would  thou  do."

X.  If  a  mason  lives  amiss  and  is  false  to  his  work,  he  must,
without  favour,  be  convened  before  the  Assembly,  and  punished


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

according  to  the  law  of  old  ordained :  or,  in  case  he  refuses  to
appear,  he  must  forswear  the  profession.

XI.  If  a  skilled  mason  observe  his  fellow  cutting  a  stone  and
likely  to  spoil  it  through  his  own  ignorance,  he  must  advise
him  in  fair  words,  and  teach  him  how  to  amend  it,  not  to  bring
shame  upon  the  whole  work.

XII.  That whatever shall be ordained in the Assembly,
being  present  the  master  and  fellows,  nobles,  burghers,  and  the
sheriff  of  the  county,  and  the  mayor  of  the  town,  that  thou
shall  maintain  against  all  thy  fellows,  if  disposed  to  dispute
the  same.

XIII.  The  mason  must  swear  never  to  be  a  thief  himself,  nor
for  any  fee  or  reward  to  abet  one  that  is.

XIV.  Before  the  Assembly  breaks  up,  each  must  be  sworn
unto  his  master  and  fellows,  to  the  king, and to all these
present. Also  they  must  seek out every  one  that  hath  con
travened  any  one  law  thereof,  and  bring  them  up  before  the
Assembly.

XV.  And  if  found  guilty,  they  must  forswear  the  Craft :

"  And  so  mason's  craft  they  must  refuse,
And  swear  it  never  more  to  use,"

unless  they  consent  to  make  amends.  If  refractory,  the  sheriff
is  to  cast  them  into  prison  during  the  king's  good  pleasure,  and
take  their  goods  and  chattels  for  the  king's  use.  The  Assembly
must  be  held  every  year,  or  at  least  every  third  year.  Unto
the  same  must  come  every  man  of  the  Craft,  and  all  the  great
nobles,  to  amend  all  infractions,  and  to  swear  obedience  to  the
Constitutions  of  King  Athelstan ;  and  especially  to  make  bold
petition  to  the  king  that  he  stand  by  the  masons  everywhere
and  enforce  the  same  statutes.

Next follows '  Ars Quattuor Coronatorum,' a manual of
religious and moral duties,  and also of good manners in

company.

"The  Four  Masters—
Who  were  as  good  Masons  as  on  earth  could  go,
Gravers  and  image-makers  they  were  also,"

were  commanded  by  the  Emperor  to  make  an  idol  to  be
worshipped.  On  their  refusal  he  first  imprisoned  and  tortured
them,  and  at  last  put  them  to  death.  These  be  the  "  Quattuori


382


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


Coronati,"  and  their  festival  falls  on  the  eighth  day  after  All
Saints.  Many  years  after  Noah's  Flood,  was  begun  the  Tower
of  Babylon.  It  was  built  up  to  the  height  of  seven  miles,  by
order  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  for  a  refuge  in  case  of  another  deluge.
But  an  angel,  in  order  to  punish  his  pride,  smote  all  the
builders  with  confusion  of  tongues.  After  this  Euclid  taught
geometry,  and  gave  his  scholars  the  following  rules.

Behaviour  in  Church.— To  use  the  holy-water  on  going  in  :  to
kneel  down,  never  sit  nor  stand,  make  no  noise  nor  talk,  but
pray  all  the  time,  saying  certain  prayers  given  in  the  text.  To
attend  mass  daily,  but  if  at  work  to  repeat  a  certain  prayer
upon  hearing  the  mass-bell.

In  Company.— On  coming  before  a  lord,  to  doff  cap  or  hood
nor  put  in  on  again  until  bid  ;  make  two  or  three  bows  with
the  right  leg,  hold  up  thy  chin,  look  him  sweetly  in  the  face ;
do  not  scrape  the  foot,  nor  spit  or  blow  thy  nose.  On  entering
a  hall  amongst  the  gentelles,  be  not  presumptuous  on  account  of
thy  birth  or  skill  :

"  In  hall  or  chamber  where  thou  dost  gan,
Good  manners  make  the  man."

When  sitting  down  to  meat,  see  thy  hands  be  clean  and  knife
sharp  :  cut  the  bread  and  meat  ready  for  eating.  If  sitting  by
a  worshipful  man,  suffer  him  to  help  himself  first.  Keep  thy
hands  clean,  smudge  not  the  napkin,  on  which  thou  must  not
blow  thy  nose  :  nor  pick  thy  teeth  at  table ;  neither  drink  with
anything  in  the  mouth,  nor  dip  thy  chin  too  deep  in  the  cup,
nor  talk  to  thy  neighbour  when  drinking.

"In  chamber  among  the  ladies  bright,
Spare  thy  tongue,  and  spend  thy  sight."

Talk  not  of  thine  own  matters,  neither  for  mirth  nor  for  mede.
Play  only  with  thine  equals.  On  meeting  a  man  of  worship
be  sure  to  cap  him;  walk  a  little  way  behind  him;  never
interrupt  his  speech ;  be  brief  and  fair  in  thy  replies,  &c.

"  Christ  then,  of  his  grace,
Give  you  both  the  wit  and  space
Well  this  book  to  con  and  read,
Heaven  to  have  for  your  mede.
Amen!  Amen! So  mote  it  bee!
So  say  we  all  par  charite"


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  383

Any  reader  of  common  intelligence  will  perceive  that  the
good  priest,  author  of  this  the  oldest  extant  document  upon
Masonry,  had  not  the  remotest  idea  of  the  same  as  being  the
possession  of  a  secret  society,  established  for  some  hidden  end,
whether  religious  or  political.  The  very  rules  which  he  pro
fesses  to  transcribe  from  the  Constitutions  of  Athelstan,  are
as  plain-spoken,  matter-of-fact  as  those  of  a  modern  Trades-
Union,  differing  only  from  the  latter  in  the  larger  admixture  of
common  sense  and  honesty  that  they  display,  the  whole  winding
up  with  directions  for  behaviour  in  good  society,  as  laid  down
by  some  anticipatory  Chesterfield.  The  "  secrets  of  the  lodge  "
are  manifestly  nothing  more  than  matters  pertaining  to  the
trade  discussed  amongst  the  masons  at  their  lodgings  after
work,  and  very  inexpedient  for  them  to  be  divulged  to  out
siders.  And  to  come  to  the  most  essential  point  of  the  question
which  these  Constitutions  fully  establish,  "  the  Assembly  "  is,
so  far  from  being  a  secret  chapter,  held  by  the  Free  and  Accepted
Brethren  only,  that  it  must  actually  be  presided  over  by  the  sheriff
of  the  county,  and  the  mayor  of  the  town  where  it  is  held  !  for
the  purpose  of  settling  all  matters  connected  with  the  building-
trade  ;  being  in  fact  nothing  more  than  what  was  called  in
those  times  an  "  Assize  of  Labour."

An  interesting  feature  in  the  treatise  is  the  fact  of  its
ascribing  these  same  "  Constitutions "  to  King  Athelstan.
There  is  very  good  reason  for  accepting  this  statement  as
founded  upon  trustworthy  tradition.  The  Saxon  Prince  was
the  first  British  sovereign  who  possessed  either  wealth  or
inclination  for  decorative  architecture  or  building  of  any  sort.
His  father,  Edward  the  Elder,  and  his  aunt  Ethelfleda  "  the
Lady  of  Mercia,"  are  recorded  as  the  first  of  the  Saxon  line
who  built  fortifications  of  stone  about  their  chief  cities.  Before
this  the  Saxons,  like  all  other  Teutons,  had  no  other  idea  of
building  than  of  constructions  in  wood,  all  stone-masons  had
to  be  brought  over  from  France  when  wanted  (as  numerous
references,  unnecessary  here  to  quote,  conclusively  evince),  in
which  country  architecture  had  kept  up  a  feeble  existence
after  the  fall  of  the  Empire,  its  preservation  being  due  to  the
patronage  of  the  Church,  which  kept  growing  in  wealth  and


384  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

power  in  proportion  as  the  Roman  authority  died  away.  The
simplicity  of  the  Constitutions  in  prescribing  the  convening  of
mere  craftsmen  tinder  the  presidency  of  the  sheriff  and  mayor,
betokens  a  truly  Saxon  state  of  society,  and  moreover  a  time
when  these  masons  were  actually  working-men.  Under  the
Normans,  regular  architects  (in  one  sense)  first  appear  as  the
"  Masters,"  who  were  almost  invariably  churchmen.  Further
more,  the  prohibition  against  taking  a  "  bondman  "  for  pren
tice  unmistakably  betokens  the  same  early  period,  when
domestic  slavery,  not  mere  villanage,  was  recognised  by  law :
the  Norman  legislation  makes  no  such  distinction  of  bond  and
free.

Aubrey  indeed  quotes  the  authority  of  Dugdale  that  "  the
Fraternity  of  Adopted  Masons,"  having  signs  and  passwords  for
the  purpose  of  mutual  recognition,  owed  its  origin  to  a  company
of  Italian  masons,  who  in  Henry  III.'s  time  obtained  a  patent
from  the  Pope  to  go  about  Europe,  building  churches.  But  the
absurdity  of  this  statement  is  manifested  by  a  single  fact :
when  the  Italians  of  that  period  wished  to  erect  any  important
edifice,  so  far  from  being  competent  to  do  so  for  other  nations,
they  were  forced  to  call  in  architects  from  Germany  and
France.  To  give  a  few  decisive  examples,  as  regards  the
wealthiest  and  most  polished  states  of  that  country  : — Pisa  em
ployed  Guglielmo  il  Tcdesco  to  plan  her  celebrated  Campanile ;
Florence,  Lapo,  alias  Jacopo  il  Tedesco,  father  of  Arnolfo
(who  had  already  gained  high  reputation  by  the  triple  church
he  had  built  at  Assisi  for  the  Franciscans),  to  construct
their  bridge  "  Alia  Carraia,"  the  Bargello  or  Townhall,  several
churches,  and  to  drain  the  Piazza  Grande.  Even  a  century
later  the  Visconti  were  obliged  to  employ  German  architects
to  design  the  Duomo  at  Milan.  It  is  true  Henry  III.  had
in  his  pay  one  Peter  "  civis  Eomanus,"  but  only  in  the
capacity  of  a  decorative  artist,  for  the  mosaic  work  at  the
Westminster  Shrine.  But  in  truth,  during  the  entire  Gothic
period,  architecture,  as  a  national  art,  may  be  said  to  have  been
extinct  in  Italy,  the  grand  centre  of  the  art  then  being
established  in  the  very  middle  of  France.

All  this  evidence  goes  to  show  that  our  Freemasons  have  no


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  385

relationship,  either  actual  or  traditional,  with  the  mediaeval
guilds  bearing  the  same  appellation,  a  pretence  they  so
zealously  maintain.  The  latter  were  corporations  of  real  work
men,  in  which  each  person,  after  serving  a  regular  apprentice
ship,  and,  according  to  the  custom  still  kept  up  in  some
counties,  producing  a  trial-piece  to  prove  his  competency,  was
admitted  "  free  "  of  the  Guild,  and  "  accepted  "  amongst  the
members  of  the  same.  The  compotations  accompanying  the
ceremony  are  in  truth  the  sole  point  of  resemblance  between
the  ancient  and  the  modern  Freemasons.

The  'Bulletin  Monumental'  for  1884,  p.  34,  contains  a
memoir,  "Les  signes  do  Tacherons  sur  les  remparts  d' Avignon,"
which  gives  the  fullest  collection  (six  pages)  of  these  marks
that  has  ever  been  published.  They  can  bo  here  traced
from  Roman  times  where  they  appear  as  single  letters  or  as
Trionian  shorthand,  down  to  the  actual  Masons'  Marks  of
mediaeval  and  modern  times.  Many  clearly  represent  the
tools  used  in  building.  Some  of  these  marks,  and  more  of
those  from  Avignon,  are  to  be  recognised  upon  Lichfield's
"Baphometic  Tablet;"  which  may,  after  all,  be  no  modern
forgery,  but  a  genuine  register  of  such  segli  of  the  seventeenth
century.*

The  mediaeval  guild  of  Masons,  as  we  have  seen,  was  no  more
a  secret  society  than  were  the  guilds  of  Carpenters,  Cordwainers  or
Tailors.  Every  man  indeed  belonging  to  the  first-named  (and  this
is  the  only  thing  belonging  to  the  Craft,  that  really  carries  with
it  an  air  of  mysterious  antiquity)  had,  upon  admission,  a  mark  (or
cypher)  assigned  him,  which  he  was  bound  to  put  upon  every
stone  he  dressed  (a  rule  still  observed)  in  order  to  distinguish
his  work  from  that  of  his  fellows,  against  the  time  when  the
materials  should  be  examined  by  the  master-mason,  who  paid
him  for  those  approved,  but  stopped  his  wages  for  those  spoiled
through  his  fault.  Similarly  every  "  Merchant  of  the  Staple  "
joined  with  his  initials  upon  his  seal,  or  trade  mark,  the  mark
of  the  staple-town  to  which  he  belonged.  This  latter,  though

*  Most interesting  of  all,  on  ac- lately  published  by  Dr.  Freshfield,
count of  their  early  date,  are the in  the  Archseologia,  Vol.  50,  Part  I.
Masons'  Marks  at  Westminster  Hall,

2  c


886  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

much  alike  in  outline,  was  variously  modified  so  as  to  indicate
each  of  the  fifteen  towns  in  England,  Ireland,  and  Wales,
appointed  by  Edward  III.  In  all  mediaeval  documents  relating
to  building,  the  name  "  Freemason "  signifies  merely  the
worker  in  hewn  stone,  the  inferior  workman  who  ran  up  the
body  of  the  wall  in  rubble  or  ragstone  being  called  the
"  Eough-waller."  Lastly,  a  very  puzzling  question  presents
itself — if  our  Freemasons  be  the  legitimate  successors  in  an
unbroken  line  of  the  ancient  lodges  and  guilds,  how  came  it
that  all  the  principles  of  Gothic  architecture  were  utterly  lost
within  less  than  a  century  ?

But  to  return  to  the  marks  themselves,  of  which  many
collections  have  been  published  gathered  from  regions  the
most  widely  separated.  Their  history  is  indeed  full  of  interest
but  likewise  of  obscurity ;  "  res  alta  nocte  et  caligine  mersae."
Many  of  them  are  traditional,  and  go  back  to  the  highest
antiquity,  being  found  on  Phoenician*  and  Greek  buildings  (as
well  as  on  vases  and  coins  of  the  earliest  times),  and  in  still
larger  abundance  and  variety  in  all  mediaeval  architecture.
These  marks  were  in  the  beginning  religious  symbols,  many  of
them  being  identical  with  the  caste-marks,  whereby  to  this  day
the  followers  of  the  respective  Hindoo  gods  are  distinguished
from  one  another.  This  religious  significance  explains  also
their  occurrence  on  Celtic  monuments,  as  on  the  Stonehenge
lintel,  and  the  Newton  Stone,  Aberdeen,  and  so  numerously  on
the  Gallic  coins ;  but  they  have  for  centuries,  further  back  than
can  be  traced,  degenerated  into  the  mere  signatures  of  illiterate
mechanics."!"  To  illustrate  this  curious  point,  I  shall  adduce  a

*  A  most  interesting  example  is  It  is,  however,  ridiculous  to  attribute

the  stone  in  the  second  course  of  the  the  foundation  of  the  Temple  Wall

Temple  Wall,  S.E. Jerusalem, dis-  to  Solomon's architects, the  fact  of

covered Jan. 1869. It bears two  its being cut through ten feet of

marks,  deeply  cut,  ^  aDd  H. Other  rubbish  thrown  from  above  proves  it

marks in  red  paint  resemble Phoe-  to have been done long after  the

nician letters. Deutsch observed  city  was  inhabited,  and  therefore  the

many  such  on  the  walls  of  the  old  work  of  Agrippa.

Castle  of  Sidon,  built from  ancient  f  Who have  introduced  a  refine-

materials. He considers them  ment  upon  the  old  system,  viz.,  the

numeral,  unity  to- 9 being repre-  necessity  of  every  mark  terminating

sented  by  vertical  lines, 10 by a  in  an  odd  number  of  ends.
horizontal,  20  by  two  parallels,  &c.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  387

few  of  the  most  remarkable  examples  of  lapidary  symbolism,*
giving,  as  in  duty  bound,  precedence  to  the  late  discovery  at
Stonehenge. The mark  is  cut  upon  the  fallen  impost  lying
across  the  supposed  altar. It  is  nine  inches  long  and  clearly
defined, and may  be described  as  a  semicircle  of  which  the
diameter  being  produced,  its  own  length  terminates  in  a  second
semicircle reversed and open, combined with the Koman
letters,  L,  V ;  having  in  fact  much  the  appearance  of  a  sicjla
or nota  scriptoria. The  mark  has  therefore  something  in its
look  that  suggests  the  signature  LVCIUS. Had  the  sagacious
Stukeley  discovered  this  inscription  he  would  unquestionably
upon  the  strength  thereof  have  ascribed  the  whole  fabric  to  the
British  Lucius  so  renowned  in  fable. It  must  not  however  be
concealed  that our fashionable scepticism  has  impugned  the
reality  of  even  this  most  venerable  "  handwriting  on  the  wall."
Dr.  Thurman  has  hunted  up  three  credible  witnesses  ready  to
make  affidavit that  they  saw  with their  own  eyes  a  certain
stranger  cut  the  sigil.f But  inasmuch  as  it  would  be  equally
facile,  by  means  of  leading  questions  dexterously  put,  to  obtain
the testimony  of  the same number  of  "  bucolical  juveniles  "
that they  were  present at  the  erection  of  Stonehenge  itself,
the  genuineness  of  the  mark  (so  wrcrnodern in  configuration)
seems to me in no measure disproved. Symbolic  figures,
spirals and interesting circles are  found  on  the stones in
Newton Grange,  Drogheda Cave,  Eouth  Linn,  Old Berwick,
Doddington  Moor,  Northumberland;  Long  Meg,  Cumberland.
The  latter  have  been  published  in  the  Archa3ological  Journal.
But to proceed  to  actual  Caste-marks. We  find  a  casual
allusion to their  use  in  ancient  writers,  who  state  that the
badges  distinguishing  the  three  orders  of  the  Egyptian  priest-
xix.  p.  78.  J

*  Regular Masons' marks are  the neighbouring Benares. Slier-
visible  upon  the  great  hewn  stones  ring,  *  Sacred  City  of  the  Hindus.'
of  the  Buddhist  buildings  at  Sarnath,  f  It  must  be  remembered  the  stone
which are known to have been  is  so  hardened  by  weathering  as  to
erected  before  the  sixth  century ;  and  turn  the  best  chisel !
more  of  the  same  kind  are  found  on  J  Lists of Masons' marks have
the  ruined buildings  of the same  been published in the following
religion  still  to  be  traced  incorporated  works: '  Arehraologia  ' (18-45), for
into  the  Brahminical  edifices  within  Scotland,  by  Prof.  Chalmers ;  Marks

2  o  2


388  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS

hood  were  the  ©  signifying  the  sun  ;  the  T  eternal  life  ;  and  the
A  pleasure.  With  the  Hindoos,  the  equilateral  Triangle  sym
bolises  Mahadeva,  or  Siva,  that  is,  the  element  Fire  personified.

The  same  figure  inverted  stands  for  Vishnu,  Water.

The  two,  intersecting  each  other,  form  the  Slierkun  or  six-
points;  that  is,  the  two  elements  in  conjunction.

The  five-pointed  figure,  made  by  bisecting  the  sides  of  an
equilateial  triangle  by  a  line  as  long  as  one  side,  and  drawing
lines  from  each  extremity  of  the  said  line  to  each  foot  of  the
triangle,  symbol  of  Siva  and  Brahma  (the  latter  god  having
five  heads)  became,  later,  the  famous  "  Solomon's  Seal."  This
appellation  it  must  have  got  in  early  times,  as  in  virtue  thereof
it  is  sculptured  along  with  the  seven -branched  candlestick
upon  Sivish  tombs  dating  from  the  Lower  Empire.*  The
Hindoos  still  venerate  the  figure  as  replete  with  virtue.
Similarly  the  Slierkun  is  engraved  on  a  large  scale  upon  each
side  of  the  gate  of  the  Fort  at  Agra,  although  the  building  is
of  Mohammedan  work.

A  point,  Puru,  is  the  Deity  ;  self  existing.  A  circle,  Bralim,
eternity.  Hence  a  triangle  within  a  circle  is  the  emblem  of
Trinity  in  Unity ;  and  the  circle  inscribed  within  a  triangle
the  converse.

Worshippers  of  Sacti,  the  Female  Principle,  mark  their  sacred
vase  with  a  right  angle  bisected  by  a  line;  and  similarly  the
worshippers  of  Isis  used  so  to  mark  the  vessel  necessary  at  her
rites.  But  the  Vishnaivas  have  for  the  same  object  a  symbol
of  wondrous  vitality  and  diffusion  :  for  it  is  seen  equally  on
Greek  coins  and  vases,  on  the  Newton  Stone,  Aberdeen,  in
ecclesiastical  sculpture,  where  it  takes  the  name  "  Tetragam-

at Brechin, and signatures to St.  those given  by  Ouseley ('  Travels,'

Ninian's  Roll,  coming down  to  the  pi.  82),  as  "  characters  of  some  un-

date  1814. Ditto,  for  1844,  contains  known  alphabet,"  found  by  him  on

a  memoir  by  G.  Godwin,  with  five  the stones of Ihe Old Palace  (a

plates of marks from England  Mohammedan building)  of Saadi-

(Gloucester, Tewkesbury), France,  talat, near Ispahan ; which never-

Gerruany (Koln). 'Annales Arche'-  theless  have  a  striking  resemblance

ologiques  ' (1844-5), '  Sigues  Lapi-  to  the  European  class,
daires,'  from  Coucy,  Avignon,  Palais  *  Numerous examples may be

do  Justice,  Paris,  Yincenues.  Eheims,  seen in their  catacomb at Rome,

Strasburgh. Most  curious  of  all  are  lately  discovered.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  389

maton,"  being  ignorantly  supposed  the  compounds  of  the
letter  r  four  times  repeated,  and  its  sound  and  power  con
founded  with  those  of  the  sacred  "  Tetragrammaton,"  or  the
Hebrew  quadriliteral  name  Jehovah.  This  mark  is  properly
the  symbol  of  Sitala,  the  seventh  incarnation,  entitled
"  Trithalesor,"  a  title  exactly  translated  by  the  alchemical
Trismcgistus :  its  name  is  the  Swastika,  an  emblem  of  Kesigna-
tion  ;  so  that  the  figure  may  have  passed  into  Byzantine  art
with  some  recommendation  from  a  knowledge  of  its  real
meaning,  In  Gothic  nomenclature  this  mark  becomes  the
equally  renowned  "  Fylfot,"  as  to  who*e  etymology  the  follow
ing  conjecture  may  be  hazarded.  The  Swastika  signified
at  first  the  arms  crossed  over  the  breast,  the  regular  Indian
gesture  of  submission,  and  also  the  legs  similarly  folded  as  the
statues  of  Buddha  are  usually  represented.  The  symbol  is
evidently  nothing  more  than  the  rough  outline  of  the  arms  and
legs  thus  disposed.  May  not  therefore  the  Gothic  name  Fylfot,
applied  to  the  same  hieroglyph,  bear  through  some  remote
tradition  a  reference  to  its  re^il  meaning,  and  imply  the  sense
of  Fold-foot  ?  In  the  same  way  the  old  Greeks  appear  to  have
recognised  its  true  sense,  when  they  changed  its  simple  form
into  the  three  conjoined  legs  that  so  aptly  allude  to  the  name
Trinacria.  In  all  probability  the  great  popularity  of  the
symbol,  wheresoever  the  Indo-Germanic  race  penetrated,  was
due  to  the  same  feeling  that  renders  it  still  so  respected  in  the
land  of  its  origin,  its  power  as  a  talisman  to  protect  all  places
where  the  figure  is  painted  up.  The  exclamation  "  Swastika  "
the  Hindoos  still  employ  as  a  mode  of  assent,  synonymous  with
"  Amen,"  "  So  be  it."  *  As  the  symbol  of  Eesignation  the  Mark
forms  the  distinctive  badge  of  an  ascetic.  When  a  man  desires
to  become  a  Bandya  (Buddhist  monk)  the  rites  required  for  his
initiation  occupy  three  days,  foremost  amongst  which  the
Swastika  is  solemnly  set  up  upon  an  altar  of  unbaked  bricks ;
the  neophyte  being  seated  on  the  ground  with  his  legs  disposed
after  the  same  fashion.  In  China  the  Mark  is  the  badge  of  the
Pon,  the  strictest  sect  of  Buddhists,  who  attribute  its  invention
to  Buddha  himself,  about  six  centuries  before  our  era.  This
*  Or,  to  speak  masontcally,  *•  So  mote  it  be !  "


390  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

fact  may  explain  how  "denying  oneself  and  taking  up  the
cross"  came  to  signify  the  embracing  an  ascetic  life;  for  so
evident  are  the  traces  of  Buddhist  influence  over  the  institu
tions  of  the  Essenes,  that  it  is  probable  enough  the  symbol
retained  its  pristine  acceptation  amongst  the  sect.

The  Swastika  occurs  amongst  the  signet-devices  of  the  old
Jaina  kings  of  Guzerat  (belonging  to  the  far-removed  epoch  of
Buddhist  supremacy  in  Hindostan),  in  company  with  that
intricate  square  figure  which  when  appearing  on  Greek  works  is
denominated  a  Labyrinth.  Other  sectarian  Marks  are  three
paralled  lines  placed  horizontally,  or  vertically,  to  denote  their
respective  deities :  others  of  truly  Masonic  aspect,  are  the  wheel,
crescent,  heart,  vesica  piscis,  all  variously  modified  to  express
ritualistic  differences.  That  the  Gnostics  borrowed  many
of  these  symbols  directly  from  Buddhism,*  adding  them  to
their  old  stock  of  Egyptian  devices,  is  apparent  upon  the
inspection  of  any  large  collection  of  Abraxas  gems.  The
lingering  influence  of  this  importation  continually  peep  out
where  least  to  be  expected.  In  the  finest  known  MS.  of  the
Apocalypse,  the  work  of  a  French  illuminator  about  the
middle  of  the  thirteenth  century  (in  the  library  of  Trinity
College,  Cambridge),  the  most  elaborate  of  all  its  decorations  is
the  heading  to  chapter  xiv.,  filling  half  a  page.  It  represents
"  The  Lamb  standing  upon  Mount  Zion,"  surrounded  by  the
saints  ;  above,  is  the  Godhead,  typified  by  an  immense  golden
Quatrcfoil,  encompassed  by  the  Four  Beasts  which  bear  the
names  of  the  Evangelists ;  at  each  side  and  below  are  the  Four-
and-tweiity  Elders,  arranged  in  groups  of  six,  eight,  and  ten
Within  the  Quatrefoil  is  seen  an  empty  throne  covered  with  a
cloth  crossed  by  diagonal  blue  lines ;  in  each  diagonal  so  formed
is  painted  in  red  a  circle  containing  a  point.  This  geometrical
expression  of  the  idea  of  the  Deity,  so  opposed  to  the  character
istic  anthropomorphism  of  regular  Gothic  art,  may  perhaps
have  been  inspired  by  the  Manicheist  spirit  that  still  actuated
the  Southern  French.  But  to  go  back  to  the  source — in  the

*  Scythicus,  the  preceptor  of  Manes, during  his  visits  to  India  as  a  trader
is  actually  declared  by  Epiphauius from  Alexandria,
to  have  picked up  his  novel  ideas


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  391

Chinese  system,  Yang,  the  Male,  Active,  Principle  has  for  his
own  possession,  the  Sun,  Fire,  and  all  the  higher  phenomena  of
Nature  :  to  him  belong  the  uneven  numbers.  Yn,  the  Female,
Passive,  Principle,  possesses  the  Earth,  Moon,  and  the  even
numbers.  The  same  notion  as  to  the  sexes  of  Numbers  was
taught  by  Pythagoras,  and  by  the  Gnostic  Marcus,  after  him.
Yang  is  represented  by  the  circle,  Yn  by  the  square,  the  two
Forces  combined,  by  two  interlaced  circles,  GD ,  the  actual  badge
of  the  Mediaeval  Vehm-Gerichte.

Having  thus  briefly  noticed  our  Masonic  Symbols,  let  us
proceed  to  consider  the  society  itself,  and  here  a  circumstance
of  the  utmost  importance  to  this  inquiry  must  always  be  kept
in  view :  the  Freemasons,  as  at  present  organised  into  a  mystic
fraternity,  derive  their  name  from  nothing  but  an  accidental
circumstance  belonging  to  their  first  establishment.  It  was
in  the  Common  Hall  of  the  London  Guild  of  the  Freemasons
(the  trade)  that  their  first  meetings  were  held,  under  Christopher
Wren  for  president,  in  the  time  of  the  Commonwealth.*  Their
real  object  was  political — the  restoration  of  Monarchy — henco
the  exclusion  of  the  public,  and  the  oath  of  secrecy  enjoined
upon  the  members.  The  pretence  of  promoting  the  study  of
architecture,  and  the  choice  of  the  place  where  to  hold  their
meetings,  suggested  by  the  profession  of  their  president,  were
no  more  than  blinds  to  deceive  the  existing  government.  There
is  a  curious  analogy  to  all  this  in  the  history  of  another  famous
society,  the  Neapolitan  Carbonari,  which  similarly  derived  its
name,  terminology  and  insignia  from  the  accidental  circum
stances  under  which  it  was  created.  Like  Wren's  associates,
the  first  Carbonari  were  defeated  Koyalists  and  fanatical
Republicans  joined  in  unnatural  union  by  one  common  hatred
of  the  powers  that  be — the  old  Bourbonists  equally  with  the
chimerical  founders  of  the  shortlived  "  Parthenopean  Republic,"
equally  forced  to  flee  for  their  lives  to  the  mountains,  the
former  to  escape  the  well-deserved  vengeance  of  the  Fiench
under  Murat,  the  latter  so  fiercely  persecuted  by  Cardinal

*  In  April,  1646,  when  Ashmole  Lilly  the  astrologer,  Dr.  Pearson,
was  admitted  member.  Others  named  the  two  "Whartoua,  Hewitt,  and
as  present  on  that  occasion  were  Oughtred  the  mathematician.


392  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Kuffo  upon  the  first  restoration  of  royalty  at  Naples.  These
desperate  men,  lurking  about  in  the  Abruzzi  forests,  were  forced
to  assume  the  disguise  of  the  only  inhabitants  of  these  wild
regions,  the  carbonari,  charcoal-burners,  as  the  best  means  of
eluding  pursuit.  After  their  forces  had  grown  to  a  regular
confederation,  the  disguise,  so  suggestive  and  terror  inspiring,
was  retained  for  a  uniform;  a  charcoal-sack  was  the  badge  of
membership,  a  charcoal-measure  the  throne  of  the  President,
and  their  conclaves  were  held  by  rule  in  the  midnight  forest.
When  Ferdinand,  "  the  Well-beloved,"  was  firmly  seated  on
his  ancient  throne,  for  the  third  and  last  time,  his  diligent
eradication  of  his  former  friends,  the  Constitutionals,  folks
almost  equally  crazed  with  the  original  "  Parthenopean  "  patriots,
sent  thousands  of  exiles  to  swell  the  ranks  of  the  Carbonari.
Soon  the  society  was  able  to  establish  ramifications  all  over
Italy,  thanks  to  the  paternal  government  of  the  Austrians  and
their  proteges,  the  various  restored  princes  of  the  Bourbon  and
Este  lines ;  and  thus  in  our  own  times  Gai-bona.ro  and  Liberal
came  to  mean  pretty  nearly  the  same  thing;  and  the  Italian
"  Carbonaro  "  to  know  no  more  about  charcoal-burning  than  the
English  "Mason"  does  about  building,

But  although  this  Society  of  Freemasons  was  convoked  in
London,  and  established  branches  all  over  England,  furnishing
also  the  members  with  the  means  for  secret  recognition,  and  all
for  a  political  end,  yet  in  its  true  origin  Freemasonry  had
nothing  political  in  its  nature,  neither  was  the  aforesaid  con
vocation  in  London  the  real  commencement  of  its  existence.
This  final  organisation  was  only  the  adaptation  to  a  special  end
of  another  society,  then  in  fullest  bloom,  the  Rosicrucian.  If  wo
reflect  how  rankly  both  astrology  and  alchemy  were  nourishing
at  that  time  in  England,*  and  that  the  Eosicrucian  sect  was
essentially  of  Protestant  growth,  we  may  on  good  grounds  con
clude  that  this  sect  already  numbered  many  English  members
from  amongst  the  educated  classes  and  the  philosophers  of  the

*  Oxford  produced  the  two  great  born  in  1612,  is  said  by  a  writer  of

lights  of  tlie  Hermetic  philosophy,  the  year  1749  to  be  then  living  at

Robert de Fluctibus (Fltuld),  and  Nuremberg,  as  the  president  of  the

his contemporary Eugenins Phila-  illuminated  throughout  the  world.
ethes(Thos.  Vaughan). The  latter,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  393

day.  These  last  were  for  the  most  part  ardent  Royalists,
hating  the  established  order  of  things,  joined  with  many
fanatical  Republicans  equally  impatient  of  the  new  despotism  of
Cromwell.  In  the  Rosicrucian  system  Religion  and  Philosophy,
the  latter  meaning  little  more  than  astrology  and  alchemy,*
were  strangely  interwoven,  and  the  terminology  of  the  one  was
borrowed  to  express  the  ideas  and  aspirations  of  the  other.
This  hypothesis  is  strongly  recommended  from  its  adoption  by
the  acute  De  Quincey  in  his  essay  entitled  "Freemasons  and
Rosicrucians "  ('London  Magazine,'  1824),  where  he  shows  how
the  Rosicrucians,  when  driven  by  persecution  out  of  Germany,
re-appeared  in  England  as  Freemasons,  taking  that  name  from
the  place  of  meeting,  and  from  nothing  else.  Under  the  new
appellation  the  sect  was  re-imported  into  the  Continent  as  an
English  institution.  De  Quincey,  however,  makes  their  object  to
have  been  purely  religious  without  any  admixture  of  politics,
and  so  far  differs  from  Nicolai,  whose  views  have  been  adopted
by  myself  in  what  precedes,  and  who,  being  himself  an  illuminate
of  the  first  water,  ought  certainly  to  be  regarded  as  the  higher
authority  of  the  two.

The  latter  writer  has  given  in  his  '  Tempel-Herren '  what
appears  to  be  the  best  supported  account  of  the  risej  and
progress  of  Rosicrucianism.  He  points  out  for  its  founder  a
Lutheran  mystic,  J.  V.  Andrew, J  almoner  to  the  Duke  of

*  The  position  of  the  latter  science  the  ancient  Fire-and-Serpent  "NYor-
in  this  century  cannot  be  more  strongly  shippers,  and  explanations  of  the
exemplified  tban  by  the  actual  exist-  Mystic  Symbols  represented  in  the
ence  of  current  coins  declaring  Monuments  and  Talismans  of  the
themselves  to  be  made  out  of  Her-  Primaeval  Philosophers.'  By  Har-
metic  metal  by  the  symbols  for  grave  Jennings,  London,  1870.  A
mercury  and  lead  (Y  y?)  stamped  truly  "  Masonic "  production,  without
on  their  reverse.  Examples  are  three  "  method  in  its  madness,"  but  valu-
dncats  of  Gustavus  Adolphus  (Paris  able  for  giving  many  Eosicrucian
Cabinet),  thalers  of  Wilhelm,  Land-  (or  rather  Kabbalistic)  expositions
grave  of  Hesse,  and  contemporary  of  symbols,  extracted  from  Fludd's
coins  of  the  city  of  Erfurt.  This  writings.  The  compiler  has,  more-
subject  has  been  well  handled  by  over,  laid  my  'Gnostics'  largely
Martin  Reg  in  his  memoir,  "  An-  under  contribution,  and  even  re-
cicnnes  Pieces  Herinetiques,"  '  Revue  produced  my  engravings  with  sundry
Numismatique '  for  1867.  fanciful  improvements  that  wonder-

f  '  The  Rosicruciaiis  :  their  Rites  fully  heighten  their  mystic  value,
and  Mysteries ; with Chapters on  J  Solomon Sernber, however, in


394  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Wiirtemberg  early  in  the  seventeenth  century.  At  least,  the
writings  of  this  divine,  wherein  the  Rosy  Cross  prominently
figures  were  the  first  indications  that  made  the  existence  of  the
fraternity  known  to  the  outer  world.  But  Andreas  appears  to
have  done  no  more  than  borrow  the  symbols  and  occult  means
of  communication  already  existing  from  time  immemorial
amongst  the  astrologers  and  alchemists  (in  other  words  the
wealthy  and  the  learned  of  the  age,  when  the  Emperor
Rudolf  II.  was  the  greatest  patron  of  the  "  curious  arts  "  ever
recorded  in  history)  in  order  to  employ  them  on  the  furtherance
of  a  visionary  scheme  of  his  own.  This  scheme  was  the  fusion
of  all  Christian  sects  *  into  one  universal  brotherhood,  and  the
projector  wisely  commenced  his  apostleship  by  attempting  to
bring  over  to  his  side  the  most  eminent  of  the  mass,  by  the
utilization  of  such  ancient  and  venerated  machinery.  The
well-meaning  enthusiast  had  evidently  disregarded  the  remark
of  the  sagacious  Julian  (Am.  Mar.  xxi.  5),  confirmed  as  it  is  by
the  experience  of  every  succeeding  generation,  owes  as  much  as
any  ;  "  Null  as  infestas  hominibus  bestias  ut  sunt  sibi  ferales
plerique  Christianorum."  As  a  matter  of  course,  his  scheme  of
universal  brotherhood  dissolved  in  smoke  as  soon  as  established,
but  the  older  philosophy,  whose  garb  he  had  adopted,  bloomed
with  fresh  vigour  under  the  new  organisation  and  euphonious
name.

But  before  going  any  further,  let  us  for  diversion's  sake
hear  the  Eosicrucians'  own  story,  and  examine  some  of  their
doctrines  and  insignia,  which  have  an  important  bearing  upon
the  subject  of  our  inquiry.  The  Rosicrucians,  fc-ays  Boyle,  make
their  founder  to  have  been  a  certain  German,  only  known  as
A.  C.,  who  having  gone  to  Damascus  in  the  year  1387,  was
instructed  in  their  mysteries  by  the  College  of  Arabian  Sages  f

his  '  Collections  for  the History  of  Frozen  Sea,  universally  believed  in

Rosicrucianism,' assigns  a  fabulous  Russia  to  be  the  lost  Grand  Duke

antiquity  to  the  sect.  Constantine.-(Dixou'8 '  Free  Russia.')
*  Exactly  the  same  s  -heme,  based f  This  tradition may  have  some

upon  Judaism,  is  the  crime  that  now  truth  in  it,  allowing  for  an  error  of

keeps in perpetual imprisonment  locality. At Cairo the Fatemite

Nicholas  Ilvin,  the  far-famed  "  Con-  sultans  (Ismaulites  be  it  remembered)

vent Spectre  " of  Solovetsk  in  the  had  three  centuries  before  this  date


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  395

there  established.  Keturning  home  he  communicated  his  Ipiow-
ledge  to  a  small  number  of  chosen  associates,  dying  in  1484.
It  is  a  matter  of  importance  to  notice  that  in  this  legend  Syria
is  made  the  fountain  head  of  the  new  philosophy.  The  Eosi-
crucian  Creed,  according  to  the  '  Essay  on  Spirits '  (dedicated
to  Mr.  Locke,  1647),  contains,  amongst  others,  this  palpable
adoption  of  the  Pythagorean  system  : —

"  Ante  omiua  Punctum  extitit,  non  mathematicum,  sed  diffusivum
extriusicas  Monados,  intrinsica3  Myriados ;  omnia  et  mini ;  Est  ct
-Non.

Ilaec  Monas  commovebat  se  in  Dyadas,  et  per  Triadas  egressas
sunt  facies  luminis  secundi.

Hie  respiciens  superiorem  et  inferiorem  Parentem,  iisdem  delude
prot.ulit  Vultuin  Trilbrmem."

In  the  second  paragraph  Clarkson*  discovers  an  allusion  to
the  Vesica  Piscis,  which  is  in  truth  a  figure  generated  by
two  circles  intersecting  at  their  respective  centres;  and  for  the
same  reason,  the  secret  sign  of  the  Brethren  of  the  Vehme-
Gerichte  was  the  two  annular  links  of  a  chain.  The  E<>-<r

i->O

formed  by  three  intersecting  circles,  contains  in  its  upper
section  seven  triangles,  and  as  many  in  its  lower  section,  which
are  the  opposing  genii  of  Light  and  Darkness.  This  was  the
idol  which  the  Manichasans  were  accused  of  worshipping  on
the  charges  brought  against  them  by  the  Popes  (Clarkson,  p.  20).
Still  more  does  the  "  Vultus  Triformis  "  of  this  Creed  arrest  our
attention  as  bearing  a  more  than  accidental  affinity  to  the  triple-
faced  idol,  the  adoration  whereof  was  so  persistently  laid  to  the
charge  of  the  Templars — the  real  meaning  of  which  accusa-


founded  the  far-famed  lodge,  entitled  of  the  richest  architecture, full of

*'  the  House  of  Wisdom." Here  the  strange birds and beasts, to the

student  passed  through  nine  degrees,  inmost  hall,  where  the  Soldan  having

beginning  with  Obedience,  Mysticism,  first adored the unseen "Master,"

Philosophy,  Doubt,  &c.,  up  to  Absolute  the  curtains  of  gold  and  pearl  were

Incredulity. William  of  Tyre  (xix.  suddenly drawn back, and that

17) tells a wonderful story, how  dignitary appeared seated in un-

Hugo  of  Caesarea  and  Geffroi  of  the  speakable  glory  on  a  golden  throne,

Temple,  envoys  to  Cairo  on  business  attended  by  his  chief  officials,
of  the  Order,  were  led  by  the  Soldan *  '  The  Symbolical  Evidence  of  the

himself  to the palace Kashef,  and  Temple  Church. Were  the  Templars

conducted  through  numerous  courts  Gnostics?'


396  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

tion  shall  be  investigated  in  its  proper  place.  This  same  "  tete
d'un  hornme  monstrueuse,"  image  of  "  le  Dieu  qui  rie  meurt  pas/'
so  often  mentioned  in  the  confessions  of  the  Knights,  may  be
recognised  beyond  all  mistake  in  the  hideous  head  with  flaring
hair  and  beard,  and  eyes  wide  open,  as  if  just  severed  from  the
body,  placed  upon  a  box  inscribed  X.  P.  S.,  which  repeatedly
occurs  amongst  the  Eosicrucian  pictures  in  the  Diary  of  Hosea
Lux.  This  MS.,  the  most  remarkable  of  the  kind  extant,  or
ever  composed,  written  between  the  years  1568  and  1612,  is  full
of  mystic  drawings,  beautifully  done  in.  pen  and  ink,  which
may  be  either  prophetic  hieroglyphs,  or  else  enshroud  the
arcana  of  some  seeker  after  the  Elixir  of  Life:  the  latter  it
would  rather  seem,  to  judge  from  the  perpetual  introduction  of
certain  vert/  significant  emblems.  The  author  must  have  be
longed  (as  an  actual  Mason  assures  me)  to  a  Lodge  of  Templars,
as  is  proved  by  his  use  of  the  "  hand  in  hand  "  and  "  foot  to
foot"  insignia.  As  exhibiting  the  whole  list  of  the  present
Masonic  signs,  but  employed  for  Rosicrucian  purposes,  at  so
early  a  date,  this  Diary  is  of  the  utmost  value  to  the  history  of
the  Order.*  To  quote  a  few  of  the  most  important  embellish
ments  of  these  mystic  pages  :  the  same  "  Baphometic "  Head
appears  in  another  place  set  on  a  box  inscribed  with  "  Solomon's
Seal,"  containing  a  retort :  over  the  head  is  a  disk,  set  all  round
dial  fashion  but  with  hearts  instead  of  numerals  ;  in  the  field
is  written  the  opposite  motto  "  Timore  et  tremore."  Another
is  picture  presents  the  Head  hovering  above  the  Ark  of  the
Covenant,  all  enclosed  within  the  outline  of  a  heart  out  of  whose
aorta  issues  a  naked  boy  bearing  a  flaming  star  and  crescent
conjoined.  Yet  more  mysterious  is  the  heart  containing  T  over
a  bell  resting  upon  a  star :  above  all,  for  a  crest  is  set  Solomon's
Seal;  for  supporters  to  the  shield,  his  pillars  Jachin  and
Boaz,  flanked  on  the  right  by  that  King  seated,  on  the  left  by  a
naked  man  standing,  who  pierces  the  heart  with  a  long  rod.
Singular,  too,  is  the  man  with  uplifted  hands,  having  instead
of  a  face  Solomon's  Seal  enclosing  a  retort.  Other  symbols


*  Through  the  kindness of the make  a  minute  examination  of  the
present  owner,  Mr.  J.  E.  Hodgkin, MS.
F.lS.A.. I have  had  opportunity  to


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  397

frequently  occurring  on  these  pictures  are  the  naked  boy
extended  on  the  spokes  of  a  wheel ;  or  again  placed  upon  an  egg
set  in  a  candlestick  :  the  king's  bust  crowned  with  the  winged
crescent  (on  which  the  merest  novice  in  alchemy  can  discern
the  allusion  to  reyulus  of  antimony  and  quicksilver)  :  the  egg
containing  a  circle  whence  issue  rays  of  light ;  probably  typi
fying  the  crucible,  for  another  heading  shows  the  same  figure
within  a  furnace  with  the  infant  metal  springing  rapturously
from  its  womb ;  the  five  links  of  a  chain  interlaced  :  all  these
being  Eosicrucian  emblems  now  embalmed  in  the  repertory  of
the  FJ  eemasons.  These  drawings,  besides  their  artistic  value
with  respect  to  their  fertile  invention  and  incredibly  minute
finish  (Lux  being  a  copper-plate  engraver  of  some  eminence),
are  highly  interesting  as  pictorial  exponents  of  the  Hermetic
philosophy  still  so  flourishing  at  the  time  of  their  execution.
Of  such  designs,  nothing  can  surpass  in  elaborate  execution  and
impenetrable  mystery  the  large  drawing  of  the  naked  female
standing  upon  musical  notes,  holding  in  her  right  a  torch  tipped
with  a  beautiful  face  whence  issue  flames ;  an  owl  perched
upon  her  extended  left  hand;  on  her  breast  for  brooch  Sol's
head  in  a  crescent.  Upon  a  pedestal  is  set  a  tall  long-necked
alembic  containing  the  most  obvious  emblem  of  the  generative
power,  emitting  upwards  the  stream  of  Life,  which  is  caught
into  the  mouth  of  a  cherub  whose  hair  forms  a  bunch  of  flowers
supporting  the  before-mentioned  disk  of  hearts,  whilst  his
hand  holds  forth  a  wheatsheaf.  In  the  field  lies  a  crown  over
a  marshal's  baton  shaped  like  a  phallas.  Another  drawing  full
of  interest  is  the  portrait  of  a  man  in  a  fur  cap  with  plume,
wearing  round  his  neck  a  pendant  inscribed  like  the  jewel  of
the  G.  A.,  from  which  again  is  hung  a  human  foot;  with  his
right  hand  he  points  to  a  crescent  divided  into  three  parts
enclosing  X.  A.  P.,  his  left  rests  on  the  head  of  a  mighty  hammer.
De  Quincey,  in  the  above  quoted  essay,  describes  a  manuscript
work  by  Simon  Stadion,  of  Wiirtemberg,  written  in  the  year
1(504,  under  the  title,  "  Naometria,  seu  nuda  et  prima  Libri
intus  et  foris  scripti  Expositio,  et  Prognosticticus."  It  is  a
series  of  dreams  and  prophecies  based  upon  the  Apocalypse  :  in
which  he  speaks  of  "  Stellas  matutina)  ductu  anno  1572  con-


398


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


spectye " ;  and  constantly  brings  in  the  Rose  and  Cross,  on
which  account  he  is  generally  supposed  to  have  been  a  Rosi-
crucian.  Martin  Luther  also  took  for  his  seal  the  Rose  and
Cross ;  some  deep  religious  significance,  at  the  time  well  under
stood,  must  have  recommended  the  device  to  the  choice  of  the
"  Tertius  Elias."

Besides  these  obligations  to  the  Rosicrucians,  the  London
Freemasons  also  borrowed  much  of  their  phraseology  from
Lord  Bacon's  work,  still  fresh  in  men's  minds,  in  which,
adopting  the  idea  of  the  "  House  of  Wisdom,"  a  technical  term
with  the  Arab  astrologers,  he  proposed  the  foundation  of  a
"Solomon's  House,"  or  learned  community  dedicated  to  the
cultivation  of  experimental  philosophy  and  the  advancement
of  science.  These  philosophic  and  royalist  plotters,  in  order
to  cloak  the  true  nature  of  their  proceedings,  conducted,  their
conclaves  according  to  the  rules  prescribed  by  Bacon :  and  the
same  ceremonial  and  nomenclature  they  carefully  maintain  to
the  present  day.

A  final  and  demonstrative  proof  of  the  recent  and  English
origin  of  Freemasonry  is  afforded  by  the  dates  of  institution  of
the  various  Foreign  Lodges,  which  are  by  their  own  profession
branches  of  the  parent  Society  in  London.  The  Parisian  was
not  founded  until  the  year  1725,  the  Madrid  in  1728,  and  the
Florentine  in  1733.  And  yet  France  and  Italy  had  been  the
birthplace  of  the  actual  art  of  masonry,  and  the  scene  of  the
full  glory  of  its  revival.

Another  important  fact  remains  to  be  noticed,  the  Rosi-
crucians  still  subsist  amongst  the  Parisian  Freemasons  as  the
designation  for  their  highest  degree  (to  be  conferred  upon
distinguished  English  visitors),  although  all  disclaim  those
mystics  as  being  the  parent  stock ;  inasmuch  as  that  truth,
if  allowed,  were  utterly  incompatible  with  their  own  claim
to  immemorial  antiquity.  Nevertheless,  they  loudly  profess
to  trace  their  descent  through  the  line  of  the  Templars  down
from  that  splendidly  fabulous  origin  they  arrogate  to  them
selves.

But  to  return  to  Andreas,  and  the  honour  Nicolai  assigns  him
as  the  creator  of  the  immediate  parent  of  modern  Freemasonry,


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  399

certain  it  is  that  his  far-famed  Rosy  Cross  had  been  ages  "before
the  regular  badge  of  the  Knights  Templars.  Considering  how
widely  the  Order  had  spread  its  branches,  obtained  possession
and  affiliated  to  itself  multitudes  both  male  and  female  amongst
the  laity  all  over  Europe,  it  would  be  a  mere  absurdity  to
believe  that  all  its  traditions  were  swept  away  at  one  stroke
by  the  suppression  of  the  Templars  in  the  year  1307.*  In  fact,
the  Parisian  Templiers,  as  the  most  important  division  of  the
French  Freemasons  still  style  themselves,  pretend  to  have  kept
up  the  succession  of  Grand  Masters  unbroken  ;  nay  more,  to
have  preserved  the  archives  of  the  Order  ever  since  that  date.
Francois  I.  is  even  reported  to  have  burnt  alive,  with  a  con
trivance  of  refined  cruelty  in  "  The  fiery  bath,"  four  unfortunate
gentlemen  convicted  of  being  Templars,f  which,  if  true,  suffices
to  prove  the  existence  of  that  fraternity  down  to  a  period  but
little  removed  from  the  public  manifestation  of  the  Rosicrucians.
Truly  was  he  by  such  proceedings  "  semina  odii  in  longum
jaciens,"  to  borrow  the  forcible  simile  of  Tacitus,  if  we  are  to
believe  Barruel's  express  declaration  that  Spartacus  Weishaupt's
Jacobins  did  no  more  than  pay  to  royalty  the  so  long  deferred
legacy  of  revenge  handed  down  to  them  by  generation  after
generation  of  secret  societies —fulfilling  the  last  Templar's  solemn
vow  of  vengeance  against  Philippe  le  Bel,  and  all  future  kings
in  his  person.  By  order  of  the  same  Francois  I.,  his  general
Almeida,  extirpated  with  a  cruelty  unusual  even  in  those  times
the  lemnant  of  the  Albigenses  still  lurking  in  the  villages
of  Provence,  a  sect,  it  should  be  remembered,  of  genuine
Manicha3ans,  transplanted  thither  from  the  East  at  a  com
paratively  recent  date.  As  Manichaaans,  they  would  naturally
have  preserved  the  symbols,  and  tokens  for  mutual  recognition
so  much  in  vogue,  as  history  and  existing  monuments  attest,

*  Even the sceptical Michelet  d'Ecosse,  et  que  les  hauts  grades  y

allows "  il est possible que les  sont  nommes  Ecossais. V.  Grouvelle

Templiers  qui  echapperent  se  soient et les ecrivains qu'il a  suivis.'

fcndus en societes secretes. En  ('Hist,  de  France,'  iii.  p.  129.)

Ecosse  ils  disparaissent  tous  excepte  f  Communicated to me by a

deux. Or,  on  a  remarque'  que  les  *  Brother ';  the  historical  authority  I

plus  secrets  mysteres  dans  la  Franc-  cannot  discover,
ma^onnerie sont repute's emaner


400  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

amongst  all  followers  of  the  Gnosis.  And  such  machinery  and
grown  yet  more  into  articles  of  necessity,  after  continued
persecution  had  transformed  their  congregations  into  regular
secret  societies.

But  dismissing  all  such  speculations,  we  are  under  no
necessity  for  connecting  the  Rosicrucians  with  the  ancient
Brethren  of  the  Temple,  in  order  to  account  for  their  display  of
the  Gnostic  symbols  which  figure  so  conspicuously  in  Andreae's
plates,  and  which  have  since  been  so  diligently  illustrated
(though  often  with  erroneous  ingenuity)  by  Von  Hammer  in
his  '  Mystery  of  Baphomet  Revealed  ; '  yet  even  his  misinterpreted
examples  go  to  prove  the  same  truth,  and  his  '  Baphometic
Idols,'  whose  adoration  should  have  been  the  heaviest  count  in
the  charges  against  the  Templars  (though  unmistakably  of
Cinque-cento  design  and  workmanship),  are  astrological  and
cabbalistic  sigils  breathing  a  purely  Rosicrucian  spirit  in  their
syncretism  of  symbolic  forms.  For  there  is  one  point  in  these
sculptures  alone  sufficient  to  upset  all  Von  Hammer's  elaborate
structure— the  Arabic  legends,  being  cut  in  current  Neshki
characters,  betray  their  modern  manufacture  ;  for  had  they  been
contemporary  with  the  flourishing  times  of  the  Templars,  the
primitive  Cufic  must,  as  a  matter  of  course,  have  been  employed
Yet,  at  the  same  time,  these  same  legends  indicate  clearly
enough  the  fountain-head  of  the  doctrines  held  in  common  by
all  similar  fraternities.

But  before  considering  this  last  and  so  important  point,  the
subject  will  be  more  conveniently  approached  by  our  first
considering  the  principal  arguments  set  forth  by  the  learned
Orientalist  in  support  of  his  theory.  His  object  in  truth  is
sufficiently  declared  by  the  title  of  his  treatise,  *  Mysterium
Baphometis  Revelatum  :  seu  Fratres  militite  Templi  qua  Gnostici
et  quidem  Ophiani,  apostasioe,  idololatria3,  et  quidem  impuritatis
convicti  per  ipsa  eorum  monumenta  "  (published  in  the  Mines
de  I  Orient,  vol.  vi.).  The  treatise  is  copiously  illustrated  with
fine  copper  plates  of  magical  statuettes,  architectural  orna
ments,  mystical  inscriptions,  vases,  and  coins.  As  regards
historical  evidence,  the  main  foundation  of  his  hypothesis  rests
upon  certain  heads  in  the  Articles  of  Accusation  against  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  401

Templars,  despatched  by  Pope  Clement  V.  to  all  archbishops,
&c.  These  are —

"  Art.  42.  Item,  quod  ipsi  per  singulas  provincias  habeant
Idola,  videlicet  capita,*  quorum  aliqua  habobant  trcs  fades,  ot
alia  unarn,  et  aliqua  cranium  humanum  habebant.

"  Art.  54.  Item,  quod  aliquod  caput  illorum  cingebant  seu
tangebant  chordulis  quibus  si  ipsos  cingebant,  circa  camiciam
seu  carnem.

"  Art.  55.  Quod  in  hac  receptione,  singulis  fratribus  prsedictso
chordula)  tradebantur,  vel  alise  longitudinis  earum."

In  this  girding  with  a  consecrated  string  there  is  a  striking
analogy  to  the  Kosti^  prescribed  by  the  Zoroastrian  religion,
still  assumed  by  every  Parsee  upon  his  initiation  (which  takes
place  upon  his  completing  his  seventh  year),  and  thenceforth
constantly  worn  over  the  shirt.  This  distinctive  badge  was
the  most  likely  of  all  to  be  retained  by  Manes  (himself  a
Magian)  in  his  Christianised  modification  of  the  Persian  creed.
Other  articles,  unnecessary  to  quote,  allege  the  permission  and
even  the  obligation  of  unnatural  practices.  But,  from  the  very
beginning,  this  last  accusation,  so  needless  to  be  proved,  because
so  readily  believed,  has  been  brought  against  the  members  of
all  secret  societies,  as  Ovid  shows  by  the  popular  tradition
respecting  Orpheus,  the  acknowledged  founder  of  the  Grecian
mysteries.

"  Illetiam  Thracum  populis  fuit  auctor  arnorem
In  teneros  transferre  mares,  citraque  juvcntam,
^Etatis  breve  vcr  et  primes  carpere  flores."J (Metam.  x.  83-85).

Clarkson  has  more  recently  discussed  the  same  question  in
his  very  ingenious  essay  '  Upon  the  Symbolical  Evidence  of
the  Temple  Church.  Were  the  Templars  Gnostic  Idolaters  as

*  Such  a  head  of  silver  was  actually  have  been  made  away  witli  by  the

seized  in  the  Parisian  Chapter-house ;  Templars  upon  the  first  alarm  of  the

but  the  Templars  passed  it  off  for  a  inquiry.

reliquary  containing  the  skull  of  one  f  Woven  out  of  seven  threads  by

of  the  11,000  virgins,  in  spite  of  the  the  wife  of  the  Moled  or  fire-priest,
long  beard  with  which  it  was  fur-  J  "  Dum erat juvenis soocularis,

nished  (Kayn.  p.  299). Another  is  omncs pueri clamabant publice et

said  to  have  been  found  elsewhere  vulgariter  unus  ad  alterum,  Custodi-

bearing  the  numeral LI  1 1. These  atis  vobis  ab  osculo  Templariorum  "

damning  evidences  would  naturally  Wilkins,  Cone.  Britann.  ii.  p.  360).

2 D


402  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

alleged  ? ' He endeavours to prove their Manicheism by
means  of  architectural  evidence,  deduced  from  the  members  of  the
edifice  and  the  geometrical  relations  discoverable  in  the  ground
plan. But,  dispassionately  considered,  such  arguments  are  of
little  weight,  inasmuch  as  they  could  be  found,  if  looked  for
(under  a  similar  prepossession),  in  many  other  buildings,  both
mediaeval  and  modern,  having  no  connection  whatsoever  with
the  Brethren of the Temple. Again, a fatal objection to
his  theory  is  the  fact,  that  all such  "  Round  Churches  "  are
acknowledged  copies  of  the  Holy  Sepulchre  at  Jerusalem,  which,
whether  Helena's  original  building,  or  merely  a  Gothic  recon
struction  by  the  Frankish  kings  (the  more  probable  explana
tion),  was  certainly  not  subjected  to Templar  influence  in  the
laying  out  of  its  plan. The  circular,  domical  shape  had  been
given by Helena to her church  simply  because that form,
according  to  the  Eoman notion  handed  down  from  Etruscan
antiquity,  was  regarded  as  most  appropriate  for  a  tomb. Hence,
to go no further back, it was adopted for Helena's own
sepulchre (Torre  pignatara),  and for  that of  her  grandchild,
Constantia. In  illustration  of  his  hypothesis  Clarkson  adduces
the  statement  of Clemens  Alexandrinus about  the  "  Primary
Elements  "  of  the old  Egyptians, and  supposes  them to have
been  the square,  the  angle,  the  semicircle,  the  circle,  the  oval,
the  line,  the waved  line,  triangular,  and  the  cross. These  would
represent  the  seven  primary  consonants,  of  which  the  invention
was  attributed  to  Memnon,  viz.,  the  letters  with  their  equiva
lent  sounds,  B,C,D,L,M,N,S. Should  this  theory  have any
truth in it,  the frequent introduction of such figures  into
talismanic  inscriptions  obtains  a  satisfactory  explanation.

But  it  is  now  full  time  to  return  to  Von  Hammer's  Bapho-
metic  Idols,  and  his  profound  interpretations  of  their  figures
and  inscriptions.  It  is  obvious  at  the  first  glance  that  the  idea
of  most  of  them  was  suggested  by  the  Roman  Jupiter  Hercules,
or  Silenus  (classical  types,  by  the  way,  entirely  unknown  to
the  art  of  the  12th  and  13th  centuries)  ;  their  heads,  or  rather
their  faces,  are  triple,  eyes  and  ears  are  plenteously  distributed
all  over  the  body,  which  is  moreover  adorned  with  planetary
Our  author  sets  them  down  without  hesitation  as  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  403

actual  figures  of  the  "  Old  Man  "  adored  by  the  Knights,  described
so  persistently  by  the  witnesses  against  them  as  "  une  ydole  avec
trois faces"*  The  same  statuettes  are  for  the  most  part  girded
with  serpents,  whose  heads  they  hold  in  their  mouths,  or  in
various  distorted  attitudes,  amply  sufficient  grounds  for  Von
Hammer  to  connect  them  with  the  Ophite  mysteries.  But  this
very  attribute,  together  with  the  numerous  eyes  studding  the
body,  would  rather  seem  to  betray  an  acquaintance  in  the
sculptor  with  similar  Hindoo  creations — Indra,  the  eye-be
spangled  god  of  the  firmament,  for  example.  Similar  fancies
had  found  their  way  even  into  the  Cinque-cento  dress ;  Queen
Elizabeth  is  painted  in  a  gown  thus  embellished.  Some,  again,
of  these  figures  carry  the  Egyptian  Tau  (marculus,  Masonic
Knocker)  conspicuously  suspended  from  the  neck.  But,  as
already  hinted,  the  artistic  composition  of  these  well-executed
monstrosities,  and  the  classical  motives  everywhere  peeping  out
in  their  outlines,  seem  altogether  foreign  to  the  quaint
simplicity  of  early  mediaeval  art.

The  three  "  Baptismal  Vases,"  or  Fonts,  on  which  he  lays  so
much  stress,  are  nothing  but  little  stone  cups  six  inches  high
at  the  utmost,  covered  with  bas-reliefs,  the  phallic  character
whereof  would  seem  to  point  to  their  employment  in  the
brewing  of  the  Elixir  of  Life  from  its  most  obvious  ingredients.
The  second  of  these  reliefs,  explained  as  denoting  the  "  Baptism
of  Fire,"  does  in  truth  recall  to  our  recollection  the  "  Twelve
Tortures  "  of  the  Mithraic  rock-tablets  ;  for  it  exhibits  a  naked
boy  holding  various  instruments — the  axe,  lyre,  bucket  of
Anubis— whilst  another,  blowing  a  horn,  feeds  the  fire  in  a
furnace.  Of  the  third  vase,  however,  the  decoration  savours
strongly  of  Judaism,  representing  the  lifting  up  of  the  Brazen
Serpent,  though  the  female  reclining  below  appears  rather  to

*  "  Car  tantot  apres  ils  alloient  fosses  des  yeux  escarboncles  reluis-

adorer une Idole, et pour certain  ants  comme  clarte  du  ciel ;  et  pour

icelle idole etait  une  vielle peau,  certain  toute  lour  esperance  etoit  en

ainsi comme toute embaumee, et  ieelle,  et  e'toit  leur  Dieu  souverain,  et

comme  toile  polie  ;  et  illecqued  certes  memement  se  affioit  en  lui  de bon

le  Templier  mettoit  sa  tres  vile  foy  cceur  "  (Art.  3. Vie  de  Philippe  le

et  croyance  ;  et  en  lui  tres  fermement  Bel, chap. 66. '  Chronique de

croyoient. Et en icelle avoit os  8.  Denys').

2  i)  2


404  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

caress  the  living  reptile  that  encircles  her,  than  to  be  alarmed
at  its  embrace  ;  whilst  the  Candlestick  of  the  Tabernacle,  which
the  second  female  is  quenching  from  a  vase  at  the  bidding  of
Von  Hammer's  "  Mete,"  personified  as  a  regular  Dutch  Solomon,
but  with  uplifted  hands  whence  drop  off  chains,  all  betray  the
same  source  of  inspiration.  Bacchic  and  sidereal  symbols,
amongst  which  the  phallus  of  course  predominates,  are  plentifully
strewn  over  the  field.  But  the  Arabic  legends  in  the  modern
lettering,  in  this  case,  equally  with  the  classical  air  of  the
design  in  the  second,  suffice  to  convince  the  sober  archaeologist
that  all  three  vases  are  nothing  more  than  a  portion  of  the
paraphernalia  of  those  Eosicrucian  or  alchemical  quacks,  who
fattened  upon  the  credulity  of  that  arch-virtuoso,  Eudolf  II.,
ever  since  whose  reign  these  "  fonts  "  have  been  treasured  up  in
the  Imperial  Cabinet.  A  sufficient  notion  of  Von  Hammer's  mode
of  explaining  these  monuments  is  afforded  by  his  interpretation
of  the  Arabic  inscription  upon  the  scroll  displayed  in  the  hands
of  his  "  Mete  "  (according  to  him  the  Ophite  Sophia),  a  female
yet  bearded  figure  whose  sex  is  ostentatiously  revealed  to  view  :
"  Exaltatur  Mete  germinans,  stirps  nostra  Ego  et  Septem  fuere.
Tu  es  unus  Eenegantium.  Eeditus  TrptoKros  fit."

The  Baphometic  idol,  that  "  Head  of  the  Old  Man,"  which
makes  so  fearful  a  figure  in  the  Articles  of  Accusation,  reminds
one  of  the  crowned  Osiris  seen  in  front  face,  otherwise  that
terminal  figure  often  to  be  found  cut  on  certain  large  green
jaspers,  which  differ  widely  in  style  from  the  true  Gnostic
talismans  dating  from  the  Lower  Empire,  but  rather  have
something  about  them  bespeaking  a  medieval  and  Arabian
origin.  For  example,  Easpe*  gives  a  gem  (No.  588)  with
"God  the  Father"  crowned  with  five  stars,  and  several
barbarous  characters.  Eeverse,  a  square,  a  sphere,  a  pentagon
of  Pythagoras,  and  several  astrological  and  geometrical  figures.
Such  a  talisman  was  lately  found  in  the  tomb  of  a  Knight
Templar  which  was  opened  in  Germany.  And  here  it  may  be
parenthetically  observed,  that  our  Freemasons,  in  order  to  give
a  better  colour  to  their  pretence  of  descent  from  the  Templars,
perpetually  talk  of  them  as  the  greatest  builders  of  their  times,
*  '  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  Engraved  Gems.'


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  405

and  as  the  best  patrons  of  the  subordinate  body  of  working
masons.  Nothing  can  be  more  baseless  than  this  assertion.  The
Order  invested  its  wealth  in  a  far  more  profitable  manner  than
in  stone  and  mortar,  and  really  did  nothing  in  the  way  of
architecture,  if  compared  with  the  great  monastic  Orders  of  the
same  period.  In  proof  of  this,  notwithstanding  its  enormous
possessions  in  England,  no  more  than  four  churches  were  built
for  "  Temples."

Von  Hammer,  amongst  the  numerous  examples  he  has  so
indefatigably  collected,  presents  many  of  a  nature  seemingly
quite  antagonistic  to  Catholic  art,  and  of  truly  Gnostic  and
Oriental  character.  Conspicuous  amongst  them  are  the  Three
Vases,  already  described,  in  which  he  discovers  examples  of  the
true  "  Sangraal,"  that  mystic  cup  which  shines  so  brightly  forth
in  the  early  romances  of  chivalry,  the  quest  thereof  being  the
highest  adventure  proposed  in  the  Morte  d' Arthur;  perfect
chastity  being  the  indispensable  condition  for  attaining  unto
the  sight  of  the  miraculous  vessel.  And  in  truth  the  decoration
of  these  mystic  fonts,  used  in  the  "Baptism  of  Mete"  (the
Gnostic  Wisdom),  whence  their  title  "  Baphometic,"  furnishes  a
very  plausible  foundation  for  the  charges  our  author  brings
against  their  supposed  inventors.  But  as  for  the  obscene
sculptures  taken  from  the  Templar  churches,  which  he  refers  to
the  rites  of  the  Venus  Mascula  celebrated  therein,  these  are  to
be  found  in  equal  abundance  and  shamelessness  amongst  the
carvings  of  other  churches  totally  unconnected  with  the  Order ;
for  example,  notably  at  Arcueil,  near  Paris.  Such  sculptures
either  contain  a  moral  grossly  expressed,  according  to  the  taste
of  their  barbarous  age,  the  censure  of  some  particular  vice,  or
may  be  no  more  than  the  ebullition  of  the  brutal  humour  of  the
beery  artist.  But  the  gravest  error  into  which  this  too  sagacious
interpreter  has  fallen  is  the  attempt  to  identify  the  heresy  of
the  Templar  with  the  Ophite — that  primitive  form  of  the  Gnosis,
swallowed  up  so  many  ages  before  the  foundation  of  the  Order,
in  the  overwhelming  flood  of  Manicheism ;  a  flood  indeed  that
may,  even  at  its  source,  Syria,  have  carried  away  as  many
inquiring  spirits  amongst  the  Knights,  as  it  was  simultaneously
intoxicating  in  Italy  and  Provence.  A  great  absurdity,  too,  is


406  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

the  building  up  his  grand  hypothesis  upon  the  inexplicable
"Mete,"  which  he  finds  out  for  himself  in  these  unintelligible
legends,  seeing  that  the  Archaic  M^ns  was  never  used  in  Gnostic
times  as  synonymous  with  2o$ia,  Achamoth,  an  identity  never
theless  taken  for  granted  in  his  argument.  And  by  the  same
rules  does  Von  Hammer  explain  the  Masons'  marks  that  he  has
collected,  although  they  in  no  wise  differ  from  others  found  in
mediaeval  buildings  of  every  conceivable  destination  and  origin.

Before  quitting  this  part  of  the  subject,  a  word  must  be  said
upon  other  etymologies  that  have  been  proposed  for  the  mighty
word  u  Baphomet."  One,  equally  consistent  with  Von  Hammer's
views,  and  much  more  so  with  the  genius  of  the  Byzantine
language,  would  be  /3a<j>r]  M^rpo'?,  "  Baptism  of  the  Mother,"  that
special  designation  of  Barbelo  in  the  Valentinian  theology.*
Such  Greek  technical  phrases  may  have  been  perpetuated  in  the
Manichean  ritual,  wherever,  and  however  late,  it  was  introduced
into  France.

Another  explanation  makes  Baphomet  the  corruption  of
Behemoth,  meaning  the  golden  calves  Opis  and  Mnevis,  whose
bones  were  exhibited  to  their  worshippers,  set  out  upon  the
lid  of  the  coffin.  So  in  later  times  were  the  bones  of  Manes
displayed  for  the  adoration  of  his  followers;  and  those  of  the
G.M.  Hiram,f  according  to  report,  at  the  initiation  of  a
Templar.  Hence  came  the  Death's  Head  and  Coffin,  that  figure
so  conspicuously  at  the  Carbonari  Conclaves,  and  the  connate
engine  of  terror  at  our  Masonic  receptions,  when  the  candidate
for  admission  "  being  brought  to  the  G.P.  receives  that  sudden
wnd  awful  impression  on  his  mind  that  cannot  fail  to  have  the
desired  effect :  a  part  of  the  ceremony  that  ought  to  be  well
attended  to,  as  well  for  the  honour  and  safety  of  the  new-made
brother,  as  of  the  Fraternity  at  large."  But  to  return  to  etymo
logy.  Visconti  is  probably  in  the  right  after  all,  in  considering
"  Baphometa  "  no  deeper  mystery  that  the  French  corruption
of  the  name  "Mahomet,"  as  repeated  by  the  ignorant  witnesses
for  the  prosecution.

*  Which  made  her  the  heavenly ing  a  corpse,  elevated  upon  a  cata-
mother  of  the  Saviour.  falque  of  five  steps  (Clarkson).

t  Being  set  upon  a  coffin  contain-


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  407

But  although  the  fanciful  Orientalist  has  pushed  this  theory
to  an  unwarrantable  and  even ludicrous  extent,  yet proved
facts,  coupled  with  probabilities,  will  induce  the  unprejudiced
inquirer  to  acquiesce  in  the  conclusions  of  the  judicious  Raspe.
"  The  Gnosis  of  Basilides  was  an  occult  science  which,  according
to  his  tenets,  should  be  known  only  and  communicated  to  one  in
thousands,  and  to  two  in  ten  thousands,  and  that  if  the  Knights
Templars  were  guilty  of  any  offence  at  the  time  of  their  exter
mination,  it  was  that  of  having  adopted  the  doctrines  of  the
Gnostics,  and  consequently  of  having  renounced  the  established
doctrine  of  the  Church  on  the  human  nature  of  Christ,  and  on
the  Trinity  : in  the  place  of  which  they,  with  the  Gnostics,
professed  one  Supreme  Being,  Father  and Creator  of  all  the
Powers  which,  emanating  from  him,  have  created  and  do  govern
this  world. At  their  reception  or initiation  into  the  highest
degree of  the Order they  received /3a^ /xyrovs, or  /xr/nos —
that is to say, the Baptism or Tincture of Wisdom ; they
were  presented  with  a  sign  or  symbol  of  their  baptism,  which
was the Pentagon of Pythagoras; and they worshipped
a  kind  of  image or  idol; that  like  the  Abraxas  or  this  gem
was the  figure  of  a  Bearded Old  Man,  or rather  the  repre
sentation of the only Supreme Being that they admitted
and  professed." The  gem  referred  to  is  a  jasper  (Townley)
presenting :  "  Abraxas,  the  Sun,  or  God-Father,  or  Demiurgus
according to the Gnostics and  necromancers. This head  is
crowned,  the  beard  long,  the  hands  crossed  upon  the  breast :
for  the  rest,  he  is  formed  as  a  Term,  or  a  mummy. In the
field  are  eight  stars,  probably  an  allusion  to  the  eight  Powers,
or  heavens,  that  are  subordinate  to  them,  according  to  Epipha-
nius. In  the  field  are  two  Hebrew  letters,  n  n-

"  Reverse.  The  same  God  the  Father,  or  Abraxas,  in  the  same
attitude,  standing  above  four  angels  placed  upon  a  sphere  and
receiving  his  emanations ;  in  the  field  are  three,  on  the  sphere
are  five  stars.  There  are  besides  in  the  field  two  Hebrew
letters,  three  lines  of  inscription,  &c."

Figures  of  unquestionably  medieval  workmanship  do,  how
ever,  exist,  which  would  have  stood  Von  Hammer  (had  he  known
of  them)  in  far  better  stead  than  the  easily  recognisable  legacies


408  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

of  Kudolf  II.  and  his  Rosicrucian  quacks.  Such  is  the  brass
statuette  published  by  Caylus  (Rec.  d'antiq.  v.  PI.,  32)  repre
senting  a  man  in  tight  jerkin  and  hose  (as  worn  under  armour),
but  head  covered  with  a  jester's  horned  hood.  Upon  his  belly
is  emblazoned  a  blazing  sun ;  he  is  girt  with  the  broad  knightly
belt,  engraved  all  round  with  planetary  signs,  and  regular
Masons'  Marks ;  which  also  run  round  the  edge  of  the  tripod
upon  which  he  stands.  The  figure,  about  five  and  a  half  inches
high,  extends  both  hands  with  the  palms  uppermost,  and  these
are  pierced  with  holes  for  the  reception  of  the  supports  of  some
vessel,  probably  a  magician's  lamp.  Amongst  other  devices
engraved  on  the  trunk,  most  conspicuous  are  the  eagle,  serpent,
and  crucible  supporting  a  retort.  Caylus  places  his  drawing  of
it  amongst  his  Egyptian  monuments,  but  reasonably  enough
distrusting  such  an  origin  for  the  inscriptions,  suggests,  with
no  better  reason,  that  the  work  belongs  to  Persia.

ManicJicism  has  been  so  repeatedly  referred  to  in  the  foregoing
pages,  as  to  make  it  necessary  to  give  a  brief  explanation  of  the
way,  in  which  that  strange  creed  may  possibly  have  affected  the
religion  of  the  Templars.  And  here,  all  is  either  assertion  of
enemies,  or  modern  theory ;  hardly  any  monuments  remaining
that  can  be  with  certitude  attributed  to  the  Manicheans,  though
so  numerous  in  their  time,  for  they  had  drawn  within  their
own  circle  every  older  form  of  Gnosticism  in  the  interval
between  Constantine  and  Justinian.  This  deficiency  is  partly
due  to  the  fast  increasing  barbarism  of  those  ages,  which  pro
duced  nothing  in  the  way  of  art,  however  degraded.  Their
sole  religious  monuments  were  sacred  books,  prayers,  spells,
committed  to  perishable  materials,  parchment,  papyrus,  dili
gently  sought  out  and  destroyed  by  every  persecutor.  The
extirpation  of  Gnosticism  was  vigorously  prosecuted  by  the
later  emperors  of  the  West,  and  by  those  of  the  East,  Ariaii
equally  with  Catholic.  In  this  pious  career  the  first  step  was
made  by  Magnus  Maximus,  the  British  usurper  under  Gratian,
by  putting  to  death  Priscillian,  bishop  of  Avila,  and  his  chief
adherents,  in  spite  of  the  very  umaintly  remonstrances  of  the
good  Martin  of  Tours.  The  usurper's  punisher,  Theodosius,
also  made  Manicheism  (Priscillian's  crime)  a  capital  offence,  his


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  409

edict  being  the  first  statutalle  infraction  of  the  old  Roman
principle  of  universal  religious  toleration.  In  the  reign  of  his
son,  Epiphanius  boasts  of  having  brought  about  the  exile  of
seventy  women,  some  noble,  through  whose  seductions  he  had
himself  at  one  time  been  drawn  into  joining  the  Marcosians.
Such  a  vaunt  leads  to  the  suspicion  that  the  renegade  had  saved
himself  by  turning  evidence  against  his  fellow  sectarians  at
the  opening  of  the  persecution.  Or  again,  this  absence  of
Manichean  relics  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  rigid  character
of  the  creed  itself,  the  offspring  of  Magism,  therefore  regarding
all  imagery  as  idolatrous  and  sinful,  a  tenet  latterly  carried
out  to  the  fullest  extent  by  the  iconoclastic  Albigenses.

To  come  now  to  the  second  diffusion  of  Manicheism  over
Europe.  In  the  middle  of  the  seventh  century,  under  Con-
stans  II.,  Constantinus  Sylvanus,  a  native  of  Samosata,  broached
that  last  and  most  far-spreading  heresy,  the  Paulician.  The
name  arose  from  his  combination  of  the  doctrine  of  St.  Paul
with  that  of  Zoroaster,  but  he  had  intermingled  a  larger
proportion  of  the  former  ingredient  than  his  precursor  Manes
had  thought  fit  to  do  in  his  original  theosophy.  The  new
teacher  easily  united  into  one  church  the  remnants  of  the  old
Gnostics,  especially  the  Manicheans  of  Armenia,  and  the  still
unconverted  Zoroastrians  of  Pontus  and  Cappadocia.  Incessantly
persecuted  by  the  Byzantine  powers,  their  chief  Carbeas
founded  a  new  capital  for  his  sect,  the  impregnable  Tephrice,
in  the  mountains  near  Trebizoiid  ;  but  which  was  ultimately
destroyed  by  Basil  the  Macedonian  about  the  year  A.D.  880.
But  in  the  middle  of  the  preceding  century,  the  irreligious
Constantino  Copronymus  had  transplanted  a  large  colony  of
these  Armenian  Paulicians  into  the  depopulated  Thrace,  where
their  numbers  were  largely  augmented  in  the  tenth  century
by  a  fresh  reinforcement  drawn  from  the  Chalybian  Hills  and
planted  in  the  valleys  of  Mount  Haernus  by  John  Zimisces.
Here  their  missionaries  converted  the  neighbouring  pagans,  the
Bulgarians,  whence  the  sect  derived  a  new  and  more  odious
appellation,  one  which  in  course  of  time  from  denoting  heresy
in  religion  was  fixed  to  the  branding  of  heresy  in  love.  War
like  and  fearless  of  death,  we  find  these  Paulicians  serving  in


410  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

the  Byzantine  armies,  notably  in  those  of  Alexius  Comnerms  in
his  wars  with  the  Normans  of  Sicily.  From  this  island  as  a
focus  they  diffused  their  doctrines  over  Italy,  they  gained
numerous  converts  even  at  Rome  and  Milan,  but  spread  with
still  more  astonishing  rapidity  through  the  South  of  France.
Persons  even  whose  interests  were  diametrically  opposed  to  the
progress  of  the  sect,  joined  it  with  inexplicable  fervour ;  twelve
canons  of  the  Cathedral  of  Orleans  were  burnt  alive  at  one
time  for  embracing  Paulicianism.  These  few  facts,  selected
from  the  wide  range  of  their  history,  will  suffice  to  illustrate
the  diffusion  of  Manichean  notions  during  the  period  when  the
Templars  were  at  the  height  of  their  prosperity  and  power.

But  Gnosticism  in  one  shape  or  other,  was  still  surviving  in
the  very  head-quarters  of  the  Order,  amongst  their  closest
allies  or  enemies,  the  mountaineers  of  Syria.  The  Templar-
Order  had  been  modelled  after  an  original,  the  last  to  be  looked
for  according  to  modern  views,  for  Von  Hammer  has  here  been
successful  in  demonstrating  that  its  constitution  is  a  servile  copy
of  that  of  the  detested  "  Assassins."  The  statutes  of  the  latter
prove  the  fact  beyond  all  gainsaying ;  they  were  found  upon
the  captives  of  their  capital,  Alamoot,  by  the  Mogul,  Halakoo,
in  the  year  1335,  when  by  a  most  singular  coincidence,  Caliph
and  Pope  were  busied  in  exterminating  the  model  and  the
copy  in  the  East  and  West,  at  one  and  the  same  time.  From
these  documents  were  verified  the  "  Eight  Degrees  "  of  initiation
as  established  by  Hassan,  the  first  Grand  Master  or  "  Prince  of
the  Mountain."  These  degrees,  probably  suggested  by  the
ancient  Mithraic  tests,  were  : —
I.  The  Trial  of  knowledge.

II.  The Trial of  Persuasiveness ; i.e.,  the  talent  for  pro-
selytism.

III.  Denial  of  the  truth  of  the  Koran,  and  of  all  other  sacred
scriptures.

IV.  The  Trial  of  silent  and  perfect  obedience.

V.  The  Disclosure  of  the  names  of  the  Great  Brothers  of  the
Order,  royal,  sacerdotal  and  patrician,  in  all  parts  of  the  world.

VI.  The  Confirmation  of  all  the  preceding  steps  of  knowledge.

VII.  The  Allegorical  interpretation  of  the  Koran,  and  of  all


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  411

other  scriptures.  In  this  lodge  the  divinity  of  all  founders  of
religious  systems  was  alike  denied.  Keligion  was  shown  to  be
a  mere  step  to  knowledge,  its  narratives  to  be  merely  allegorical
and  exhibiting  the  progress  of  civil  society :  thus,  Man's  Fall
signified  political  slavery ;  Redemption  his  restoration  to  liberty
and  equality.

VIII.  That  all  actions  were  indifferent,  provided  only  they
were  done  for  the  good  of  the  Order ;  *  there  being  no  such
thing,  absolutely,  as  vice  or  virtue.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  principle  running  through  these
"  Degrees  "  is  identical  with  that  pervading  the  jnain  counts  in
the  Articles  of  Accusation  brought  against  the  Templars.

The  same  author  (History  of  the  Assassins)  shows  that  the
organization  of  the  Templars  was  exactly  modelled  upon  that
of  the  Assassins,  and  thus  confronts  the  several  degrees  in  each
of  the  two  orders.

Of  the  Assassins.

I.  The  Grand  Master,  or  Prince  of  the  Mountain.

II.  The  Dais-al-Kabir,  or  three  great  viceroys  under  him.

III.  The  Dais,  or  provincial  masters.

IV.  The  Refek,  or  chaplains.

V.  The  Lazik,  or  military  body.

VI.  The  Fedavee,  or  death-devoted.

VII.  The  Batinee,  or  secret  brethren,  i.e.,  those  affiliated  to
the  order.

Of  the  Templars.

I.  The  Grand  Master.

II.  The  three  Grand  Priors.

III.  The  Provincial  Prior.
IV.  The  Chaplains.

V.  The  Knights.

VI.  The  Esquires.

VII.  The  Serving-brethren.

VIII.  The  Donati  and  Oblati.
IX.  The  Affiliati.t

*  The  maxim  of  the  Jesuits  "  that  t  The  benefits  of  affiliation  were
implicit  obedience  includes  the  com-  obtained  at  the  small  annual  fee  of
mission  of  a  mortal  sin."  two  or  three  deniers.  One  of  the


412  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

The  "  Donati "  and  Oblati "  were  sworn,  in  return  for  the
protection  afforded  to  them  by  the  Order,  to  leave  to  it  all  their
property  at  their  deaths,  and  consequently  to  refrain  from
having  offspring,  or  even  to  stand  sponsors  to  the  children  of
others.  If  married  at  the  time  of  joining  the  Order,  they  were
bound  to  put  away  their  wives.  Infraction  of  the  vow  was
punished  by  perpetual  imprisonment.  The  "Affiliati"  had,
probably,  nothing  to  do  with  the  secrets  of  the  Order ;  they
merely,  in  return  for  a  certain  sum  paid  down,  received  their
daily  maintenance  (their  commons)  out  of  the  corporate  fund  ;
such  an  arrangement  being  a  simple  anticipation  of  the  principle
of  life  annuities,  and  admirably  suited  to  the  requirements  of
those  barbarous  times.

It  is  not  a  matter  for  surprise  that  the  grand  elements  of
ancient  Gnosticism  should  have  thus  been  discovered  lurking  in
the  secret  rules  of  the  Order  of  Assassins  ;  when  the  origin  of
that  order  is  investigated,  it  proves  to  be  only  a  branch  of  the
Ismaelites,  or  those  Persians  who  supported  the  cause  of  the
descendants  of  Ali.  But  Abdallab,  himself  a  Magian,  had  from
the  beginning  founded  in  the  midst  of  these  Ismaelites,  a  secret
society  composed  of  those  Persians  who  had,  through  Arab
compulsion,  embraced  Mohammedanism  only  in  name.  By
inculcating  those  vital  dogmas  of  the  old  Gnosis,  that  knowledge
was  the  real  end  of  Eeligion,  and  that  in  all  scriptures  the
allegorical  interpretation  was  the  only  true  one,  Abdallah  united
under  his  teaching  the  remnants  of  all  the  older  religions  that
still  lurked  in  Persia,  in  fact  he  did  in  Persia  under  the  Caliph,
what  the  new  Manichean  Chrysocheir  was  doing  at  Tephrice
under  the  Byzantine  emperor.  The  Ismaelites  having  gradually
become  absorbed  into  the  new  sect,  succeeded,  in  the  tenth
century,  in  placing  a  prince  of  Ali's  line  upon  the  throne  of
Cairo,  thus  founding  the  Fatimite  dynasty.  After  this,  Hassan,
who  had  served  with  distinction  under  the  Seljuk  Sultans,
aided  by  his  brethren  to  when  he  had  returned,  having  captured
the  hill  fortress  of  Alamoot  or  «  The  Vultures'  Nest '  (1090  A.D.),
set  himself  up  there  as  an  independent  prince,  and  established

chief  causes  of Philippe le Bel's refusal,  in  the  early  par  t  of  his  reign
hatred  against the  order  wns  their to  admit  him  into  this  class.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  413

his  community  as  a  political  body,  under  the  constitution  already
described.  In  a  short  time  these  bold  sectaries  made  themselves
masters  of  all  the  strong  planes  of  Lebanon,  thereby  securing
their  independence  of  the  Egyptian  Caliph.  The  Druses  are
only  the  modern  representatives  of  the  suppressed  Assassins.
Like  them,  they  are  Ismaelites,  their  ostensible  founder  being
Hakim,  a  Fatemite  Caliph  of  Cairo,  who  professed  himself
the  new  incarnation  of  the  Godhead.  Their  notion  that  the
present  seat  of  their  ever  absent  Grand  Master  is  Europe,
tallies  curiously  enough  with  Von  Hammer's  theory  about
the  close  relationship  that  existed  between  the  Templars  and
the  actual  progenitors  of  the  Druses.  These  same  Druses  may
also  possibly  represent  the  '  polytheists  and  Samaritans '  who
nourished  so  vigorously  in  the  Lebanon  as  late  as  the  times
of  Justinian,  to  whose  persecuting  zeal  Procopius  ascribes  the
extermination  of  a  million  inhabitants  of  that  district  alone.
Of  their  present  creed,  preserved  in  unviolated  secrecy,
nothing  authentic  has  ever  come  to  light ;  popular  belief
amongst  their  neighbours  makes  them  adorers  of  an  idol  in  the
form  of  a  calf,  and  to  celebrate  their  nocturnal  assemblies,  orgies
like  those  laid  to  the  charge  of  the  Ophites  in  Eoman,  of  the
Templars  in  mediaeval,  and  of  the  Freemasons  (continental)  in
modern  times.  Their  notion  of  their  Head  residing  in  Scotland
has  an  odd  resemblance  to  the  German  appellation  "  Scottish
Brethren,"  given  to  our  Masons.  Some  such  association  of  ideas
seems  to  have  led  the  Lessing  to  maintain  that  "  Freemason,"
in  German  Masson,  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  English
meaning  of  the  word,  but  comes  from  mass  only,  the  proper
name  for  a  Templar  lodge,  called  also  a  "  Round  Table."  For
this  derivation  he  cites  Agricola,  an  authority  removed  by  no
more  than  1 50  3  ears  from  the  date  of  the  suppression  of  the
Order.  On  this  account,  he  adds,  the  old  Templar  buildings  in
Bologna  and  Milan  still  retain  the  title  "  de  la  magione,"  that
is,  "  of  the  masson ;  "  although  a  less  acute  critic  would,  most
assuredly,  only  be  able  to  discover  here  nothing  deeper  than  an
Italian  corruption  of  the  French  maison  in  its  common  sense.

The  influence  of  the  Crusades  and  their  results  upon  the  mind
and  life  of  mediaeval  Europe  cannot  possibly be  exaggerated


414  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIE REMAINS.

The  true  masters  of  the  Western  barbarians  in  philosophy,
science,  and  many  of  the  arts,  were  the  Arabs,  firstly,  those
of  Syria,  later,  of  Spain.  Together  with  their  learning  they
communicated  other  ideas,  far  different  from  those  originally
contemplated  by  their  pupils.  Nevertheless,  the  connection
between  their  science  and  their  secret  creed  was  so  inti
mate  that,  in  reality,  no  other  result  was  to  be  looked  for.
So  much  of  primitive  Gnosticism,  before  its  admixture  with
Christianity,  was  based  upon  Magism,  that  is,  upon  astrological
ideas,  as  to  make  it  often  difficult  to  determine  whether  a
Gnostic  monument  involves  a  religious  notion,  or  is  merely  a
sidereal  talisman.  For  example,  the  Decani  of  the  Signs,  whose
figures,  according  to  Teucer,  were  commonly  worn  as  amulets,
are  often  to  be  seen  bearing  the  names  inscribed  of  Michael  and
other  Jewish  angels.  In  the  flourishing  times  of  Mahom-
medanism,  before  the  spread  of  universal  ignorance  had  esta
blished  everywhere  the  dull  reign  of  uninquiring  orthodoxy,
there  existed  at  its  very  heart  (probably  originating  in
Persia)  an  esoteric  body,  styling  themselves  Sufit  a  title
evidently  derived  from  the  Greek  2o<£oi,  their  predecessors.
Now  this  title  appears  assumed  as  equivalent  to  the  previous
IVCDO-TIKOI,  although  with  far  more  arrogance,  since  these
"  wise  "  men  claimed  the  possession  of  that  knowledge  of  things
divine  which  the  Gnostics  by  their  own  designation  were  only
"  desirous  of  knowing"  Meantime,  the  tenets  they  held  were
precisely  those  of  the  old  Antitactae,  "  ordinance-haters,"  as  to
the  indifference  of  all  things  pertaining  to  the  body,  and  the
invalidity  of  the  Jewish  moral  law  (the  mere  appointment  of
the  Demiurgus),  as  regarded  the  regulation  of  the  life  of  the
"  Spiritual  Man."  Just  as  it  is  a  constant  charge  of  the  Fathers
against  the  primitive  Gnostics  that  they  outwardly  conformed
without  scruple,  in  order  to  escape  all  annoyance,  to  the  esta
blished  religion  of  whatever  place  they  chanced  to  inhabit,  it  is
equally  probable  that  the  Manicheans  and  other  sectaries  of
Asia,  persecuted  with  like  zeal  by  orthodox  Byzantine  and  Zoro-
astrian  Persian,  would  gladly  shelter  themselves  under  the
easy  cloak  of  the  true  religion  of  their  Arab  conquerors,  during
the  two  centuries  following  Justinian's  reign,  and  either  save


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  415

their  liberty  by  professing  Mahommedanism,  or  else  continue,  as
tributaries,  in  the  unmolested  exercise  of  their  old  faith,  being
confounded  by  the  uninquisitive  conqueror  under  the  general
name  of  Infidels.*  "The  sects  of  Egypt  and  Syria,"  says
Gibbon,  "enjoyed  a  free  toleration  under  the  shadow  of  the
Arabian  Caliphs,"  and  therefore  may  reasonably  be  supposed  to
have  maintained  their  peculiar  notions  and  observances  down  to
the  time  of  the  Crusades.  Of  such  protracted  existence  we  have
the  most  convincing  proof  at  the  present  day  in  the  numerous
sect,  the  Mandaites,  or  Nazarenes  of  the  Shat-el-Arab,  and
Bassora ;  veritable  Gnostics,  holding  a  creed,  the  true  image  of
that  of  Manes,  in  their  '  Book  of  Adam ; '  and  detested  by  their
Christian  and  Moslem  neighbours  alike.

Now,  inasmuch  as  these  Sufi  were  composed  exclusively  of  the
learned  amongst  the  Persians  and  Syrians,  at  a  time  when
learning  signified  little  else  than  proficiency  in  medicine  and
astrology  (the  two  points  that  brought  the  Eastern  sages  into
amicable  contact  with  their  barbarous  invaders  from  the  West),
it  is  easy  to  see  how  the  latter  may  have  imbibed  the  esoteric
doctrines  simultaneously  with  the  other  teaching  of  those  who
were  their  sole  instructors  in  all  matters  pertaining  to  science
and  art.  Now  the  Sufi  doctrine  was  based  on  that  grand  idea
—  one  universal  creed  that  could  be  secretly  held  under  the
outward  profession  of  any  established  religion — taking,  in  fact,
virtually  the  same  view  of  all  religious  systems  as  that  in
which  the  philosophers  of  old  had  regarded  them.  Such  too
had  been  a  striking  feature  in  the  Gnostic  teaching:  the
Naaseni,  or  Ophites,  says  Hippolytus,  boasted  in  language  truly
Masonic,  "  We  of  all  men  are  the  only  Christians,  standing  in
the  third  gate,  and  anointed  with  the  ineffable  unction  out  of  the
horn  like  David,  not  out  of  the  earthen  vessel  like  Saul,  who  con
sorted  with  the  evil  spirit  of  carnal  concupiscence."  These  same
genuine  Christians  at  the  same  time  zealously  celebrated  all  the
Mysteries  of  Paganism,  affirming  that  in  their  higher  knowledge
they  possessed  the  only  key  to  the  one  truth  locked  up  under
those  superstitious  ceremonies.  And  in  our  day  the  acknow-

*  The  semi-Magian  Abdallali  and  family  resemblance  to  Weishaupt
his  new  Ismaelites  have  a  strong  and  his  illuminati  in  the  last  centtiry.


416  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

ledgment  of  one  universal  religion  by  the  Freemasons,  as
expressed  by  their  requiring  from  the  candidate  for  admission
nothing  more  than  the  declaration  of  his  belief  in  one  God,  is
denounced  with  pious  horror  by  the  bigots  of  every  variety  of
the  Christian  scheme.

This  recognition  of  one  universal  religion  in  fact  pervades  all
the  works  of  the  lights  of  Mohammedan  literature.  In  the
Malzamat  of  Hariri  the  sermons  preached  by  his  hero  the  Dervish
are  full  of  a  sentiment  more  sublime  when  touching  upon  things
pertaining  unto  God — a  sentiment  harmonising  infinitely  more
closely  with  those  of  enlightened  religious  men  of  our  times
upon  the  same  subject — in  a  word,  these  sermons  breathe
a  spirit  in  every  respect  more  Christian  (to  use  the  modern
phrase)  than  characterises  any  writings  of  the  actual  Christian
divines,  the  contemporaries  of  the  author.*  But  this  is  neces
sarily  so,  Hariri  and  Mohammedans  like  him  being  guided  by
the  traditions  of  the  old  philosophy  still  secretly  maintained
amongst  them,  whilst  the  spirit  of  modern  Christianity  is
strongly,  though  unconsciously,  directed  by  precisely  the  same
influence  revived,  though  under  a  different  name,  and  professedly
contemning  its  real  source.

Again,  the  greatest  of  all  Mohammedan  sovereigns,  the
Mogul  Akbar,  was  a  true  Sufi ;  equally  so  was  his  prime  minister
and  historian,  Abul  Farez.  It  would  be  difficult  to  find  in  a
modern  Christian  prayer-book,  much  less  in  any  one  composed
in  his  age,  an  address  to  the  Deity  so  sublime,  so  consonant
with  our  present  notions,  as  the  invocation  opening  his  Ayeen-
Alcbari.  In  all  such  outpourings  of  Oriental  adoration  no
allusion  whatever  to  their  special  lawgiver  is  to  be  detected,
nothing  to  betray  any  distinctive  sectarian  prejudice ;  the
reader,  if  unacquainted  with  the  history  of  the  author,  would
admire,  but  know  not  to  what  creed  to  adjudge  the  composition.
Akbar,  according  to  his  vizier,  "  made  a  point  of  never  ridiculing
or  condemning  any  form  of  religion."  He  had  thus,  perhaps
without  knowing  it,  reverted  to  the  grand  and  distinguishing
feature  of  the  religion  of  Greece  and  Kome  in  their  best  times
that  discerned  the  same  great  truth,  the  real  basis  of  universal
*  He  flourished  in  the  ninth  century.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  417

toleration,  that  all  religious  systems  were  but  expressions  of  the
same  idea,

u  By  saint,  by  savage,  or  by  sago."

Wherever,  in  ancient  times,  the  principle of  toleration was
apparently  violated,  it  was  in  cases  where  the  rites,  by  their
corruption,  had  become  prejudicial  to  public  welfare,  as  when
the  Senate  put  down  the  Bacchanalia,  or  Claudius  the  Druids
in  Gaul,  on  account  of  their  human  sacrifices ;  exactly  as  Iliero
of  Syracuse  had  made  it  an  article in his treaty with the
vanquished Carthaginians,  that  they  should  discontinue  their
burnt-offerings  of  young  children  to  Melcarth. Ilesiod's  maxim,
Mr)  d/)/o7/rots  ^to/AeuW,  was  that  of  his  race,  as  well  as  of  the
Roman, and the same  was the guiding  principle  of  Akbar.
From  a  hint  dropped  by  his  panegyrist  it  would  almost  appear
that  the  Emperor  had  imbibed  some  slight  tinge  of  /oroastrian
doctrine, for  he remarks his particular  veneration for the
element  of  fire ;  and  again  the  significant  circumstance  of  his
regulating  his  frequent  daily  prayers  by  the  position of  the
sun  in  the  heavens ;  and,  what  bears  directly  upon  our  subject,
his  favourite  occupation  was  to  converse  with  the  Svfi  and  the
learned  of  all  nations  and  religions.  It  sounds  also  very  odd  to  hear
a  Mohammedan  grandee,  like  this  writer,  declaring  that  amongst
the  Brahmins  were  to  be  found  "the  most  virtuous  men  upon
earth,"  those  very  religionists  in  whom  Akbar's  successors,  like
Aurungzeb,  could  (quite  according  to  our  own  ideas  of  what
riecessaiily  should  have  been  his  feeling)  discern  nothing  but
de\  il- worshippers,  whom it  was his bounden  duty  either  to
convert  or  exterminate.

The  constant  intercourse  between  Syria  and  Europe,  .main
tained  first  by  the  flocks  of  pilgrims  perpetually  crowding  to
Jerusalem,  then  by  the  Crusades,  and  lastly  by  the  establish
ment  of  the  Frankit>h  kingdom  in  Palestine,  and  of  the  different
principalities  upon  the  coast,  produced  vast  effects,  both  apparent
and  concealed,  upon  tl:e  nations  of  Europe,  more  especially  those
seated  upon  the  Mediterranean.  Arabian  influence  brightly
manifests  itself  in  the  poetry  of  the  Troubadours,  half-amatory,
half-mystical  like  its  model,  of  a  spirit  differing  as  widely  from
the  materialism  of  classic  elegiacs,  as  does  the  pointed  "  Sara-

2  E


418  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

cenic"  architecture,  with  all  its  forms  suggested  by  tho
tentpole  and  curtain,  from  the  massive  Romanesque  which  it  so
rapidly  displaced.  Of  poetry  and  architecture  alike  the  germs
had  been  carried  into  France  by  the  causes  already  noticed,  and
kept  in  full  vigour  by  the  permanent  establishment  of  the  two
great  military  orders  having  their  headquarters  in  Jerusalem,
but  looking  principally  to  France  for  recruits  and  resources.
For  the  Crusades  were  eminently  a  French  idee,  and  both
leaders  and  soldiers  in  the  most  important  of  them,  were  either
actual  Frenchmen  or  princes  holding  territories  in  France —
our  Norman  kings  for  example.  How  many  arts,  the  most
admired  in  those  ages,  are  direct  importations  from  Syria  or
Egypt !  Glass-working  in  all  its  processes  connected  with  the
manufacture  of  ornamental  and  coloured  vessels,  and  painted
windows,  enamelling,  majolica,  damascening  on  steel,  tho
coinage  of  gold,  the  cultivation  of  the  silkworm.  The  Italian
language  has  preserved  this  history  in  the  terms,  purely
Arabic,  still  designating  things  pertaining  to  all  such  processes,
as  zecca,  tazza,  cameo,  mantece,  rocca,  gala,  pataea,  ricamare,  dr.
Italian  Gothic,  particularly  its  civil  branch,  as  exemplified  in
the  buildings  of  the  great  maritime  cities  on  the  Mediterranean
(those  on  the  Adriatic  continued  faithful  to  the  Byzantine  taste),
such  as  Genoa,  Pisa,  Florence,  is  a  mere  transcript  of  Cairo  and
Kosetta ;  to  the  latest  days  of  the  style  bearing  no  resemblance
to  the  Gothic  then  flourishing  beyond  the  Alps.

This  diffusion  of  Oriental  ideas  over  Europe  has  a  very
important  bearing  upon  the  present  inquiry,  for  it  explains  the
readiness  with  which  Manicheisrn  was  embraced  in  France
during  the  two  centuries  preceding  the  fall  of  the  Templars.
These  very  Templars  are  found  during  their  residence  in
Palestine  exhibiting  a  tolerant  spirit,  utterly  inconsistent  with
the  ostensible  object  of  their  institution;  making  alliances
with  any  of  the  neighbouring  Emirs  able  to  assist  them  in
holding  their  own  against  the  common  enemy,  the  Soldan  of
Egypt ;  amongst  whom  figures  conspicuously  that  arch-Gnostic,
the  redoubtable  "Old  Man  of  the  Mountain."  *

*  His  practice  of  intoxicating  the  trial  paradise,  gave  the  sect  the  name,
neophyte  with  hashish  (extract  of  afterwards  accepted  by  the  Italians
liomp)  before  admis;- ion  into  his  terres-  in  its  present  opprobrious  sense.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  419

A  distinguishing  feature  of  Gnosticisim  was  the  profession  of
continence,  at  least  as  far  as  regards  the  propagation  of  the
human  species,  which  was  denounced  to  the  "spiritual"  as
the  doing  in  the  highest  measure  the  will  of  the  Demiurgus,
and  the  perpetuating  the  reign  of  Matter.  The  strange  means
they  adopted  to  preserve  their  vow  inviolate  may  be  learnt  by
referring  to  Clemens,  where  he  quotes  their  interpretation  of
the  ancient  fable  about  Saturn's  devouring  his  own  children,
or  to  Epiphanius  when  he  describes  the  rites  of  the  Ophite
eucharist.  In  no  other  doctrine  of  the  Gnosis  is  the  Buddhistic
influence  more  clearly  traceable  than  in  this,  for  any  intrinsic
merit  in  similar  asceticism  (as  practised  purely  for  its  own
sake)  was  never  dreamed  of  by  the  Grecian  philosophy,  that
offspring  of  reason  in  her  brightest  and  most  uncorrupted
development.  This  selfsame  affectation  of  purity  contributed,
even  more  than  the  proclaimed  liberty  of  conscience,  to  promote
the  spread  of  Gnostic  tenets  in  every  age  of  their  development,
from  Yalentinus  down  to  the  grand  apostle  of  Laiiguedoc,
Nicetas  of  Constantinople.  His  Manichajan  bishops  owed  their
success  in  great  measure  to  their  black  robes  and  professed
abstinence  from,  nay,  more,  pious  horror  of,  all  the  pleasures  of
sense.  For  any  preaching  is  certain  to  obtain  flocks  of  converts
that  shall  make,  besides  the  promise  of  fully  explaining  things
too  high  for  man's  understanding,  an  outward  and  noisy
profession  of  asceticism,  and  proclaim  the  exaltation  of  the  poor
and  the  certain  damnation  of  the  rich  as  a  capital  article  of  its
creed.  For  the  vulgar  mind  ever  admires  what  is  difficult
merely  because  it  is  difficult,  however  useless  in  itself  may  be
the  result,  or  even  pernicious  to  society  in  its  consequence,  if
logically  carried  out;  and  inasmuch  as  the  abstinence  from
sensual  pleasures  is  to  them  the  hardest  of  all  tests,  so  much
the  more  is  the  ostentation  of  similar  self-denial  the  most
effectual  method  for  gaining  ascendency  over  brutish  intelli
gences,  utterly  incapable  of  distinguishing  the  means  from  the
end.  Moreover,  such  doctrines  find  powerful  allies,  ready
existing  for  them,  in  the  natural  enviousness  and  greed  of
common  souls.  The  actually  poor  being  ever  the  vast  majority  in
the  land,  such  hearers  joyfully  receive  the  teaching  that  promises

2  E  2


420


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


the  punishment  of  their  betters  in  the  next  world,  purely
as  a  counterbalance  to  their  superior  happiness  in  this:  whilst
as  scarcely  any  one  considers  himself  as  a  truly  rich  man,  but
is  constantly  climbing  upwards  towards  a  point  that  constantly
recedes  before  him  at  every  successive  stage  of  his  ascent,  even
the  wealthy  convert  is  enabled  to  hold  the  comfortable  assurance
that  he  himself  continues  in  the  category  of  the  poor,  and  that
the  anathema  is  only  launched  against  the  one  immediately
above  himself  on  the  social  ladder.  In  this  feeling  lies  the  true
secret  of  the  amazing  success  of  Manicheism,  its  rapid  absorption
into  itself  of  the  earlier  Gnostic  forms,  and  above  all,  of  the
facility  with  which  it  got  possession  of  tho.se  very  regions
where  the  Catholic  Church  was  the  most  richly  endowed  ;  and
where  her  clergy,  particularly  the  Regular,  were  attracting  the
greatest  envy  by  their  wealth  and  ostentation.

The  Templars  began  their  course  in  actual  poverty,  leading
a  doubly  hard  laborious  life— that  of  monk  and  soldier  combined.
To  express  this  poverty  the  original  device,  or  common  seal,  of
the  Order,  bore  two  knights  mounted  upon  the  same  horse,  the
most  striking  exemplification  of  humility  that  could  be  imagined
in  those  days  of  chivalry.  Becoming  ashamed  of  such  a  badge
as  they  grew  in  power,  they  altered  it  into  the  somewhat  similar
outline  of  a  Pegasus — such  at  least  is  the  old  tradition.  The
Winged  Horse,  however,  may  from  the  first  have  involved  a
more  spiritual  meaning,  allusive  to  the  heavenward  aspirations
of  those  initiated  into  the  Order.  And  when  their  career  was
drawing  to  a  close,  amidst  the  wealth  and  luxury  that  drew
down  upon  them  so  cruel  a  destruction,  the  brethren,  no  doubt
through  some  ingenious  mode  of  self-deception,  still  flattered
themselves  that  their  vows  were  as  faithfully  observed  as  in  the
very  springtide  of  their  institution.

The  strange and  obscene*  ceremonies  observed  on  the  ad
mission of  neophytes into the various secret societies that

*  "  Art.  26.  Item,  quod  in rccep-  «  Art.  29.  Item,  aliquando  in  virga

tione Fratrum hujus Ordinis, vel  virili."

circa,  interdum  recipiens  et  receptus  "  Art.  30.  Item,  quod  in  receptione

aliquando se  deosculabantnr  in  ore,  sua ilia faciebant juxta eos quos

vel  in  umbilico  seu  in  ventre  nudo,  recipiebant  quod  Ordinem  non ex-

vel  in  ano  seu  in  spiua  dorsi."  ieriut."


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  421

flourished  under  the  Lower  Empire  and  in  the  Middle  Ages
are  all  of  them  no  more  than  faint  traditions  of  the  penances,
or  "  Twelve  Tortures "  that  purchased  admission  into  the
Cave  of  Mithras.  How  widely  diffused  were  these  Mithraici,
especially  in  the  West,  is  attested  by  the  innumerable  tablets,
altars,  and  inscriptions  still  remaining  in  Germany,  France,  and
this  country.  The  religion  of  Mithras  was  so  readily  embraced
and  flourished  so  extensively  amongst  all  the  Celtic  races,
in  consequence  of  its  analogy  to  the  previously  dominant
Druidical  religion.

This  affinity  had  struck  with  astonishment  that  sagacious
observer,  the  elder  Pliny,  who  must  have  had  ample  opportunity
for  forming  a  correct  judgment  during  his  protracted  military
service  upon  the  Rhine.  He  declares  (Nat.  Hist.  xxx.  4) :  "  Gallias
utique  possedit  (Magica)  et  quidem  ad  nostram  memoriam ;
namque  Tiberii  Csesaris  principatus  sustulit  Druidas  eorum  et  hoc
genus  vatum  medicorumque  per  senatus  consultum.  Quid  ego
hflec  commemorem  in  arte  Oceanum  quoque  transgressa,  et  ad
Naturte  inane  pervecta?  Britannia  hodieque  celebrat,  tantis
ceremoniis  ut  dcdisse  Persis  videri  possit;  adeo  ista  toto  mumlo
consensere  quamquam  discordi  et  sibi  ignoto.  Nee  satis  aBstumari
pote-t  quantum  Romanis  debeatur,  qui  sustulere  monstra  in
quibus  hominem  occidere  religiosis^imum  erat,  mandi  vero  etiam
saluberrimum."  A  hundred  years  before,  Ciesar  (Bell.  Gall.  vi.
13)  had  stated  :  "Disciplina  Druidica  in  Britannia  reperta  atque
iiide  in  Galliani  translata  esse  eestiniatur,  et  nunc  qui  diligentius
earn  rem  cognoscere  volunt  plerumque  eo  discendi  causa  proficis-
cuntur."  The  subjects  of  study  in  the  Druidical  school  were
literally  those  of  the  Magiaii  Gnosis,  "  Multa  pra3terea  de
sideribus  eorumque  motu,  de  mundi  ac  terrarum  magnitudine,
de  rerum  natura,  de  deorum  immortalium  vi  ac  potestate  disputant."
For  Pliny  by  his  "  Magica  "  understands  the  rites  instituted  by
Zoroaster,  and  first  promulgated  by  Osthanes  to  the  outer  world,
this  Osthanes  having  been  "  military  chaplain "  to  Xerxes
during  his  expedition  into  Greece.  And  this  judgment  of  the
Romans  is  fully  borne  out  by  native  evidence,  for  Druidism
(such  as  it  appeared  in  its  final  struggle  with  Christianity
during  the  short-lived  independence  of  Britain  after  the  with-


422  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

drawal  of  the  legions)  is  a  religion  agreeing  most  wonderfully  in
many  important  points  with  the  doctrine  of  Zoroaster.  Thus,
it  expressly  teaches  the  eternal  existence  and  antagonism  of
the  Two  Principles,  the  final  triumph  of  Good,  and  the
Eenovation  of  all  things.  A  most  valuable  fragment  of  early
Druidical  teaching  Plutarch  has  preserved  to  us  in  his  strange
essay  "  On  the  Face  in  the  Moon,"  by  the  title  of  the  "  Doctrine
of  the  Sons  of  Saturn,"  which  is  full  of  Gnostic  ideas  ;  those  of
Manes  for  instance,  and  even  of  Gnostic  expressions.

Now  Manes  himself  started  as  a  Zoroastrian  priest,  and  framed
his  new  creed  (according  to  Epiphanius)  by  engrafting  upon
the  original  the  transcendental  Buddhistic  notions  picked  up  by
his  true  master,  Scythicus,  during  his  travels  in  India.  Is  there
not  then  a  possibility  that  some  sparks  of  the  anoient  Mithraic
doctrine  may  have  lingered  unnoticed  in  the  West*  until  made
to  blaze  up  anew  by  the  congenial  breath  of  the  Paulician
Apostles?  Indeed,  one  may  even  now  discern  the  awful  antique
ceremonial  as  parodied  to  the  minutest  particular  in  the
procedure  of  the  modern  convivial  lictseria ;  for  Jerome's  Miles,
the  lowest  grade  in  the  Cave  of  Mithras,  the  Templars'
"  watchman  placed  on  the  roof  of  the  house  or  church  wherein
the  Chapter  is  held  "  (Art.  101),  have  their  exact  representative
in  the  armed  man,  the  "Tiler,"  lowest  official,  who  stands
sentinel  at  the  door  of  the  Freemasons'  secret  conclave.

The  Druidical  temple,  always  circular  in  ground-plan,  whether
formed  out  of  native  rocks,  or  built  with  Gallo-Koman  masonry
as  in  its  latest  example  at  Laiitef  in  Bretagne  (figured  by
Caylus,  vi.  pi.  124),  consisting  of  two  concentric  enclosures
pierced  with  numerous  arches,  bears  in  this  point  a  remarkable
analogy  to  all  other  structures  dedicated  to  the  element  of
fire.  Such  is  the  plan  of  the  temple  of  Moloch  (uncovered  at
Carthage  by  Davis),  the  Roman  Vesta's  temple,  the  Guebre  fire
temples  at  Balkh,  to  this  day  circular  towers,  and  the  great
Sassanian  temple  at  Gazacas  destroyed  by  Heraclius  in  his

*  Similarly  there  is  every  reason  the  only  change  being  in  the  name

to  believe  that  the  medieval  Witches'  of the presiding  deity. Michelet

Sabbat  preserved  uninterrupted the  is  of  this  opinion  in  describing  the

ceremonial  of  the  ancient  rural  orgia,  immense  Sabbats  of  the  17th  century.


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  423

invasion.  The  spherical  edifice  within  the  palace  containing
the  abominable  idol  of  Chosroes,  the  image  of  himself,  enthroned
as  in  heaven,  and  all  round  him  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  which
the  superstitious  king  worshipped  as  gods  :  angels  also  had  he
placed  standing  about  him  like  sceptre-bearers.  Moreover,  this
enemy  of  God  had  so  contrived  by  means  of  certain  mechanism
that  drops  of  water  should  fall  from  the  ceiling  to  imitate  rain,
and  that  sounds  of  thunder  should  reverberate  therefrom.  Our
Vemlamium  also  boasted  a.Mithraic  temple  commensurate  to
the  importance  of  the  place ;  until  destroyed  by  the  superstitious
barbarian,  Ealdred,  eighth  Abbot  of  St.  Albans,  for  to  no  other
purpose  could  have  served  "  the  very  deep  grotto,  covered  with
an  unbroken  hill  of  earth,  and  approached  by  a  subterraneous
passage,"  the  ruins  of  which  were  yet  visible  when  Matthew
Paris  wrote.  "  Specus  quoque  profundissimum  monte  continuo
circumseptum,  cum  spclunca  subterranea  quam  quondam  Draco
ingens  fecerat  et  inhabitavit,  in  loco  qui  Wurmenhert  dicitur,'  in
quantum  potuit  explanavit,  vestigia  tamen  ajterna  habitatioms
serpentinae  derelinqueiis."*

The  foregoing  considerations  seem  to  furnish  a  reasonable
solution  of  the  problem  set  to  the  archaeologist  in  the  continued
existence  of  genuine  Gnostic  symbols  (whether  in  their  pristine
significancy  or  as  mere  dead  forms,  is  for  the  Masons  themselves
to  judge)  still  paraded  before  us  as  things  holy  and  full  of
meaning.  Treasured  up  amongst  the  Sufis  of  Persia,  and  the  dark
sectaries  of  the  Lebanon,  thence  transmitted  to  the  Templars,
and  handed  over  by  them  to  their  legitimate  heirs  the  Brethren  of
the  Piosy  Cross,  these  signs  maintain  a  perpetual  vitality.  The
famous  Pentade  (Solomon's  seal)  of  the  Templars  was,  thinks
Nicolai  with  good  reason,  the  powerful  symbol,  prescribed  in
the  Diagraming  of  the  Ophites  to  bo  offered  by  the  ascending
soul  to  the  Genius  of  each  sphere,  to  extort  from  them  free
passage  to  the  supernal  Light:  "0  First  and  Seventh  One
(lldabaoth,  aeon  of  Saturn),  born  to  rule  with  power,  chief  Word
of  the  pure  Intelligence !  Perfect  Work  in  the  sight  of  the
Father  and  the  Son  ;  by  presenting  unto  thee  in  this  seal  the
sign  of  life,  I  open  the  gate  which  thy  power  hath  closed  to
*  Gesta  Abbatum  S.  Albani,  cd.  H.  T.  Riley,  vol.  i.,  page  25.


424  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

the  world,  and  freely  traverse  thy  domains."  A  sufficient
reason  this  for  the  constant  appearance  of  this  particular  sigil
upon  tombstones  of  every  date.  The  reverence  with  which  the
Hindoos  still  regard  the  same  figure  has  been  already  noticed.
In  its  five  points  lies  concealed  the  same  expression  of  the  virtues
of  that  numeral  as  was  conveyed  to  the  Grecian  philosopher  by
the  Delphic  e  ;  interpreted  in  the  same  sense  as  by  Plutarch,  in
the  Middle  Ages  the  Pentacle  was  held  a  sure  protection  against
all  danger  of  fire — though  found  unavailing,  alas  !  for  its
knightly  wearers;  Beranger's  dictum  being  too  well  verified,

"  Les  heretiques  n'orit  pas  trouve
Onguent  pour  la  brulure,"

and  was  therefore  regularly  painted  up  in  buildings  that  from
their  destination  were  particularly  liable  to  such  ri>k,  brew-
houses  amongst  the  rest.  This  last  custom  explains  how  the
pentacle  came  at  last  to  indicate  the  places  where  fermented
liquors  were  on  sale.

As  for  the  transmission  of  these  symbols,  the  question  would
be  at  once settled  should  we  accept the  bold declaration  of
Leasing,  for  which,  however,  we  have  only  his  own  authority
(Fortsctzunrj ties  Ernst,  p.  53)  :  "  The  Lodges  of  the  Templars
were in the very  highest repute  during  the  12th  and  13th
centuries ;  and  out  of  such  a  Templars'  Lodge  which  had  been
continually  kept  up  in  the  heart  of  London,  was  the  Society  of
Freemasons  established  in  the  17th  century  by  Sir  Christopher
Wren." But  this  venerable  tradition  is  directly  contravened  by
the  testimony  of  the  most  unimpeachable  of  all  witnesses,  the
grand illuminato, Spartacus  Weishaupt  himself. At  Munich,
in  the St.  Theodosius  Lodge  (in  1777),  he  received  the  first
Masonic  degrees,  but  was  inexpressibly  disappointed  on  finding
in Masonry nothing beyond "  les jeux d'une fraternite
innocente ! " Nevertheless  he  suspected  that  something  deeper
yet  remained ;  and  soon  his  expectations  were  fulfilled. That
same winter his friend, Cato Zwack, had an interview at
Augsburg  with  a  certain  Abbe  Marotti,  who  conferred  upon  him
the highest  degrees, even  those  of  the Scottish  Lodges,  and
expounded  to  him  all  the  mysteries,  founded,  according  to  the


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  425

Abbe,  upon  the  religion  and  history  of  the  Church.  Zwack
lost  no  time  in  communicating  his  acquisitions  to  Weishaupt,
who  replies :  "  The  important  discovery  you  have  made  at  Nico-
media,  in  your  interviews  with  Marotti,  gives  me  extreme
pleasure ;  let  us  profit  by  the  circumstance,  and  extract  from  it
all  the  advantages  possible."  Weishaupt  had  therefore  been
anticipated  by  his  explanation  of  their  symbolism,  which  he
himself  adopted  in  the  new  Mysteries  he  founded.  Barruel  adds
( Jacobin isme,  iv.  81)  that  the  charge  of  illuminatism  does  not
apply  to  the  first  three  degrees  of  Masonry,  neither  to  such  as
hold  that  these  three  degrees  alone  belong  to  the  real,  ancient,
fraternity.  This  would  intimate  that  the  "  Rosicrucian  "  had
been  later  grafted  upon  the  original  number  of  gradations  in
the  Masonic  hierarchy.

For  the  sake  of  comparison  I  shall  give  Barruel's  account  of
the  degrees  amongst  the  Illuminati,  the  predecessors  of  the
Jacobins,  viz.,

I.  Novices.

II.  Brethren  of  Minerva.
III.  Minor  Illuminate.
IV.  Major  Illuminate,  or  Scottish  Novices.

V.  Scottish  Knights.

VI.  The  Lesser  Mysteries:  Epoptas,  or  Illuminati  Priests.
VII.  The  Eegent  or  Illuminato  Prince.
VIII.  The  Greater  Mysteries ;  the  Magus  or  King-Man.

Like  the  Rosicrucians,  each  novice  upon  admission  received
his  characteristic,  or  mystic  name,  taken  from  Roman  history :
he  then  studied  the  geography  of  the  Order  which  classicised
modern  places  after  a  similar  fashion  :  then  he  acquired  the
cypher,  of  which  the  simple  set  was  this

12  .  11  .  10  .  9  .  8  .  7  .  6  .  5  .  4  .  3  .  2  .  1  .
a  .  6 .  c  . d . e . f . g . h .  i . k . I  .m.

The  other,  more  abstruse,  cypher  consisted  of  particular  symbols
The  Noviciate  lasted  from  two  three  years,  according  to  the  age
of  the  Candidate.  One  of  the  things  most  strictly  prohibited


426


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.


was  to  ever  write  the  name  of  either  Order  or  Lodge;  they
must  be  expressed  by  O  and  n  respectively.*

In  the  admission  to  his  degrees  Weishaupt  adopted  all  the
Masonic  ceremonial.  For  example,  in  making  the  "  Scottish
Knight,"  the  "secret  conclave"  was  hung  with  green;  the
Prefect,  booted  and  spurred,  wearing  St.  Andrew's  Cross  by  a
green  ribbon  tied  en  saltire,  sat  under  a  green  canopy,  and
received  the  candidate  similarly  equipped,  holding  a  mallet  for
sceptre.  There  was  also  the  triple  Benediction,  and  the  sacra
ment,  to  conclude,  administered  by  the  Chaplain.  At  the  making
of  the  Epoptas,  he  was  taken,  blindfolded,  by  his  sponsor  in  a
perfectly  closed  coach,  by  a  circuitous  route,  into  the  hall  now
hung  with  red;  on  a  table  covered  with  scarlet  were  laid  the
crown  and  sceptre,  heaps  of  gold  mingled  with  chains.  On  a
cushion  lay  a  white  robe  and  girdle.  The  novice  was  told  to
choose  :  if  he  took  the  gold,  he  received  a  severe  reprimand,
phrased  with  a  lot  of  humanitarian  cant  too  tedious  to  copy  here,
and  unnecessary  besides— seeing  that  the  same  is  perpetually
dinned  into  our  ears  at  the  present  day.f

At  the  end,  the  Ilierophant  delivered  a  long  address  upon
natural  liberty  and  equality,  and  all  the  rest  thereto  pertaining.
Weishaupt,  a  professional  Atheist,  was  both  astonished  and
diverted  at  finding  eminent  Protestant  divines,  after  their
initiation,  declaring  that  all  these  notions  were  the  genuiue
doctrines  of  the  Gospel :  which  was  certainly  a  very  awkward
truth  to  be  held  by  the  friends  of  the  established  order  of  civi
lised  society.  It  is  not,  however,  less  a  truth,  if  the  same

' '  Brother A. B., Write upon  parts  of  the  body  with  the  lotus,  the

tliis  MS.  of  the  R.  S.  of  this  Degree.'  colocy  nth -flower,  and  the  timbrel  of

In  his  attempt  to  do  this  he  receives  Cybele  (Plutarch, <De  diguoscendo

a  severe  and  prudent  C.  by  the  J.  D.  adulatore  '). The marking of the

placed  behind  him  for  that  purpose,  Mithraici has been noticed in  the

by  the  C.  T.  united  to  his  F.  &c." —  section  devoted  to  that  worship  (pp.

Masonic  Ceremonial.  139, 140). Hence  came  the  mediaeval

t  The  popular  notion  of  the  brand-  belief  in  the  secret  mark  impressed

mark  received  by  Masons  on  initia-  by  the  Devil  at  the  Sabbat  upon  those

lion is derived from the stigmata  who  swore allegiance to him;  and

impressed  upon  the ancient  mystso  which  mark  could  be recognised  by

at  their  admission. A remarkable,  the  witch-finders  from  its  insensibility

example  is  that  of  Ptolemy  Auletes,  to  pain,
who  was thus  marked in several


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  427

doctrines  be  carried  out  to  their  logical  consequences,  instead  of
"being  employed  in  defending  ideas  deduced  in  reality  from  a
totally  different  source.  But  Barruel,  the  refugee,  who  had
just  seen  the  doctrines  of  liberty,  equality  and  fraternity
practically  and  naturally  expounded  by  means  of  the  guillotine,
reasonably  enough  puts  down  this  declaration  of  Weishaupt's  as
the  most  conclusive  proof  of  his  audacious  impiety.

The  symbols,  forming  the  proper  subject  of  the  present
enquiry,  embodied  in  their  origin  the  deepest  mysteries  of
Brahminical  theosophy;  they  were  eagerly  accepted  by  the
subtile  genius  of  the  Alexandrine  school  and  applied  to  the
hidden  wisdom  of  Egypt;  and  lastly,  in  their  captivating  and
illusory  promise  of  enlightenment,  the  few  bright  spirits  of  the
Middle  Ages  sought  for  something  better  than  the  childish
fables,  engendered  by  monkery  upon  the  primal  Buddhistic
stock,  which  then  constituted  the  Faith :  and  these  holy  figura
tions  still  continue  to  flourish,  but  only  as  the  insignia  and
mummery  of  what,  at  best  a  mere  charitable,  is  perhaps  only
a  convivial  association.  In  the  same  way  Apollo's  golden
Pentagon,  which  of  yore  blazed  on  high  above  the  Delphic
shrine,  in  the  Middle  Ages  the  badge  of  the  proudest  Order  of
Chivalry,  and  a  sure  defence  from  peril  of  lightning  and  fire,
has  come  at  last  to  be  degraded  into  the  mere  sign  of  a  German
pothouse !

A  Master-Mason  of  the  very  highest  degree  lately  informed
me  that  he  had  detected  the  Signs  now  in  use,  engraved  amongst
the  sculptures  in  the  Cave-temples  of  Elephanta ;  and,  what  is  still
more  important,  that,  although  the  Brahmins  are  Masons,  yet  if  a,
European  makes  the  Sign  to  them,  they  immediately  put  their
hands  up  before  their  eyes,  as  if  to  shut  out  the  sight  of  the  pro
fanation  of  things  holy.  But  this  curious  fact  can  be  explained
with  the  utmost  certainty.  The  Dionysiac  Mysteries,  the  most
popular  of  all  in  Greece,  were  believed  to  have  been  introduced
direct  from  Syria,  and  necessarily  brought  along  with  them
all  the  signs  and  rites  of  their  birth-place.  The  painted  vases
of  the  period  of  the  Decadence,  of  the  fourth  and  third  centuries
before  our  asra,  take  for  their  favourite  subject  scenes  from
the  celebration  of  these  Mysteries,  and  in  these  pictures,  mystic


428  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

Siglse  perpetually  recur,  amongst  which  the  Fylfot  shines  con
spicuous.  But  in  truth,  all  the  ancient  Mysteries  came  from
the  East,  as  their  names,  the  Phrygian,  the  Mithraic,  the  Iliac,
declare,  and  these  Mysteries  existed  publicly  almost  to  the
close  of  the  Roman  Empire,  and  how  much  further  down
into  mediaeval  times  they  existed  as  secret  and  prohibited
things,  it  is  impossible  to  decide.  .

From  the  very  nature  of  things  we  may  be  certain  that  their
signs  and  symbols,  after  the  esoteric  doctrines  were  forgotten,
passed  into  the  repertory  of  all  "  who  used  curious  arts,"  the
alchymists,  astrologers,  and  wizards  of  the  Dark  Ages,  and  then
became  the  property  of  Rosicrucians,  who  truly  were  the  parent
stock,  and  not  a  recent  brand  (as  is  now  pretended)  of  the
present  Freemasons.*

A  most  important  contribution  to  the  history  of  Masons'
marks  has  (1877)  been  obtained  through  the  researches  of  Sig.
Arnoaldi  Yeli  amongst  the  Gallic  cemeteries  around  Bologna.
Many  of  the  vases  there  exhumed  bear  Siglse  upon  their
bases,  more  rarely  upon  their  sides,  which  are  unmistakably
of  the  same  nature,  and,  what  is  more  curious,  are  constructed
on  the  same  principle  as  those  used  by  the  regular  stone-mason
at  this  very  day.

Those  in  Class  A  (see  Veli's  Scavi  prcsso  Bologna)  may  bo
considered  as  of  the  highest  authority,  because  they  are  the
actual  stamps  of  the  potter,  impressed  upon  the  clay  before
baking.  That  they  distinguished  individuals,  and  were  not
merely  religious  symbols,  but  stood  for  the  proper  names  of
people  unacquainted  with  writing  maybe  inferred  not  only  from
the  established  custom  of  antiquity  in  this  respect,  but  from
the  much  more  frequent  occurrence  of  the  class,  of  which  he
gives  examples  in  list  B.  These  are  scratched  upon  the  bases
after  baking,  and  therefore  must  have  been  added  by  the

*  The  Jews  have  a  tradition  that  the  gious  Jew upon  the Sabbath  day.

boards  of  the  Tabernacle  were  marked  It  is  a  singular  coincidence  that  tlie

with  Hebrew  letters,  as  a  guide  for  stones  of  the  Wall  of  Servius  Tullius

their  adjustment  in  the  setting  up  of  at  Eome  are  inscribed  with  Mason's

that migratory Temple. Writing,  marks that  much  resemble  Phoeui-

therefore,  becomes  one  of  the  thirty-  cian  letters,
two  works  interdicted  to  every  reli-


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  429

buyers,  not  by  the  makers.  The  great  variety  in  the  forms
of  these  latter  siglce  sufficiently  proves  that  they  were  the
"  marks "  of  private  persons,  not  of  clans  or  tribes.  Class
C,  of  similar  "  marks  "  engraved  upon  articles  of  metal,  lead
irresistibly  to  the  same  conclusion.  It  must,  however,  be
observed  that  although  these  characters  cannot  be  distinguished
at  first  sight  from  the  modern  Masons'  Marks  of  which  I  have
given  specimens  in  the  large  Plate,  it  appears  upon  examination
that  no  care  has  been  taken  to  make  them  end  in  an  odd  number
of  points — the  guiding  rule  with  the  modern  craft.

To  come  from  the  Cisalpine  to  the  Western  Gauls,  some
evidence  of  the  same  practice  is  deducible  from  their
coins.  The  large  billon  pieces,  evident  copies  of  Alexander's
tetradrachms,  found  so  plentifully  in  the  Channel  Islands,
often  bear  a  figure,  upon  the  cheek  of  the  Hercules'  head,
and  repeated  in  the  field  of  the  reverse.  What  can  these
symbols,  placed  so  prominently  to  catch  the  eye,  have  been
intended  for,  but  to  inform  the  world  what  particular  tribe
of  the  confederation  using  one  national  type  had  issued  the
coin  thus  distinguished  ?  There  is  some  analogy  to  this  in  the
Greek  series,  where  distant  cities  use  the  type  of  Athens,  or
Corinth,  but  make  it  their  own  by  placing  some  appropriate
symbol  in  the  field.  We  need  not,  however,  carry  out  this  theory
to  the  same  fanciful  length  as  does  the  Baron  Donop,  who,  struck
by  the  evident  resemblance  of  these  figures  to  the  Hindoo  Caste
marks,  builds  upon  it  a  complete  history  of  the  migration  of
the  Aryans  into  Jersey  ;  and  points  out  the  Puranic  deities  to
whom  each  of  such  symbols  is  to  be  referred.  Of  these  figures,
again,  a  great  variety,  and  much  better  executed,  are  to  be
seen  in  the  field  of  the  pretty  hemi-drachms  of  Solimara  ;  which,
as  well  as  those  above  mentioned,  belong  to  the  times  im
mediately  preceding  Cassar's  conquest  of  Gaul — a  date  clearly
ascertained  from  that  of  the  Roman  denarii  often  forming  part
of  the  same  deposits.  Of  the  continued  use  of  these  "  Marks  "
under  the  Roman  rule  in  Gaul  some  vestiges  are  still  to  be
discovered.  The  "  Pile  Cinq-Mars  "  which  cuts  so  ludicrous  a
figure  in  Rabelais'  description  of  Garagantua's  hor^e,  is  a  lofty
quadrangular  column,  ending  in  a  point,  in  the  most  compact


430  THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.

and  skilfully  executed  brickwork,  apparently  built  within  the
first  century  of  the  Empire.  Upon  each  face,  towards  the
top,  are  wrought  in  bricks  of  different  colour  from  the  main
structure  various  devices  of  the  same  sort  as  those  of  the
coins.  These  can  be  nothing  else  than  the  "  armorial  bearings,"
of  the  several  cities  or  tribes  that  had  combined  together  for
the  erection  of  so  costly  a  monument  ;  which  we  may  safely
suppose  intended  for  one  of  those  "  plurima  simulacra  "  of
Mercury  which  Caesar  noticed  in  Gaul,  and  which  forms  the
intermediate  link  between  the  upright  stones  (menliirs)  roughly
cut  into  a  phallic  shape  at  top,  of  the  uncivilised  aborigines  ;
and  the  grand  Colossus  of  Zenodorus,to  which  native  taste  had
advanced  by  the  time  of  Nero.

A  lucky  accident  has  thrown  in  my  way  another,  and  much
more  curious  proof  of  the  use  of  these  "  marks  "  by  the  more
barbarous  part  of  the  Celts  at  a  much  later  period.  That  the
decoration  of  the  skin  which  gave  the  name  to  the  "  Picts  "
consisted  in  stigmata  in  the  literal  sense  of  the  word,  and  not  in
mere  dyeing  with  woad  (like  the  early  Britons),  is  made  out  by
Claudian's  definite  expression,


notutas
Terlcgit  exanimes  Ficto  moricntc  figuras."  —  De  Bcllo  Getico,  xxvi.  417-18.

"  The  Book  of  Kells  "  is  a  MS.,  written  some  time  in  the
ninth  century.  In  one  of  the  facsimiles  of  its  pages  published  by
the  Pala30graphical  Society,  amongst  the  ornamentation  of  one
vast  initial  letter,  the  most  conspicuous  is  the  figure  of  a
naked  man,  writhing  himself  amongst  its  most  intricate  con
volutions.  This  man's  body  is  entirely  covered  with  "  marks  "
of  various  forms  ;  and  from  the  circumstances  under  which  the
drawing  was  made  we  can  safely  assume  that  we  have  here
preserved  to  us  the  portrait  of  a  true  Pict,  taken  from  the  life.
The  four  centuries  that  had  elapsed  since  Claudian  wrote
were  not  likely  to  have  changed  the  customs  of  a  country  so
remote,  and  in  which  the  small  amount  of  civilisation  derivable
from  its  Eomanised  neighbours  must  have  gone  backwards
in  proportion  as  they  relapsed  into  their  pristine  barbarism.
This  pictured  Pict  may  also  lead  us  to  conclude  that  the  sigil


THE GNOSTICS AND THEIR REMAINS.  431

seen upon the cheek of  the Jersey  Hercules was actually
tattooed  upon  that  of  the  Gaul  who  issued  the  coin.

Out  of  deference  to  the  popular  belief  in  the  Masonic  Brand
mark,  I  shall  wind  up  this  section  with  a  few  observations  upon
that  most  time-honoured  method  of  distinguishing  those  initi
ated  into  any  mystic  community.  To  give  precedence  to  the
Patron  Saint  of  Freemasons,  St.  John  the  Divine,  his  making
the  followers  of  the  Beast  receive  his  Mark  "  upon  the  forehead
and  the  palm  of  the  hand,"  is  a  clear  allusion  to  the  Mithraical
practice,  of  which  Augustine  (as  already  quoted)  speaks,  in
mentioning  "a  certain  Demon,  that  will  have  his  own  image
purchased  with  Mood"  Ptolemy  Philopator,  whom  Plutarch
describes  as  "  passing  his  sober  hours  in  the  celebration  of
Mysteries,  and  in  beating  a  tambourine  about  the  palace,"
submitted  also  to  receive  the  Dionysiac  brand-marks  ;  which
were,  no  doubt,  those  symbols  so  plentifully  introduced  into
the  vase-paintings  of  Bacchanalian  rites.  "  Brand-marks,"
however,  is  an  incorrect  name  for  such  insignia,  fur  they  were
imprinted  on  the  skin,  not  by  fire,  but  by  the  milder  process  of
Tattooing,  as  we  learn  incidentally  from  Yegetius  (I.  cap.  8),  and
also  that  it  was  the  regular  practice  in  the  Roman  army,  in  his
day,  the  close  of  the  fourth  century.  Ho  advises  that  the
recruit  be  not  tattooed  with  the  devices  of  the  standards  (Punctis
signorum  inscribendus  est)  until  he  has  been  proved  by  exercises
as  to  whether  he  be  strong  enough  for  the  service.  That  these
tattoo  marks  were  the  distinctive  badges  painted  on  the  shields
of  the  different  legions,  may  be  inferred  from  their  insertion  in
the  epitaphs  of  individuals  of  each  corps.


FIG.  IS,


WOODCUTS  IN  THE  TEXT.

Frontispiece.  Ceraunia  of  green  jade,  converted  into  a  Gnostic  talisman
described  at  p.  197.  Presented  to  the  Repository,  Woolwich,  by  General
Lcfroy.

Title-page.  The  Ophite  version  of  the  "  Good  Shepherd,"  described  at
p.  230.  Sard.  (New  York.)

Agathortemon  Serpent,  inscribed  101  With  Me  [thou  shalt  be  safe].
Remarkable  mineralogically,  as  being  cut  iti  a  piece  of  true  jade  (Nephrite)
(Lewis  Collection).  P.  xii.

No.  1.  The  Gnostic  Gorgon,  a  late  Byzantine  amulet.  The  legend,  full
of  blunders  and  contractions,  is  AriOCAriOC  KTPIOC  CABAGOQ  6N
TOIC  TYICTOIC  eTAOrHMeNOC,  "Holy,  holy,  Lord  of  hosts,  in  the
highest,  Blessed !"  Drawn  to  the  actual  size,  from  a  cast,  sent  tome
many  years  ago  by  the  late  Mr.  Albert  Way.  But  by  a  singular  chance,
the  gem  itself  (a  green  jasper)  two  years  back,  came  into  the  hands  of  Mr.
W.  Talbot  Heady,  who  supplied  me  with  a  drawing  of  it,  from  which  it
appears  that  its  other  face  represents  Saint  Anne,  with  the  Infant  Madonna
in  her  arms,  and  her  name  and  title  in  the  field,  the  legend  around  being
TCT6PA  MGAAINH  MGAAINOMeNH  GOC  0AAATTAN  TAAHNH
CAIN6I,  "0,  womb,  black,  blackening,  as  the  calm  soothes  the  sea  [be
thou  quiet].  The  gem  is  therefore  a  talisman  for  the  protection  of  women
during  pregnancy ;  a  fact  accounting  for  its  frequent  occurrence  ;  Chiflct
figures  another  (the  Gorgon  side  only)  in  his  "  Apistopistus,"  No.  70.  P.  20.

No.  2.  The  Abraxas-god,  as  he  is  usually  represented,  with  shield  and
whip  to  scare  away  all  evil  spirits.  The  reverse  exhibits  the  Agathodsemon
Serpent,  surrounded  by  triplets  of  the  sacred  animals  of  Egypt,  all  paying
him  adoration.  The  legend  in  the  field  EVIA,  is  Syriac  for  "  Serpent,"  the
rest  remains  unexplained.  Drawn  to  the  actual  size,  from  a  red  jasper,
discovered  at  Bombay,  to  which  place  it  had  probably  been  carried  by  the
Persian  refugees  of  the  seventh  century.  (Lewis  Collection.)  P.  41.

No.  3.  A  circular  green  jasper  (of  the  size  of  the  drawing)  preserved
from  time  immemorial  in  Maestricht  Cathedral,  where  it  passes  for  the
"  Seal  of  Saint  Servatius,"  although  in  reality  many  centuries  posterior  to
his  date,  being  a  late  medieval  work.  The  obverse  represents  the  bust  of
some  saint ;  the  reverse,  the  Gnostic  Gorgon  ;  around  both  rims  a  most
barbarous  attempt  at  a  common  Byzantine  spell ;  that  is,  of  a  few  of  the
first  words  only.  The  spell,  in  full,  may  be  translated  thus,  "  Death,
(Molpa)  black,  blackening,  as  a  serpent  dost  thou  writhe,  as  a  lion  dost
thou  roar  ;  but  as  a  lamb  shalt  thou  lie  down  !  "  P.  57.


WOODCUTS IN THE TEXT.  433

No.  4.  The  Abraxas-god  mounted  in  the  chariot  of  the  Sun.  This
design  is  unique  in  its  kind,  and  of  great  value,  as  proving  the  original
identity  of  the  Basilidan  deity  with  the  Solar  Power.  He  has,  however,
been  adopted  into  the  new  religion  by  the  legend  of  the  reverse,  the
"  Great  Names,"  lao  and  Abraxas  placed  within  a  coiled  serpent,  emblem
of  Eternity.  Green-jasper.  (Bosanquet.)  P.  103.

No.  5.  Horus,  the  Vernal  Sun,  seated  on  the  lotus,  type  of  the  world,
and  reviewing  the  adoration  of  the  Baboon,  attribute  of  the  moon.  Jasper.
(New  York.)  P.  155.

No.  6.  The  Sim  in  his  car,  in  his  hand  the  orb ;  he  is  saluted  in  the
legend  as  "  Thou  art  our  Father !  "  and  the  word  in  the  exergue  Trallianus
tells  us  is  one  of  his  titles,  and  enters  into  a  spell  against  gout.  The
reverse  exhibits  Luna  guiding  her  milk-white  heifer,  the  Grecian  substitute
for  the  silver  antelope  of  the  Hindoo  Chandra  Hematite.  (New  York.)
P.  157.

No.  7.  Isis,  one  lotus  on  her  brow,  holding  a  sceptre.  Sardonyx.
(Muirhead.)  P.  175.

No.  8.  Caduceus,  within  a  myrtle  wreath.  On  the  reverse  is  beautifully
engraved  APIKGU<J>I,  which  is  the  exact  transliteration  of  the  Hebrew
charm  against  the  special  demon  of  the  latrina,  and  which  is  found  in  the
Talmud,  being  consequently  more  ancient  that  the  fourth  century.  The
meaning  is  "  Upon  the  head  of  a  lion."  Sard.  (New  York.)  P.  178.

No.  9.  The  Abraxas  god,  engraved  in  so  superior  a  style  that  the  work
must  date  from  the  earliest  period  of  the  sect.  Green  jasper.  (New  York  )
P.  194.

No.  10.  The  Abraxas  god,  with  the  title  "  loa,  Son  of  the  Universe !  "
This  is  a  truer  version  of  the  Hebrew  than  the  "  Eternal  Son,"  proposed
by  Matter.  Haematite.  (New  York.)  P.  244.

No.  11.  Talisman  against  the  Evil  Eye.  The  much-dreaded  organ  is
shown  encompassed  by  the  symbols  of  the  deities  presiding  over  the  days
of  the  week,  as  the  Lion  for  the  Sun,  the  Stag  for  the  Moon,  the  Wolf  for
Mars,  &c.,  all  combining  to  baffle  the  force  of  the  stroke.  This  attribution
of  days  came  from  the  Chalda3an  astrologers  :  it  is  represented  in  a  painting
at  Herculaneum,  but  the  earliest  use  of  it  to  mark  a  date  is  found  in  Dio
Cassius,  who  observes  that  Jerusalem  was  taken  "on  Saturn's  Day."
Sard.  (New  York.)  P.  256.

No.  12.  Drawing  rudely  scratched  on  the  plaster  of  the  wall  of  a  guard
room,  or  the  Palatine,  representing  a  man  of  the  lower  class  touncatus
popettus,  or  a  slave,  making  a  gesture  of  adoration  to  a  biform  diety
elevated  upon  steps,  with  the  explanatory  inscription  "  Alexamenos,
worships  (or  is  worshipping)  God."  It  is  disputed  whether  this  be  a  bona
fide  adoration  of  the  jackal-headed  Anubis ;  or  the  caricature  by  some
heathen  scoffer  of  the  convert,  Alexamenos  aod  his  newly-found  god,
depicted  here  in  the  shape  described  by  Tertullian.  tSee  remarks  at
page  230.  P.  279.

2  F


434


WOODCUTS IN THE TEXT.


No.  13.  Bust  of  Apollo,  in  the  Greek  style,  interpolated  by  a  later  hand
with  a  talismanic  legend,  that  would  have  defied  all  interpretation  but  for
the  existence  of  another  of  the  same  nature,  yet  rather  more  explicit.
This  is  a  portrait  of  Pescermius  Niger  (Paris),  inscribed  with  an  invocation
to  the  "  Holy  King,  Apollo,"  to  preserve  the  health  of  that  Emperor,
expressed  like  the  present  one,  chiefly  by  the  initial  letters.  Ouri,  there
fore,  must  be  read  Bao-iXei/s-  'ATrdXXcoi/  'lepbs  Seoi^ooi/)  [<r£ff]  and,  in
the  same  way,  calls  upon  the  God  of  Health  to  show  this  favour  to
Pescennius'  rival,  Severus.  Sard.  (New  York.)  P.  302.

No.  14.  Talismanic  Ring  of  Bishop  Seffrid,  found  in  his  tomb;  now
preserved  in  the  Cathedral  Library,  Chichester.  P.  328.

No.  15.  The  Agathodasmon,  declaring  by  the  legend  "  I  am  Chnnmis,
Sun  of  the  Universe,  700."  The  Greek  numeral  must  be  the  Number  of  a
Name,"  just  as  888  is  that  of  Jesus,  but  what  that  name  was,  I  leave  to
deeper  Kabbalists  than  myself  to  discover.  Calcedony.  (British  Museum  )
P.  340.

No.  16.  Serapis  and  Agathodremon  combined  in  one  body ;  enthroned
and  holding  the  Orb,  as  being  Lord  of  the  Universe.  He  receives  the
adoration  of  the  Cynocephalus,  attribute  of  the  moon;  whence,  perhaps,  it
may  be  inferred  that  Serapis  is  to  be  understood  now  in  the  more  restricted
seuse  of  the  Solar  Power.  Green  jasper.  (New  York.)  P.  358.

No.  17.  SPHINX,  emblem  of  mystery,  sporting  with  a  narthex,  the  wand
carried  by  the  candidates  for  initiation  into  the  Dionysia.  Campanian
style,  engraved  upon  the  base  of  a  Sard.  Scarabeus.  (New  York.)  P.  372.

No.  18.  The  golden  Delphic  E,  surmounted  by  a  fillet  of  roses.  For
the  explanation  of  the  symbol,  see  p.  297.  Cameo  iu  a^ate-onyx.  (New
York.)  P.  431.

No.  19.  Vase,  the  lower  part  modelled  as  a  triple  face  of  the  boy  Atys;
at  the  base  lie  the  pastoral  staff  and  pipes.  Atys,  in  the  Phrygian
Mysteries,  is  invoked  as  the  "  Shepherd  of  the  white  stars,  and  guiding
them  by  the  sound  of  his  piping,"  which  Tatian  (Hymn  to  the  Mother  of
the  Gods)  explains  by  identifying  him  with  the  power  that  governs  the
motions  of  the  heavens,  lied  jasper.  (New  York.)  P.  466.


DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  PLATES.


THE  drawings  were,  for  the  most  part,  made  from  gems  in  the  Praun
Cabinet,  now  transferred  to  the  British  Museum,  some  few  from  my  own
collection,  now  in  the  Museum  of  Art,  New  York.  The  materials  are
either  dark  green  and  yellow  jaspers,  or  calcedonies  varying  in  colour  from
olive  green  to  light  yellow.  All  designs  are  drawn  to  double  the  actual


PLATE  A.
VARIOUS  TYPES  OF  THE  GOD  ABRAXAS.

1.  Abraxas  brandishing  a  whip,  to  scare  away  malignant  influences,  his
shield  emblazoned  with  some  word  of  power. Keverse,  the  usual  Greek
transliteration  of  the  Hebrew  name  of  God.

2.  Abraxas,  armed  with  a  sword ;  the  exceptionally  neat  execution  of
the  intaglio  bespeaks  the  first  days  of  the  religion.

3.  Abraxas,  wielding  a  mace,  a  Persian  weapon  that  betrays  the  Asiatic
origin  of  this  particular  design ;  the  thunderbolt  in  the  field  identifies  this
Power  with  the  classic  Jupiter. The  reverse  exhibits  the  Triple  Hecate,
Queen  of  Hell,  brandishing  various  weapons  for  the  same prophylactic
purpose  as  the  god  himself. A  unique  combination  of  ideas,  engraved
upon  a  circular  copper  plaque,  found  in  the  south  of  France.

4.  The  Agathodjemon  Serpent,  with radiated head,  identified  by  the
legend  with the  god  Abraxas. One  of  the  few  types that can  with
confidence  be  attributed  to  the  sect  of  Ophites.

5.  Abraxas,  of  very  debased  and  late  execution. The  title  "  Sdbaoth  "
on  the reverse,  properly  signifying "of  hosts,"  was  mistaken by the
ignorant  Hellenists  for  the  actual  name  of  a  Power,  by  translating  "  Lord
of  Hosts  "  as  "  the  Lord  Sabaoth." Under  this  title  he  figures  largely  in
the  sigillum  of  the  "  Pistis-Sophia."

PLATE  B.

1.  Abraxas,  represented  here  with  the  head  of  an  ass,  and  thereby
identified  with  Typhon,  a  singular  perversion  of  ancient  ideas.  This  gem
is  valuable  as  distinctly  declaring  its  purpose  by  the  legend  on  the

2  F  2


436  DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.

reverse,  <£YA((£tiXao-(rf),  "  Defend  me,"  addressed  to  the  Power  depicted
upon  it ;  and  thus  putting  out  of  doubt  the  destruction  of  all  the  other
specimens  of  its  class.

2.  Abraxas,  of  neat  work  and  early  date,  not  later  than  the  fourth
century.

3.  The  Giant  Typhoeus  defying  Jove  :  his  serpent-legs  denote  that  he  is
the  son  of  Mother  Earth. This  beautiful  intaglio,  which  is  of  Italo-Greek
workmanship,  and  found  at  Cumse,  is  introduced  here  merely  to  show  the
source  whence  the  sectaries  of  the  Decline  borrowed  the  idea  of  similar
combinations  of  discordant  natures. (Burnt  sard :  New  York.)

4.  Abraxas,  with  whip  and  shield,  combining  his  influence  with  Horus,
seated  on  the  lotus,  the  regular  personification  of  the  Vernal  Sun. The
meaning  of  the  type  is  set  forth  in  the  legend,  which  is  the  Greek
transliteration  of  the  Hebrew  Shemesh  Ham,  "Sun  of  the  Universe."
The  union  of  the  two  types  indicates  that  Abraxas  is  here  to  be  under
stood  in  his  original  sense,  the  simple  personification  of  the  Solar  Power.


PLATE  C.

1.  Terminal fiszure,  perhaps  allusive  by  its form to  Justinus'

"  The  Cross."  The  interminable  legend  surrounding  it  yields  no  intelli
gible  words,  but  the  title  below  the  Herme,  NIXAPOriAHC  occurs  also  on
a  talisman  in  the  French  Cabinet.  The  reverse  gives  the  Seven  Vowels  (or
"  Voices  ")  that  shroud  the  Ineffable  Name,  which  has  never  been  uttered
aloud  since  the  day  of  the  destruction  of  the  Temple,  but  is  communicated
only  in  half-whispers  to  every  Rabbi  upon  his  ordination.  It  is  a  re
markable  fact  that  a  Talmudist,  who  remembered  the  Second  Temple,
observes  that  this  Holy  Name  was  "  warbled  rather  than  pronounced  "  hi
the  course  of  the  service ;  hence  we  may  suspect  the  possibility  of
imitating  its  sound  by  the  permutation  of  vowels  that  form  so  important
an  element  in  the  construction  of  our  talismans.

2.  Father  Nile,  reclining  and  holding  forth  a  cornucopia,  emblematic  of
amity.* As  the  "number  of  his  Greek  name,"  365,  is  equivalent  to
that  of  Abraxas,  it  is  probable  that,  according  to  Kabbalistic  rules,  he  here
represents  that  god. This  explanation  is  supported  by  the  type  of  the
reverse,  Horus,  seated  on  the  lotus,  addressed  by  the  Greek  transliteration
of  the  Hebrew  Ablanathanalba,  "  Thou  art  our  Father !  "

3.  Horus  seated  in  the baris, or sacred boat ; the  prow and poop
whereof  terminate  in  the  hawk's  head  of  Phre,  and  the  ox-head  of  Apis.
He  is  here  addressed  by  the  Ineffable  Name.

4.  The  same  deity,  addressed  as  before  by  the  salutation  Ablanathan-
alba,  followed  by  an unintelligible  word. The  unskilful  gem-engraver,
unable  to  form  curves  in  the  lettering,  has  given  to  his  B  the  form  of  K,
and  increased  the  difficulty  of  deciphering  this  legend.

5.  The  same,  but  now  seated  upon  the  scaraba?,  type  of  the  Creator,

*  The  type  also  of  an  Alexandrian  coin  of  Hadrian.


DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.  437

enclosed  within  the  coiled  serpent,  emblem  of  Eternity.  With  these
purely  Pharaonic  sigils  the  reverse  combines  the  name  of  the  Jewish
angel  Michael,  and  the  Seven  Vowels  of  the  Ineffable  Name ;  thus
presenting  an  instructive  example  of  that  reconciliation  of,  apparently,
the  most  antagonistic  creeds  which  is  the  very  foundation  of  Gnosticism.


PLATE  D.
SIGILS  OF  THE  CNUPHIS  SERPENT.

This  class  of  figures  has  no  connection  with  Gnosticism  considered  as  a
development  of  Christianity ;  being  nothing  more  than  talismans  for  the
protection  of  the  chest,  as  I  have  already  shown  from  Galen.  It  is  true
indeed  that  the  Kabbalists  of  Alexandria  sought  to  heighten  the  medicinal
efficiency  of  the  ancient  Pharaonic  sigil  by  adding  to  it  formula?  of  their
own  fashion,  embodying  the  all-powerful  Name,  but  this  did  not  endow
the  gem  with  any  spiritual  sense.  The  appellation  "  Kabbalist "  I  shall
always  employ  in  this  treatise  in  its  strictest  acceptation,  and  the  present
is  as  good  a  place  as  any  for  stating  my  reasons  for  doing  so.  It  is  the  rule
nowadays  to  treat  the  Kabbala  as  the  pure  production  of  the  Middle  Ages,
and  such  it  probably  is,  in  the  form  under  which  it  is  now  presented  to
us.  I  will  not,  indeed,  go  as  far  as  the  most  learned  Rabbi  of  our  times,
and  boldly  assert  that  Moses  himself  was  a  profound  Kabbalist,  although
"  the  Wisdom  of  the  Egyptians,"  in  which  Holy  Writ  declares  he  was  a
proficient,  was  beyond  a  doubt  something  of  very  much  the  same  nature.
Whatever  unprejudiced  person  will  carefully  read  what  I  have  adduced  of
the  doctrines  of  Sastri  and  of  Marcus  (themselves  "  converted  "  Jews)  will
find  there  the  regular  system  of  the  Kabbala  fully  developed,  and  its
earliest  and  Egyptian  rudiments  in  the  "  Pistis  Sophia  "  of  Valentinus.  No
person  really  acquainted  with  the  history  of  religions  can  suppose  that
these  theosophists  invented  these  rules  of  interpretation:  they  merely
transferred  principles  sanctioned  by  antiquity  from  the  explanation  of  the
Old  Testament  to  that  of  the  New.

To  return  to  our  Chnuphis,  Chubis,  or  ChupJiis  (for  thus  the  Greeks
transliterated  the  Coptic  KnepJi)  it  is  probable  that  the  veneration  in  which
this  sigil  of  the  Pharaoh  Nechepsi  was  held,  was  the  true  source  of  the
legend  concerning  Moses's  elevation  of  the  Brazen  Serpent.  At  all  events,
I  know  of  an  enamel  picture  of  the  scene  (date,  thirteenth  century)  in
which  the  Serpent,  lifted  up  on  the  Cross,  is  figured  with  the  radiated
lion's  head,  really  as  he  is  seen  on  these  talismans.  This  particular  sigil
is  generally  engraved  on  calcedony,  varying  in  colour  from  olive-green  to
waxy-white.  The  best  executed  have  for  material  the  plasena  traversed
by  an  opaque  white  line  (Pliny's  laspis  Graminatias),  the  estimation  of
which  as  an  amulet  by  the  Orientals  he  particularly  mentions.

1.  The  reverse  of  this  gem  reads  Chumis,  accompanied  by  a  row  of
vowels  that  appear  to  contain  the  word  I  EH,  which  is,  according  to
Kabbala,  an  inferior  title  of  God.


438


DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.


2.  The  Serpent  elevated  above  the  thymele,  Bacchic  altar — a  combination
betraying  the influence of  the Dionysiac Mysteries. He declares  in
phonetic  Hebrew,  "  I,  I  am  the  Good  Spirit." The  reverse  of  this  gem
had  been  covered  with  a  long  invocation  in  minute  characters ;  now  almost
entirely  lost  by  the  fracture  of  the  material  in  the  fire  to  which  it  had
accompanied  its  owner. (New  York.)

3.  This  Chnuphis,  of  exceptionally  fine  work  and  yet,  finer  material,  has
each  of  the  seven  rays  of  the  crown  tipped  by  one  of  the  seven  vowels
that  make  up  the  Ineffable  Name. The  reverse  exhibits  the  serpent-
entwined  wand,  (badge  of  the  Egyptian  priesthood)  which  generally  goes
with  this  sigil,  and doubtless  added to its  power. Moses's rod and
Aesculapius's  club  hence  took  their  origin.

4.  Another  Chnuphis,  in  the  ordinary  style. It  is  noticeable  how  the
gem-cutter  has  endeavoured  to  give  variety  to  the  endless  repetition  of  the
same  sigil,  by  altering  the  arrangement  of  the  serpentine  folds.


PLATE  E.
MONUMENTS  OF  THE  SEKAPIS  WORSHIP.

1.  Serapis,  viewed  as  the  Sun-god,  enthroned  ;  at  his  feet,  the  triple-
headed  monster  described  by  Macrobius. Before  him  stands  Isis,  or  Mother
Earth,  holding  a bunch  of  wheat-ears  and poppy-heads,  to mark her
character. The  legend  is  the  invocation  "  Immaculate  is  Our  Lady,  Isis ! "
A  fine  specimen  of  Alexandrian  art,  in  a  beautiful  sard.  (New  York.)

2.  Venus,  arranging  her  hair  at  a  mirror,  held  up  to  her  by  a  Cupid ;
two  Loves,  hovering  in  the  air,  hold  a  myrtle-crown  over  her  head. The
inscription  "  The  Manifestation  of  Aroiiph,"  occurs  in  a  similar  connection
upon  a  gem  in  the  Paris  Cabinet. It  is  hard  to  determine  whether  she
be  the  "nuda  veritas,"  whose  Kabbalistic  revelation  to  Marcus  is  given  in
my  text ;  or  merely  a  talisman  for  engendering  love  towards  the  wearer ;
the  material,  magnetic  haematite,  supports the  latter  acceptation. The
reverse  exhibits  Horus,  seated  on  the  lotus,  planted  upon  the  baris,  which
is  constructed  out  of  long  papyrus-stalks  lashed  together. He  here  takes
the  title  of  Abraxas,  and is  surrounded  by  adoring  triplets  of  all  the
animals  held  sacred  by  the  Egyptians. The  symbol  of  the  Sun  is  seen  at
his  right.

3.  Bust  of  Serapis,  very  curious  for  the  prayer  surrounding  it,  "  Protect
Jupiter ! "  a  proof  that  Serapis  is  here  regarded  as  the  Supreme  Being,
and  the  ancient  Jupiter  reduced  to  the  rank  of  an  astral  Power ;  as,  indeed
he  was  occasionally  so  understood  in  better  times.  Thus  Persius  : — "  Satur-
numque  gravem  nostro  love  fregimus  una." (v.  50.)

4.  Isis,  veiled,  with  the  tubulus  on  her  head,  and  leaning  on  a  tall
sceptre,  in  the  pose  of  the  Roman  Juno ;  for  whom  she  might  be  mistaken
but  for  the  invocation  on  the  other  side,  "  Baffle,  Serapis,  the  Evil  Eye  ! "
which  declares  the  object  of  this  talisman.


DESCRIPTION OP THE PLATES.  439

5.  Serapis,  enthroned,  seen  in  front  face.  Inscribed  "  Hermes,"  followed
by  three  letters,  the  initials  of  some  then  well-known  address  to  that
god.  Or  if  merely  a  private  signature  (Martial  mentions  a  physician  of
the  name)  the  initials  refer  to  his  business.  The  God  of  the  Shades  was
a  very  fit  patron  for  a  professional  who  had  doubtless  done  his  best  to
swell  the  ranks  of  his  subjects,  lied  jasper.  (New  York.)


PLATE  F.
ANCIENT  EGYPTIAN  TYPES  ADAPTED  TO  GNOSTIC  IDEAS.

It  is  in  this  class  that  the  influence  of  Judaism  is  more  strongly
marked  than  in  any  other  family  of  these  monuments.  These  gems
were  designed  as  amulets  against  the  power  of  demons,  either  considered
specially,  or  as  manifested  in  the  diseases  of  which  they  were  the  final
cause  to  mankind.  But  before  proceeding  further,  it  will  tend  much  to  the
elucidation  of  this  curious  subject  briefly  to  sketch  the  orthodox  Jewish
doctrine  upon  this  point.  1  here  is  no  such  thing  in  existence  as  a  spirit
naturally  evil,  inasmuch  as  God,  being  all  goodness,  was  absolutely
incapable  of  creating  evil.  Satan  is  himself  an  angel,  like  the  others,  and
has  his  own  place  in  the  Court  of  Heaven ;  but  he  is  deputed  to  test,  by
temptation,  the  strength  of  Man's  virtue,  since  without  a  struggle  there
can  be  no  crown.  The  Babylonian  Eabbi,  Philemon,*  having  demon
strated  this  grand  truth  to  the  satisfaction  of  his  numerous  school,  was
surprised  the  next  day  by  a  visit  from  this  Ange  mal  entendu,  in  a  bodily
shape,  who  tendered  him  public  tlianksf  for  the  pains  he  had  taken  to
.  set  his  character  in  a  true  light.  But,  unfortunately,  the  Demiurgus  had
commenced  his  work  by  creating  so  vast  a  number  of  spirits,  that  the
Sabbath-even  came  upon  him  before  he  had  made  bodies  enough  for  half
of  them.  These  poor  houseless  beings  are  not  naturally  malignant,  but
are  jealous  of  their  more  fortunate  brethren,  for  the  same  reason  that "  the
man.  who  has  no  coat  to  his  back  hates  the  man  that  has."  They  there
fore  roam  up  and  down  the  world,  ever  striving  to  force  their  way  into
bodies  already  occupied,  where  their  struggles  with  the  rightful  owner  give
birth  to  all  the  maladies  that  flesh  is  heir  to.  It  is  remarkable  that  the
latter  belief  is  universal  among  primitive  races,  however  widely  separated —
the  Samoiedes,  the  Hindoos,  the  Red  Indians.  Something  similar,  too,  may
be  found  in  Plutarch's  curious  disquisitions  on  the  nature  of  demons,
contained  in  his  two  Treatises  upon  Oracles.

It  is  the  fashion  of  our  days  to  believe  that  the  Jews  borrowed  all  their
metaphysical  theories  from  the  Platonists  of  Alexandria ;  but  whoever  has
gone  deeply  into  the  subject  sees  good  reason  to  suspect  that  both  Jews
and  Greeks  had  gone,  independently  of  each  other,  to  a  much  more  ancient
source  for  such  traditions.

*  Or  "Polemo,"  as  the  Hebrew  t  "Kissed  his  knees"  is  the  ex-
,  may  equally  well  be  read.  pression  iii  the  Talmud.


440  DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.

1.  The  Agathodaemon  Serpent,  mounted  upon  a  pair  of  human  legs. A
unique  variety  of  the  class — the  same  idea  being  more  usually  embodied  in
a  human  figure  with  head  and  neck  of  a  serpent ;  or  in  a  serpent  with  the
head  of  Serapis. The  long  invocation  on  the  field  evidently  begins  with
the  name  of  "  Abraxas."

2.  The  jackal-headed Anubis, an Egyptian sceptre  in each hand,
advancing  between  the  Sun  and  the  Moon,  the  regular  emblems  of  Eter
nity. A  remarkable  specimen  of  religious  syncretism,  for  the  power  of  the
Pharaonic  god  is  doubled  by  adding,  on  the  reverse,  the  name  of  Michael,
guardian-angel  of  the  Jewish  race,  between  four  stars,  which  certainly  stand
for  the  letters  of  the  Great  Tetragrammaton.

3.  Mummy,  enveloped  in  the  folds  of  the  guardian  Agathodsemon. The
detached  letters  around  (often  so  found  in  these  gems)  seem  to  cloak  the
word  "  Initia." If  so,  this  may  have  been  a  token  (syinbolum)  given  to
the  neophyte  upon  his  initiation  into  certain  mysteries :  a  custom  to  which
St.  John  alludes,  mentioning  the  "  white  stone  "  with  the  New  Name  graven
thereon,  to  be  given  to  him  that  overcometh.

4.  A  Power  equipped  with  double  arms  and  wings,  bearing  sceptres  to
mark  his  dignity,  and  carrying  on  his  head  the  sacramental  Table. The
tree-trunk  below,  with  its  Five  lopped-off  branches,  had  doubtless  a  deep
mystic  meaning,  probably  the  degree  of  the  person  who  carried  the  talisman.
Of  the  most  barbarous  execution,  but  valuable  for  the  name  "  Baincho "
on  the  reverse  :  the  astral  Power,  according  to  the  "  Pistis-Sophia,"  resident
in  the  planet  Mercury.

5.  Anubis,  in  one  hand  the  sceptre,  in the other the lustral  vase,
standing  above  the  open  left  hand,  which  Apuleius  informs  us  was  the
type  of  Justice. At  his  side  is  the  goddess  of  Truth,  her  head  formed
out  of  a  bunch  of  ostrich-feathers  :  under  her  feet  the  udder-shaped  vessel
carried  in  the  Isiac  procession. One  deity  is  invoked  by  "  Thou  art  our
Father  !  "  the  other  as  "  Sun  of  the  Universe !  " The  letters  in  the  middle
eeem  to  make  up  the  owner's  |name,  "  Pia  .  .  ."

G.  Anubis,  advancing  with  the  sceptre  and  situla :  the  legend  on  the
reverse  is  unexplained.

7.  A  talisman,  certainly  meant  to  be  of  mighty  efficacy,  for  it  combines
the  influences  of  Anubis,  Cnuphis,  and  Horus  with  that  of  the  God  of
the  Jews,  rudely  cut  upon  the  four  sides  of  a  cube  of  steaschist.


PLATE  G.
EGYPTIAN  TYPES  (continued).

.1.  In  this  composition  an  element  from  a  little-used  source  is  introduced.
The  Grecian  Apollo,  distinguished  by  his  proper  attribute,  the  bay-branch,
is  seen  caressing  the  Ibis,  sacred  to  Thoth,  scribe  of  the  gods.  The  latter
deity  being  identified  with  Hermes,  his  bird  carries  the  caduceus ;  it  also
bears  upon  its  head  the  corn-measure,  typical  of  abundance.

2.  The  Ass-headed  Typhon,  or  the  Principle  of  Evil,  with  quadruple


DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.  441

wings  and  one  foot  hoofed,  carries  by  the  tail  two  monstrous  scorpions :
over  his  head  a  scarabseus  flying.  Of  no  esoteric  meaning,  bat  simply  an
amulet  against  the  bite  of  the  reptile,  made  after  the  rule  in  such  cases
prescribed.  The  most  convincing  proof  of  the  practice  is  the  early  Greek
gem  published  by  Gen.  Cesriola  ('  Cyprus.'  pi.  xl.  1.7),  representing  two
asps,  with  the  explanation  EXK  ;  and  to  this  day  the  Arabs  always  draw
upon  their  amulets  the  figure  of  the  thing  against  which  it  ought  to  guard
the  wearer.

3.  A  Dual  Power,  who  combines  the  jackal's  head  of  Anubis  with  the
ass's  head  of  Typhon,  whence  one  of  his  feet  is  hoofed,  brandishes  in  his
four  hands  swords  and  torches,  wherewith  to  scare  away  the  evil  spirits.
The  legend  on  the  reverse,  FIEPAAMBA  VBAKA  KZIK  A,  has  not  been
read,  but  contains  the  Coptic  name  of  Anubis.

4.  The  Sun-god,  Phre,  with  radiated  head,  adoring  the  seated  Thoth,
ibis-headed,  and  using  the  invocation  (cut  on  the  reverse)  "Thou  art
our  Father  !  " Inasmuch  as  the  Neo-Platonists  made  Hermes  to  be  the
Power  that  regulates  the  motion  of  the  heavens  (for  which  reason  Julian
addressed  his  morning  prayer  to  him),  there  is  evident  reason  why  the
god  of  Day  should  thus  do  domage  to  Thoth  as  his  superior  and  director.

5.  A  very  popular  Oryllus,  its  components  being  the  emblems  of  the
elements— the  Bird  standing  for  air ;  the  Lion  for  Fire ;  the  Ram's  head
for  Earth,  and  the  Bacchic  mark  for  water. This  Pagan  talisman  has
been  Gnosticised  by  Thoth's  ibis,  with  the  Holy  Names,  "  Abraxas  "  and
"  lao ; "  but  the  work  on  both  sides  is  evidently  from  the  same  hand,  and
in  the  style  of  the  fourth  century. The  material  is  a  rarely-used  stone—
obsidian.

PLATE  H.
EGYPTIAN  TYPES  (continued}.

1.  Tortoise  lying  upon  the  lotus,  which  springs  out  of  the  back  of  a
crocodile. The  unexplained  legend  of  the  reverse  occurs  again  in  connection
with  an  analogous  design — a  vulture-headed  winged  Genius,  seated  on
the  back  of  a  double-headed  crocodile,  published  by  Walsh  (No.  13)  in  his
'  Coins,  Gems,  &c.,  illustrating  the  Progress  of  Christianity.'

2.  The  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  apparently  copied  from  the  "  Altar  of  Lyons,"
that  so  common  device  of  the  brass  coins  of  Tiberius. The  engraver  ol
this  late  Roman  gem  had  not  studied  the  minute  description  of  the  Ark,
given  in  the  Law. There  is  a  Rabbinical  tradition  (although  savouring
too much of  Alexandrian  philosophy  to  demand  any  credit)  that the
Cherubim  placed  over  it  were  represented  as  male  and  female,  in  the  act
of  copulation,  in  order  to  express  the  grand  doctrine  of  the  essence  of  Form
and  Matter,  the  two  principles  of all  things. When  the  Chaldeans
broke  into  the  Sanctuary,  and  beheld  this  most  astounding  emblem,  they
naturally  enough  exclaimed  "  Is  this  your  God,  of  whom  you  boast,  that  He
is  such  a  lover  of  purity !  "

On  the  side  is  a  blundeied  attempt  at  the  mystic  word,  Tctragranimutun,


442  DESCRIPTION O-7? THE PLATES.

i.e.  the  Name  of  Four  Letters,'  viz. — Jod,  He,  Van,  He.  For  the  Names  of
God,  according  to  the  Kabbala,  are  made  up  respectively,  of  Four,  Forty-
two,  and  Seventy-four  letters.  The  second  explains  the  motive  for  the
number  of  sacrifices  offered  up  by  Balaam  in  his  fruitless  attempt  to
propitiate  the  God  of  the  Hebrews ;  and  perhaps  may  have  induced  the
composers  of  the  Genealogy  of  Jesus  (though  working  independentlv  of
each  other)  to  bring  out  the  same  mystic  number  by  curtailing  the  second
series  of  three  of  its  kings.

3.  A  doubly-winged  and  doubly-armed  Power,  holding  four  Egyptian
sceptres,  and  standing  on  a  coiled  serpent,  enclosing  a  Holy  Name. The
legend  is  a  transliteration  of  the  Hebrew  for  "  Light  of  Lights." Another
form  of  such  transliteration  is  given  by  Caylus  (<  Recueil  d'Antiquites,'  vi.
PI.  21),  o-pvopiovo;  reading  from  the  end  backwards ;  cut  for  reverse  to  a
coiled  serpent  enclosing  various  sigla.

4.  Thoth's  baboon,  bearing  on  his  head  the  Solar  disk,  in  the  attitude  of
adoration. The  reverse  bears  HNA-MEPU),  sometimes  written  MAPCx)-
HNI,  "  Enlighten  my  eyes  !  "  whence  we  may  suspect  this  very  common
type  to  be  no  more  than  an  amulet  against  ophthalmia.

5.  This  gem  is  given  here  as  a  good  specimen  of  a  type  of  which  great
numbers  are  to  be  met  with,  although  its  whole  conception,  and  the  vague
symbols  in  the  field — the  Solomon's  Seal,  celestial  globe,  etc.,  entirely  out
of  the  antique  taste,  refer  its  creation  to  the  fancy  of  mediaeval  quacks  and
astrologers. Was  the  figure  suggested  by  the  idol  "  in  the  shape  of  an
Old Man"  with  whose  worship the Templars were so persistently
charged? The  present  example, belonging  as  it  does to the original
Praun  Cabinet,  must  have  been  executed  before  the beginning  of  the
seventeenth  century.

6'.  The  outline  of  the  human  figure  filled  up  with  "  Holy  Names,"  and
thereby  representing  Adam  Kadmon,  "the  Primitive  Man"  of  the
Kabala.  The  finest  example  of  this  curious  design,  and  in  which  the
letters  are  the  most  clearly  defined,  is  the  one  Caylus  gives  (I.e.  pi.  22\
which  has  been  cut  by  a  later  hand  on  the  reverse  of  a  Lion  passant,  in
the  Persian  style.

7.  The  Baboon  adoring  a  Triangle,  Egyptian  symbol  of  the  Moon,
elevated  upon  a  column  bearing  an  inscription.  The  fact  that  the
Pythagoreans  (who  avowedly  got  their  whole  system  from  Egypt)
symbolised  Athene  by  the  triangle,  lends  srength  to  the  idea  that  the
Attic  goddess  was  in  her  origin  merely  the  expression  of  the  Lunar
Power.

PLATE  J.

SUBJECTS  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  MITHEAIC  MYSTERIES.
1.  This  pretty  design  may  be  tersely  described  in  a  line  of  Manilius  :—

"  Quadrijugis  et  Phoebus  equis  et  Delia  bigis."

Sol  and  Luna  in  their  appropriate  equipages :  a  heathenish  device  enough,
but  the  same  hand  has  backed  their  influence  by  the  invocation,  "  lao


DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.  443

Sabaoth,  Abraxas  ; "  He,  i.e.  the  living  God,  protect  Aparastath<%  the  bearer
of  this  talisman.  Similar  formulae,  always  attached  to  women's  names,
very  frequently  occur.

2.  The  Zoroastrian  Dog,  of  whom  and  whose  office  so  much  has  been
said  in  the  text. The  ill-cut  Bird  is  intended  for  the  Haven,  the  usual
Mithraic  attribute.

3.  The Lion  of  Baal, the Syrian Sun-god; below,  the Scarabams
typifying  the  Creative  Power. The  Phoenician  inscription  Osan  el,  "  God
gives  strength,"  is  the  name  of  the  owner  of  the  signet. Levy  quotes  an
agate  scaraba3us  at  the  British  Museum  exactly  similar  to  this  gem  (a  fine
sard),  a  proof  of  the  popularity  of  both  type  and  name.

4.  A  unique  talismauic  device,  converting  a  male  Sphinx  into  a  novel
bird,  by  the  addition  of  the  legs  of  a  crane  and  the  tail  of  a  scorpion. It
is  engraved  in  the  Persian  style :  my  motive  for  admitting  it  into  the
present  class.

5.  The  Zodiacal  Lion,  guided  by  its  astral  Genius  in  its  course  through
the  seven  planets.

6.  The  Sun-god,  with  radiated  head,  mounted  upon  a  camel,  typifying
the  East. Below  is  set  the  fire-altar  of  Mithraic  worship. He  is  followed
by  Chanticleer,  attribute  of  the  god  of  Day,  preceded  by  the  Horse — his
peculiar  sacrifice,  as  Ovid  tells  us  :  —

"  Plncat  equo  Persis  radiis  Hyporiona  cinctum,
Ne  detur  Celeri  victima  tarda  deo." (Fasti.  I.  305-86.)


PLATE  K.
MITHRAIC  (continued).

1.  Circular  copper  plate,  of  the  same  size  as  the  drawing,  bearing  the
name  of  Aurelius  Furellius,  the  person  for  whose  benefit  the  talisman  was
devised. It represents a female figure, standing in the attitude of
adoration  ;  legend,  "  The  Birth of  Salvation." On  the  reverse  is  seen
the  Solar  Lion  bestriding  a  corpse,  a  type  so  frequent  in  this  class  that
it  may  reasonably  be referred to the entrance-rite of  initiation, the
"  simulation  of  death  "  alluded  to  by  Spartianus.

2.  The  most  elegant  of  these  mystic  designs  that  has  ever  come  to  my
knowledge. Two  Cranes,  one  with  the  head  of  a  Earn,  the  other  of  a
Bull,  stand  guardians  over  the  Mithraic  sacramental  table,  under  which
lies  crouched  the  Solar  Lion,  "  the  House  of  the  Sun." Upon  the  table
are  set  the  sacred  vessels ;  above  it  is  the  Delphic  E,  badge  of  Apollo,
between two Palmyrene  (?) letters, and over all the Seven Planets,
engraved  with  an  accuracy  worthy  of  its  elegance  in  a  very  fine  sard.

3.  A  talisman of  uncommon potency, to  judge  from  the  profusion
of  symbolism  with  which  its  two  faces  are  overloaded. A  four-winged,
four-armed  Power,  standing  like  the  Babylonian  Belus  in  the  air,  is  involved
with  a  multiplicity  of  legends,  amongst  which  the  usual  formulas  "  Thou
art  our  Father,"  "  Sun  of  the  Universe,"  "  Michael,"  "  Adonai,"  can  clearly


444  DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.

be  read.  The  reverse  shows  a  female  figure  standing  and  adoring  the
Deity,  who  guides  the  Solar  light.  In  the  legends  we  can  distinguish
"  Abraxas,"  "  Michael,"  and  "  Michalo."

4.  This  type  only  differs  from  the  last  by  the  addition  of  the  prostrate
man  under  the  Lion's  feet,  and  that  nothing  definite  can  be  made  out  of
the  disjointed  inscription.  The  reverse  merely  bears  the  Great  Name
"  lao,  Sabaoth,"  and  the  Seven  Vowels.  The  potency  of  such  words  is
still  an  article  of  faith  with  all  true  Jews.  In  the  year  1835-6,  the  Eabbi
of  Neutra,  in  Hungary,  actually  stood  his  trial  for  murder  on  the  charge  of
having  cursed,  by  the  "  Ineffable  Name  "  an  enlightened  lady  whom  he  had
ordered  to  leave  the  synagogue  on  the  Sabbath-day,  because  she  had
ventured  to  make  her  appearance  there  with  her  hair  in  sight,  and  who
had  died  suddenly  on  the  very  same  day.  The  Rabbi  only  escaped
conviction  by  publicly  and  solemnly  disclaiming  the  possession  of  any
such  power,  to  the  inexpressible  disgust  of  his  whole  congregation,  who
looked  upon  him  as  a  wretch  that  had  denied  his  God  in  order  to  save
his  life !

PLATE  L.
MITHRAIC (continued).

1.  The  Mithraic  Lion, moving  through  the  stars  of  heaven. The
reverse  exhibits  a  complete assemblage of  the  Siglee that  are  found,
dispersed,  upon  so  many  talismans. That  they  stand  for  the  names  of
deities  and  astral  Powers  may  be  guessed  from  the  fact  that  Moham
medans  still  express  Allah  by  a  circle  filled  up  with  diagonal  lines.

2.  Lion-headed  Man,  doubtless  a  Leonticus  (one  of  the  grades  in  the
Mithraic  Mysteries),  uttering,  with  uplifted  hand,  the  inexplicable  adjura
tion,  "  0,  Centaur  of  God,  Thou  match  for  a  hundred  [demons]  !  " Here
fKarovTopaxos  is  formed  after  the  analogy  of  p-ovo/jLaxos,  "  a  match  for  one."

3.  A  Mobed  (Zoroastrian  priest  or  Magus)  performing  his  nocturnal
devotions  before  an  altar,  on  which  are  set  up  various  sacra,  amongst
which  may  be  recognised  the  regular  insignia  of  his  profession,  the  Sword
and  the  Divining-rods. Engraved  upon  the  base  of  a  calcedony  cone,  an
early  form  of  the  sknet  in  Assyria.

4.  Horns,  the  Vernal  Sun-god,  making  the  gesture  of  adoration,  his
whip  resting  upon  his  left  arm. He  is  seated  upon  the  seed-vessel  of  the
lotus,  that  aptest  symbol  of  the  Universe,  in  virtue  of  its  innumerable
contents. In  the  long,  clearly-cut legend  that  fills  the  exergue, no
hitherto-explained  formula?  are  to  be  recognised.

PLATE  M.
GENERAL  TALISMANS.

1.  Zodiacal  Monster,  compounded  of  Scorpio  and  Capricornus,  carrying  a
legionary  standard.  Bearing  in  mind  that  the  former  Sign  is  under  the
patronage  of  Mars,  according  to  Manilius — "  Pngnax  Mavorti  Scorpius
haeret " — and  the  latter  a  badge  of  the  second  Augustan  Legion,  we  may


DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.  445

reasonably  suppose  this  gem  to  have  been  engraved  for  the  benefit  of
some  member  of  that  corps. Sard. (New  York  Museum.)

2.  Three  lines  of  the  usual  Gnostic  siglae,  in  a  cartouche  formed  by  a
coiled  serpent,  precisely  in  the  same  way  that  the  Brahmins  still  write
the Great Name AUM — a sure evidence of  the meaning of  these
mystic  characters. Sard.,  set  in  an  iron  ring,  of  which  only  fragments
remain.

3.  Fortuna,  with  rudder and  horn of  plenty, standing. The word
Feliciter,  in  scattered  letters,  the  usual  acclamation  of  the  crowd,  and  the
palm-branch  prove  this  gem  a  present  to  some favourite  auriga. Its
purport  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  monogram  so  often  found  enclosed  in
the  field  of  the  Antoniate  medal,  also  accompanied  with  a  palm,  which
has  at  last  been  made  out  to  contain  the  elements  of  Palma  Feliciter !

4.  Masks  of  Silenus  and  of  Bacchus,  combined  into  the  outline  of  an
elephant's  head,  bearing  a  caduceus  in  his  trunk. The  typical  beast  of
India  is  an  allusion  to  the  Indian  origin  of  the  god ;  and  the  conceit  was  a
favourite  with  the  Komans,  to  judge  from  the  number  of  such  compositions
that  they  have  bequeathed  us. Bed  jasper. (New  York.)

5.  Astrological  Trine,  or  figure  produced  by  dividing  the  circle  of  the
Zodiac  into  equilateral  triangles. Here,  Virgo  (Astrsea)  at  the  apex  of  a
triangle,  is  borne  up  by  Taurus  and  Capricorn. This  was  the  horoscope  of
Pescennius  Niger,  who  placed  it  on  the  reverse  of  a  coin,  on  account  of  its
appropriateness  to  his  surname  of  Justus,  of  which  virtue  Astraa  was  the
emblem.

6.  The Gorgon's  Head :  the type  explains  itself  by the legend,  "  I
protect Khoromandares" — some  Greco-Persian,  to  judge  from  his  Oriental
name. The  younger  Lucian  tells  us  in  his  '  Philopatrios '  that  the  Gorgon
was  placed  upon  the  shields  of  the  Heroes  as  being  "  a  thing  that  wards  off
all  dangers." Red  jasper. (New  York.)

7.  Mars,  grounding  arms,  in  the  costume  of  a  soldier  of  the  times  of
Constantine. The  legend  declares  the  virtue  of  the  sigil : "Mars  hath
cut  off  the  disease  of  the  liver." But  a  most interesting  point  in  the
amulet  has  been  discovered  by  Prof.  Stephens,  viz.,  that  the  four  characters
behind the  head  of Mars  are the Runes for ABLE, Help. Under
Constantine  and  his  sons,  the  Franks  (as  Arnmian  observes)  were  para
mount  in  the  army. It  is  easy  to  conceive  how  some  officer  of  that  nation
has  thought  to  augment  the  great  virtue  of  this  important  talisman  by  the
addition  of  one  of  his  national  spells. Engraved  in  a  slight  manner,  upon
hcematite.

8.  Naked  Warrior,  upon  a  prancing  steed,  brandishing  a  mace,  that
specially  Oriental  weapon ;  legend,  "  The  Seal  of  God." Curious  for  the
material — a  turquoise  ;  to  the  present  day  the  Persians  firmly  believe  in
the  protective  virtue  of  this  gem,  to  which  they  give  the  name  of  Phirux —
"  The  Victor."


446  DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.

PLATE  N.
GENERAL TALISMANS  (continued}.

1.  Universal  Nature,  symbolised  in  a  highly  poetic  manner,  combining
all  her  forces  for  the  protection  of  the  bearer. The  Eagle  of  Jupiter
(Air) ;  the  Dolphins  of  Neptune  (Water)  ;  the  Lion  of  Sol  (Fire),  are
moulded  into  the  mask  of  Pan,  whose  semi-bestial  nature  is  of  the  Earth,
earthy.

Winckelmann,  in  describing  an  intaglio  of  the  Stosch  Cabinet  (No.  1232)
Pan,  playing  upon  his  syrinx,  seated  in  the  centre  of  the  Zodiac,  observes
that  the  ancients  considered  this  god  as  the  "  Type  of  the  Universe  " ;  and
saw  in  his  horns  and  shaggy  hairs  mystic  allusions  to  the  solar  rays.  For
the  same  reason  Apollo  shared  his  Gryphon  with  Pan,  and  Orpheus  sings
of  him  as  "  Attuning  the  harmony  of  the  world  with  his  sportive  music."
Onyx  cameo  (Rollin  and  Feuardent).

2.  Isis,  standing,  with  the  Asp,  badge  of  royalty,  rising  from  her  fore
head. The  Coptic  legend  opens  with  the  name  of  Osiris. The  characters
in  the  inner  circle  seem  to  be  Demotic— they  are  not  Palmyrene. I  have
published  this  gem,  as  being  the  finest  example  of  the  class  that  has  ever
come  to  my  knowledge,  by  the  kind  permission  of  its  owner,  Mr.  J.  C.
Robinson. Dark  jasper. (On  the  reverse,  a  later  hand  has  inscribed  the
"  Great  Name,"  and  the  Seven  Vowels,  to  adapt  the  talisman  to  the  new
creed.)

Nos.  3  and  G  are  very  frequent  forms,  made  up  entirely  of  siglae  and
Numerals ;  on  which  latter  subject  more  shall  be  said  further  on.

4.  This  spell,  "  Great  is  the Name  of  the  One  God,"  is the Jewish
defiance  to  its  rival,  "  Great  is  the  Name  of  Serapis,"— of  which  Caylus
publishes  a  beautiful  example,  in  relief,  of  antique  paste — a  material  that
indicates  a  large  manufacture  of the  same article  to  meet  a  constant
demand.

5.  Certain  astral  Powers,  represented  by  their  then  well-known  symbols,
are  enlisted,  by  this  engraving,  in  the  service  of  a  lady,  SaUnia  Quinta.
A  popular  kind  of  talisman  this ;  another  very  similar  is  known  to  me,
made  for  the  benefit  of  one  Victorina.

Pythagoras  is  perpetually  referred  to  by  Hippolytus  as  the  real  master
of  the  Gnostics  in  the  application  of  Numerals  to  the  expression  of  things
divine.  He  is  known  to  have  learned  his  system  in  Egypt ;  and  neces
sarily  brought  away  with  him  the  cyphers  which  he  found  employed  for
the  same  purpose  amongst  his  teachers.  The  primitive  Egyptian  numerals
were  of  the  simplest  nature,  but  their  abbreviations  ultimately  became
distinct  symbolical  cyphers  for  the  several  days  of  the  months ;  and  out
of  these  cyphers  the  Arabs  composed  their  own  system  of  notation.  Hence
it  follows  that  many  of  the  Gnostic  siglss  may  be  no  more  than  numerals
connected  with  the  astrological  use  of  the  charm  on  which  they  occur.  In
fact,  Porphyry  says  of  Pythagoras  (in  his  'Life')  that  his  famous
'  Numbers '  were  merely  hieroglyphs,  whereby  he  expressed  ideas  con
nected  with  his  own  philosophy.  The  so-called  "  Pythagorean  Nume-


DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.  447

rals "  are  shown  in  the  MSS.  of  Boethius's  Geometry,  composed  in  the
sixth  century.  And  that  the  "Numbers"  of  Pythagoras  were  Ten.
appears  from  the  remark  of  Aristotle  (Met.  vii.  8)  "  that  some  philo
sophers  maintained  that  ideas  and  numbers  were  of  the  same  nature,  and
amount  to  Ten  in  all."

That  the  Numerals  as  written  down  by  "  the  last  of  the  Romans,"
were  Egyptian  demotic  characters  in  their  origin  is  a  very  probable
conjecture  ;  but  it  is  a  curious  fact,  and  remarkably  confirms  what  has
been  said  above,  that  several  of  them  when  viewed  upside  down  assume
the  exact  form  of  our  present  Arabic  cyphers.


PLATE  0.
HINDOO  SYMBOLS  AND  CASTE-MARKS.

I.  No.  1.  Type  of  Mahadeva  or  Siva. Fire  personified.

No.  2.  Type  of  Vishnu  :  Water.

No.  3.  The  Sherkun  :  symbol  of  the  union  of  the  two  Elements.

No.  4.  The  five-pointed  figure  representing  the  conjunction  of  Brahma
(Creator)  with  Siva  (Destroyer)  becomes  the  famous  "  Solomon's  Seal,''
the  badge  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  therefore  engraved  upon  their  tombs
in  the  Roman  Catacombs.

The  equilateral  Triangle,  Trikun,  symbolises  Triune  Co-equality.  A
Point  (mathematical)  the  self-existing  Deity.  The  circle  expresses
Brahma,  or  Eternity.  The  Triangle  inscribed  in  the  Circle,  Trinity  in
Unity.  The  Circle  within  the  Triangle,  Unity  in  Trinity.

The  worshippers  of  a  Sacti  (Female  Power)  mark  their  sacred  jars  with
the  very  expressive  symbol,  No.  5 ;  those  of  Vishnu  with  No.  & ;  and  those  of
Siva  with  No.  8,  which  signifies  the  copulation  of  Siva  with  Durga.

Amongst  the  signatures  of  the  ancient  Jaina  (Buddhist)  kings,  occur
the  symbols  8  and  9;  and  also  the  so-called  "Maeander,"  that  frequent
decoration  of  Greek  Coins.

The  six  following  symbols  are  various  Caste-marks,  which  religious
Hindoos  put  upon  their  foreheads  every  morning,  with  ashes  of  cowdung,
or  coloured  earths,  and  powdered  sandalwood,  producing  a  great  variety  in
them  by  the  employment  of  different  colours.  Those  figured  here
designate  the  followers  of  Vishnu.

II.  These  marks  distinguish  the  votaries  of  Siva  and  his  wife,  Pauvati.
The  most  obvious  symbol  of  the  Passive  Principle  of  Nature,  the  mystic
Yoni,  (and  with  which  Sesostris  branded  the  nations  that  had  submitted
to  his  arms  without  resistance)  is  decorously  repressed  in  the  general  form
of  these  marks,  the  two  Deities  being  those  that  preside  over  propagation
and  change  which  the  vulgar  call  by  the  name  of  Death.

III.  Other  caste-marks,  denoting  minor  differences  in  the  sects  that  bear
them  :  they  are  given  here  because  they  include  in  their  number  some  that
appear  to  have  been  the  originals  of  certain  Mediaeval  siglse.

IV.  Characters  cut  upon  the  rock  in  the  sandstone  quarries  of  Silsilis


448


DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.


in  Upper  Egypt.  That  they  are  alphabetical  may  be  inferred  from  the
fact  of  their  accompanying  the  figures  of  various  animals ;  they  are  of
great  interest  to  us,  being  identical  with  those  so  often  found  upon  our
talisman.

V.  Palmyrene  characters  from  a finely-cut  inscription now  in  the
Louvre.

VI.  Siglx,  exactly  of  the  nature  of  Masons'  Marks,  and  of  very  ancient
date,  for  they  are  found  on  the  pottery  deposited  in  the  Gallic  tombs
around Bologna. Some are stamped in the clay  before  baking,  and
therefore  must  have  indicated  the  maker's  name ;  but  the  greater  number
have  been  scratched  on  the  surface  at  some  later  time,  probably  when
placed  in  the  sepulchre,  to  carry  down  to  posterity  the  memory  of  the
deceased. Those here  given  are  selected  from  the  list  figured  by  the
Conte  Gozzalini  in  his  very  instructive  memoir  « Gli  Scavi  presso  Bologna,'
1877.

VII.  Masons'  Marks,  cut  on  the  ashlar  of  the  old  Palace  of  Sadilat,  near
Ispahan,  whence  they  were  copied  by  Ouseley,  in  the  belief  that  they  were
inscriptions  in  some  unknown  tongue.

VIII.  Masons'  Marks  from  the  "  Drawing-room  "  of  Raglan  Castle,  an
Elizabethan  building. They  will  suffice  for  specimens  of  the  notation,  all
the  medieval,  early  or  late,  being  of  the  same  nature,  though  infinitely
varied  in  minor  details. Many  lists  of  these  have  been  published  from
time  to  time,  the  most  recent,  of  the  Marks  in  Duffield  Church,  a  Norman
building,  published  in  the  Journal  of  the  Derbyshire  Arch.  Soc.,  ix.  p.  168.

IX.  Every  genuine  Free  Mason  (not  Rosicrucian  recoctus  Freemason)
after  serving  his  apprenticeship,  and  being  made  "  free  and  accepted  "  of
the  Craft,  receives  his  own  "  Mark,"  which  he  must  thenceforth  cut  upon
every  stone  that  he  dresses,  in  order  to  identify  his  own  work  when  pay
day  comes. The  essential  principle  in  the  Mark  is  that  it  must  have  an
odd  number  of  terminations. The  Marks  here  set  down  were  in  use  with
the  masons  employed  in  the  construction  of  the  South  Wales  Railway.
The  most  convincing  proof  of  the  emptiness  of  the  lofty  pretensions  of  our
so-called  Freemasons,  is  that  they  actually  are  entirely  ignorant  that
this  most  ancient  rule  of  the  Craft,  to  which  they  pretend  to  belong,  is
still  regularly  followed.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  APPENDIX

BY

JOSEPH  JACOBS,  B.A.

PART  I. — GNOSTICISM  AND  ITS  SOURCES,  pp.  1-112.

THE  Gnostic  heresies  play  so  important  a  part  in  the  Christianity  of  the
first  three  centuries  that  they  naturally  come  up  for  treatment  in  all  the
Church  histories  for  that  period,  such  as  those  of  Gieseler,  Neander,  Hase,
and  Scliaff,  as  well  as  in  the  histories  of  Christian  doctrine  (Hagenbach,
F.  K.  Meier,  F.  C.  Baur,  A.  Neander,  L.  Noack,  &c.),  and  even  in  the
histories  of  philosophy  of  Ueberweg,  Zeller,  &c.  But  the  monographic
treatment  of  the  subject  from  the  theological  standpoint — the  Gnostic
gems  attracted  early  attention — may  be  said  to  have  begun  with

A.  Neander. — Die  genetische  Entwickelung  der  vornehmsten  gnos-
tischen  Systeme.  Berl.  1818.  [Sober  and  clear.]

C.  A.  Lewald. — De  Doctrina  Gnostica. 1818.

J.  Matter. — Histoire  critique  du  gnosticisms  et  de  son  influence  sur  les
autres  sectes  religieuses  et  philosophiques  pendant  les  six  premiers
siecles.  Paris,  2  tomes,  1828.  [Second  and  best  edition,  Strasbourg,
3  tomes,  1843.  Somewhat  superficial  and  viewy,  but  still  useful ;
giving  outlines  of  whole  subject,  including  iconography.]

E.  Burton. — Inquiry  into  the  Heresies  of  the  Apostolic  Age. Oxford,

1830. [Bampton lectures for 1829, uncritical; superseded for
English  readers  by  Mansel.]

J.  A.  Moehler. —  Versuch  iiber  d.  Ursprung  dcs  Gnosticismus.  Tiib.
1831.

F.  C.  Baur. — Die  Christliche  Gnosis. Tubingen,  1835. [The  place  of

publication indicates the tendency of  this publication. Baur's

views  are  read  to  best  advantage  in  his  Das  Christenthum  der  3

ersten  Jahrhunderte.~]
Norton. — History  of  the  Gnostics. 1845.
H.  Eossel. —  Geschichte  der  Untersuchungen  uber  d.  Gnosticismus  in  his

Theologische  Nachlass. Berl.  1847.
E.  A.  Lipsius. — Gnosticismus  in  Ersch  and  Griiber. Bnd.  71. 18GO.

[The  starting-point  of  new  lines  of  inquiry  rendered  necessary  by

the publication by  Miller  of  the  Philosophumena  attributed  to

Hippolytus  (Clar.  Press,  1851).]
W.  Moller. — Geschichte  der  Cosmologie  der  griechischen  Kirche  bis  an

Origenes. Leipzig,  18G2.

2 G


450  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL APPENDIX.

H.  L.  Mansel. — The  Gnostic  Heresies  of  the  First  and  Second  Centuries.
London,  1875.  [Posthumous.  Edited  by  J.  B.  Lightfoot.  Best
English  work,  clear,  fair,  mainly  founded  on  Lipsius,  classification
of  sects  geographical.  His  arrangement  is  :  Notices  of  Gnosticism
in  New  Test.  (iv.  v.) — Precursors,  Simon  Magus  and  Menander
(vi.) — The  Ophite  Sects  (vii.) — Cerinthus,  Carpocrates,  Nazarenes
and  Ebionites  (viii.) — Syrian  Sects,  Saturninus,  Tatian,  Barde-
sanes  (ix.) — Egyptian,  Basilides  (x.) — Valentinus  and  Valen-
tinians  (xi.  xii.) — Asiatic  Gnosticism,  Marcion  (xiii.) — Judaising
Reaction,  Clementines,  Elkesaites  (xiv.).]

A.  Hilgenfeld. — Die  Ketzergeschichte  des  Urchristenthums.  Leipzig,
1884.  [Ill-arranged,  but  at  present  the  work  round  which

* discussion  on  Gnosticism  centres.]

These  are  the  chief  monographs  on  the  whole  subject.  Besides  these,
several  articles  in  theological  reviews  may  be  mentioned,  many  of
them  reaching  the  length  of  monographs.  They  were  mostly
occasioned  by  the  various  publications  mentioned  above,  as  can  be
seen  by  their  dates.  F.  K.  Liicke  in  Berliner  theol.  ZeiUch.  1819  ;
J.  C.  L.  Gieseler  in  Hall.  lit.  Zeit.  1823;  and  in  Studien  u.
Kritiken,  1830 ;  F.  C.  Baur.  ibid.,  1837  ;  H.  T.  Cheever  in  Amer.
BiU.  Repos.  1840  ;  R.  Baxmann,  Deutsche  Ztst.  1861  [translated
Amer.  ThcoL  Rev.  1862]  ;  Hilgenfeld  in  Ztst.f.  iviss.  theoL  Bd.  xiii.
Articles  in  encyclopedias  often  show  original  research,  or  present
useful  summaries:  besides  the  epoch-making  one  of  Lipsius  hi
Ersch  and  Grliber,  reference  may  be  made  to  the  sa«ie  writer's
article  "  Gnosis  "  in  Schenkel's  BiM-Lexikon  (1868) ;  C.  P.  Wing
in  McClintock  and  Strong,  vol.  iii.  1873  [useful  bibliography]  ;
\V.  L.  Alexander  in  last  edition  of  Kitto  and  J.  L.  Jacob!  in
Herzog-Plitt.

The  SOURCES  are  scanty  and  scattered,  at  any  rate  as  regards  in
dependent  works  by  Gnostics.  In  addition  to  scattered  fragments  in
Grabe's  Spicikgium,  there  have  been  published—

Miinter. — Odx  gnosticx. Kopenh.  1812.

Korbcrg. — Codex  Nazareus  vel  Liber  Adami. Leiden,  1815.

[The  so-called  Bible of  Gnosticism,  i.e.  of  the  Mendaites ; on

whom  see  Christian  Review,  Jan.  1855,  and  Petermann  in  Herzog.]
A. Halm.  —  Bardesanes Gnosticus Syrorum primus hymnologus

Leipz.  1819.

A.  Halm  — Antitheses  Marcionis  Gnostici. Leipz.  1823.
M.  G.  Schwartze. — Pistis  Sophia,  opus  gnosticum  a  codice  manuscripto

Coptus Londini descripsit  et Latine  vertit M. G. Schwartze,

edidit  J.  H.  Petermann. Berl.  1851-3.

[Now  considered  to  be  a  production  of  the  later  Ophite  schools,

see K.  Kostlin,  Die  gnostische  System des  Buches  Pistis Sophia

in  Thcol  Jahrb.  for  1851,]


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL APPENDIX.  451

But  the  real  sources  of  our  knowledge  of  Gnosticism  are  to  be  found  in
the  earliest  heresiologists,  Irenrcus  (Adv.  hxreses},  Epiphanius  (Adv.
hareses),  and  Hippolytus  (Elenchus  and  Philosophumena)  ;  on  the  trust
worthiness  of  these  a  considerable  literature  exists.

G.  Volkmar.— Die  Quellen  der  Ketzergeschichte. I.  End. 1855.
11.  A.  Lipsius. — Zur  Quellenkritik  des  Epiphanios. 1HG5.

„  Die  Quellen  der  dltesten  Ketzergeschichte. 1875.

A.  Harnack. — Zur  Quellenkritik  d.  Gesch.  des  Onosticismus. 187.3.

„  in Zt.  f. lut. Theol. 1874,

pp.  143-226.
Hilgenfeld's  Ketzergeschichte  goes  thoroughly  into  these  sources.


P.  3. — Aristobulus.  Valckaener's  monograph  De  Aristobulo  Judxo,
1806,  is  still  the  fullest  and  best.

P.  4.,  vide  p.  18,  note  on  Enoch.

"  Book  of  Adam  " — Codex  Nasareus  Liber  Adami  appellatus,  syriace
transcriptus,  latineque  redditus  a  M.  Norbery. Berlin,  1815.

P-  7. — Of  the  large  literature  on  Ephesus  it  is  sufficient  to  refer  to
Guhl,  Ephesiaca,  Berl.  1843  ;  Faikcner,  Ephesus  and  the  Temple  of
Diana.  1862.

P.  8.— On  traces  of  Gnosticism  in  the  Gospels.  C.  C.  Tittmann,  De
vestigiis  Gnosticorum  in  Novo  Testamento  frustra  guxsitis,  Leip.
1773  ;  translated  Contributions  to  Foreign  Literature.  New  York,
1827.  On  Pre-Christian  Gnosis,  Lightfoot.  Colossians,  pp.  80  seq.

P-  14.— Title  given  above,  also  Kos  din's  monograph.

P.  24.— Jews  in  ancient  world  form  the  subject  of  Prof.  Mayor's
elaborate  notes  on  Juvenal  xiv.  06-106,  running  over  twelve  closely
printed  pages  and  preceded  more  suo  by  an  elaborate  bibliography
of  previous  treatment.  The  only  thing  of  importance  since  is  a
paper  of  Heyd's  Les  juifs  devant  I' 'opinion  romaine  in  7?ey.  des  etudes
juives.  1884.  The  relations  of  Gnosticism  and  Judaism  formed
the  subject  of  the  historian  Graetz's  first  work,  Gnosticismus  und
Judenthum.  Krotoschin,  1846.

P.  29.— The  Zendavesta  is  now  translated  in  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,
vols.  iv.  xxiii.  and  xxxi.  For  literature  see  Tide,  Outlines  of  the
History  of  Religion,  §  100.  Chief  work,  Hang,  Essays  on  the
Parsis  in  Triibner's  Oriental  Series.  On  Persian  influences  on
Jewish  angelology,  Kohut,  Angelologie  des  Talmuds.  1868.

P.  33. — Dr.  Ginsburg  collected  in  small  compass  the  modern  views  on
the  Kabbala  in  his  monograph  The  Kalhila.  1866.  It  has
attracted  little  attention  from  Jewish  scholars  since  that  date.
All  scientific  inquirers  place  the  origin  of  Kabbala  in  the  twelfth
century,  though  mysticism  akin  to  it  appears  as  early  as  Bible
times.  On  the  great  influence  of  the  Kabbala  in  Middle  Ages  cf.
Stockl,  Gesch.  d.  Philos.  im  MittelaUcr.  Bud.  ii.  On  the  Talmud
at  the  time  of  writing  three  monographs  are  about  to  .appear —
Prof.  Strack  separately;  Dr.  Ginsburg  in  Smith- Wace,  Diet,  of

2 G  2


452  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL APPENDIX.

Christ.  Biog. ;  and  Dr.  Schillcr-Szinessy  in  Ency.  Brit.  Ham
burger's  Real-Encyclopadie,  though  unequal,  is  useful  and  at
present  the  easiest  means  of  getting  second-hand  information
about  Talmudical  topics.

P.  40. — Camillo  Leonardi,  Speculum  Lapidum. Ven.  1502.

P.  42. — The  earliest  monograph  dealing  with  the  relations  of  Gnosticism
to  the  East  is  J.  J.  Schmidt,  Verwandschqft  d.  gnostischen  Lelire
mit  den  Religionssystemen  d.  Orients.  Leip.  1828.  On  Manes
and  Manichcism  the  great  work  is  still  Beausobre,  Nistoire  critique
du  Manicheisme.  1734.  But  important  additions  to  our  knowledge
have  come  from  Oriental  sources,  which  are  given  in  somewhat
haphazard  fashion  but  with  excellent  index  in  Fliigel,  Mani,  seine
Lelire  und  seine  Schrift'-n.  Leip.  1862.  Early  works  on  Mani  are
given  in  Fabricius,  Bibl.  grcec.  t.  vii.  p.  310  seq.,  ed.  Harles.  See
also  Kessler,  Untersuchungen  z.  Genesis  d.  manichaisch.  Religions-
system.  1876.

p.  49 — For  bibliography  of  Buddhism  see  Tiele,  Outlines  §  82.  A  good
short  account  by  T.  Rhys  Davids  (S.P.C.K.).  The  best  recent
books  are  Oldenburg,  Buddha;  his  Life  and  Doctrines,  1885;
and  H.  Kern,  Der  Buddhisrnus  u.  seme  Geschichte  in  Indien.
Leipz.  1885.

P.  51  n.— See  Buddhist  Records  of  the  Western  World,  translated  by
S.  Beal.  2  vols.  1885.

P.  52. — The  best  account  of  the  Essenes  is  in  the  appendices  to  Lightfoot's
Colossians,  strangely  neglected  by  German  inquirers  as  Lucius.

P.  58. — The  special  literature  on  Simon  Magus  is  rather  large.

Mosheim.- — De uno Simone Mago  in his  Dissert, ad  hist.  eccl.

pert. 2nd  ed.  vol.  ii. Alton.  1767.
A.  Simson. — Lebtn und Lehre Simon  Magiers in Zt.  f. hist.

Theol. 1841.

F.  Huelsen. — Simonis  Magi  vita  doctrinaque.  Berl.  1868.  [Progr.]
A.  Hilgenfehl.— Der  Magier  Simon  in  Zt.  f.  wiss.  Theol.  1868,

pp.  357-D6.

R.  A.  Lipsius. — Die  Quellen  d.  romischen  Petrussage. Kiel,  1872.
W.  Moller  in  Herzog-Plitt,  1884,  t.  xii.  pp.  246-56.
On the alleged statue of  Simon see A.  van  Dale,  De statua
Simonis  Magi. Amst.  1700 ;  and  Corp.  Ins.  Lat.  vi.  1.

P.  70. — On Basilides besides the Disputatio in Zacagni, Collect.

monument,  veter.  see
Uhlhorn. — System  des  Basilides. 1855.
Baur  in  his  Theol.  Jahrh. 1856.
Ilofstede de Groot. — Basilides als erste Zeuge  f. neutestament

Schriften  [translated  from  Dutch]. 1868.

J.  L.  Jacobi. —  Ueber d. ursprungl. Basilid. System in Zt.  f.
Kirchengesch. 1877  ;  p.  493  ff.

P.  82.' — Besides  the  Ophite  Textbook  '  Pistis  Sophia  '  mentioned  above,
the  special  treatments  are  to  be  found  iii


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL APPENDIX.  453

Moshcim. — Gesch.  d.  Schlanyenlriider. Hclmst.  1746-8.

A.  Fuldner.— De  Ophitis. Hint.  1834.

Lipsius.— Ucber  de  ophit.  System  in  Zt.f.  wiss.  TheoL 1863-4.

F.  Giraud. —  Ophitse, dissertatio historico-theoloyica de eorwn

origine  placitis  ac  fails.  Paris,  1884  [best  modern  work].
P.  104. — On  the  Egyptian  Pantheon  see  Lipsius,  Der  Gotterkreis  d.  alien
Aegypter.  Berlin  Academy,  1851,  and  Tiele  1.  c.,  §  29.  Their
representation  in  art  best  given  in  Perrot-Chipiez,  Ilistoire  de  VArt
dans  VAntiquiie — Eyypte  (also  English  translation,  1884).  Mas-
pero,  Archeoloyie  eyyptienne.  1887.


PART  II. — WORSHIP  OF  MITHRAS  AND  SERAPIS,  pp.  115  seq.

THE interesting problems that have collected about the worship of
Mithras  have  been  dealt  with  in  the  following  special  works  : —

Sainte-Croix. — Eecherches critiques sur les mysteres du  payanisme.

Paris,  1817.

Seel. — Die  Mithras  Geheimnisse. 1823.
Hammer. — Mithriaka. Vienna,  1834.
Creuzcr.— Das  Mithreum. Heidelb.  1838.
Lajard. — Recherches  sur  le  culte  public  et  les  mysteres  de  Mithra. Paris,

1847-8.

Windis-chmann. — Mithra. 1857.

Shrines  of  Mithras  are  described by  J.  Hodgson  in  Eliena  Archeoloyie
i. 274-320, who gives the earlier literature, and by Stark, Zwei
Mithrxen  d.  yrossherzoyl.  Alterthumersammluny  in  Karlsruhe. 18G4.
P.  116. — On  the  Persian  relations  of  Mithraicism  see  Burnouf,  Sur  le

Yacna.
P.  117.— For  another  etymology  see  G.  Barzilai,  Gil  Abraxas,  studeo

archeoloyico. Trieste,  1873.
P.  119. — This  view  of  the  origin  of  Christmas  was  first  enunciated  by

Wernsdorf,  De oriyine solemnium  JNatalls Christi  ex  fesHvitate

Natalis Jnvicti,  Wittenb. 1757  ; he is followed by Jablonsky

in  his  Opuscula,  Amst.  1809,  vol.  iii.  p.  351  seq.,  who  argues  that

the  Bas-ilidans  caused  the  adoption  (p.  361).
P.  120. — The  latest  monograph  on  the  Sadducees  and  Pharisees  is  that

of  E. Montet, Essai  sur  les oriyines  des  partis sadduceens et

phariseens. Paris,  1883. A  full  bibliography  at  end  of  Seiffert's

article  Sadducaer  in  Herzog-Plitt.

P.  129. — Flam.  Vacca  in  Nordiui,  lioma  Antiqua,  pt.  iv. 1771.
P.  137. — On  contemporary  Parsees,  T.  D.  F.  Karaka,  History  of  the

Parsis,  2  vols. 1885.
P.  139. — Caste-marks  of  modern  Hindoos  are  given  in  Sir  G.  Birdwood's

Industrial  Arts  of  India. 1880  (plate  M).
P.  153. — On  penances in  general,  the  exhaustive  work  of  F.  W. H.


454  BIBLIOGRAPHICAL APPENDIX.

Wasserschleben,  Die  Bussordnuwjen  der  abendlcindiscJien  Kirche.

Halle,  1851. On  those  of  the  Brahmins,  Sir  M.  Williams,  Modern

India

PP.  158  seq. — See  bibliog.  note  on  p.  104.
P.  174. — The  mitre is unknown in  the  Eastern  Church; v.  Hefcle,

Beitrdye  z.  Kirchenyeschichte,  t.  ii.

P.  179. — llcfcrencc  may  be  made  here  to  Lessing's  well-known  essay.
P.  105. — The  latest  study  of  the  jettatura  is,  I  am  informed  by  Mr.

Nutt, a series of articles, La Fascination, by Tuchmann in

Melusine. 1885-7.


PART  III.— THE  AGATHOD^EMON  WORSHIP  AND  THE  ABRAXAS
GEMS,  pp.  215  seq.

P.  217. — On serpent  worship comp.  introductory  essay  to  Ferguson,

Tree  and Serpent Worship,  second  ed. 1873. Among  Semites,

Baudissin,  Studien  zur  seiuit.  Religionsgeschichte  I.  §  iv.
P.  226. — J. Bellermaun, Ueber die Gemmen der Alien mit dem

Abmxaslihle. Stuck  1-3. Berl.  1818,  19,  20.
P.  230. — This  formed the  subject  of  a  monograph by  F.  X.  Krans,

Das  Spotter  ucifix. Freib.  1872. V.  cut  on  p.  279  here.
P,  251. — Vide  Barzilai's  tract  quoted  in  bibliog.  note  on  p.  117.
P.  254. — On  the  age  of  this  "  Gcmatria  "  see  J.  Gow,  Hist,  of  Greek

Mathematics,  p.  44.

P.  259. — For  bibliography  of  Basilides  see  note  on  p.  70.
P.  203. — On  Vjileiitmtis,  G.  Henrici,  Die  Valentinische  Gnosis  und  die

Ifeiliye  Schrift. Berl.  1871.
P.  279. — On  the fig.  see monograph referred to  in  bibliog.  note  on

p.  230.
P.  281. — The  99  epithets  of  God  in  Islam  form  the  subject  of  E.  Arnold's

poem,  Pearls  of  the  Faith. 1882.

P.  281  n.— Levy,  Gemmen  und  Sieyel. 18G9,  p.  47-9  and  Taf.  iii.
P.  284. — Die  Seherin  von  Prevorst  was  published  1866,  and  translated

into  almost  all  European  languages.


PART  IV. — TEE  FIGURED  MONUMENTS  OF  GNOSTICISM,  pp.  305  seq.

GNOSTIC  gems  have  long  attracted  the attention  of  antiquarians,  their
separate  investigation  beginning  with

Macarius. — [Hcureux]  Abraxas  sen  Apistopistis.  Ant.  1657 ;  with
appendix  by  Chifflet.  [Plates  included  in  Gorkcaus,  Dactyliotheca,
3rd  edit.  Leyd.  1695.]

Kirchmann. — De  annulis. 1657,  c.  xxi.

Montfaucon. — UAntiquite  expliquue.  Paris,  1722;  vol.  ii.  livre  iii.
Li>s  Abraxas,  pp.  353  seq.  Supp.  vol.  ii.  1724,  pp.  209  seq.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL APPENDIX.  455

Gori. — Thesaurus gemmarum astriferarum. Florence, 1750, fol.

[includes  essay  by  Passeri,  De  gemmis  Basilidianis].
Marrette. —  Traite  des  pierres  gravecs.  1750.  11.08-73.
F.  Miinter. —  Versuch  uber  d.  Kirchlichen  Alttrthumer  der  Onostiker.

1790.

Bellerman.— Vide  bibliog.  note  to  p.  226  [only  vignettes  on  title  pages].
Kopp.—Palieographia  critica. 1819-29 ;  4  vols.  [third  and  fourth  on

Abraxas].

Matter.— Ilistoire  du  gnosticisme. 1828. [2nd  ed'tion,  1843.]
Hammer. — Deux  coffrets  gnostiques  du  nioyen  age. 1832.
Stickel. — De  gemma  Abraxea  nondum  edita. 1842.
Matter. —  Voyage  gnostique  en  Italie. 1852.

King. — The Gnostics and their remains, ancient and medixval.
London,  1864. [First  edition  of  present  work  including  all  the

gems  in  the  preceding  and  more  also  :  13  plates  and  27  woodcuts.]
No  collection  of  consequence  has  been  made  or  published  since  1864
till  the  present  volume.

p.  309. — On IAQ  see Graf v. Baudissin's elaborate essay "Der

Ursprung  des  Gottesnamens  'la'co  "  in  his  Studien  zur  semitischen

Jteligionsgeschichte,  1873,  pp.  181-254. On  the  name  itself  cf.  S.  H.

Driver,  Recent Theories  on  the Origin  and  Nature  of  the Tetra-

grammaton  in  Studio,  Billica.  1885,  pp.  1-20.
p.  370. — On  the  apices  of  Boethius  considerable  discussion  has  arisen.

Woepcke,  in  Jour.  Asiat. 1863,  p.  54,  traces  them  from  India;

T.  H.  Martin,  Annali di matem. 1863,  p. 350, from Egypt;

while  Friedlein,  Zahlzeichen,  pp.  15-19,  &c.,  and  Weissenborn  in

Zt. Math. 1'hys.,  1879,  declare  the  passage  in  Boethius  to  be  a

forgery. See  Grow,  Hist.  Greek  Math.,  p.  38.
P.  372.— On  magic  squares  treated  mathematically,  see  DC  Morgan  in

English Cyclopaedia,  sub.  voce. sect. Arts  and Sciences, vol.  v.

col.  415.


PART  V. — TEMPLARS,  EOSICRUCIAXS,  FREEMASONS.

ON  the  TEMPLARS  the  most  complete  history  is  still  that  of  Dupin,
Ilistoire  de  I'ordre  militaire  des  Templiers.  Bruxellcs,  1751.  On  their
mysteries,  Loiseleur,  La  doctrine  secrete  des  Templiers.  Orleans,  1872.
And  the  trials,  Michelet,  7 Voces  des  Templiers.  1871.  The  statutes
contained  in  Memlorf,  Geheimstatuten  des  Ordens  der  Tempelherren,
Halle,  1877,  have  been  shown  to  be  fictitious  by  11.  G-.  Prtitz,  Geheimlehre
und  Geheimstatut' n  des  Tempelherren  Ordens.  Bed.  1879.  See  also
F.  Schottmiiller,  Der  Untergaug  des  Templer-Ordeus,  nut  urkundlichen
Beitragen.  2  vols.  1887. '

On  the  PVOSICRUCIANS  the  earlier  literature  is  given  in  W.  v.  Murr,
JJeber  d.  wahren  Ur sprung  d.  llosenkreuzer.  See  also  Buhle,  Ur sprung
und  vornehmste  Scliicksale  d.  Orden  d.  Freimaurer  und  llosenkreuzer ,
1810  ;  and  Kliipfel,  sub  voc.  in  tlerzog-l'litt.  On  the  origin  of  Freemasonry,


456


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL APPENDIX.


full references in II.  F.  Gould's huge  and  uncritical  History  of  Free
masonry,  vol.  i.  1884.

P.  393ft. — A  third  edition  in  two  vols.  appeared  in  1887.
P.  409. — On the influence of  these Manichaean sects in spreading
Eastern  folklore  through  Europe,  see  M.  Caster, Greeko- Slavonic
literature. 1887.

P.  410.— Assemblies  of  Al  Hariri,  translated  by  T.  Chenery,  vol.  i.
18(57 ;  and  Riickcrt's  remarkable  translation,  Dd  Verwandlunyen
des  Abu  &eid.


INDEX.


A.  A.  A.,  Kabalistic,  109
ABAANA0ANAABA,  246,  317
Abdullah,  the  Magian,  412
Abgarus,  Christ's  letter  to,  317
ABRACADABRA,  origin  of,  310
Abraxas  as  Phoebus,  103

,  explained,  117

— ,  the  Sun-god,  117

,  etymology  of,  251

Religion,  257

Religion  defined,  257

,  meaning  of,  259

,  curious  type  of,  328

figure,  first  mention  of,  111

gems,  the  true,  2-45

gem-legends,  247

gems,  how  used,  274

gems,  materials  and  art  of,  274

god,  described,  250

Abraxaster-gems,  226
Abraxoids,  237
Abraham,  statue  of,  161
Abrak,  the  Mystery  of,  317
Achamoth,  Wisdom,  330
Achoreus,  322
Adad,  the  Sun,  161
Adam,  Book  of,  4,  415

Kadmon,  34

Kadmon  typified,  233

Added  talisman  ic  legends,  277
Adonai,  Adonis,  296
Adoneus,  '  the  Invisible,'  297
A.E.I.O.U.,  Austrian  version  of,  234
./Eneas,  his  funeral  sacrifice,  367
./Eons,  Simon's,  67

,  whence  derived,  260

,  list  of  the,  263

,  male  and  female,  263

• ,  seals  and  numbers  of  the,  331

,  addresses  of  the  Soul  to  the,  332

,  pictures  of  the,  363

./Esculapius,  177

,  the  Sun,  177

Agatliodsomon  Serpent,  215


AGATHODXEMON,  legend,  216
Agathodaomou  gems,  examples,  296
Ahriman,  Evil,  132
Akbar,  his  religion,  416
Alabarches,  27
Albigenses,  their  creed,  340

— ,  last  traces  of  the,  399
Alexamenos,  graffito  of,  230
Alexandria,  the  Scrapis  of,  159
Allah,  sigla  for,  10
Alleius  Caronius,  spell  of,  223
Alphabetical  names,  311
'  Amen,'  why  used  in  prayer,  267
Amenti,  the  Four,  106
AMHN,  the  Three,  147
Ammian,  upon  the  Magi,  272
Amor,  how  adopted,  234
Amshaspands,  the  Seven,  140
Amyclae,  Apollo  of,  298
Andrese,  and  the  Rosy  Cross,  394
Andrew,  Revelation  to  St.,  341
Angel- worship,  344
Angels'  Names,  talisman,  193

— ,  planetary,  344
Antigonus Gonatas, his  treaty with

Asoka,  51
Anubis,  with  two  faces,  110

— ,  with  triple  head,  293

—  -Christus,  230

Christus,  figure  of,  279

-  -Typhon,  302

Apis-bulls,  catacombs  of  the,  164
Apollo,  with  talismanic  legend,  302
Apollonius  of  Tyana,  53
Apsetlms  and  the  parrots,  58
Apuleius,  110

-,  '  De  Magia,'  283


Arabic  terms  in  medieval  arf,  418
Archon,  the  Second,  77
,  Demiurgus,  81


'  Archons  of  the  Great  Fate,'  352
Aristotle,  copied  by  Basilides,  70
Ark  of  the  Covenant,  7
Artemis  of  Pallene,  167


458


INDEX.


Arthur's  Oon,  136
A.S.  the  Rosicrucian,  315
Asceticism,  why  enjoined,  419
Asoka's  Edicts,  51
Assassins,  the  sect  of,  410

• ,  their  Degrees,  ib.

,  grades  of,  411

*  Assembly,'  Masonic,  378
Ass-headed  deity,  230
Astrology,  in  Rome,  227
Assumption  of  deities'  forms,  3G5
Athelstan,  first  Saxon  builder,  383
Athelstans'  Constitutions,  381
AHONONOMA,  gem-legend,  172
Augustine,  a  Manichsean.  48
AUM,  symbolism  of,  266

or  OM,266

• ,  virtues  of  its  use,  267

,  type  of  the  Trinity,  320

Avila,  bishopric  of,  339
' Ax6ava.pd<>,  place  of  torment,  355
BABYLONIAN  characters  used  in  talis
mans,  3G8

Salylonii  numeri,  368-69
Bacchic  serpent,  323
Bacchus,  the  sun-god,  322

,  god  of  the  Jews,  323

Bacon's  '  House  of  Wisdom,'  398
Balsamus,  Barbclus,  259
Balaam's  sacrifices,  442
Bambino,  il  santissimo,  33 G
4  Baphomet '  of  the  Templars,  235
Baphometic  figures,  403

Tablets,  383

'  Baphometicum  Mysterium,'  128
Barbelo,  259

• ,  '  Mother  of  the  Saviour,'  333

Barruel,  upon  the  Illuminati,  425,  426
Basilides,  his  system,  70,  257
Basilidau  doctrine  defined,  258
Bath,  scroll  found  at,  300
B.  C.  D.  L.  M.  N.  S.,  402
Belenus,  136

• ,  Gallic  Sun-god,  136

Betulns,  thunderbolt,  2JO
'Birth  of  the  New  Sun,'  366
'Birthday  of  Mithras,'  119
Blood-offerings  to  ghosts,  165
Bocthius'  Arithmetic,  370
'  Bolorjna,  Scavi  presso,'  428
Bouillon,  Cardinal,  362
Boundary  Spirit,  the,  76
' Spirit,'  Deus  Terminus,  299


Boundless  Power,  59

Bouteilles  cemetery,  371

Brachmans,  origin  of,  272

Brandmarks,  Mithraic,  139

Brazen  Serpent,  the,  218

—  Serpent '  whence  derived,  3

•  Bringer  of  luck,  the,'  85

Bromius,  how  figured,  132

'  Brother,'  Masonic,  378

Buddha  Gaya,  inscription  at,  269

Buddha's  Foot,  270,  271

Buddhism  described,  49

Buddhist  missions,  51

symbols,  389

influence  on  Gnosticism,  390

Bulgarians,  the  sect,  409

Bull,  Mithraic,  132

« Bulletin Monumental,' on  Masons*
Marks,  383

Bulls,  mummies  of,  164

Burying-alive,  penance,  154

Byzantine  Gorgon-amulets,  169

CABIRT,  copper  of  the,  89

Caducous,  its  symbolism,  176

Camillus  Leonardi,  338

Capricorn,  183

,  bearer  of  souls,  183

Carbonari,  their  origin,  391

Carnarvon,  gold  plaque  found  at,  339

Caste-marks, and various siylx ex
plained,  13,  14

diffusion  of,  386

Catalogues  of  Gnostic  gems,  278

Cave  of  Mithras,  136

Chain,  Magic,  362

Chalice,  Mithraic,  126

Cliarun,  the  Etruscan,  182,  187

Ceraunia,  talismanic,  197

Chest-protector,  223

Chiflet's  talisman,  290

Childeric,  Tomb  of,  194

Chinese  symbols,  391

Christ,  identified  with  Serapis,  161

Christ's  person  described,  162

Christmas  day,  how  fixed,  120

Chrysocheir  of  Tephrice,  412

'  Chnumis,'  various  spellings  of,  216

Chnuphis,  with  mystic  numeral,  340

gem-legends,  243

'  Circle  of  the  Sun,'  300

Clemens  Alexandriuus,  257

Clemens  and  Basilides,  257

'  Cleopatra,  Death  of,'  18i


INDEX.


459


Cnidus,  Temple  at,  SCO
Cochct,  abbe,  371
Colic,  amulet  for  the,  367
Collar  of  SS,  its  origin,  219

*  College  of  Arabian  Snges,'  394
Colossus  of  different  metals,  1G3
Constancy,  emblem  of,  220

*  Constitutiones  Artis  Geometricae,'  377
Continence,  meritorious,  334,  335

*  Corax '  of  Mithras,  120
Cow,  typo  of  Isis,  110

*  Counterfeit  of  the  Spirit,'  38
Crescent  and  seven  stars,  318
Cross,  Sign  of  the,  276
Crown  of  Mithras,  128
Crusades,  their  effect,  418
Cursing  by  the  Name,  444

« Psalm,'  the,  360

Cynocephalus,  108

Cypher  of  the  Illuminati,  425

Cypselus,  Coffer  of,  183

A.A.A.,  199

Aai/j-wv,  Novs,  Vvx'h',  347

AAMNAMENEYC,  198

Dante's  allotment  of  Heaven,  345

Dante's  Cliaron,  188

Death,  antique  type  of,  179

• ,  extinction  of,  335

,  Grecian  types  of,  188

,  in  ancient  art,  179

« ,  Spiritual,'  what,  180

Decline,  gems  of  the,  274

Deities  represented  by  numerals,  307

Delphic  E,  the,  297

Demiurgus,  how  baffled,  330

' ,  doing  the  work  of  the,'  334

Demons,  Kabbalistic,  36

Do  Quiucy,  on  the  Eosicrucians,  393

Destructive  Principle,  167

Deva,  her  symbol,  301

Devils,  casting  out  of,  259

,  their  various  shapes,  357

Dextrx :  Fede,  336
Diagramma  of  the  Ophites,  332
AIKAIOZ,  on  a  gem,  129
Dionysiac symbols in vase-painting,

427

Dis,  the  Roman,  187
Dis-pater,  of  Gaul,  164
Divining-rods  of  the  Magi,  307
Docetae,  illusionists,  261

,  typical,  109

,  of  the  Parse cs,  137


*  Domine  quo  vadis,'  Church  of,  271

Donati,  Ollati,  412

Donatist  Confession  of  Faith,  316

Donner-keil,  strahl-pfeil,  205

Draco,  type  of '  The  good  and  Perfect

Serpent,'  289.

'  Dragon  of  the  Outer  Darkness,'  358
Dragon  shaped,  lion-shaped,  demons,

357

Dream-bringing  demons,  70
Dreams,  caused  by  magic,  40

— ,  sold  by  Jews,  221
Druidical  religion,  422

stone,  with  Caste-marks,  387

Druidism,  invented  in  Britain,  421
Druids,  put  down  by  Tiberius,  421
Druses  of  Lebanon,  413
Dualism,  Hindoo,  264

of  deities,  204

Dolcino  Fra,  and  Margarita,  68
Durya,  of  the  Indians,  260

D-V.X.,  256
'  E  DELPHICOI,'  297
Egg  of  the  World,  367
Egyptian  deities,  list  of,  105

sacred  animals,  107

' Gospel  of  the,'  335

EICZETC  CAPAniC,  327
Eleazar,  drives  out  devils,  280
Elements,  Angels  of  the,  39
,  toons  of  the,  262

Elephanta,  rock-temple  of,  427

Elias,  legend  of,  334

Emanation,  doctrine  of,  92

'  Emanations,'  the  Busilidau,  259

,  doctrine  of,  259

,  the  Five,  their  Coptic  names,  313

Einesa,  Temple  of,  154

Enipedocles  quoted,  61

Enoch,  Book  of,  18
— ,  or  the  "  Name,"  253

Epiphanius,  13

Ephcsus,  School  of,  7

'  Ephesian  Spell,  The,'  ib.

Epoptas,  the  Masonic,  426

Esoteric  Mohammedanism,  415

Essenes,  origin  of  the,  51

Evil  Eye,  talisman  for,  256

,  theory  of  the,  195

Spirits,  origin  of,  439

Eye-covered  figure,  403

FABLES,  Gnostic  love  of,  257

Faculties,  whence  derived,  346


460


INDEX.


Fakir,  badge  of  a,  390
Fate,  office  of,  350
Ferdinand  of  Naples,  392
Fermesse,  emblem  of,  219
*  Fifteen  Points,'  Masonic,  379
•  Fire,  amulet  against,  422

the  First  Principle,  69

Five,  the  sacred  number,  299

' words  '  on  the  vesture  of  Jesus,

308
Foot,  carved  on  stone,  185

' ,  the  divine,'  270

,  winged,  271

Formulae,  Gnostic,  280

— ,  purpose  of,  329
Forty-two  a  sacred  number,  442
'  Free  and  accepted,'  385
Freemasonry,  antiquity  of,  375
,  first  established,  391

— ,  pretender  founder  of,  376
'  Free-masons,'  the  real,  386
Freemasons,  true  origin  of  title,  391
Frog  and  serpent,  symbolical,  36
Future  punishments,  356
Fylfot,  Swastika,  389
'  GABES,  the  book  of,'  343
Galen,  upon  the  jasper,  219

,  upon  demoniacal  possession,  280

Gallic  brand-marks,  428

coins  with  Tribal  marks,  429

Garnet  talisman,  289

'  Gate  of  the  Gods,'  346

Gaul,  Gnosticism  in,  338

Gayatris,  quoted,  268

Geomancy,  Arab,  305

Geometrical  symbols  for  deities,  307

'  Genealogy  of  Mary,'  231

Germanicus,  bewitched,  358

Gitteh,  21

Gnosis,  machinery  of  the,  104

,  the  Jewish,  4

,  true  aim  of  the,  333

Gnostic  gems,  lists  of,  278

—  symbolism,  preservation  of,  375
Guosticised  types,  277
Gnosticism,  beginnings  of,  21

,  wide  diffusion  of,  337

Godhead,  how  constituted,  39

God's  name,  how expressed by the

Egyptians,  319
Gold  plaque,  Carnarvon,  339
'  Good  one,  the,'  354
Gorgon,  an  amuiet,  169


Gorgon,  original  type  of,  167

— ,  type  of  Death,  18
Gracchus  destroys  Cave  of  Mithras,  126
'  Great  Names,'  the,  308
Gustavus  Adolphus,  chymic  gold  coins

of,  396

Ha-Brachali, '  Abraxas,'  251
Hadrian,  upon  Serapis,  161
Harpies  and  Syrens,  189
Harpy,  on  tombs,  188
Heavens,  the,  259,  365
Hebdomad  of  Basilides,  81
Hebrew  terms  used  by  Christians,  125

words,  false  use  of,  88

words,  use  of,  285

Hecate,  how  invoked,  281
Helena,  '  the  Lost  Sheep,'  68

,  made  an  idol,  70

Heliodorus,  upon  the  Evil  Eye,  195
Heliogabalus,  119

— ,  magic  practices  of,  226
Hell,  description  of,  356

— ,  gods  of,  170
'  Helmet  of  Adoneus,'  296

—  of  Hades,'  186

Henry  in.  employs  Italian  artists,  384
Henry  vi.  on  Freemasonry,  376
Heracleonite  passport  to  the  moribund,

329

Hiero  prohibits  human  sacrifices,  417
Hindoo  deities,  264

—  dualistic  deities,  264

—  symbols  explained,  388
Hippolytus,  on  Basilides,  257

— ,  his  Treatise,  11
Historians  of  Gnosticism,  11
'  Holy  Name,'  Basilidan,  259
Homer,  Ophite  explanation  of,  86
Hoop,  type  of  Time,  179
Horapollo's  '  Interpretation,'  108
Horse,  symbolic,  185
Horua  or  Moses,  322

,  how  adopted,  232

Hosea  Lux,  mystic  book  of,  397
Hours,  Genii  of  the,  366
Human  sacrifices,  226

— ,  Druidical,  421
IAO,  his  various  titles,  326
lao,  the  Lunar  Genius,  332
Jaos,  Autumnal  Sun,  321
I AQ,  the  name  explained,  319
Ibis,  type  of  Moon,  107
Idea,  the  Platonic,  34


INDEX.


461


Idol-worship,  Gnostic,  70

Idols,  wooden,  of  primitive  Greece,  1G7

CIY  the  Primal  Man,  351

Ignorance,  the  god  of,  261

I H COVC,  numerical  value  of,  255

Ildabaoth,  demon,  357

— ,  son  of  Darkness,  37
Uluminati,  grades  of  the,  425
Imprecations  fixed on Temple-walls,

360

Incubi  and  Succubse,  334
India,  her  connexion  with  Greece,  271

— ,  her  influence  upon  Egypt,  320

— ,  primitive  religion  of,  272

,  source  of  the  Magi,  272

visited  by  Greeks,  53

Indian  sources  of  Gnosticism,  42
Ineffable  Name,  the,  266

Name,  Hindoo,  266

Name,  origin  of,  320

—  One,  Mystery  of  the,  148
Infant  sacrifice,  334
Infernal  powers  depicted,  364
Initiated,  brand-marking  of  the,  139
Initiation,  tests  at,  421
Inner  Man,  the,  38
Innsbruck  Tablet,  the,  127
Inscriptions,  Abraxas,  248-9

— ,  Gnostic,  248-9
Inserted  legends,  327
Intelligences,  Simon's,  67
'  Invisible  Gods,  the,'  289
Invocation  of  Names,  310
loh,  the  Moon,  324
Irenseus,  11
Isiac  Procession,  111

Symbols,  ib.

Isis,  symbol  held  by,  301

Italian  masons,  mediaeval,  384

Iva,  god  of  thunder,  175

ITANTA,  198

Izeds,  Zoroastrian,  132

JAMBUES,  magician,  40

James  i.  of  Scotland,  Act  concerning

Masons,  371

Jasper,  virtue  of,  219,  222
Jerome,  on  Basilides,  259

,  on  Spanish  Gnosticism,  339

to  Lc-cta,  126

Jersey,  Gallic  coins  of,  429
Jerusalem,  visited  by  Scythicus,  44
Jesus,  his  invocation,  285
,  ineffable  origin  of,  255


Jewish  badge,  388

influence  at  Rome,  27

Magicians,  40

Joan  of  Navarre,  220
Jovis  Axur,  278
Judaism,  origin  of,  28
Justice,  symbol  of,  110
Justinian's  persecution,  340
Justin  Martyr  on  Mithras,  122
KABBALA,  real  source  of  the,  3

— ,  and  Talmud,  33
Kabbalistic  cyphers,  199

-  titles,  287
Kali  Bhavani,  167
Karamala,  Psychopompos,  16G
Kauldkauch,  262
Kavlacav,  88

Kef  Mariam,  Agnuscastus,  369
'  Kells,  Book  of,'  430
Kerner,  on  talismans,  205
Kerner's  division  of  the  Soul,  348
Kingdoms  of  Nature,  98
Kircher's  Leaden  Book,  362
Klippoth,  demons,  36
Knocker,  Masonic,  403

*  Knot  of  Hercules,'  176
Eosti,  Zoroastrian  401
Kronos,  abode  of,  241

,  how  figured,  240

Krjp,  how  figured,  100

*  LADY,  the  Great,'  307
Lump,  spoil  made  to  the,  223
Language  of  Gnostic  legends,  282
Lapo,  il  Tedesco,  384

Larva,  181

,  ghost,  181

Lat,  the  Hindoo,  298
Lantef,  Temple  of,  422
Leaden  Books,  362

scrolls,  magical,  358

Lebanon,  sects  of  the,  340
Legends,  translations  of,  311
'  Leonticus,'  '  Coracicus,'  126
Lessing,  on  Freemasonry,  422
Lettering  of  legends,  276
Letters,  composing  a  female  form,  288
Life,  possible  duration  of,  221
Light,  Empire  of,  8

*  _I  _  of  lights,'  293

— ,  The  Divine,  81
— ,  Place  of,'  350
Lines  and  dots  on  gems,  305
Lion,  typical,  109


462


INDEX.


Lion,  form  of  Bacchus,  131

headed  man,  131

Litanies  of  the  dead,  331
Lizard,  type  of  Logos,  107
Lodge,  ceremonies  at  the,  382

' ,'  Masonic,  380

' of  St.  Thcodosius,'  424

* ,  the  Scottish,'  425

' ,  Templars/  413

'  Logos,'  emanation  of  the,  2G1

,  Nous,  Sophia,  261

-,  version  of  Shem,  288


«  Lord  of  Light,'  47
Lots  of  the  Kingdom,  153
Lotus,  explained,  174
'  Love,  Perfect,'  69
Lower  world,  Euler  of,  97
Lucan's  Gods  of  Hell,  170
Lucian's  Philopatris,  184

—  '  Toxaris,'  53
Lingam-yoni,  the,  112
Lunus  dcus,  324

Lydney,  leaden  scrolls  found  at,  361
MACROBIUS,  on  TEsculapius,  177

,  on  Serapis,  159

• ,  on  the  descent  of  the  Soul,  346

Magdalene,  discourse  of  the,  150
Magi,  General  Council  of,  49

,  their  origin,  273

Magic,  cultivated  in  Britain,  421

,  the  founders  of,  40

,  founders  of,  221

chain,  to  make  a,  362

' Papyrus,' spell from the, 242,

282

May  tone, Masson, Massoney,  a  Tem
plars'  Lodge,  413

Makam-at,  of  Hariri,  416

Mandaites,  4
— ,  the,  415

Manenti,  inscription  at  Villa,  361

Manes,  history  of,  46

• ,  his  use  of  Palmyrene  alphabet,

370

Mauicheism,  156,  157

,  elements  of,  47

,  how  diffused  over  Europe,  409

,  why  successful,  420

Manicheists,  persecuted  by  Justinian,
408

MAPOOHNI,  talisman,  313

Marcus, '  Revelation  '  of,  286

Maria  Honorii,  191


Marini,  scrolls  found  at  Villa,  366
Marks  of  owners',  Gallic,  428
Maroni,  abbe,  425

Mary  Magdalene,  on  the  use  of  talis
mans,  332

,  Revelation  to,  349

,  the  Heavenly,  141

'  Masonic  Grip,'  337

rules,  genuine,  379

secrecy,  380

signs,  origin  of,  427

Masonry,  genuine  rules  of,  377
Masons'  Marks,  origin  of,  385
Matter,  to  be  renounced,  356

's  theory,  326

Maya,  illusion,  261

Medicinal  talismans,  328

'  Mercia,  the  Lady  of,'  383

*  Merchants  of  the  Staple,'  their  Marks,

385

Meru,  Mount,  42
Mete,  Von  Hammer's,  404
Metempsychosis,  355
Middle  space,  the,  102

,  archon  of  the,  353

' ,'  the  Platonic,  347

— ,  lao,  Ruler  of  the,  325
Missa,  derived,  125
Mithraic  bronze  ticket,  9

Cave,  discovery  of  a,  131

Degrees,  the,  127

monuments,  115

Sacraments,  122

remains  in  the  West,  422

Mithras,  bought  with  blood,  122
,  how  figured,  133.

-  identified  with  Christ,  119

— ,  Zoroaster's,  116
Mobed,  insignia  of  a,  10
Modern  forgeries,  275
Molochites,  green  jasper,  275
Montfaucon,  365
Moon,  absorber  of  souls,  347

,  Egyptian  idea  of  the,  324

,  how  lighted,  48

— ,  type  of,  107

Moor's  '  Hindoo  Pantheon,'  267
Moses,  magician,  221
Mylitta,  155
'  Mysteries,  the,'  145

— ,  benefit  of  the,  352

— ,  explanation  of  the,  89
Mystery  of  the  First  Court,  352


INDEX.


463


'  Mystery,  the  First,'  342

Mystic  Names,  Invocation  by,  285

Nans,  the  element  Water,  224

,  worship  of  the,  101

Naaseni,  their  celestial  hierarchy,  309

,  Ophites,  101

«  Nabis '  on  gem,  244

«  Name,'  power  of  the,  201

,  virtue  of  the,  253

Names,  expressed  by  numerals,  254

,  spells  made  up  of  Holy,  281

of  God,  how  made  up,  286

Nushirwan  protects  Philosophers,  56
Nature,  Active  and  Passive,  symbolized,

112

Navel,  '  Circle  of  the  Sun,'  363
Nebuchadnezzar,  382
Nebuchadnezzar's '  Image,' whence

derived,  163
Nechepsos,  King,  216
Neutra,  Eabbi  of,  plate  K,  4

*  New  Name,'  a,  129
Newton  Stone,  the,  386
Nicocreon,  160

«  Nile,'  derivation  of,  320

*  Ninety-nine  Names  of  God,'  231
«  No-being  God,  The,' 75
Nodens,  Temple  of  Deus,  361

*  Nothing,'  of  Basilides,  72
Numbers  of  the  Names,  287
Numerals,  sacred,  10,  369

— ,  standing  for  deities,  307,  368
Numerical  forces,  254
O.  O.  O.  199
Oath  of  Artaxerxes,  116
Obsidian  arrow-heads,  203
'  Ocean '  of  the  Ophites,  87
Ogdoad  of  Basilides,  84
'  Old  Man  of  the  Mountain,'  418
'  Old  Man's  Head,'  Baphometic  idol,

404
'  Omestes '  Dionysos,  human  sacrifice

to,  168

Omphalos  of  Delphi,  298
ONOKOIHTHZ,  230
Ophiuchus,  98,  237
Ophite  doctrine  of  the  First  Principle*

224

theogony,  309

Ophites,  12

— ,  hymn  of  the,  92

,  their  '  perfect  sacrifice,'  323

,  their  system,  82,  92


Ophites,  Schema  of  the,  332,  342
Or,  The  Divine  Light,  35
Oracle  of  the  Clarian  Apollo,  321
Orcus,  189

,  the  demon,  356

,  typified,  182

Orai,  Venus,  332
Origen,  12

,  on  Gnostic  deities,  325

Orites,  209

Orleans,  Paulicians  of,  410

Ormuzd,  Good,  132

Orpheus,  on  mystic  Names,  284

,  Mysteries  of,  401

Osiris,  Lord  of  the  West,  188

'Osor-Apis,'  164

Osthanes,  magician,  421

Outer  Darkness,  the,  357

Ovid's  *  Ibis,'  181

PALMYRENE  alphabet,  370

Pantheism  of  Manes,  48

Pantheism  of  the  Manicheans,  156

'  Papyrus,  the  Magic,'  223

Parca,  how  personified,  190

Parvati,  origin  of  Isis,  171

'  Passover,  the  perfect,'  334

Passport,  for  the  next  world,  329

Paulicians,  sect  of,  409

Pegasus,  badge  of  the  Templars,  420

Penances,  Hindoo,  153

*  Peratai,'  sect,  225

Persea-plum,  301

Perugia,  Mithraic  Cave  at,  132

'  Peter  Gower,'  Pythagoras,  376

Petraces,  talismanic  gem,  299

Petrus,  civis  Romanus,  384

Phanaces,  Sun-god,  116,  140

Philip,  Gospel  of,  333

Phoenician  deities,  240

Phocius,  on  the  Bxtylus,  207

Pictish  tattoo-marks,  420

Pilate's  letter  to  Lcntulus,  162

Pile  Cinq-Mars,  the,  429

'  Pistis-Sophia,'  analysis  of,  14

,  analysis  of  the  soul,  349

,  celestial  hierarchy,  239

,  doctrine  of  the  Sacraments,

141

— ,  Kabbalistic  names  of  deities,

311

— ,  Theogony  of  the,  341
— ,  Types  explained,  233
Plague,  amulet  against,  317


464


INDEX.


Planetary  genii,  Gnostic  gods,  325
Planets,  mystic  names  of  the,  309
Pleroma,  defined,  245
Pluto,  how  figured,  186
Pluto,  Plutus,  186
Potentiality  and  Activity,  65
Powers,  figures  of  the,  343

,  invocations  to  the,  343

,  names  of  the,  198

Praun  Cabinet,  gems  in  the,  292

Prayer  of  the  Saviour,  289

Priscillian,  338,  406

Procopius,  340

Propagation  of  species  why  prohibited,

419

Proserpine,  Eape  of,  187
nTEpdtyopos,  Egyptian  priest,  315
Ptolemy  iv.,  158
Punch,  council  of  five,  299
Punic  language,  late  use  of,  283
Pythagoras,  his  Four  Books,  43

,  studies  in  Egypt,  287

,  source  of  his  system,  12

Pythagorean  Numerals,  370

—  symbols  for  Deities,  307
QUAKRELSOMENESS,  Christian,  394
Quaternion,  the  Basilidau,  261
Quatuor  Coronati,  381
Queen  of  the  dead,  184
Quietism,  Indolentia,  344
Quinternion,  the  Basilidan,  262
RADICALS,  Simon's  Sis,  61
Raspe's  remarks  on  Gnostic  symbolism,

291

'  Receivers  of  Light,'  354
Recognition  by  signs,  337
Regeneration  typified,  233
Ring,  Magic,  to  make  a,  243
Rosicrucian  ceremonies,  396

symbolical  pictures,  397

Rosicrucians,  their  object,  393

Round  Churches,  402

Rudolf  ii.  patronises  alchemists,  408

Runic  legend  on  a  talisman,  11

S.S.S.  on  bar,  218

Sacred  animals  of  Egypt,  108

Sacrifice,  the  True,  225

Sacti,  female  Power,  264

Salagrama,  209

Samaritan  legends,  316

Samothracian  Mysteries,  89

Saugraal,  quest  of  the,  405

Sanscrit  names  in  Egypt,  265,  320


Satan,  his  real  character,  441

'  Saturn,'  sons  of,  422

Saturninus,  260

Sayce,  Professor,  368

'  Scottish  Knight,'  costume  and  cere
monies  of  the,  426

Scythicus,  precursor  of  Manes,  43

Seal  used  by  Christ,  317

Seals  of  the  /Eons,  331

'  Seed  of  the World,'  73

Seele,  Nerven-geist,  Geist,  348

Seffrid,  ring  of,  338

'  Seherin  von  Prevorst,'  284

'  Self-collection,'  continence,  334

CeMeceiAAM,  explained,  222,  326

Sepheroth,  the,  35

Sepoy  Mutiny,  125

Serapeum,  when  destroyed,  164

Serapion,  Aganaric,  164

Serapis,  158
— ,  Foot,  attribute  of,  271

,  gems  referring  to,  172

,  how  figured,  159

,  introduction  of,  158

,  type  of  the  Universe,  321

and  Agathodaemon  combined,  358

Serenus  Sammonicus,  220,  316

Serpent,  kept  in  an  ark,  323

,  guardian  of  tomb,  367

,  guide  of  souls,  368

Servatius,  seal  of  saint,  57

Seven-branched  candlestick,  388

Seven  vowels,  mystery  of  the,  201

Severus  Alexander,  his  worship,  16,  227

Siglx,  standing  for  deities,  10

«  Sign  of  Life,'  366

Signs  and  Passwords,  Masonic,  384

Simon  Magus,  history  of,  58

Simon's  Four  Books,  64

Sin,  Assyrian  Moon-god,  324

Sin,  the  cause  of,  349

Sins  to  be  renounced,  356

Skeleton,  larva,  181

Sleep  and  Death,  typified,  183

Solar  symbols  explained,  155

'  Soli  Invicto  Comiti,'  222

Salome's  question  to  the  Lord,  335

Solomon's  Seal,  388,  423

'  Sons  of  the  prophets,'  273

Sortes  Antiates,  305

Soul,  change  of  shape  in  the,  346

,  how  constituted,  37

,  planetary  origin  of  the,  344


INDEX.


465


Soul,  Platonic  division  of  the,  347
Souls,  sent  back  into  other  bodies,  355
Spells,  specimens  of,  243
Sphinx,  the  Destroyer,  ,327
Spiritual  Man,  the,  99
'  - — ,'  who,  414

' Men,'  who,  225

'  Spirits,  Essay  on,'  395

SpuJcen,  its  cause,  348

Square-cut  letters,  27G

Sri-pa,  Serapis,  105

'  Sticks,  asking  counsel  of,'  30G

Stone,  tools  of,  202

Stonehenge,  Mason's  mark  at,  387

Stukeley's  theory,  323

Sufi,  the  Persian,  414

Sun,  invoked,  2C8

and  Moon,  their  names  used  as

talismans,  283

-god,  various  types  of,  322


Suttee,  monument  of  a,  185

Swastika,  mendicants'  badge,  390

Symbol,  Emblem,  336

Symbola  of  bronze,  338

Symbolic  figures,  expressing  doctrines,

2G3

Symbolism,  degradation  of,  427
Symbols,  transmission  of,  423
Syrian  influence  on  mediaeval  Europe,

417

'  TABOR,  Light  of,'  300
Talismanic  conversions,  277
Talismans,  material  of,  275
Taraka's  penances,  153
Tat  and  Sat,  267
Tau,  the  Egyptian,  102,  112,  403
Taurobolia,  154

Templars,  accusations  against,  401
,  cause  of  their  ruin,  420

— ,  grades  of,  411

— ,  the  Parisian,  399

— ,  suppression  of,  ib.
Temple-church,  symbolism  of  the,  401
Ten,  a  sacred  number,  369
Terbintlms,  46
Tertullian,  187
Tetragramrnaton,  talismanic,  441

— ,319
Theogony,  the  grades  in  the  Gnostic,

341

Theosebius,  259
Thales,  doctrine  of,  224


Thor's  hammer,  206,  403
Thunderbolt,  cell,  206
Tikkun,  universal  type,  34
Timothy,  Epistle  to,  7
Toleration,  ancient,  417
Tomb  of  a  Koman  Empress,  192

—  treasures,  191

Tombs,  talismans  found  in,  371
Tortures,  the  Twelve,  127
Tower  of  Babel,  382

—  of  Silence,  137
Townley  talisman,  the,  290
Trades-union  Rules,  mediaeval,  383
Transposition  of  letters,  312
Trees,  the  Five,  147

Triad,  Pentad,  Heptad,  how  typified,

314

'  Trial-piece,'  383
Triangle,  Kosicrucian,  315
Trihasa,  Cerberus,  166
Trinity,  Egyptian,  321

— ,  the  Hindoo,  2G9
Truth,  how  figured,  288

— ,  Revelation  of,  286
UDDER-SHAPED  BOWL,  111
Ulysses  and  the  Syrens,  189
Ulysses'  visit  to  Hades,  165
Uninitiated,  their  future  state,  354
Universal  Nature  typified,  446

— •  religion,  idea  of,  417
Universe,  re-absorption  of,  321

* ,  typified  by  Serapis,  ICO

Uterine  amulet,  300
VALENTINUS,  241

— ,  his  system,  260
Valentinian  Sacraments,  141
'  Vultus  Triforrnis,'  395
'  Varan cs,'  derived,  273
Vase,  the  Baphometic,  405
'  Vase  of  Sins,'  111
Velaunii,  335
Venus  Auadyomene,  287
Veruluinium,  spells  found  at,  339

— ,  scrolls  found  at,  3GO
Vesture,  the  shining,  of  Jesus,  308
'  Vibies  abreptio,'  182
Victory-stones,  Runic,  212
Vienna  Cabinet,  gems  of  the,  278
Virgil,  on  spells,  281
Virgil's  'Copa  Syrisca,'  181
'  Virgin  of  Light,'  351
Visconti's  magic  scroll,  358

2 H


466


INDEX.


Vishnu's  Foot,  270

Von  Hummer  on  Tortures,  128

's  theory,  403

Vowels,  the  seven,  199

Vowels,  shrouding  the  '  Great  Name,'

315

WATER,  the  First  Principle,  224
Weishaupt,  Spartacus,  424
Westminster  Hall,  Masons'  Marks  at,

325

'  White  stone,'  St.  John's,  129
Winds,  Hindoo,  265
'Winged  Foot,'  the,  185
'  Wisdom  of  Egypt,'  278
'  Wisdom  of  the  Egyptians,'  437
'  Wisdom,'  the  Power,  330
Wisdom,  secret,  G
Woes,  denounced,  358
Wolf  of  Serapis,  160
Wood's  Serapis,  312
*  Word,  the  true,'  252
Words  of  power,  280
World,  creation  of,  132
Worlds,  the  four,  36


Wormenhert,  specus  at  St.  Albans,  423
Wren  establishes  Freemasonry,  391,  422
XERXES,  Ethiopian  troop  of,  203

— ,  sacrifice  of  his  nephews,  168
X.P.S.  on  coffer,  396
YAMA,  Lord  of  Hell,  165

,  and  Serapis,  270

putra,  Hades,  71

Yang,  Chinese  symbol,  391

Year,  how  typified,  179

Yellow  jasper,  talismanic,  132

Yoni,  Hindoo,  111

York,  Mitliraic  Tablet  at,  136

Z.Z.Z.  on  bar,  218

Zarmanes  Chagan,  54

Zendavesta,  analysis  of  the,  29

Zenodorus,  his  colossus  of  Mercury,  430

Zodiac,  mystic  sense  of  the,  346

Zodiacal  gems,  frequency  of,  132

—  Lords,  349
Zoroaster,  a  Bactriau,  272
Zoroastrian  Angclology,  9

burial,  137

Zwacke,  Cato,  424


FIG.  19.


LONDON:  PRINTED  BY  WILLIAM  CLOWES  AND  SONS,  LIMITED,  STAMFORD  STREET
AND  CHAKING  CROSS.


PLATE  A


Fig  2


Fie  3


ABPACA3


THE CAMBRIDGE SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENT COMPANY


PLATE  B.


THE CAMBRIDGE SClENTlf-C INSTRUMENT COMMAS'


PLATE  C


;HL CAMBRIDGE SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENT COMPANY.


PLATE


THE CAMBRIDGE SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENT COMPANY  .


PLATE  E


IHfc fAMBR'DGE SCitNTlF'C INS"fR!.iM£ N" COMPANY  ..


PLATE  F


THE CAMBRIDGE SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENT COMPANY


PLATE  G


Till; CAMRRIDOt SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENT COMPANY


PLATE.H


THE CAMBRIDGE SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENT COMPANY


^LATE.  J.


t CAMBRIDGE SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENT COMPAQ


PLATE  K


THE CAMBRIDGE SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENT COMPANY


PLATE  L


THE  CAMBRIDGE SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENT COMPANY.


PLATE  M


CAMBRIDGE SCIENTIFIC INSTRWENT CCMPANY  .


PLATE  N.


4


THE  CAMBRIDGE SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENT COMPANY..


5  6  7  8  9


AV


.rf


IX


y


t-  L>^


z


LLJ


Y


>c


THL  CAMBRIDGE SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENT COMPANY.


University  of  Toronto
Library


DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET
